

THE HISTORY OF THE Turkish Empire From the YEAR 1623. to the YEAR 1677.
CONTAINING THE REIGNS Of the three last EMPERORS, VIZ. SULTAN MORAT OR AMURAT
IV. SULTAN IBRAHIM, AND Sultan MAHOMET IV. his Son, The XIII. Emperor now
Reigning.

By PAUL RYCAUT Esquire late Consul of Smyrna.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleet Street near
Temple Bar. M DC LXXX.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE KING.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
I Cannot without some despondency of mind and awful fear of the Greatness of
Your Majesty, make an Offering at Your Sacred feet of so small an esteem and
inconsiderable value, as these following Histories. For having traveled long
in remote Countries, and resided no less than eighteen years in Turkey, the
World may reasonably expect some rich returns unto Your Majesty in Persian
Silks, and Tyrian Purples, or in the finest Carpets, and other Gayeties in
which the softness and luxury of the Lesser Asia did anciently abound: and may
now judge me a Bankrupt, or an ill Husband of my Talent, when they see me at
home trembling in Your Royal Presence, with a Gift no more worthy than a few
sheets of Paper; which being a Sacrifice inferior and beneath the acceptance
of so Great a Monarch, I might reasonably fear, that they would take fire at
the heat of Your just displeasure, were they not with all humility and
reverence consecrated to the Royal Clemency. For in this glorious Title and
Attribute, Your Majesty (as is notorious to the World) exceeding all the most
Serene and the most Clement Emperors that ever were, expects not from me,
either Gold or Jewels, but rather a true account of my time, how I have spent
it in the Service of God and of Your Majesty: and how I have administered that
Public Trust and Interest which was committed to my Management. Accept
therefore, GREAT SIR, these following Discourses to discharge part of the
account of my time, with other Treatises which have been the Employment to fill
up my vacant Intervals: the remaining account of my hours are not to be
justified by my own report, but by the Testimony of others, whose wisdom and
goodness will be as ready to own my Industry and Faithfulness in their
Concernments, as they will be to excuse and pardon my infirmities.

Ever since the time of Your Majesty's happy Restoration, my Lot has fallen
to live and act within the Dominions of the Turk, and there to move in a
Public Capacity; which though it was in an Administration of one of the lowest
note and degree, yet the great Influence which the flourishing Estate of that
Trade has on the common Good of England, nourished in me a secret pride and
satisfaction in that Employment, which called and raised up all my endeavors
to acquit my self therein with prudence, faithfulness, and industry, there
being the same Regularity required in the Stars of the lower, as in those of
higher Magnitude.

This has been the first, and indeed the only Affair I ever managed for the
Public; for before Your Majesty's blessed Return, the Character noted on my
Family of being Loyal, as it made them at first active and zealous in the
Service of Your Glorious Father, so afterward it famed them for their
Sufferings, and rendered them and me incapable of Office. But Your Majesty
returning like the Sun to animate and cherish all living Creatures with an
equality proportioned to their several Capacities, has been pleased also to
bestow a Ray of Your benign Influence on my self, whereby having received
comfort and refreshment, I do with all sense of my Duty, and with entire
Devotion pray unto the King of Kings for the Happiness, long Life, and immortal
Glory of Your Majesty, and with all reverence and humble submission devote and
consecrate my self, for ever to remain,

YOUR MAJESTY'S Most humble, most dutiful, and most obedient Servant, PAUL
RYCAUT.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE Reign of Sultan Amurat or Morat being imperfectly wrote in Knolls his
History, consisting for the most part of abrupt Collections; I have thought fit
for the better completing of the Reign of that Sultan, and the whole Body of
our Turkish History, to deliver all the particular Transactions thereof with my
own Pen: whereunto also I have added the Reign of Sultan Ibrahim, never before
Published in the English Tongue, the particular Occurrences of which being
acted before my time, were for the most part extracted from Venetian Writers,
who by reason of their Vicinity to the Turk, have been always most curious, and
concerned to note and observe the Affairs of that Empire.

But the other part of this History beginning from the Year 1660. and continued
to the Year 1677. is the Product of my own Observations, being matters
transacted in my time, which being part seen by my self, and in part received
from good and probable Advices, I call by the Name of my MEMOIRS, in regard
that I am little obliged to other Writers for those Collections; and therefore
by Gods assistance assume the chief Merit of that Work unto my self: which I
desire and heartily wish, Good Reader, might for thy satisfaction, and for the
benefit of the World be still continued, and the thread of History drawn out
unto future Ages: as also that those Errors and Mistakes of which I have been
guilty herein, might be corrected and amended. Farewell.

Sultan MORAT or AMURAT the 4th, Emperor of ye Turks.


My Brothers folly and my want of years
Let loose the reigns of Rule to Mutiniers,
But as with, time my strength and wit improve,
I all reform with, fear and not by love.
By mighty force I Babylon subdue,
From whence a peace with Persia does ensue.
And when against Christian foes I do design
To turn my Arms dye with excess of wine
THE REIGN OF Sultan MORAT OR AMURAT IV. THE Eleventh EMPEROR AND Twenty first
MONARCH OF THE TURKS.
THE weak Understanding of Sultan Mustapha, and his inability Where violence
and injustice prevail, there is so little distance between the most eminent
height of Grandeur and the lowest abyss of misery, that a Prince may in a
moment step from one unto the other. The Janisaries and Military Officers
commanded more now than the Civil, all things being guided by the air and fancy
of the Soldiery, who placed and displaced with that wind of favor and
displeasure, which is agreeable to the humor of a multitude and the
licentiousness of Arms. For at the same time there were three Emperors, seven
Great Viziers, two Captain-Pasha's, five Aga's of the Janisaries, three
Treasurers, six Pasha's of Cairo, and in proportion the changes and alterations
were as many in all the Provinces of the Empire. All this confusion evidently
proceeding from the weak and almost senseless understanding of Mustapha; the
Ministers and people concurred as it were in an universal consent to dethrone
him a second time, and exalt into his place Sultan Morat Brother to Osman, who
was murdered the year before. The principal Actors in this contrivance were
Kiosem the Mother of Morat, and the Mufti; but in the execution hereof three
difficulties occurred. The sirst was Chusaein Pasha the Great Vizier, who by
reason of the inabilities of Mustapha, being become absolute Lord and Sovereign
of all, would be unwilling to assent unto that Proposition, which might degrade
him of his Dignity, and divest him of his Power. A second obstacle was the
fancy and humor of the Soldiery, who having with much zeal and passion exalted
Mustapha to the Throne, it might be doubted, that in maintenance of the same
humor they would with equal obstinacy persevere in their Election. A third was
the poverty or low ebb of the Exchequer, which at that time was in no capacity
to supply that Donative to the Soldiery, which was usual and customary at the
Inauguration of every Sultan. To forward and hasten this change and ripen this
Plot, the News of the Rebellion of Abassa did much contribute, who with a Body
of fifteen thousand Horse roved over all the Plains of Kara-hisar, calling
himself Avenger of Sultan Osmans Murder, and Enemy of the Janisaries, by whose
Mutiny and Conspiracy he was put to death; in satisfaction for which he not
only killed all Janisaries which fell into his hands, but their wives,
children, and those allied to them he destroyed with implacable malice and
bloody rage. Upon this advice the Janisaries at Constantinople being moved with
equal fury and desire of revenge, applied themselves to their Aga, proposing a
speedy union with the Spahees for suppressing this Rebellion before time gave
it greater growth, and made the humor more stubborn and difficult to be purged.
At the same time also came Letters from Cicala Pasha (who was dispeeded into
Asia with a strong Party to give a stop to the farther progress and advance of
Abassa) advising that upon his near approach to the Enemy, so general a fear
possessed his Soldiery, that most of them disbanded and forsook their Colors;
and that at present he had no more than five hundred Janisaries, and two
hundred Spahees under his Command, which he found to be an unequal match to
contend with the increasing power of Abassa. This Intelligence served happily
the occasion of the Mufti, Vizier, and Aga to give a turn to the desired
change, and supplied them with an answer to the Janisaries, that they were
ready to yield compliance unto their Address, but that the incapacity of their
Sovereign obstructed their proceedings, and that the defect in the principal
wheel disordered all the motions of good Government. At which reply the
Janisaries becoming more unquiet, assembled themselves in a tumultuous manner
at the Mosch of Sultan Solomon, where making an Avack in Turkish signifies a
Foot.
Ayack Divan, (so called, because they sit not down, but stand on their legs to
denote the present haste and urgency of their affair) it was enacted by an
unanimous consent of the Civil and Military power, That young Morat or Amurat
should be promoted to the Throne, and that Mustapha should be deposed: and
because the Exchequer was at its lowest ebb, and wholly exhausted by
miscarriage of the Officers, the Soldiers were contented to dispense with
their Donative, which they relinquished in consideration of the public good,
reserving still their Title and Claim thereunto at times of a more happy
Inauguration. With this News the Vizier immediately mounted on Horseback to
signify this universal Decree to Mustapha, but he found him so stupid, as if
he had been insensible of the Message; and his Mother wanting power to resist
this strong convulsion, gave way to necessity, and seemed to embrace what she
could not oppose.

Thus Mustapha falling from the Heaven of his Throne to the Abyss of his
Prison, seemed to return unto his center; for being only by the wildfire of
Fortune carried as far aloft, as the force of popular powder could reach, he
afterward by the mere weight of his earthly temper returned with the like
quickness of motion to the place from whence he ascended.

Hereupon Sultan Amurat, a Youth of about fourteen years of age, was brought
forth to the people, and placed in the Throne with all the acclamations and
rejoycings of the people. And being taught by his Mother in a feigned manner to
refuse acceptance of the Empire, he pretended that the Exchequer was exhausted,
and that therefore he was not able to demonstrate the affection and esteem he
had for them, and that since they had killed their former Sultans, he was
fearful lest the tenderness of his age should betray him to the like violence:
but the Soldiery having not the patience to hearken to his excuses,
immediately carried him to the Divan, where having clothed him in white, they
Amurat installed.
seated him on a Safraw erected with four Pillars studded with precious Stones;
the Covering of which was of Crimson Velvet richly embroidered with Gold and
Oriental Pearl. And being so seated, the Mufti with all reverence approached,
and kissed his hand; and then turning to the people he demanded of them, if
they were contented with that Prince whom they now beheld in the Seat of the
Ottoman Kings; to which they having given assent by their loud acclamations,
Morat with a becoming gravity encharged the Mufti to take care that Justice and
the Law be executed, and so retired to his Lodgings with general satisfaction.
The next morning he was carried by Water to the Mosch of Jub in the Suburbs of
Constantinople, where according to the Solemnity of the Ottoman Empire, having
performed his Which is a dispensing of Mutton to the Poor.
Corban or Sacrifice, and having his Cemiter girt to his side by the
Emirsheriff, he mounted on Horseback, and with a magnificent Train entered by
the Gate of Adrianople. In the mean time Mustapha, who was more worthy to bear
a Fools Cap than an Imperial Diadem, was conducted to Prison, and more narrowly
guarded than formerly; howsoever no man offered to take away his life, the
persons of Fools and Idiots being sacred in esteem of the Turks, and the least
injury offered to them accounted irreligious and unlucky.

Morat was of a lively countenance, full-fac'd, dark hair, of a black and
lively eye, ruddy and sanguine Complexion, and in every degree of a promising
and hopeful Aspect: but his exterior appearance did not correspond with the
internal cruelty of his violent Spirit, having some similitude with the Swan,
which has white feathers and black flesh.

The Great Vizier who assisted at this Solemnity was (as we have said) Chusaein
Pasha, a person of self-interest, who had wasted and consumed the Treasury, and
converted a great part thereof to his own benefit; he was a Tyrant, hated of
all men, and supported himself by no other Art than bribing of the Soldiery:
and to his other Crimes he added that of having unjustly persecuted Halil
Pasha, and deprived him of his Office, his power not reaching to the taking
away his life; which being reserved for better times, he was again recalled
from his retirement, and Chusaein Pasha being terrified by the sensible touches
of his own conscience, took his flight by way of the Black Sea, and being out
of the reach of Justice, a Fine was set of five thousand Zechins, and of Lands
to the Revenue of an hundred thousand Aspers a year, to be given unto him who
should bring his head; many of those who had sold him their friendship and
favor being affrighted with this Sentence, voluntarily disgorged the rewards
they had received, and amongst the rest the last Aga of the Janisaries, who had
been his Kahya or Steward for the space of three months, restored eight hundred
thousand Dollars as an atonement for his sin, and a ransom for purchasing his
own life and Office. At length by force of the foregoing reward Chusaein Pasha
was betrayed and taken alive, and being brought to Constantinople, was
immediately strangled before the gate of the Divan.

Many were the difficulties which this young Sultan was to encounter, the
greatest of which was the insolence of the Janisaries, who feeling themselves
empty of money, began to repent of the prodigal and easy remission of their
Donative, and in a tumultuous manner to redemand it again. There was no
argument or debate to be used against men of the Sword, who hearkened to no
other reason than their own wants, and to satisfy them there was no other
remedy than compliance; wherefore all Officers and persons not employed in
Military Affairs were forced to contribute toward a large Tax, and a shameful
demand was made for the Loan of thirty thousand Zechins from the four Christian
Ambassadors resident at the Port, that they also as Friends might yield an
assisting hand toward the present urgency of Affairs: so little consideration
and shame have Turks to lay open the nakedness and distress of their Country
even to strangers and enemies of it. And indeed such was the insolence and
uncontrollable power of the Soldiery, that their desires and commands were
Laws, and their determinations Rules for their Sultan and his Subjects.

This humor of Usurpation and unlimited Power wearied all the Officers of the
Empire, and inclined them secretly to approve the cause of Abassa Pasha of
Erzirum, who declared and styled himself Enemy to the Janisaries; and of Bechir
Pasha of Babylon, who was joined with him. The Vizier also finding his power
abridged by the arbitrary will of the Soldiery moved slowly and coldly into
Asia, where all the Force he could make consisted of no more than fifty
thousand new and unexperienced men, such as were incapable to contend with a
more numerous Army of veterane Soldiers; to which also the Beglerbei of
Anatolia joined himself, as did all other the chief Timar-Spahees, who
conspired together to confound and destroy the pride and government of the
Janisaries. The Vizier also was of the same Party, and coldly at first answered
the request of the Janisaries, when they earnestly pressed him to lead them
against Abassa their common and mortal Enemy: at length being fortified with
the Force of the Timar-Spahees, he told them plainly, That if they would go and
fight, he would be a Spectator of the success, but would not engage himself in
a quarrel wherein the blood of Musselmen might be spilt on one side and the
other: by which means the Rebels in Asia took head, increased in force, and
every day rendered them in a more formidable

But this was not all the trouble which ensued; for the Tartars having refused
that King whom the Grand Signior had appointed them to receive, declared for
Mehmet his Brother, who was seconded by the Votes of the generality, and
maintained by the strongest nerve of that Nation. The Vizier was unwilling to
engage in this quarrel, alleging, That a Civil War was the worst of evils, and
that it was better to coanive at a present inconvenience, than in this
distracted time of Affairs to pollute the Empire with the blood of Tartars, who
were their Brethren and of the same Religion and Alliance with them. Howsoever
the Divan was of another opinion, and resolved to dispeed the Captain-Pasha
with a Force sufficient to re-instate Gherey (for so the elder Brother was
called) in the Government of that Kingdom: but yet the Instructions given
rather directed him to act with dexterity than with force, supposing that the
Authority of the Turks abetted with the presence of a considerable Force would
create an inclination in the Tartars to obedience, so soon as they discovered
them to appear on their Coast. The Captain-Pasha being arrived at The chief
City of the Krim Tartar.
Caffa, declared, That he was sent by the Grand Signior not to exclude either
one or other of the Pretenders, but only to be Witness of a free and fair
Election, that so all Civil discord ceasing, that Party might be chosen who was
most pleasing to the generality of the people: to which end two Standards were
erected, one for Gherey the name of the Family.
Gherey the elder Brother desired by the Turks, and the other for Mehmet
beloved of the Tartars. The people in multitudes ran to the Standard of Mehmet,
and but few to that of Gherey, which demonstrated at how mean a rate the
Tartars esteemed the protection and favor of the Port. The Captain-Pasha vexed
hereat, denied to give his assent to the confirmation, on pretense, that he was
first to demand the Grand Signior's pleasure; but at length was persuaded by
Gherey to land a Force of about eight thousand men to own and maintain his
Cause, on hopes, that rather than engage against the Turks, the people would
condescend to Terms in his admission and favor. The Tartars not being in the
least dismayed hereat, arrayed themselves in a warlike posture, and feigning
fear and flight, allured the Turks to a pursuit of them, until they had brought
them to a place where thirty thousand Horse lay in ambush, which on a sudden
arising and encompassing them round, had entirely destroyed them, had not Salil
the Brother of Mehmet given a stop to the slaughter, on hopes, that such a
testimony of friendship would reconcile the spirits of the Turks, at least
might render his Brother's preferment more tolerable and grateful to the Turks.
In this conflict Ibrahim and Chusaein who were Viziers of the Bench, the Kahya
and a Capigibashe of the Seraglio were slain, whose bodies were afterward
transported to Constantinople, six hundred Janisaries and as many Seamen were
killed, and fifteen hundred Prisoners were taken, whose liberty was procured at
a mean ransom for the sake of that Faith and Religion which they jointly
professed; they also took thirty Pieces of Cannon, and might also have become
Masters of the whole Fleet consisting of thirty six Galleys, had they been
desirous to have prosecuted their Victory to the utmost advantage: and moreover
in that conjuncture of affairs, when a general consternation had overspread the
principal parts of the Ottoman Dominions, when the Counsels were feeble and
faint, and that a languishing pulse beat in all the Government, had the Tartar
with an Army of fifty thousand Horse then ready to march, made up to the Walls
of Adrianople; it might have proved such an opportunity for dividing and
destroying this Empire, as has not offered at any time since that occasion.
But the two Brothers Mehmct and Salil stiling their War forced and defensive,
used that moderation in their Victory which might not provoke a desire of
revenge in the Turks. The Captain-Pasha being thus permitted to depart from
Caffa with his Fleet, sailed to Varna, a Port in the Black Sea about two
hundred miles distant from Constantinople; where the News of this defeat being
arrived, put all the City into confusion, and raised the Viziers at midnight to
consult of those remedies and expedients, which were agreeable to the present
emergency of Affairs. The Great Vizier Ali was of opinion, that the Grand
Signior ought to condescend to Terms of Accommodation, though to the
disadvantage and disreputation of his power; and that accordingly a Letter
should be wrote to Mehmet the Tartar, beginning with the usual Complements of
Friendship and Salutation; and afterward declaring, That it was never the
intention of the Port to engage in a War against him, the late conflict having
only proceeded from a mistake and misinterpretation of Orders; and that there
was no other design than to compose the Civil differences amongst themselves by
advancing that Prince to the Kingly Dignity who was most pleasing and grateful
to the people. This advice was approved by the rest of the Council, and a
Messenger dispatched with the Letter, accompanied with a Cemiter and Vest of
Sables, which are the Signals of the Sultans favor. In the mean time the
people murmured at the pusillanimity of the Government, saying, That they had
sent an Ambassador to thank the Tartar for not seizing their whole Fleet, and
acknowledge their obligation to him for the blows and wounds he had given their
Army. The Tartars also gloried in this submission, and took the boldness to
vaunt of their Lineage and Descent to be more Ancient and Noble than that of the
Ottoman Family; and that in this time of decay and degenerate procedure of that
Monarchy, it appertained to the Greatness of the Tartars to stir up the fire
and snuff the lamp, that the Splendor of that Empire might become more bright
and shining than in former Ages: and so little respect did they now maintain
for the Port, that they surprised two Ambassadors sent from the Moscovite in
their way to Constantinople, robbed and killed them, as also the Turkish Chiaus
that was with them, lest his testimony should be brought in for an evidence
against them.

During these Troubles the Cosacks taking advantage of the Captain-Pasha's
Tartary, entered the Bosphorus with about an hundred and sifty Sail of Saicks
and Boats; these Boats and Vessels which the The form of Cosacks Boats.
Cosacks use are built long and light with ten Oars of a side, and two men to
an Oar; the Head and Stern are not unlike, so that they hang the Rudder
sometimes at one end, and sometimes at the other, being not obliged to turn
their Vessel, but without loss of time to proceed with that end which happens
to be foremost. Each Boat carries fifty select men armed with Firearms and
Cemiter, in the management of which they are very expert; and are a People
sober, enduring labor and hard diet, and so speedy in their Incursions, that
they forestal the advices, and commonly strike before they threaten. With these
Boats and people (as we have said) they entered the Bosphorus, where they burnt
several Villages and Houses of Pleasure; on the Grecian side they burnt
Boyuc-deri and Yenichioi, on the Asian side Stenia. The appearance of this
Enemy so near the Imperial City caused a general consternation, not unlike that
at London, when the Dutch entered the River of Chatham. To oppose this Force
there was not one Gally in readiness, so that Saicks, Chimbers, and small Boats
were armed to the number of four or five hundred, and manned with such people as
the present haste and expedition offered; the great Chain was then brought
forth to cross the Bosphorus, which the Grecian Emperors used at the Siege of
Constantinople: and ten thousand men were issued from the City to defend the
shore from depredation and farther mischief. The Turkish Fleet faced the
Cosacks to give them a stop, whilst they hovered about the middle of the Chanel
in form of a Half Moon, and so continued the whole day until Sunset; when with
the night they returned into the Sea, carrying with them, besides their Booty,
glory sufficient to have entered the Chanel, and without blows or opposition to
have braved the Capital Seat of the Ottoman Monarchy, and the most formidable
City of the whole World. Not many days after they returned again with a greater
Force than before, which put the City into the like consternation; and having
hovered about three or four days at the Mouth of the Black Sea, they burnt the
Pharos or Lantern with certain Villages thereabouts, and being laden with
Spoils and Glory, they again returned into their own Country. Thus we may
observe, how bold Enemies are made with the weakness of a State: a Horse is
soon sensible of his Rider, when backed by a faint hand and an unaccustomed
lightness, but a stisf Rein and a close knee makes him obedient to his Ruler.
All people having discovered the imbecility of the Government, made head
against it: and the young Sultan had those for his Enemies in the time of his
Nonage, which in his strong and fiercer years became the most submissive and
fawning Slaves in the World.

And though at this time the Turkish Ministers were corrupt and rebellious, and
the Soldiery mutinous; yet Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, a Christian,
was observant to the Port, demanding license Bethlem Gabor desires assistance
against the Emperor.
to wage War against the Emperor, which was easily granted, and upon payment
of the usual Tribute of ten thousand Hungars, the Ambassador with thirteen of
his Followers received Coftans or Vests of Honor, and a promise of Succor and
Protection, as the condition of his Affairs should require. Thus we see, that
whilst the Turks themselves endeavored to rent in pieces their own Monarchy;
to which one would have thought, that the Christians had most reason to
contribute: yet such was the unhappy Fate of Christendom, that Gabor was the
only person at that time to court the Turks; and that for no other reason, than
that he might be supported and abetted in a War against the Emperor and other
Christian Princes of Germany.

The Army of Bethlem Gabor consisted of above thirty thousand men, with which
he marched over all Hungary, having taken most Towns of consideration, unless
Presburg alias Possonium, Rab, and Komorra: but if we penetrate into the depth
and foundation of this War, we shall find that it had a deeper interest than
that of Gabor, and had its Original from the discord and Civil War of Germany.
For the House of Austria being at that time in a condition to render it self
formidable, and in a posture to create a jealousy in all the Princes subjected
to it, did under color of subduing the Palatine of the Rhyne, oppress also the
liberty of the Empire, and of the several States which composed it. For after
the Emperor against the Constitutions of the Golden Seal, and the sense of the
Electoral College, had divested the Palatine and his Children of their Estates
and Dignity, not so much by force of Arms as by deceit and breach of promise;
instead of disbanding the Army, which was to have been performed according to
agreement, new Troops were added; and though the Protestant League was
dissolved, yet the Catholic Combination with all its Adherents remained armed
and immovable to compel the Protestants to a restitution of the Ecclesiastical
Revenue, notwithstanding the Articles of Peace to the contrary: so that the
Princes and Towns of the Lower Saxony entering into a new League raised an Army
under the Command of Christian of Brunswick Bishop of Alberstadt. Bethlem Gabor
having his interest adjoined to this Party, entertained the same desires and
intentions to suppress the Greatness of the Emperor; and having the just
complaint to allege of wanting his annual Pension of fifty thousand Crowns, as
was agreed by the Treaty of Niclasbourg, he resolved to force it by Arms, and
take part with the Princes of the Protestant Religion which he professed: but
because his strength and power was not sufficient without the assistance of the
Turks, he not only obtained their permission and approbation of this War, as we
have said before, but by payment of fifty thousand Dollars presented to the
first Vizier, and of forty thousand by way of annual Tribute, he procured an
auxiliary Force of fifty thousand Turks and Tartars; with part of which,
commanded by Budiani, he made an irruption into the Lower Austria, and with the
other Bethlem himself about the beginning of October entered into Moravia,
defeated the Regiment of Tissenbach, retook the Town of Turnova, and routed the
Count of Montenegro General for his Imperial Majesty before the Town of Ghoding
on the Frontier of Moravia, which he afterward beleagured and held besieged
until the 20th of November, when Stanislaus Turzow a Hungarian Palatine became
Mediator of the Peace, and at length obtained a Truce: the principal Articles
of which were as follows.

1. That on both parts Arms be laid down for ten months, and all Acts of
Hostility cease, that on neither side any attempt should be made either by
force or fraud to take any Castles, Forts, Cities, or places of defense during
this time; and that both Germans, Hungarians, and Turks should be alike
comprehended.

2. That if the Emperor were desirous to treat and conclude a final Peace with
the Grand Signior, he should use Bethlem Gabor as Mediator, and do nothing
therein without his privity.

3. That all Places and Forts taken by the Prince of Transylvania in his late
Expedition, and that all Cities and Castles now in possession of either, should
so remain without any alteration.

4. That all Passages should be open for free Trade of Merchants, and all other
the Subjects and Friends of either side.

A Truce being thus concluded, the Turks in their return made great havoc,
carrying with them great numbers of poor Christians into Slavery, which Gabor
out of compassion seemed willing to redeem with a low price at his own charge,
which the Turks refusing, carried those miserable Wretches into Captivity. The
Count Esterhast Governor of Newhausel for the Emperor, being highly incensed
at this treacherous action contrary to the Truce so lately concluded, having
drawn out a sufficient Force from the neighboring Garrisons, fell on the Rear
of the Turks in their March toward Buda, and charged them so home on the Banks
of the River Niter, that he killed five hundred of them on the place, took all
their Baggage, with diverse Prisoners, and gave liberty to many Christian
Slaves. The next day but one after he charged another Party of them, as they
attempted to pass a Bridge, which the night before he had caused to be broken
down; of which having killed a great number, the rest saved themselves by
swimming: howsoever many Christians procured their liberty thereby, and a
considerable Booty was made of Horses, Camels, Wagons, and all Provisions. The
other Troops consisting of greater numbers were worse treated than the former;
for Esterhast having received a Recruit of Horse from Reiffemberg Governor of
Komorra, and Breuner of Javarin or Rab, he proceeded boldly to meet the Turks,
and joining Battle with them, he slew twelve hundred on the place, gave liberty
to fourteen hundred Christians, took diverse of their principal Commanders with
all their Bag and Baggage, besides a considerable quantity of Gold and Silver
in Plate and Money. Nor were Reiffemberg and Breuner less successful over those
who passed through their Quarters to join with the Garrisons of Alba Regalis
and Canisia, having killed seven hundred of them, and taken all their Baggage.
Moreover Count Serini in his Journey toward Vienna defeated six hundred of
them, and presented their Colors to the Emperor: and Esterhast in like manner
after his several Exploits offered thirty Cornets at his feet, with six
Prisoners of Quality, one of which was Kinsman of Bethlem Gabor.

These rebuffs cooled the courage of the Turks a little, and altered the
resolution of the Council for carrying forward the War on the side of Germany,
as was intended, had the success answered expectation: For these misfortunes
abroad, and intestine troubles at home, with Pestilence and Famine, which at
the same time greatly afflicted the parts of Constantinople (whereby an hundred
thousand people dyed) abated the mettle of the Turks, and caused them to take
new measures in all their determinations: and for that reason Ambassadors were
sent both to Vienna and into Poland to renew the Articles of Peace, and so to
confirm the League, that whilst the Sultan was employed in his Wars with Persia
and the Eastern Countries, nothing should intervene from the Western parts to
trouble or obstruct his progress, or recall him from his Enterprise. For now the
Rebellion of Abassa, joined with Bechir Pasha of Bagdat, growing daily more
considerable, and his strength increasing to that condition, that he was able
to keep the field in despite of the Grand Signiors Forces, he adventured to
quarter within five days March of Constantinople: and at the same time Letters
coming from Hafish Pasha General of the Army in the Province of Bagdat, that
the King of Persia was entered into the Dominions of the Turk with a powerful
Army, a general consternation seized the whole Turkish Court, the wisest and
stouiest having occasion to call up for all their wisdom and courage to assist
at a time when the Government was assailed on all sides, both at home and
abroad. Various were the Counsels and Proposals in what manner to proceed in
times of such emergency. First it was resolved to proclaim a War both against
the King of Persia and the Rebels in Asia, and that whosoever took of the Grand
Signior Pay from one Asper a day to a higher value, should be in readiness to
serve in the War upon penalty of losing his Estate, of being accounted a Rebel,
and his wife and children sold for Slaves. But the more sober and moderate sort
judged it policy to take off Abassa by sending him a general Pardon, with a
concession of all his demands, upon condition, that he should turn his Arms
upon the King of Persia, who was the common Enemy of their Country and
Religion: but the Janisaries would by no means assent to this agreement with a
person to whom they bore a more inveterate hatred, than to the Persian himself,
as he did also to the Janisaries. For that he might better justify his
pretense of revenge, he declared, That being one day in a Mosch at his Prayers
the murdered Osman appeared to him, and taking him by the hand said, My
faithful Mussulman, since thou art the most generous of all my Slaves, I
command thee to revenge my death, with the blood of sixty thousand Janisaries
and Spahees, good Fortune shall accompany thy Arms, and Victory shall crown thy
labors. During these intrigues and difficulties of reconciliation, Abassa
spoiled the Lesser Asia, and the Persian King conquered the City and Province
of Bagdat or Babylon, took Kur Asan Pasha an old Soldier Prisoner, possessed
himself of Mosul and Leska on the Persian Sea, and meeting no considerable
opposition, he divided his Army into four parts. The first was dispeeded into
Mesopotamia commanded by the King himself. The second made Incursions into
Palestine. The third infested the Coast of the Black Sea: and the fourth
marched toward Mecha, with hope and design of sharing all the parts of the
Eastern Empire.

Ali Pasha, who opposed the King in Mesopotamia, was slain and his Army wholly
defeated, so that the Province became a prey to the Enemy: the success in
Palestine was equally fortunate by the revolt of Damascus, a place of great
riches and importance; the Coast of the Black Sea was grievously infested, and
a Port taken near to Trapezond; and little opposition being made at Balsora,
the Town was taken by that Army in their March toward Mecha and the parts of
the Red Sea, where they rendered themselves Masters of Medina the City of their
Prophet Mahomet.

To repair these losses, and to encounter numbers so strong and valiant in all
parts, the Vizier was dispeeded with a powerful Force to the Town of Bagdat;
but by reason of Mutinies and Tumults amongst the Soldiery, matters found not
the success expected: and the Garrison making valiant and vigorous Sallies
against the imbecility of the Turkish Soldiery, which were always most
obstinate and stout to oppose their The Siege raised at Bagdat, and the Turks
overthrown.
own Commanders, obtained an advantage in every Attempt; by which
discouragement many forsaking their Colors, the Siege was raised with
dishonor, and the interest of the Turk impaired and almost irreparably lost in
those Provinces. This News arrived at Constantinople, that the Camp was risen
and fled by night, that they were forced to burn their Tents and Provisions,
and to break their great Artillery and cast them into the Euphrates: that the
miseries in the Army had been such by Famine and Pestilence, and want of all
Provisions and Ammunition, that the like was never known: that the Vizier had
beheaded three of his Pasha's, that so he might cast the whole blame upon them;
and that now retreating with his Army into the Turkish Dominions, the Persians
pursued them in the Rear, and for ten days did execution on them, making the
best use they could of their Victory; which relation silled the hearts of all
people with sadness, and disordered the Counsels with confusion. The cause of
which ill success according to custom being imputed to the General, he was
deprived of his Office, and sacrificed to the fury of the Janisaries.

These troubles were increased at Constantinople by the Addresses which the
Prince of Transylvania made unto the Port by his Kapi-Kahya or Agent,
representing to the Grand Signior, That he wanting Heirs Male to succeed him in
his Principality, the States at a Diet had with common consent elected his Lady
for his Successor, and therefore desired consirmation from the Port; in excuse
of her Sex he alleged the urgent necessity of the present times, which
persuaded rather to admit of the Government of a Woman, than that his
Principality should for want of an Heir fall into the hands of the powerful
Family of Austria. To make good this demand, Duke John of Weymar and Count
Mansfelt arrived Duke of (...) and Count Mansfelt join with the Prince of
Transylvania.
in Silistria, to whom the Prince of Transylvania joined his Troops; and
Morteza Pasha of Buda wrote to the Port, that he was marching toward Valz to
meet the Prince, and confer with him concerning these designs. The Emperors
Resident at Constantinople greatly exclaimed against these proceedings, which
something troubled the Counsels of the Turks, who in that conjuncture were
unwilling to give beginnings to a new War; so that besides fair words they
promised to write such Letters to the Pasha of Buda, as should give a stop to
the Investiture of the Princess; but to say truly, the Instructions given were
in such ambiguous terms, that they in essect lest the whole matter to the
discretion of Morteza to act, as he judged most agreeable to the state of
Affairs on the Frontiers, and security of the present Peace.

Thus did the Turkish Court seek to ward off the blow of a War with Germany,
and yet secretly nourished and encouraged it, by giving Orders to the Pasha of
Buda to take up his Winter Quarters with the Prince of Transylvania, and to
follow his directions; but yet so to govern matters with caution, as not to
engage too far on uncertain grounds or doubtful hazard, but to embrace
Propositions of Peace, if offered with honor and security. In prosecution of
these Rules, Morteza observing, that Weymar and Mansfelt having united their
Forces with Gabor, had formed a considerable Army, and were able to sight with
Wallestein General of the Imperialists; joined also his Forces to theirs,
judging it a prudent and politic design to wage a War at the blood and expense
of others. With these encouragements, and with the favor of a good opportunity
the Confederates fell upon the Army of Wallestein near the River Gran, who not
being able to withstand their force and fury, was The Emperors Army deseated.
put to flight, and pursued in the Rear with great slaughter; and endeavoring
to pass the River on two Bridges of Boats, were closely followed by the Princes
Forces, who gaining the pass, put the whole Army into great amazement, and
resolved to pursue them to the Gates of Presburg or Vienna.

Notwithstanding this success, the Prince of Transylvania observing the
backwardness of his Allies to contribute the Succors of Men and Money which
they had promised; and fearing that the unfortunate estate of the Turkish
Affairs should cause the Sultan to disown the War, dispeeded a Messenger to the
Emperor in the Winter-season to excuse the constraint upon him of taking up
Arms, and to offer Terms of Accommodation and Peace: but the Emperor refused
all Treaties, until such time as Gabor had separated himself from his Allies,
and from association with the Turk; upon which Answer Gabor retired to
Cassovia, and Morteza to Pesth. This compliance gave beginning to a Treaty at
Komara, where the Commissioners on part of the Emperor, of the Grand Signior,
and Prince of Transylvania assembled. All Parties seemed inclinable to War, and
yet with occult intentions to make Peace, being necessitated thereunto by the
urgency of their distinct Interests. The Emperor was urged by his Wars with
the Protestants of Germany, and apprehension of Forces from England in favor
of the Elector Palatine, then King of Bohemia: the Grand Signior was encumbred
by the unfortunate condition Peace concluded between the Emperor and Gabor.
of his Wars in Asia: and Bethlem Gabor, jealous of being disowned by the Port,
deserted by his Allies, and exposed to sight and contend singly with the
Emperor. In short, Gabor concluded a Peace with the Emperor apart, which gave
some jealousies and displeasure to the Grand Signior: howsoever he dissembled
his discontent, and willingly interessed Gabor with Morteza as Commissioner for
him; who being variously disposed, yet moved with the considerations of their
common advantage, worked all differences into a Composition of Peace, the
Articles of which being brought to Constantinople by an Internuntio from the
Emperor, and delivered in presence of the two Ambassadors of Gabor, they were
accepted by the Chimacam, and ratified by the Grand Signior. Articles of Peace
Concluded between the Emperor of Germany Ferdinand the Second, and Bethlem
Gabor in the Month of December 1626.
I. THE Prince of Transylvania does promise by the Faith of a Christian never
to move Arms, or use any Hostility against the Majesty of the Emperor, or the
House of Austria, or their Successors, much less to enter into their Dominions
with an Army, nor to aid his Enemies, or keep a Correspondence with them: not
to plot any Innovation in the Kingdom of Hungary or other Christian Countries:
nor to stir up or provoke the Turks, Tartars, or others to invade them: not to
entertain or assist in any evil Counsel against his Majesty, nor to give ear to
the requests and desires of his Enemies; but rather to reveal all their
Conspiracies and Wickednesses, which shall be made known unto him, and by all
means to demonstrate and show a sincere mind truly desirous of Peace, and
sollicitous of the common Good.

II. That the Prince shall instantly depart with his whole Army out of the
Territories and Cities of the Emperor; and that he shall restore as well all
Goods belonging to the Imperial Treasure, as those of his faithful Subjects.

III. That he shall remove from him the Rebel Mansfelt, and all other his
Followers and Adherents desirous to invade the Dominions of the Emperor; and
that he shall not aid any Stranger whatsoever, who at his instance has entered
into the Territories of his Majesty with Count Mansfelt, to whom Letters of
public Safety shall be given, that they may return by twenty or thirty in a
Troop, conditionally that in no placo of their Retreat they shall join with the
Enemies of the Emperor.

IV. That seeing it is fit for Establishment of the Peace, that the Inhabitants
of Countries and Cities belonging to the Prince, by consont of the Emperor,
should remain during his life in Obedience and Fidelity to him; and that those
Inhabitants should do Homage to the Emperor (saving their corporal Oath to the
Prince) to keep inviolate these Articles, That they should have leave by
Letters of full Authority and Power granted them by the Prince in their first
Assemblies and Conventions to make such Oath of Homage.

V. That at the same time of performing the Homage and Oath, besides the Oath
before the last War, they shall take a new Oath according to the Agreement
between the Prince and the Commissioners of the Emperor.

VI. The Prince shall procure, that all Places upon the Consines which were
taken by the Turks in the last War, be restored; and that all Captives taken
Prisoners shall be set at liberty: and that the Prince shall procure the
freedom of all such the Emperors Subjects as shall be in the Turkish Captivity.

VII. That all the Subjects of the Emperor, lately incited and drawn to the
Service of the Prince, shall be free from their Oath: and if the Prince has
any of their Writings Obligatory in his hands, that he shall restore them: and
that these Conditions being confirmed, all other things formerly treated, shall
remain in their former state and vigor.

VIII. That if any other difficulties arise, they shall be accontmodated with
fidelity and quietness by Commissioners on both parts: And that all those who
in the last Commotions have served the Prince, shall be absolved according to
the Treaty and Agreement at Vienna.

IX. That all the Inhabitants of Cities and Countries, which have served the
Prince, shall be absolved; only those excepted, who have voluntarily taken up
Arms against the Emperor, for whom the Prince only shall intercede, excusing
always private men, who have done private wrongs; for they shall according to
Law and Custom seek their restitution by Civil Action.

X. That all other Articles of Peace concluded at Nichilsburg and Vienna, shall
remain in their former vigor and force: And that all Goods of the Emperors
Clergy, possessed by the Prince from the Year 1619. to this present day, shall
be restored; except the Abbeys of Replana belonging to the Seminaries of
Strigonium, for which the Prince shall pay yearly to the Emperor five hundred
Florens.



These Articles being thus agreed, and signed, and approved by the Sultan, in
the month of September following 1627. the Articles between the Emperor and
the Grand Signior were also agreed at Komara, the which are as follow
translated out of the Turkish word for word. THat seeing the Peace established
formerly at Zitwar, Vienna, Komara, and Chiarman, has remained in the same
state, and in the same Articles, without any alteration, it shall not be
violated by any new occasion of contention.

That the differences of Vatz, whereof is made mention at the present; shall
rest in the same state that the Commissioners on both sides shall agree.

That the new Forts built upon the Confines of Croatia, contrary to the Peace,
shall be demolished. To which purpose our said Deputy Mehmet, and our Vizier
Mortesa Pasha, shall meet upon the Frontiers of Buda with your Deputies, at the
time appointed by the Treaty, and thereupon the places on both sides shall
cause to be demolished the Forts built contrary to the Peace: wherein if they
find any impediment, they shall choose able and valiant men to perform and
execute the said service.

That after the approbation of this happy Peace, your great Ambassador shall
come to Komara, and ours shall repair with our Imperial Letters to Strigonium:
and there one of them advising the other, yours shall set forward to our happy
Port, and ours shall advance to you. For so it is agreed by our Imperial Order,
both carrying with them the new Imperial Capitulations.

That all complaints of Villages subject to both parts, shall be laid aside,
and no Violences, Taxes, or Contribution, contrary to our sormer Convention,
shall be exacted. And all Forts built in the common Consines shall be rased.
And reciprocally it shall be made known, according to the ancient Treaty, what
great men do dwell amongst our Tributaries. And for the execution of the
sixteenth and seventeenth Articles of the Peace of Zitwa, the tenth of Vienna,
and the fourth of Komara and Chiarman (for such was then the agreement) two
Capigi-Pasha's of our high Port shall be deputed and dispeeded, the one to this
side, and the other to that side of the Danube. And upon your part you shall
send two such qualified persons to the same places: who being met together with
the Deputies of Mortesa Pasha and the Palatine of Hungary, shall rectify all
disorders, and see that good Justice be done on both Parties: for so it is our
most high pleasure.

That the Slaves which have been taken during this our Treaty, shall be freed
and set at liberty without any ransom: and those who were taken before the said
Treaty shall be exchanged and redeemed, according to their qualities and
estates, by the interposition of Mortesa Pasha and the Palatine of Hungary
deputed for that purpose.

For the good of poor people on both sides, the Commissioners have thought it
fit to conclude this renewed Peace for twenty five years from 1627. Whereunto
we have given our Imperial assent.

That all Merchants, and other our Subjects on both parts, shall have safe
passage and conduct through both our Dominions: and we have given Command to
our Pasha's, Beglerbeghs, Generals, Beghs, and Captains, upon our Consines, to
apprehend, bring into Justice, and punish all such as shall any way disturb or
molest them contrary to the Peace. As likewise the Palatine of Hungary and
other your Ministers shall do on your part, is they find any such offenders.

That our Beglerbeghs, Sanzacks, Captains, and Governors; and your Generals,
Commanders, and Captains shall upon occasion employ all such persons as are
lovers of the Peace and common Good.

That there shall be no damage or hurt done to any of our Subjects in any of
your Kingdoms or Dominions, neither by Sea nor Land: as there shall none be
done to yours in our Dominions.

That all bypast wrongs, enmities, and unkindnesses on both parts shall be
forgotten and laid asleep: and that this happy Peace shall be sincerely and
firmly continued and kept inviolate.

Upon condition that the Emperor perform and observe all the aforesaid
Articles, and that there follow no action from any Ministers, contrary to the
said Peace; We promise and swear by God our Creator, who made the whole world
of nothing, and by the honor which we bear to our most high Prophet Mahomet
Mustapha, That there shall not be done during the whole term of the said Peace,
the least hurt or damage to the Subjects, Countries, Kingdoms, Castles, or
Forts of the said Emperor, by any of our Ministers or Armies, nor to any
Christian Slaves subject to our happy Port.



By these Articles we may observe, that both Parties were desirous of a present
Peace, rather than one which was durable; for things are so slubber'd over to
serve the present occasion, that they leave all disputes undecided, till time
should happen more proper to interpret them with the Sword, than with the Pen:
like sores obducted by an unskilful Surgeon, which festering within, must be
again opened before they are cured: howsoever they served the turn of Gabor,
whose interest it was to maintain an ill correspondence between the two
Emperors. Peace Ferdinand the Second and Sultan Morat, gave some reputation to
the Affairs of the Turks: so that notwithstanding the late success of the
Persian in their War by raising the Siege of Bagdat, and overthrow of the
Turkish Army; yet that King finding himself now engaged alone, and singly to
contend with the Ottoman Power, feared the Puissance of that Empire, lest being
roused and heated with the sensible pinches of the late disgrace, they should
call up and invigorate all their Forces to a revenge, which might at length
tend to a ruin and destruction of Persia, unless Fortune which attended the
first auspicious beginnings with success, did also continue constant, and still
accompany their Arms, which could hardly be expected.

Wherefore on these considerations becoming more faint in prosecution of the
War, the Persian dispatched an Ambassador to Constantinople, furnished with
various Proposals and projects for a Peace; but still matters driving so as to
reserve the City and Province of Bagdat or Babylon in the hands of the Persian,
the Treaty became ineffectual, in regard the Vizier (who was then called Halil
Pasha) judged it a high and an irrecoverable disreputation to the Empire to be
dismembered of so principal a part of it. Wherefore the Ambassador being
dispeeded away with some neglect, the Turks armed with that diligence and heat,
that they entered Persia with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand men, with
which appearance the people being dismayed, suffered Tauris to be taken without
much opposition. From hence marching to Bagdat, they found the City well
provided and defended with a numerous Garrison, from whence many Sallies were
made with variety of Fortune, till at length the Turkish Soldiers being
wearied and tired with incessant labor and watchings, many of them fled from
their Colors; and with such diminutions, the Army being much abated in its
numbers, the Vizier withdrew them from the Persian Dominions.

Some months after the Turkish Army being reinforced, the Vizier entering again
into Persia, overthrew the Turcmen who opposed him in Another Expedition into
Persia.
his March, and destroyed the Gregorians, who were friends to the Persian, with
a very great slaughter, took Moroc their General and cut off his head, and
adding to these Victories the report of having taken some few inconsiderable
Towns, this Expedition ended without other advantages, or progress of their
Arms. This ill success much troubled the Councils at Constantinople; for they
considered that they had now waged an expensive, laborious War for the space of
three years without any effect agreeable to the blood and charge which
maintained it, but rather to the loss and damage of the Empire. The Soldiers
abhorred the length and tediousness of the way, and the misery of the March,
being to pass over vast Countries and Deserts, where there was nothing besides
rocks, sands, and barrenness: many Horses, Camels, and other Beasts of burden
perished for want of nourishment; and where provisions were to be had, the
price was so excessive, that the Timariots and other Soldiers had not a purse
to defray their charges. The Enemy likewise was very strong, for the Sosi was
at the head of forty thousand brave Horse, which daily infested the Ottoman
Camp, beat their Convoys, and cut off their Provisions, and so obstructed them,
that they could not advance. The Vizier Halil then General being discouraged by
these Proposition made by the Persian for a Peace.
disasters, was inclinable to accept of the Proposition made by the Persian,
viz. That Babylon should remain to his eldest Son in Fee, and to his Heirs and
Successors, acknowledging to the Grand Signior a Tribute as great as the
yearly Revenue which proceeded from it, at the time when it was in the hands of
the Sultan. But this middle way seemed an Expedient dishonorable to the
Greatness of this Empire, and that which argued pusillanimity and want of
courage in the Government, and therefore was rejected by the Council of State
as well as by the Military men. Howsoever the Persians taking their measures by
the disposition they discovered in the Vizier thereunto, adventured to dispatch
an Ambassador to Constantinople with tender of the same project; but as he was
coldly and faintly received, so he was in a few days dispatched with few words
and little respect, as if he had been sent as a Spy to discover Rejected by the
Turk.
the state and condition of the City, and the inclination of the Prince, rather
than to obtain any benefit by a Treaty. For now Amurat growing into years,
increased in spirit, and discovered a Martial courage; he began to leave his
delights, and walks in gardens, and the society with his Mother and Women, and
to assume thoughts of War and Government: such as entertained him in softness
and luxurious pastimes were reproved by the Ministers about him, and by them
persuaded to buckle on his Armor, and to delight in Martial Exercises: so that
now new measures were taken in all Affairs; and in the first place Halil the
Great Vizier was recalled from being General in Persia, and the Pasha of
Darbiquier put into his place; and though he was Brother-in-law to the Grand
Signior, yet being esteemed at Court as a person who had amassed great richess
in his employment, he was forced to disgorge five hundred thousand Crowns as an
ease of his burden, and an atonement to pacify the Sultan for the fault of his
misfortunes and ill success.

In these times of licentiousness and revolt, the Pirates of Algier and Tunis
began also to cast off their respect and reverence to the Ottoman Empire; for
being become rich by the Prizes they had taken on Christian Vessels, they
resolved to set up for themselves, and to esteem the The Pirates of Tunis and
Algier trouble the Seas.
Peace which Christian Princes had made with the Grand Signior not to concern
them; but as if their Governments had been independent, demanded a particular
Treaty, and distinct Articles with themselves: so that now daring to do any
thing, six Vessels of Tunis chased some Christian Ships into Rhodes, and there
attaqued them, notwithstanding that the Castle shot at them: they afterward
took a Dutch Ship which had laden at Alexandria; and entering the Port of
Salines in Cyprus, they engaged with two Venetians: the lesser Ship made a good
resistance, but having no help she was thrice fired, and at last burnt: the
other being a Ship of eight hundred Tuns, was cowardly set on fire by the
Mariners, and abandoned, escaping ashore with their Boats. Then they sailed for
Scanderone, where finding a Dutch Ship and a Polaca they took both, and then
landed. The Aga of the Scale with all the Inhabitants fled, so that finding no
opposition they ransacked and robbed all the Warehouses, and afterward set
them on fire: the greatest loss fell upon the English and Dutch, the first lost
about ten thousand Dollars, and the latter about thirty thousand. Of these
losses and breach of Peace the Christian Ambassadors much lamented; and
complained, that if some remedy were not applied thereto, all Trade must be
given over, no security being to be expected in the Articles and Faith of the
Grand Signior: to which, though the Vizier and Great men did seem to yield a
favorable ear, and promise redress; yet being corrupted with some share of the
Spoils, and sweetened with part of the robbery, they began to reject the
Memorials of the Ambassadors, and to allow the pleas of the Pirates as
grounded on some solid foundation of reason and Religion: fuffering them to
publish discourses, that the Turks were obliged to maintain a perpetual War
with the Christians, as Enemies to their Law and Alchoran; and though policy
may suggest some conveniences by peace with them, yet those considerations are
matters of sin rather than of reason. To make all this good, the Divan of Tunis
sent two Deputies to remonstrate the great benefit and advantage the Port
received by the depredations and hostile acts which they committed on the
Christians; and to inculcate this argument the better, they declared, That they
had lately taken two Galleys of Malta, out of the spoils of which, they
presented unto the Sultan two Stirrups of Gold, with diverse Slaves, two of
which were Cavaliers, one of the Roman, and the other of the French Nation:
those which were Youths, and comely in shape and feature, were entered into the
Service of the Seraglio, and the more strong and robustious were committed to
the service of the Galleys; so that the Turks were inwardly pleased with these
Piracies, howsoever gave good words to the Christian Ambassadors, promised
much and effected nothing. At that time Trade flourished greatly in those
parts, and had done much more, had it not been interrupted by the Piracies of
Barbary; and the Trade was especially so great with Venice, that a Turkish
Merchant called Rodul Aga, whose whole Negotiation and dealing was for that
place, dyed worth a million of Soltanees, of which for want of children the
Grand Signior became the sole Heir. But one accident happened about this time
on the Seas worthy to be recounted. The Seas (as we have said) swarming then
with Pirates, the General of Candia with three Galleys coasting on the Seas for
defense and protection of Merchant-Ships, arrived in the Port of Andro, from
whence espying a Gally plying close under the shore, and believing her to be a
Corsaire or Pirate, made up to her; and because it was about the glimpse of the
evening, so that she could not be well known or distinguished, the General
rashly charged her, and meeting a stout resistance, many were killed before it
was known that the Gally belonged to the Archipelago, commanded by Dervis Bei,
one of the Grand Signiors Captains: but so A Fight at Sea by mistake.
soon as the mistake was discovered, the Candiot General demanded of the Turk a
thousand excuses, returned him his Gally and Slaves again, and whatsoever was
taken from him, bestowing with them an infinity of complements, supposing that
thereby the spirit of the Turk being somewhat appeased and mollified, he would
represent this encounter with the more favorable terms and advantage at the
Port. Notwithstanding which offices of kindness, Dervis Bei without farther
loss of time passed up to Constantinople, bringing his Gally in without
Lantern, shot thorough, ill treated, and shattered, feigning himself also to be
wounded related that he had lost forty four Levents, and seventy seven Slaves
which were killed; and that all the Haratch or Tribute-money, which was
collected for the Grand Signiors service from the several Islands, was robbed
and embezled by these Candiots. His complaints were aggravated by many
circumstances, and being assisted with the clamours of other Beys or Captains
of Galleys, the noise and dispute was exceeding high in the Divan, urging, that
the Venetians were obliged to make good a loss which they had caused rather out
of malice than mistake. At that time Georgio Giustiniano resided at
Constantinople for the most Serene Republic, who to oppose the high clamours
of these Complainants, showed courage, and accompanied his answers with
prudence and resolution, which are often very convincing in the Turkish Court.
They alleged, that the Peace was broken, he answered, That it would not be the
first time, and that they ought not to yield entire credit to the relation of
persons passionate and partial in their own cause; that such accidents as these
were as ordinary and common in the World as cold and heat, as fair and foul
weather; and that so soon as the error was discovered, and the Gally known not
to belong to Barbary, but to the Grand Signior, it was punctually and entirely
restored with all the excuses imaginable. In short, this business which had so
bad an aspect at the first, by the dexterity of this Minister, and giving
something to Dervis Bei whereby to stop his mouth, the complaint ceased, and
all farther proceedings were superseded.

The Wars in Persia being unsuccessful, it was proposed in Council, Proposals
of Accommodation with Abassa.
that a Peace should be made, if possible, with Abassa Pasha; that his demands,
whatsoever they were, should be granted, and promises given him of Honors and
Preferment: but the inveterate enmity and hate which the Janisaries bore him,
and the difficulty there was to persuade Abassa, that the overtures made him
were free and candid, and not mixed with treachery and design, were
obstructions not to be obviated or overcome. Wherefore Abassa keeping mutual
Intelligence with the Persians, and receiving assistance and succors from
them, was become very formidable and strong, and the Town of Erzirum well
fortified with Works and a numerous Garrison. Howsoever the Janisaries, his
mortal Enemies, pressing the Vizier to proceed against him, at length obliged
him to besiege the place; which having done, and closely begirt it, the most
forward and brave amongst the Janisaries were the first to scale the Walls, but
were repulsed by the valor of stout and resolute Soldiers; Erzirum besieged.
for they knowing that there was no other safety but in their Arms, and no
other mercy than an ignominious death, being the just reward of their
Rebellion, refused to give or to receive quarter: wherefore they made frequent
Sallies on the Enemy, and as many Janisaries of them as they took Prisoners,
they immediately hanged about the Walls, as a spectacle of horror to their
Associates. This resolution and cruelty deterred the Turks from their frequent
assaults and storms made upon the Town; and the many Batteries and
Fortifications rendered the place almost impregnable, so that there seemed no
other hopes to remajn, but to overcome them by a long Siege and Famine: but
Abassa had so well provided against this danger, with such plenty of
provisions, that the Turkish Army began to be more straightened for want of
sustenance than the besieged; so that becoming weary and discouraged amidst so
many difficulties, they raised the Siege with such disorder and haste, that
they The Siege raised.
left several Pieces of Cannon behind them, and retiring with some confusion,
were charged in the Rear, so that many Janisaries fell a Sacrisice to the hate
and revenge of the Enemy. The News of this success coming to Constantinople,
was ill received; but the disaster thereof, according to the usual custom, was
attributed to the Vizier who was General; for which cause he was deprived of
his Office, and the Selictar Aga (who carries the Sword before the Grand
Signior) was put into his place, a person of a fierce, bloody, and cruel
disposition.

To these, new troubles were added out of Tartary. For Mahomet the King of that
Country, exalted to the Princely Dignity (as we have already declared) by the
favor and Election of that People, though contrary New troubles from Tartary
to the sense and pleasure of the Port, was now fallen from the good esteem
which they conceived for him, because he gave some hinderance to their usual
Incursions on the Polonians and Cosacks out of memory and gratitude to the
assistance they had contributed toward his Election; for which reason being as
it were famished for want of their usual depredations, they refused to obey his
Commands, and then openly threw off their Obedience to him as their Prince. The
Turks, who always envied this Dignity to Mahomet, rejoiced to see this discord
between him and his People, and therefore thought it time to make use of this
occasion to re-instate Gherey the elder Brother into the possession of his
Kingdom; whom the Turks, for his better security, having placed at Rhodes, the
usual Retirement of the Tartarian Princes, dispatched a Squadron of Galleys to
fetch him from thence to Constantinople; where being arrived, he was received
with a magnificent and Princely Entertainment by the Sultan: that so the Fame
thereof forerunning his arrival in Tartary, the people might be better prepared
to concur with the Port in their acceptance of him for their King. He was
afterward conducted to Caffa, the Grand Signiors Town in Tartary, with a
strong Fleet of fifty Galleys, where at his first landing he was received by
Cant-Emir, a rich and powerful Tartar, and Chief of the Turkish Faction, and by
many others with great honor and solemnity, with whom also a considerable
Party most willingly engaged. But the Cosacks of Poland and Circassians,
friends to Mahomet the Brother, joining their Troops to his Forces, became too
strong for the Turks; for giving them Battle near the Enclosures of the Danube,
at a place called Bandet, they defeated them, and killed three or four thousand
of their men, putting all to Fire and Sword round about; and entering on the
Seas with their Fleet of Boats, took five of the Turkish Galleys: with which
ill success the Tartars, which took part with Cant-Emir, being discouraged,
abandoned their Colors and fled; so that Cant-Emir was forced to take
Sanctuary in Caffa, which being a Town belonging to the Grand Signior, it was
hoped, that the reverence they owed to that Name, would cause them to refrain
all violence thereunto. But the Tartars, provoked by this late effusion of
blood, lost all respect to that Government; so that besieging the Town, they
assaulted and took it, and therein the Son of Cant-Emir whom they cut in
pieces, the Father escaping in a disguise from the City. The News hereof
arriving at Constantinople was greatly displeasing, and caused many serious
Debates and Consultations thereupon; the wisest and most sober of the Council
was for dissembling the matter, and with their usual dextcrity to suffer what
they could not remedy: for that it was by no means advisable in the present
conjuncture of Affairs, to proceed unto an open rupture with the Tartars,
fearing lest the Christians, Persians, and other Enemies should make a benesit
of this occasion, and joining with a Nation so strong in Horse, should
dangerously press upon the Empire, and force them to the ultimate extremity of
affairs. Wherefore an Envoye Extraordinary was sent to the Tartars, who
covering the inward sentiments of regret and anger which the Sultan conceived
for the late disgrace, seemed to wonder at the cause and reason of the last
Engagement, as if it had been acted without the knowledge or order of the Grand
Signior; and thus with gentle terms insinuating, that the Surrender of Cassa
would be very acceptable to the Port, and that which would atone for all
miscarriages, and be such an offering of pacisication, as would reconcile all
past differences, and restore a perfect correspondence between the Sultan and
them, the Tartars readily assented to the demand, upon condition, that the
Turks should impose no other King upon them than him, whom by general consent
they had elected for their Prince.

Though differences were thus concluded with the Tartars, yet the

But the grand Concernments which busied the thoughts of the Turks was the
Rebellion of Abassa, and the War in Persia, the management of which was the
charge and care of the Selictar Aga lately made Vizier, called Serches Pasha.
His Headquarters were at the beginning of this year taken up at Iconium,
called by the Turks Conie; and Abassa was encamped at Kaisaria, against whom
the Vizier marched; and being nearly approached, the Janisaries earnestly
urged, that Battle might be given the Enemy; but the Vizier having received
Instructions not to engage, if possible, but rather to enter into a Treaty, and
to propose terms of Accommodation, delayed the time, and with various excuses
eluded the present premures of the Janisaries; at which they became so angry,
that they slew into an The Janisaries mutiny.
open Mutiny, cutting the Cords of his Tents, stoning him, and wounding him in
the head: by which open violence the Vizier being compelled to make known his
Orders, he assembled the chief Commanders of the Spahees and Janisaries, giving
them to understand, that the Grand Signiors pleasure was to make up the
difference with Abassa, as the only means to conclude an intestine and
unnatural War, and to be able to withstand the Persians, and regain the Country
and reputation which the Turks had lost. This Proposition seemed plausible to
the Commanders at the General Assembly, and more especially because it was the
pleasure and injunction of the Grand Signior; but more difficult it was to
incline the rough and obstinate minds of the Janisaries to a resolution so
different to their natures, and so contrary to that revenge which they had
deeply rooted in their hearts and sworn to execute: howsoever the persuasions
which the Officers used to their inferior Soldiers, putting them in memory of
the blood of their Companions, and how destructive the continuance of such a
War must necessarily prove for the future by those large essusions of blood
hwich they must expect farther to make, were so prevalent upon them, that at
length they condescended to a Treaty, and to receive Abassa for a Friend and a
Fellow-Souldier. Abassa at They consent to treat with Abassa.
first suspecting some treachery, refused to give a private meeting to the
Vizier; but the Vizier giving his Brother the Beglerbegh of Caramania and the
Pasha of Anatolia for Hostages, the day and place for a Conference was
appointed; where both Parties meeting, Articles were agreed, that Abassa should
still continue to be Pasha of Erzirum, his Son Pasha of Bosra, his Kahya or
Lieutenant to be Pasha of Maraseh (all which were places on the Confines of
Persia) a general Act of Pardon and Anmestie was to be given to Abassa and his
whole Army, and the Articles sworn unto in the most solemn manner by the
Vizier, and confirmed in the public Camp of the Janisaries, who also promised
to maintain this word and promise of the Vizier; to all which the Grand Signior
gave his Hand, Abassa reconciled to the Grand Sigmot.
and affixed his Royal Signature. A Reconciliation being in this manner
completed, the City of Erzirum resigned it self to the Obedience of the Grand
Signior, and the Army of Abassa was employed on the Confines of Persia, and
converted against the Enemy. The Vizier also was appointed to proceed on the
same Enterprise; but his Army was so ill provided of all necessaries, that he
made his excuse, and refused to march forward; but on the contrary, he returned
to Constantinople in company with Abassa, where with many demonstrations of
friendship and respect, he was conducted to the presence of the Grand Signior
to receive Honor, and the reward of his penitence, and return to obedience.
The approach of these two great Personages near to Constantinople made much
noise and rumor in the City; some blamed the weakness of the Government for
accepting an Enemy unto favor, and that the crowning of his Rebellion with
rewards, was to encourage others in the like practices. The Vizier was also
murmured against for leaving the Army and the War, contrary to the Royal
Command, by such as were emulous of his Greatness: but as envy is converted
into veneration, and The Vizier and Abassa make their Entry into Constantinople.
ceases as smoke does, when it is blown up by the flame of success and glory;
so those who were emulous of these persons, submitted to all obsequious offices
toward them, and dissembling their malice, went to meet them as far as
Scutari, that they might add to their Train and Equipage, and help at the
Solemnity of their Entrance. All people now cast their eyes on the Vizier and
Abassa, as the two great men of this Age; the first was esteemed for his
dexterous and successful management in bringing over Abassa to his submission
and obedience; for though he was not famed much for his great Feats of Arms,
yet this Reconciliation of Abassa was accounted a Masterpiece of Policy, and
better service than a Victory. Abassa also drew the eyes of the people, who
crowded to see so great a Captain, that could contend with the Port, and put
all Asta into disturbance, and in conclusion could make the same Arms serve his
Master, which had lately before given a check and stop to all the Ottoman
Force. The Vizier was the first introduced to the Royal Presence, where being
graciously received, he was presented with a Vest of Sables and a Cemiter set
with Jewels. Abassa was afterward admitted, and having performed his obeisance
by touching the ground with his forehead after their fashion; he declared, that
he never was other than a faithful Vassal to the Sultan, and that he had taken
up Arms for his sake, that he might subjugate the insolence of the Janisaries,
and with their blood revenge the death, and sacrifice to the Ghost of his
murdered Brother Osman, that they might learn to reverence their Princes for
the suture, and learn to know how sacred the blood is of their Sovereign. The
Grand Signior seemed kindly to accept this Apology, and as a token thereof
bestowed three Vests upon him, which was a treble Honor of that kind, and made
him Pasha of Bosna; on which employment he immediately entered: and though when
such Offices are bestowed, it is commonly the custom for that person who is
invested in the Employment given, to kiss the sleeve of the Grand Signior
publicly by way of thanks; yet lest such demonstration of Honor should ill
afsect the eyes of the Janisaries, and cause murmuring and repinings amongst
the most envious of the Soldiery, his last Audience was designed privately,
and his Dispatch procured in more secret and familiar manner, and therefore
more obliging than was usual.

To yield some assistance to the present growing Charges of the Empire, the
Vizier imposed a heavy Tax on the Christians and Jews; on the first it was
levied with all severity; but the Jews found more favor by their Arts and
secret management of Affairs; for they are a people The Jews at Constantinople
how treated.
of some Authority and Power in Turkey: they are cursed by particular persons,
but caressed by the generality: they are Slaves in all Countries, and yet
acquire somewhat of Mastership and Propriety: they are Vagabonds, and yet every
Country is their own: they cannot buy Lands, and yet daily increase their
Fortunes: they multiply in abundance, because they all marry, and are not
destroyed by Wars: they are great Confidents of the Turks, and Enemies to the
Christians. In short, covetousness in Constantinople is like a public
Courtisan, to whom the Jews are the Panders and Ruflians.

The Grand Signior passing one day through the streets, unhappily Transylvania,
who because he did not immediately descend from his Horse in token of
reverence, he caused him and his whole Family to be imprisoned; but being
afterward excused by the Chimacam to have only been a matter of inadvertency,
his omission was pardoned, and so released from his restraint.

The Soldiery having for a long time been governed by a loose and gentle hand,
continued their licentious way of living, committing many outrages on the
Merchants and Inhabitants of Constantinople, against which many Decrees having
been published, and Proclamations made without any effect or notice of the
Soldiery; the Vizier was unwilling to dally longer; and therefore taking a
Spahee and a Janisary, hanged them up, and cut off their Heads, and with such
course and method of severity he so abated the haughty stomachs of the
Soldiers already mortified by the assumption of Abassa into favor, that they
began to yield unto Command, and to behold their Rulers with an eye of respect,
as those which were seated in some degree above themselves; for till now there
was scarce a common Janisary, but who thought himself to be the Creator or
Elector of his General, and therefore to be little inferior to him in Power
and Dignity. And as this Vizier was severe toward the Soldiery, so he
demeaned himself with equal rigor toward the Pasha's and Grandees of the
Court; which though it was an humor in the Vizier at that conjuncture laudable
and necessary, yet it procured him such enmity, as removed him at a distance,
and caused him to be sent into Persia to command the Army, and by that means to
expose him to the hazard and difficulties of doubtful success in a dangerous
War.

The Vizier being departed, the Grand Signior appeared in public on
Horseback, together with his Brother by his side, an unusual sight amongst the
Turks; but the Queen Mother, who in absence of the Vizier ruled much, commanded
that it should be so: the Grand Signior had this year a Son born which caused
great rejoicing at Constantinople; because there were few Males at that time
surviving of the Ottoman Line; but scarce was the Festival ended before the
Child died.

But let us now for a while withdraw our Discourse from the Wars of Persia, and
look to the Actions in Poland and Transylvania. Mehmet the late King of
Tartary, who was so displeasing to the Port (as we have already related) was
now dead, to whom succeeded a Kinsman of his called Fembeg Gheray, universally
pleasing and acceptable to that people. This new King, to demonstrate his
prowess, and to act something acceptable to the Port, dispeeded forty thousand
Horse into Podolia and The Tartars overthrown by the Polanders.
Russia to sack and ravage the Country, which dividing themselves into several
Parties, made their Incursions as far as Socal. But in the mean time the
Polonians and Cosacks having formed a strong Body of Horse under the Command of
Stephen Chmieleskie, met them at their return near to Burstinow, where they
gave them a total overthrow; and in like manner Stanislaus Lubomiski encountered
another Party, and overthrow them, leaving thirty thousand slain on the place,
and taking two thousand Prisoners, amongst which was the younger Brother of the
Tartar King. This defeat, as it was the greatest that ever was given to the
Tartars, so it is probable, that had it been well prosecuted at that time by
the Polonians, they might have entered the Chersonesus Tauricus, and without
much opposition have put an end to that Kingdom; but Sigismond King of Poland
had other designs in hand: such mixed Monarchies as that being better able to
defend their own Dominions, than to acquire or conquer others.

To this News ill received at Constantinople supervened the unexpected death of
Bethlem Gabor; unexpected, I say, because that though he had The death of
Bethlem Gabor.
been long laboring under the diseases of Dropsy and Asthma, yet the
greatness of his Soul, and activeness of his Spirit mastered for a long time
his indisposition, so that he seldom or never omitted his Counsels and
business; and to the very time of his death was meditating and contriving
designs, whereby to preserve his Dominions, and enlarge them. And indeed the
Government of Transylvania required no less than such a stirring Spirit: for
being seated between two such powerful Monarchs, as the Emperor and the Turk,
there was need of dexterity and courage to steer between the rocks of such
opposite Interests: sometimes it was necessary to join with one, and anon with
the other: so Sigismond Battori Prince of Transylvania uniting his Forces with
the Emperor's in several Conflicts overthrew the Turk, and kept the scale in
an equal balance: Gabor on the contrary inclined to the Turks, and supported
his Interest with the Ottoman Power, following such Maxims as had been more
ruinous to Christendom, had he transferred them to a Son to imitate and pursue;
but dying without issue, the Government devolved to his Princess by Vote of the
States of the Country, and by Confirmation of the Turk, as we have already
intimated. Gabor knew so well how to deal and treat with the Turks, that he
gained an abatement of ten thousand Dollars of the annual Tribute; he managed
his affairs so subtilely with the Emperor, that he was always invited to a
Peace, and accordingly made his advantage by the Treaty. The other Princes of
Christendom in like manner courted him, and particularly the Cardinal Richelieu
employed one Bornemis, a Gentleman of Transylvania, a Lover of the French
Interest, to be always about him, by whose means, and with the assistance of
twenty thousand Crowns of yearly Pension, he obliged him to make War on the
Emperor, at such seasons as it should be intimated unto him to be most
conducing to the advantage of France. At length, as we have said, giving way to
mortality, he died on the 15th of November, after he had reigned eighteen
years: he was a Prince of great abilities, but exercised them ill to the damage
of Christendom; howsoever he was a Soldier of extraordinary courage and
conduct, having begun to manage his Sword at seventeen years of age, and as it
is said, had been engaged in forty two several Fights. His Widow Katherine,
Sister of the Elector of Brandenburgh, rendered an account to the Port of this
accident, and the Grand Signior immediately returned Answer by Sulficar Aga,
condoling the misfortune, and encouraging her to a dependence on the Port:
which she accepting with due resentment promised obedience to the Grand
Signior, and begged his Protection. But the weather was too boisterous and rude
for a Vessel to be navigated well under the Pilotage of a Woman; for the
situation of the Country between two mighty and potent Monarchs required more
than a masculine mind and courage to free and defend it from the plots, snares,
and violence with which it was, as with a toil, encompassed by those two great
Nimrods of the East and West. And though the Sultan undertook to defend his
Female Ally, yet the diversion of the Ottoman Arms in Persia, the intestine
distractions, and the Minority of the Emperor were such burdens on the
foundation of Empire, and obstructions to great and Heroic Achievements in
behalf of the distressed Princess, that all the promises made to her were
unavailable and ineffectual. For Stephen Bethlem, a Kinsman of the deceased
Prince, a man conspicuous The Widow of Bethlem Gabor persuaded to quit her
Government.
in his own Person and Estate, as well as for the several Governments divided
amongst his Sons, and the interest he had gained in his Country, procured means
to convoke the States at Claudiopolis, and insinuating the foregoing
inconveniences of a Female Government, so prevailed with the Assembly, that
they persuaded the Princess to yield up her Sovereignty to Stephen Gabor, as
one better capacitated for Rule and Sovereignty than her self. Stephen having
thus obtained his intent, entered into a serious Consultation with his Friends
and Relations, whether he should labor to confirm the Government to himself
and entail it to the Family, or renounce it to some other. The first seemed a
matter very dubious and difficult; for that Bethlem Gabor his Predecessor had
disobliged the principal Boyards or Barons of the Country, and thereby derived
an envy and hatred to all his Family: his long and violent government annexed
to the interest of the Turk, had not only rendered his Memory odious to his
own-People, but likewise to the House of Austria, which would be ready to
continue the like prejudice and aversion to any of the same Family, as it did
to the last thereof. For which Reasons, after due and mature consideration, it
was resolved to offer the Government to George Ragotski, a person rich in money
and of great interest, by reason of the Jurisdiction and Castles which he
possessed in Hungary, belonging to his own paternal Inheritance; and in
pursuance thereof they sent Stephen the second Son, and Solomon a Kinsman of
that Family for Ambassadors to Ragotski, representing to him, that they had
preferred his Merit before the Interest of their own Family, and therefore
desired The Principality offered to Ragotski.
him, that he would be pleased to take upon himself the Regency of the
Principality. The offer of Government was a savoury bait to the palate of
Ragotski, which he embraced with singular afsectation and contentment, and was
easily persuaded on this occasion to take a Journey to Varadin, one of the
principal Fortresses and places of consideration in that whole Province, and
was there received by Stephen the Ambassador, Governor of the Citadel, with
firing all the Cannon, and with the common Joy and Festivity of the whole City.
But in the midst of this mirth, an unexpected Messenger arrived with News, that
the States had with common consent elected another Prince, which was Stephen
Bethlem, Father of the Ambassador, and Author of this Counsel. Ragotski was
strangely surprised with this Intelligence, and the Ambassadors were put to
the blush to see their Negotiations under such a shameful defeat: howsoever
resolving to continue constant to their first Election, and to renounce the
interest of their own Family, they still maintained the same obsequious offices
of Honor and Reverence toward Ragotski, as formerly. And notwithstanding the
Orders received from the States to abstain from any other demonstrations of
Honor to Ragotski, than what were ordinary toward a private person of his
Quality and Riches; and that he should retire from the Confines of Transylvania
to the Precincts of his own Castles: yet they still persisted to execute their
first Commission, and so to attract people to his Party; that the number
thereof daily increasing, it was at length agreed, that the first Election not
being fair, the point in Controversy should be determined at Sazburg, a City
of Saxony. The States General being assembled, Ragotski accompanied his
pretensions with a large effusion of Gold, the most powerful and most
convincing Argument imaginable: to which he added, That he had no design to
affect the Principality, had not the same been first offered to him from
Stephen Gabor the Father by the hand of his Son: that it was very improper for
that person to offer a Dignity to another, which he affected for himself: that
it was in the power of the Transylvanians not to have offered him the
Principality; but having once chosen him to it, they could not, without his
disparagement and prejudice, retract from their Election. In short, these
considerations, assisted by the interest of the Princess Dowager, so far
prevailed, that Stephen Bethlem was put aside, and Ragotski, who attended the
success of this matter at Varadin, was with common consent elected Prince;
Ragotski chosen Prince.
from whence being with great Acclamations, and a general concourse of the
people, conducted to Alba Julia, he there took the usual Oath with much
Solemnity and Magnificence; and with Princely Magnificence entertained and
treated the two Ambassadors Stephen and Solomon, and dispensed freely his
money unto diverse; who before being Enemies, were now reconciled, and become
his Friends and Admirers. Liberality in a Prince is the most resplendent Gemm
in all his Crown, and is a light so forcible, that it dazles envy it self, and
puts out all the eyes of suspicion and jealousy.

By this time the Great Vizier was far advanced with his Army into Persia,
having been encouraged to proceed by the feigned flight, or rather retre at of
the Enemy, who burned, destroyed, and laid waste all round them, as they
retired; which put the Turks to such inextricable difficulties, that in two
months March they had all the inconveniences and miseries to contend with,
which commonly attend Armies in strange Countries; the Plains through which
they traveled were abandoned by the Inhabitants, and void of provisions, the
Mountains were covered with Snow and comfortless; and what was worst, the
Persians kept all the narrow passages so strongly guarded, that the Vizier was
now more in danger of Famine than of the Sword: but being a person of great
sense and experience in Military affairs, he prudently disingaged himself from
the intricacy of these dangers; and encamping his Army in the Plain of Amedan,
he so provoked the hot Spirits of the Persians, that they resolve to assault
him on that side of his Camp, which they judged A Victory gained by the Turks
over the Persians.
to be the most weakly defended; of which having some advertisement, he
secretly laid an Ambuscado in the way, which so happily succeeded, that he
killed eight thousand Persians on the place; but howsoever the Victory cost so
dear, and was so bloody by the loss of the stoutest Janisaries, and the bravest
of the Soldiery, that the news thereof made little noise or rejoicing at
Constantinople.

With this Intelligence the Vizier demanded new Recruits; for that besides the
abatement of his numbers by the last Engagement, the multitudes of the Enemy
increased, and his own Soldiers fled from their Colors; of which many being
observed to enter Constantinople, notwithstanding the severe Decrees of Martial
Law published against them, put the Grand Signior into a high choler and
indignation. And being desirous to reinforce the Viziers Army with all the
Recruits that he was The difficulty of sending men into Persia.
able, Proclamations were made, that all the Militia at Constantinople should
immediately pass over unto Scutari under their respective Commanders; and that
whosoever received one Asper of Pay from the Grand Signior in quality of a
Soldier, should immediately pass the Chanel into Asta, and follow their
Leaders to the War. But so great was the abhorrency which the Soldiers had to
this March into Persia, calling it the Sepulcher and Cemetery of the Turks,
that few or none would obey, every one flying, hiding, and shifting for himself
as well as he could; during which fears and troubles, the ways from Persia were
so obstructed by the Curdes, that in the space of three or four months no News
arrived at Constantinople from the Army, which caused as great apprehensions
and affrightments there, as if the Empire had been reduced to the utmost
extremity. Nor did the Sultan want jealousies and fears of receiving affronts
from the Emperor, and King of Poland; the first of which had a fair
opportunity presented of regaining all Transylvania, especially at a time when
that Country was divided by two several Factions; but more pressing and
troublesome were the Cosacks, who daily The Cosacks trouble the Turks.
infested the Black Sea, and to the great reproach of the Imperial City
perpetually disturbed it with Alarms, passing up almost in sight of
Constantinople: of which complaints being made to the Polonian Ambassadors, he
answered with some indignation, That the Cosacks had reason for what they
acted; for that since the Tartars had by Orders from the Grand Signior made
their late irruption into that Country, as they could well prove from the
Commission taken amongst the Baggage of the Prince of Tartary in the last
defeat, the Cosacks might with all justice assume to themselves a method of
revenge. But the Grand Signior not being able to support this affront, or to
see himself braved on the very Banks of his Imperial Seat, and his Villages and
Towns round about burnt and pillaged by a crew of Free-booters and Pirates,
cast all the blame on the Chimacam, to whom in his rage he gave such a blow
with his sist on the face, that blood issued from his nose; and had not the
Queen Mother interceded for him, he had been delivered into the hand of the
Executioner to take away his life. Nor was the Captain-Pasha in less danger at
his return; because, that upon his assurance, that the Cosacks would not for
that year make any attempt in the Chanel of Constantinople, the Grand Signior
had assented, that the Fleet of Galleys should that Summer make a Voyage into
the Archipelago; which mistake having been the cause of all this affront, the
Captain-Pasha was to share in the blame, and had likewise in the punishment,
had not good Friends interposed between him and danger. Nor were the Cosacks
satisfied with their late Plunder, but speedily made another return with two
hundred Boats; and though the whole Fleet of Galleys were then in Port, yet
they had the boldness to proceed as far as Pompey's Pillar, and thereby to
hinder all Provisions from passing to Constantinople by way of the Black Sea.
And what gave greater fear than all this, was the News which came at the same
time, that the Poles were on the Frontiers with thirty thousand Horse; to whom
immediately a Chaous or Envoye was dispatched with Propositions very
advantageous to the Crown of Poland, conditionally that the continual
irruptions made by the Cosacks should be stopped, and they restrained within
the due terms of peace and moderation. The Chaous found a civil reception from
the Poles, and promises of compliance, in regard that the King had some
intentions of making War upon the Moscovite; but whilst these things were in
agitation, and that the Chaous was ready to return, behold on a sudden News
came, that ten thousand Tartars were broken into Podolia, which put all things
back again, and so changed the style of Affairs, that in the stead of Articles
of Peace, the Chaous was again returned with the menaces of War, and with
reproaches for the last perfidious action.

Notwithstanding all these troubles abroad, the Puissance of the Ottoman Empire
might have been able to have struggled with greater difficulties, had not its
own intestine distractions rendered all things dangerous, and of a malevolent
aspect. The Government was at that time chiefly in the hands of the four
Brothers-in-law, who had married four The disorders in the Ottoman State.
Sisters of the Grand Signior's, and for that reason were powerful, and
employed in the principal Offices of State, and commonly drew contrary to the
opinions of the Mufti and Chimacam, which two last were not well accorded
between themselves; for that the latter encroached on the Office of the Mufti,
to the great scandal and discontent of all the religious and literate men in
the whole City; howsoever they both joined in consultation by what means they
might best secure themselves and the Government from the lusts and evil designs
of this quadruple Fraternity; but their wisdom and interests were too weak to
contrive remedies against such high oppressions; for besides the violences
daily practiced by the Brothers, the extravagant humors in the Sultan himself
added to the disorders of State, and increased the discontents and
dissatisfactions of the people: for though Morat was naturally endowed with a
good wit and parts, was stout and of a good courage; yet as his perpetual
debauchery in Wine rendered him in appearance but of a weak understanding, mixed
with much levity, so it caused his accessions of the Falling sickness (to which
he was subject) to return often, whereby the strength of his brain was daily
weakened and impaired: he was negligent also in the performance of those
Ceremonies which his Ancestors were accustomed to observe; nor did he live with
that gravity and regular course which is agreeable to the Grandeur of so great
a Prince: for sometimes he would go out of his Seraglio with no other
Attendance than of three or four men, which were for the most part Buffoons,
Players upon the Gittern, and Eunuchs; and with no better an Equipage would he
sometimes be seen on Horseback, or in his Boat rowed on the Bosphorus with six
Oars only: by which actions and other mean sallies of Youth, he created such a
contempt toward his Person, that evil men grew factions and weary, and entered
into Conspiracies against his life, whilst the good men feared and presaged the
ruin and downfall of the Empire: for neither justice, nor order, nor obedience
prevailed; no Offices were conferred for Merit, but by money, or some other
unlawful means; there remained no Counselors of true faith and integrity, nor
Soldiers almost either of experience for Sea or Land-adventures. The people
being burdened by double Taxes and Imposts were mutinous; and ready to take the
least fire of Rebellion; the Soldiery were disorderly for want of Discipline
and their constant Pay: the Pasha's of remote Provinces grew insolent, taking
upon themselves rather an absolute than a depending Sovereignty. In short, all
things looked with that black appearance, that nothing seemed to keep the frame
of Empire together, but only the expectation of good success to the Army in
Persia, the which, as it depended on uncertain events, so the Ottoman Monarchy
was then shaking, and stood tottering on its deepest foundation.

Wherefore all people being intent to hear of good News from Persia, were much
pleased to understand, that the Vizier having by advantage in the last
Engagement laden his Army with Plunder and Spoils, was now preparing to besiege
Bagdat, for whose good success Prayers were The Vizier prepares to besiege
Bagdat.
daily made in the Moschs; and the Schoolmasters surrounded the streets with
their young Scholars, singing out Prayers with the Amen at every period,
according to the custom of that Country. The Vizier marched toward Bagdat, and
began to besiege it about the 10th of September; in order whereunto he amassed
great abundance of all sorts of Provisions, and made his Magazine of them at
Mosul, two thousand Camels, each laden with two Sacks of Cotton, every Sack
being of about ten foot long, were carried to the Siege, for shelter of the
Soldiery, and to fill the Ditches. The Vizier having passed part of his Army
over the River Tigris, the rest with the Cannon remaining on the hither side,
he dispatched Nasuf Pasha of Aleppo with six thousand Spahees to take a view of
the place, and discover the Avenues unto it: in his way thither he met with
eight thousand Persian Horse sent to reinfore the Garrison, which he valiantly
engaged; but being dangerously wounded, was forced to retreat with the loss of
almost half of his men, part killed, and part taken; those which were carried
Prisoners to Bagdat were treated with all civility by the Governor, who gave
them a view of the Garrison, which consisted of twenty thousand effective men,
showed them their Stores and Provisions, and that there was scarce an unuseful
mouth in all the City to devour them. Notwithstanding this disaster at the
beginning, the Vizier nothing dismayed proceeded on his design, spending the
whole month of September in making his approaches. In the month The Siege.
of October he mounted eighteen Pieces of great Cannon, which for the space of
twenty five days battered continually the Curtain between the two Bastions on
which were four Pieces of Cannon not perceived by the Turks; there was also a
deep and large Ditch not discovered by them, for that it was planked over with
Boards, and covered with a green Turff, so that it appeared like a plain and
firm ground; the broach being made, and seemingly undefended, the Turks
resolved to make an Assault; wherefore the Vizier on the 20th of November
commanded the Spahees under the Conduct of the Beglerbei of Anatolia,
accompanied with Pasha's, Sangiacks, and other persons of note, as also with
Janisaries, to the number of thirty thousand, to enter the breach: which being
performed, and great numbers crowding on the Turff, the weight of them pressed
down the Planks; and therewith the whole Engine giving way, five or six
thousand were in a moment taken as it were in a Pit-fall, and swallowed up
without any possibility of succor to be yielded from their Companions. After
which on an instant there appeared fifteen thousand men on the breach and on
the Bastions, which with their The Siege raised.
Cannon and continual Vollies of Musket Shot, so galled the Spahees, that they
broke their main Body, and killed the Beglerbei of Anatolia with other persons
of note and quality, and made the whole Army to retreat. Two days after this
disgrace the Vizier raised the Siege, and marched toward Mosul, and the
Persians encouraged with this success, pursued the Turks with eight thousand
Horse, assailed the Rear-guard of the Enemy; and though the conduct and care
thereof was committed to the charge of the Pasha's of Aleppo and Damascus, yet
the Persians killed three thousand Turks, and had defeated the whole Rear of
the Army, had not the Spahees turned their Horses, and withstood the shock with
great Valor.

Notwithstanding this dishonorable Retreat the Vizier lost not his courage, or
hopes of taking the Town, in order unto which he appointed all things necessary
to renew the Siege again in the months of September and October following; for
that the foregoing months are either too rainy, or too hot in those Countries
to undertake a design or enterprise of that nature: he fortified all the small
places in those parts round, and quartered his Soldiers in them; so that
having all conveniences of living, they might be induced to continue, and not
abandon their Colors: especially he took care to fortified Illay, a place of
about two days journey from Bagdat, reinforcing the Garrison with six thousand
men under the Command of three Beglerbegs, in regard that it was a very
considerable Pass, and the principal Magazine and Granary of Corn and other
Provisions. At the same time he sent Letters to Constantinople, representing
the state of his affairs to be in a hopeful condition; and desiring Recruits
both of men and money, gave great assurances of conquering the City at the next
Attempt.

In this perilous condition of the Ottoman State one would have imagined, that
Christian Princes would have seen their own interest, and made use of their
advantage; but God not having as yet fixed a period The Poles and Turks make
Peace.
to the bounds of this Empire, was pleased by his secret Providence to divert
both the Emperor and the King of Poland from making War with the Turk,
inclining them to employ their Arms on their Christian Neighbors. For though
the Chaous (as we have said before) was returned from Poland with disdain, and
with an angry Message; yet the Chimacam, when he made Moses Vayvod of Moldavia,
encharged him to perform all offices of Mediation between the Grand Signior and
the Poles, persuading them to restrain the Incursions of the Cosacks, and to
send an Ambassador to the Port: in which affair Moses so well performed his
Negotiation, that applying Lenitives to the anger of the Poles, he reduced them
to Articles of Peace, and to promises of restraining the Cosacks, on condition,
that the Turks reciprocally forbid and withhold the Tartars from joining or
affording assistance to his Enemies the Moscovites. These Conditions being
agreed, an Ambassador was sent from Poland to Constantinople, where he was
received with as much joy as he was expected with impatience. The Cosacks and
Tartars were two sorts of people which lived equally on Spoils and Booty, the
first as offensive to the Turk, as the latter to the Pole; and The Cosacks and
Tartars compared.
therefore as it was an equal benefit, so it was an agreement of even Terms to
counterchange the caution given reciprocally for one and the other. But the
Engagement for such wild people was more easily given than performed, which
because it was a point agreeable to both Parties, it was expressed with the
most clear words and strict terms possible. The Poles were weary and grieved to
see their Provinces depopulated by the Tartars, who yearly carried away some
thousands of souls: the Turks on the other side were not less infested with the
Cosacks, who captivated their people, burnt their Towns and Villages, and kept
them in continual Alarms. But because these people are hardly restrained from
their robberies and pillaging, the Poles, as a remedy, resolved to carry the
Cosacks to the War against the Moscovite, and better to secure the Tartar, the
Polish Ambassador obliged to pay them twenty thousand Florins yearly, and six
thousand pair of Boots, according to the ancient Articles of Peace; on which
considerations the Tartars were engaged never to enter Poland in a hostile
manner, but to serve that King in his Wars against all Nations whatsoever, the
Turks only excepted.

In this manner were the Turks this year freed from all apprehensions Poland.
And the Emperor was so busied concerning the surprise of Mantoua, and engaged
in the quarrel about that Duchy, and with some ambitious thoughts relating to
Italy, that the Turks hoped to have prosecuted their Wars in Persia without
fear of diversion from the Western parts. But yet the affairs Troubles in
Hungary.
toward the parts of Germany were not so well secured, but that the turbulent
spirit of Ragotski administered subject for dissension; for being lately seated
(as we have said) in his Principality, he was doubtful, whether it were most
for his interest to incline unto the Emperor, or to the Turk; and whilst both
Parties courted his friendship, and cheapned his acknowledgments (for of
necessity he must be a Vassal to one or the other) the Heyducs who were Tenants
to the Lands of Gabor, refused to return to the obedience of the Emperor,
demanding protection from the Grand Signior. The jealousy of those ill
consequences which this commotion might produce alarmed all the Country; and
the Emperor and Ragotski being hereby raised to a mutual defiance, advanced
their Troops one against the other upon the Frontiers; but all Hungary
trembling with fear of those calamities which ensue from War, several of those
concerned interposed so far toward an Accommodation, that Deputies were
appointed to meet at Cassovia to treat of Peace: but in the mean time the
Palatine of Hungary passing eight thousand men over the River Tibiscus to make
seizure of a certain Fort built by George Basta, so alarmed and awakened
Ragotski, that he dispatched a Gentleman to him to demand the cause of this
motion; and not receiving an answer agreeable to his expectation, he advanced
upon him with an Army of ten thousand men, and engaging him with great
resolution, killed four thousand on the place, and so caused him to retire:
from these beginnings all the mischiefs of a bloody War had certainly ensued,
had not Ragotski refused to receive Succors from the Turk; but he depending on
his own strength (having fifteen thousand men in Arms for defense of his
hereditary Lands in Hungary) contemned all external assistances, as savouring
too much of vassalage and dependence; howsoever the Pasha's of the Frontiers
assembled their Forces, and yet acted with such caution, as not to proceed to
an open Rupture; for the Wars in Persia being unsuccessful and pressing,
required moderation and Lenitives on this side, that so the differences now on
the Frontiers might be transferred to an opportunity more seasonable for
dispute.

In the month of September Sultan Morat being at his small Seraglio called
Daout Pasha, and sleeping there one night in his Bed, he was on a sudden
awakened by a terrible Lightning; which entering his Chamber The G. Signior
affrighted with Lightning.
rounded his Bed, leaving several marks on his Sheets and Quilts; and whilst he
sought some place to hide himself in, it passed under his arm, and burnt part
of his shirt, the affrightment of which so astonished him, that he remained for
some time in a swound, which for ever after did much impair the strength of his
brain: he now began to be sensible that there were other Thunderbolts than
those that proceed from his own Throne; and like Tiberius learned to tremble at
the voice of God, whilst he heard him speak in the clouds: Nec Deum unquam nisi
iratum pertimuit, and turbatiori Coelo fulminantem. And so affected was the
Sultan with this accident, that afterward he dismissed diverse of his Buffoons
from the Court, and particularly a Mute whose ridiculous gestures were his
common Divertisement, and for some time caused him to abstain from Wine; and as
a farther token of his Conversion and thankfulness to God for this escape, he
ordered five thousand Dollars to be given in alms to the poor, and Korban to be
made of three hundred sheep; and the Friday following he solemnly went to the
Mosch, to render thanks unto God for having so prodigiously preserved him from
the Executioner of his Vengeance.

During all this time the Great Vizier wanting Succors and Supplies of men and
money, had great difficulty to contain his people in their due obedience, or
within the bounds of their Quarters; for they were apt to leave their Colors,
and would really have disbanded, had not their spirits been daily held up with
the hopes and amusements of Pay and Recruits. The four Brethren-in-law which
greatly apprehended lest their Power and Authority should be abated by the
return of the Vizier, exercised all the diligence they were able to make new
Levies, the reinforcement of which might instill new courage into the
Soldiery, and be a means to continue the Vizier in those parts; but the Mufti
obstructed all Levies on the side of Greece and the Frontiers of Christendom,
alleging, That the best Soldiers being sent from those parts, would hazard
the Empire by exposing and laying it open to the Incursions of the Christians:
by which contrary opinions and delays the Vizier wanting the assistance
expected, the Persians recovered all the little Fortresses which they had lost
the year before, with the considerable place of Illay; which being taken by
assault and by an absolute force of Sword and Arms, the greatest part of the
Garrison consisting of eight thousand men commanded by the three Pasha's
beforementioned, were cut off, which was an important loss to the Turks, not
only for the slaughter of so many brave Soldiers, but also for the quantities
of Provisions, being the Granary and Magazine for the whole Army. Therein Illay
retaken from the Turks.
were likewise taken forty Fieldpieces carrying eight pounds Bullet, with a
great Chain of Iron, which usually encompasses the Treasury which is carried
into the Field. With this ill success the Vizier retreated from Mosul as far as
Mirdin, from whence he redoubled his instances for Supplies for men and money.
At length it was agreed, that an Army of thirty thousand Tartars should be sent
thither; but Ragotski advising, that he was upon the point of breaking with the
Emperor, it was ordered, that their number should be reduced to ten thousand;
the which taking their Journey into Persia by the way of Circassia, were there
encountered by Han Gherey, the Prince of Tartary, (whom we formerly mentioned to
have been deposed by that people) and by him obstructed in their passage, the
Vanguard of their Army being cut off by him; so that they were forced again to
retreat and to embark their Men and Horse at Caffa to be transported by Sea to
Trapezond; which as it was a matter of great trouble, so it was a course
unpractised by the Tartars. The G. Signior being unable to render a more
considerable Succor than this unto his Army, which was now reduced to the weak
number of two thousand Janisaries, and three thousand Spahees, he resolved to
condescend to Terms and Articles, as the only means to save his Honor, and the
remainder of his Forces. In order unto which, he released a Persian Lord from
his Imprisonment in the Seven Towers, and qualified him with the Title of
Ambassador, bestowing upon him an Equipage of Men and Horse agreeable to his
Character, with four thousand Dollars to defray his Expense; and that the King
of Persia might be assured of the Sultan's real intentions and desires of
Peace, he recalled his Army in the Spring, whereby all Acts of Hostility
ceased: and thus the Vizier being returned to Constantinople, that pride and
rigor which he exercised toward all in the time of his prosperity, laid him
low by misfortunes in the esteem of his Enemies; who gladly embracing the
opportunity to disgrace him with all the terms of obloguy and detraction,
deprived him at length of The Vizier deprived of his Office.
his Office. One of the four Brothers-in-law married to one of the Grand
Signior's Sisters, and Prime of the Cabal, being constituted Vizier in his
stead. Nor did the late Vizier easily escape with his life, until he had
reprieved it with an atonement of an hundred thousand Zechins of Gold and some
choice Horses which he presented to the Sultan; the like Example other Pasha's
his Companions followed in proportion to their Estates and Employments; by
which Presents the empty Treasury was in a manner recruited, and the present
necessities of the Sultan relieved.

But this new Vizier enjoyed not long either his Honors, or his life; for the
first act he performed, was to mitigate the Valede Sultana or Queen Mother to
obtain a Hattesheriff, or writing under the Grand Signior's Hand for cutting
off the Head of Casref Pasha, the Spaheeler-Agasi, or General of the Spahees,
which being executed by Mortesa the Commander in Chief in Persia, his Head was
brought and thrown at the Gates of the Divan. The Spahees astonished at this
spectacle, and enraged to see that Head on the ground which they so much
esteemed and loved, forgot all the terms of duty and obedience to their
Superiors; and without regard to the place wherein they were, even within the
Walls Mutiny of the Spahees joined with the Janisaries.
of the Grand Signior's Court they threw stones at the Vizier, and beat him
from his Horse; which though the Grand Signior and all the Viziers highly
resented, as the most scandalous indignity that could be offered to the Majesty
of a Supreme Ruler and to all Government, yet their Counsels rather sought
remedies to suppress the Mutiny, than to make Proposals of executing Justice on
the Offenders; for the Spahees seconded by the Janisaries, (who were glad of
any cause to make a commotion) assembled in the Hippodromo, from whence they
sent an Arz to the Sultan, requiring the Heads of the Great Vizier, and of
diverse others, as well within as without the Seraglio. The Grand Signior
denying positively to assent hereunto, the Soldiery as plainly threatened to
depose him, and place his Brother in the Throne; at which barbarous resolution
the Grand Signior being affrighted, his youthful constancy was so shaken, that
he wrote to his Mother to desire her excuse in case he assented to the death of
her Son-in-law the Great Vizier; for that the storm of the military fury was so
great, that he could not endeavor to protect him without the loss of his life
and Crown: wherefore the Vizier being turned out of the Gates of the Seraglio,
he was immediately butchered in the presence of the Sultan. Nor did the
impetuous rage of the Soldiery end here, but they proceeded farther to demand
the Head of the Janisar-Aga, or General of the Janisaries, who was reputed the
chief Instrument of the death of Casref, because he was a principal Favorite
to the Grand Signior; but he wisely taking diverse off with Money and Presents,
sowed division between the Janisaries and Spahees; so that some difficulty
arising hereupon, the determination of his death was deferred for a while;
howsoever they proceeded to demand, that the Mufti should be discharged of his
Office, and that the Tefterdar or Treasurer should be delivered into their
hands. To the first the Grand Signior assented; but being willing to save the
other, he pretended, that he was escaped and fled; but when he was found, he
should run the same Fate with the Vizier. But the military Sedition not being
appeased with this answer, they roved through the whole City, and Galata, and
other parts of the Suburbs: the Spahees persisting to require the Head of the
Janisar-Aga, and not finding him in his House, they plundered it, and departed;
and meeting with a Youth, a Favorite of the Grand Signior's, they killed him;
and so returning with the like fury to the Seraglio, they required admission to
the New Vizier and Mufti. Regep Pasha, another of the Brothers-in-law, was then
made Vizier, who with the new Mufti trembling at these Tumults, were careful to
treat the Soldiery with all lenity and condescension imaginable, desiring them
to declare their grievances, and whatsoever might give them satisfaction should
be granted. The seditious Soldiers replied, That they were resolved to see the
Grand Signior's Brother, for that when the present Sultan did not govern well,
they might know from whence to produce another of better abilities, and more
agreeable to the designs of the Empire. That necessity which caused the late
easiness of condescension to former demands, made way also for compliance with
this; so that the young Prince being brought forth, they obliged the Sultan not
to attempt any thing against his life, and caused the Vizier and Mufti to
become caution and security for it. Nor did these concessions contribute
toward a pacisication; but rather their insolence increased thereby, renewing
their exclamations at the Gates of the Seraglio for the Heads of the
Janisar-Aga and the Testerdar; nor would they be satisfied with answer, that
these men were not found in the Seraglio, but still persisted in their rude
outcries and menaces, losing all respect and reverence to the Sultan and the
Superiors; so that the Grand Signior resolved once to sally out upon them with
his own Guard; but trying their temper and resolution, he discovered most of
them to be poisoned with the like spirit of Sedition, and combining with the
others as Associates in the Treason. The Viziers and other principal Officers
perceiving the Mutiny to increase daily, and not knowing to what degree it
might arise, made it their business to search out for those proscribed by the
Soldiery: at length the Aga was happily discovered by a certain person, to
whom a reward was given of a thousand Zechins, with the Office of Zorbasi or
Captain; and the Aga confessing that he had counseled the death of Casref, he
was immediately strangled, and his body hanged upon a tree to public view. The
like Fate befell the Testerdar, who being also taken, was killed and hanged up,
together with the body of the Aga. All which persons thus inhumanely murdered
by the Soldiery, were the Enemies of the present Great Vizier Regep; for which
cause the Grand Signior suspecting that he secretly contrived and nourished
these Rebellions, never after looked on him with a gracious eye. Of which the
Vizier being sensible, combined with the Soldiery; and judging it almost
impossible to set himself right in the affection of his Master, he courted the
favor of the Militia, as the only means to protect his life, and maintain his
Power. But as the revenge of Princes is not like a Thunderbolt, which wounds
on a sudden, but rather like a Mine which requires time to form, and is then
sprang, when it may do the best execution: so in the same manner, the Grand
Signior dissembled his hate toward the Vizier, until one The Vizier strangled
by order of the Grand Signior.
night being present with him in the Seraglio to see certain Fireworks, he
called him aside, and whispered to him, that he should go into his private
Lodgings, where being entered, the door was shut upon him, and he strangled by
certain Eunuchs, who were appointed to attend him for that purpose. But little
benefit or riches did the Grand Signior reap by his death; for the Vizier
having for some time expected this blow, had concealed his Treasure, and
conveyed it away for the use of his Posterity. The like hatred did the Sultan
conceive against the Soldiery, resolving in his mind to execute his revenge
especially on the Janisaries, as the most turbulent Fomenters of Rebellion and
Treason, and to vent his anger either by the Cord or Sword, or some other more
expedite way, as opportunity presented: and to prevent or oppose the like
Seditions for the future, he fortified the Seraglio, and brought Arms in
thither by night, choosing into his Guard select men of courage and
faithfulness: and being sensible, that the being of his Brother attempered his
Sovereignty, and drew away the hearts and eyes of his Soldiers and People from
fixing entirely on his own person; he therefore intended to cut him off, but
the caution and security given by himself and chief Ministers to preserve his
life, diverted him from this resolution.

In place of the deceased Vizier, Mehmet late Pasha of Cairo was constituted,
and the Seal consigned to him, with whom the Grand Signior consulting of the
present emergency of affairs, often uttered his displeasure against the late
Seditions, and signified his intentions to redress them for the future; in
order unto which, he caused the Heads of the most mutinous Spahees to be cut
off, and on various pretenses separated the Soldiery each from other into
diverse parts; some numbers of Janisaries he commanded to march to the Confines
of Persia, and caused many others of them to be killed by night, and by various
other means greatly weakened the Chambers, both by diminishing the numbers, and
taking off such who were the men of best courage and conduct: many bodies were
found swimming in the Bosphorus, and known to be Spahees; great part of the
Lands belonging to the Timariots was taken away, and the Pay of the Spahees was
abated, and diverse Offices of Profit and Honor were taken from the Militia,
that so men might be made sensible of the indignation of their Prince, and that
there is no sport or jesting with the anger of a provoked King, who knows no
other mean of his passion than the total evaporation of his choler and
vengeance. To maintain and make good these several acts of just punishment,
young Morat growing in courage with his years, mounted on Horseback well
armed, and like a Soldier attended with a select Party of Cavalry, passed
through the most public streets of the City in a huffing manner, and casting a
stern eye upon the Soldiery and People as he went, and making a hundred passes
through the midst of them, struck them with an awe of his Majesty, and
admiration of his warlike and Martial appearance; with which severity and
gallantry the Soldiery being affrighted, began to consider, that they were not
longer to be governed by a Woman, or a Child, but by the most brave Prince that
ever swayed the Ottoman Scepter; and thereupon for the future resolved upon an
impartial submission and obedience unto him. To encourage them in which, and to
reconcile their spirits and affections to him, Morat oftentimes assembled his
Soldiery at Ackmeidan, where he exercised with them shooting with the Bow at
Marks and at Rovers, rewarding those who shot best with adding an Asper a day
to their Pay; besides which he distributed six thousand Hungars amongst them,
to demonstrate that wise Princes are used to mix Lenitives with their rigor.

These Mutinies and Seditions in the Capital City encouraged rebellious Spirits
in diverse other places: so that a certain bold and audacious Fellow drawing a
number of Miscreants after him, possessed himself of the City of Prusa: another
of the same temper called Elia Pasha made himself Master of Magnesia, where he
committed all the outrages which Rebellion in Anatolia.
Enemies inflict on a conquered People; and being about twenty four miles
distant from Smyrna, so assrighted the people of that place, who were
Merchants, and such as lived by Trade, that they fled with their Wealth, and
such things as were portable, left they should be exposed to the robbery and
spoil of Thieves and Rebels. But the Beglerbey of Anatolia suffered not Elia to
reign long in his lust, but giving him Battle in those Plains, wholly defeated
him, and sent twenty of the Heads of the chief Commanders to the Sultan for a
Present; and pursuing Elia and the rest of his Army to Magnesia, besieged him
in that City. The Grand Signior being advised hereof, and fearing left the
Siege should take up too much time, and move other ill humors in that Country,
dispatched Orders to offer Terms and Conditions of Accommodation with Elia,
which were secretly treated, and great promises made him of favor and rewards
from the Grand Signior. The easy Fool accepted the Conditions, and embraced
the promises; and leaving his City of Magnesia, proceeded confidently to
Constantinople to receive the gracious rewards of the Sultan for his past
Services. At his Entry into the Seraglio in place of the Kapislar-Kahyasee or
Master of the Ceremonies, he was received by Officers with a Cord in their
hands, who bestowed on him the gracious reward of his Masters ultimate favor.

These Rebellions were no sooner suppressed in Asia, but that other Mutinies of
the Janisaries for want of Pay began at Buda in Hungary, Mutinies at Buda.
where they threw stones at their Aga, and pursued him to the very Palace of
the Pasha, electing another into his place. They also cut in pieces the
Governor of Pest, and bestowed his Office upon his Lieutenant. To remedy these
disorders, and extinguish the Mutiny, the Grand Signior sent Commissioners to
examine the matter, and to render him an account of the grievances and demands
of the Soldiers: but they fearing to be surprised with some severe acts of
Justice, prevented or forestalled the inquiries of the Commissioners by
acknowledging their fault, and demanding pardon, with surrender of four of the
Ringleaders to punishment, declaring, That by their seducement and evil
persuasions, they were debauched into that disorderly course of proceedings:
the Sultan accepted the submission, and all things were quieted in Hungary.

Howsoever new troubles arose in Moldavia: for that People being Troubles in
Moldavia.
oppressed overmuch by their Prince Alexander, made an Insurrection against
him, and drove him out of the Country, who for refuge fled to Constantinople.
And the people desirous that one Bernoschi, a Polonian by Nation, might be put
into his place, to obtain his Confirmation he came to the Port, and offered
himself before the Grand Signior; but Morat suspecting, that to obtain the
Principality for himself, he had secretly instigated and nourished the late
popular Commotions, caused his Head to be cut off in the public Divan.

Amurat had now born to him a seventh Daughter by his Slave, called the shining
Star; and though he was much troubled that she had not brought him forth a Son
and Heir, yet so much was she beloved by him, that he resolved to create her
Queen, had not his Mother declared against it, as a thing not usual for any
Woman to be honored with that Title before she had supplied the Inheritance by
the Birth of a Male Child. And that he might now totally extinguish the fire of
Sedition amongst the Soldiery, he caused Ferdum Efendi and Saluc Aga, two
prime Chiefs of the Spahees, with eight principal Janisaries, to be put to
death; after which severity, fearing another Insurrection, he passed the Water,
and retired to his Seraglio at Scutari, where he fortified himself.

It happened about that time, that a Turk Woman a Slave was found aboard a
French Ship, ready to sail from Constantinople, which the Turks highly
resented, and aggravated the crime so much against the French Ambassador, that
they imprisoned his Son then embarked, and would have confiscated the Vessel
and her Lading. In those days the Christian Ambassadors resident at that
Court, kept better Union and Correspondence amongst themselves than they do at
present; so that all of them as concerned, joined together to represent before
the chief Ministers, that such a fault merited not so grand a forfeiture, for
that it was most probable to have been committed without the privacy either of
the Ambassador or Commander of the Ship. The Ambassadors then resident were
Sir Peter Wych for England, the Sieur Marcheville for France, and Pietro
Foscarini for Venice, at whose warm and urgent instances the Turks condescended
to release the Vessel and the Goods laden upon her, with free liberty to
depart. Howsoever it being represented to the Grand Signior by the
Captain-Pasha (who is Admiral of the Seas) that one Baldasar, an Armenian by
Nation, but Dragoman or Interpreter to the French Ambassador, was a principal
Instrument to move the Ambassadors to unite in this pretense; and being
observed to manage the Interest of his Master with warm and earnest
solicitations, the surly Sultan grew so angry that one of his own Slaves
should presume to manage a dispute with him, in fury and rage commanded, that
he should The French Interpreter empaled.
be immediately empaled; and that he might be assured that his Sentence took
effect, he would see him with his own eyes on the Stake before he would pass
the Water to his Seraglio at Scutari. The resolution was so sudden, and the
Execution so speedy, that there was neither ear lent to hear, nor time given to
mediate in his behalf; and the act being performed, complaints would not serve
to redress a tyrannous action now past remedy, and not to be recalled:
wherefore as the Ambassadors were forced to acquiesce and patiently endure the
affront; so if they would have resented it, they could scarce have found one
amongst their Interpreters of so bold a spirit, who durst have opened his mouth
after so terrifying an example. The truth is, the Dragomen or Interpreters to
Ambassadors at Constantinople are required to be men of Learning, Courage, and
Courtship, their studies ought to endue them perfectly with the Turkish, Greek,
and Arabic Languages, with some knowledge also of the Persian, and with good
Elocution, and readiness of Tongue: their constancy and presence of mind is
always necessary at their appearance before those Grandees or Great men, who
are ever proud, haughty, and arrogant in all their expressions and ways of
Treaty, the which they commonly manage toward Christian Ministers with the
same respect which we use toward our Servants, or our Slaves. And therefore by
reason of this and other Presidents of like nature, Dragomen have been always
timorous in representing the true sense of the Ambassadors and Consuls; at
least have so minced and tempered their words, that they have lost much of that
vigor and accent which is necessary to inculcate perfectly a business into the
Understanding of a Turk, especially if you intend to incline him to Reason and
Justice. Wherefore it would be an excellent Qualification for an Ambassador
himself to understand and speak the Turkish Language, or at least to have a
young man by his side of the English Nation educated in the Turkish Court, who
should be ready to explicate those matters which are too thorny and prickly for
Subjects of that Country to handle.

Had all the foregoing Troubles, Mutinies, and Misfortunes encountered the
spirit of an easy and a gentle Sultan, certainly the Fate of this Amurat had
been the same with that of Osman, who retiring within his have no other
foundation than the ill success and miseries which attended the War in Persia;
for the way being long, and the Countries hot, barren, and for the most part
void of all comfort, the Soldiers abhorred the fatigues, and march thither,
and hated to consider, that they should be made a Sacrifice to the lust of
voluptuous Ministers, who, to gain Estates and Riches out of those Moneys,
which were designed to carry on the War, did not care, whilst they lived at
ease and in delights, what labors, wants, and dangers attended the Militia.
These considerations made likewise some impression in the Sultan, who therefore
inclined to hearken unto those Propositions of Peace which were brought him by
an Ambassador from Persia; and being accompanied with very great Presents, the
Peace was clapped up and concluded on a sudden. But as The Peace made with
Persia, and speedily broken.
things quick in their birth and production are not long-lived, nor long
durable; so this Peace was broken the same year with an inconstancy equal to
that inconsideration with which it was agreed and signed. For no sooner was the
News hereof flown into the Eastern World, than the Great Mogol dispatched his
Ambassador with Letters to the Grand Signior, persuading him to make War again
with the Persian, promising to assist him therein, by stopping up the passage
of Nachivan, which is a City in the Lesser Armenia, built upon the River
Aranes, and is the common Road into the Indies; the which motion, as it was
pleasing to Morat, so being accompanied with Indian Curiosities and Presents of
an inestimable value, the Ambassador was graciously received and treated with
such Feasts and Entertainments as are not usually known amongst the Turks; and
returned again with Letters giving hopes, that he would speedily take an
occasion to break with the Persian. But those who had experienced the
difficulties of a War with Persia, and observed, that in the present
Conjuncture of Affairs it might be more easily and with advantage waged on the
side of Hungary, endeavored with many pregnant arguments to persuade the Grand
Signior thereunto, giving him Persuasions for a War against the Emperor.
to understand, that Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden being victorious over the
Emperor in Germany, had taken many Towns and Cities of great strength; and
having overthrown him in diverse Battles, had slain or taken his best Captains
and most Martial men of Valor; and that other Christians, who were desirous to
abate the pride of the Austrian Family, were ready to embrace the same
Conjuncture, whereby they might entirely shake off the yoke and servitude to
the Imperial Tyranny. These advantages being well represented, took place
easily in the mind of Morat, so that he dispatched express Orders to the Pasha
of Buda to assemble his Forces, and put all things in a readiness on the
Frontiers: in compliance with which, though the Pasha set forth his Tents, and
made great appearance of a March, yet some secret designs caused him to move
slowly, and to affect a Peace rather than a War; so that receiving an
Ambassador from the Emperor at Pesth, he readily admitted him, and gave him
safe conduct and Convoy unto Constantinople: at which time Advices coming, that
the Great Gustavus Adolphus was slain, and that the Affairs of the Swedes went
backwards and unsuccessfully in Germany, altered all the measures of the
Ottoman Counsels; and though Ragotski endeavored all he was able to foment the
differences, and encourage the Turks to a War, having besides other specious
pretenses, an Army of thirty thousand men in a readiness to join with the Turks
against the Emperor; howsoever the Turks looking on the condition of the
Swedes as desperate, and the proffers of Ragotski to be uncertain, and of no
true foundation, and the state of affairs amongst themselves to be turbulent
and unsettled, gave a kind reception A Peace made between the Emperor and the
Grand Signior.
to the Emperors Ambassador, and signed the Agreement for continuance of the
Truce. By this and other actions of like nature Ragotski lost much of his
esteem with the Emperor and the Grand Signior; the first always looked on him
as an ambitious Prince, exciting the Turk against him, and ready on the least
occasion to enter his Country with fire and sword; the other looked on him as a
false Friend, who never made proffers but those which squared with his own
designs and interest, and particularly he had disgusted the Port by presuming
to instate one Mathias in the Principality of Valachia, and to eject another
constituted there by Authority of the Grand Signior, called Stridia Bei, or
Lord Oysters, because his Father was a Fisherman, and gained a good Estate by
the Trade of Oysters; howsoever it being the Grand Signior's pleasure to ordain
such a person to that Office, it was a presumption and a bold piece of
Usurpation in Ragotski to dispose of that Government by virtue of his own
single Power: howsoever the Grand Signior, to avoid contention with the
resolved spirit of Ragotski, confirmed Mathias, upon condition of a double
Tribute paid for the Investment to the Principality. But besides these reasons
for a Peace with the Emperor, the designs the Grand Signior entertained of
making War upon Poland with the assistance of the Moscovites and Tartars, and
of dispossessing Emir Facardin of his Government, were strong inducements to
make fair weather on all other sides of the neighboring Princes. The envy
which the riches and greatness of Emir Facardin (who was a Prince inhabiting in
the parts of Arabia, to whom a large tract of Land with several Fortresses did
belong) had contracted to him from the Pasha's of Damascus, Tripoli, and Gaza,
caused them to accuse him before the Grand Signior of Rebellion and other
enormous Crimes: the Plea against him was managed especially by the Pasha of
Tripoli, who alleged, That he was an Enemy to the Mohammedan Law, destroyed the
Moschs, kept correspondence with the Malteses and the Corsaires of Ligorn,
permitting them freely to take water in his Country; that he openly favored
the Christians, suffering them freely to build Churches in his Country. That he
continually fortified his Castles, and encroached on the Lands and Territories
of the Emirs his Neighbors. In short, his riches were so great, that every one
feared and envied him, and therefore represented his case in that manner, that
the Grand Signior resolving to destroy him, sent great Forces into those
Countries under the Command of the Pasha Preparations of War made against Emir
Facardin.
of Tripoli, to whom he commanded the Pasha's of Damascus, Gaza, Aleppo, and
Cairo to join their Forces: and for better expedition, the Captain-Pasha was
appointed to equippe his Fleet, to transport Men and Ammunition into those
parts. The Captain-Pasha in his passage by Sea encountered two English Ships
lading Corn in the Gulf of Vola, called the William and Ralph, and Hector:
this being a prohibited Commodity A Fight of the whole Turkish Fleet against
two English Ships.
not to be transported under penalty of forfeiting Ships, Goods, and Liberty of
the men, moved the Pasha with the sight of such a Booty to command his Galleys
to seize the Vessels; which being only two, it was imagined, that they would
immediately yield and surrender without contest. But these bold Brittons
knowing the consequences of such a surrender, resolved not tamely to yield
themselves, at least to sell their liberties, lives, Ships, and Goods to the
Turks at the dearest rate they were able: wherefore cutting their Cables, put
themselves under Sail, and got into the main Sea, fighting with the whole Fleet
above three hours; sometimes they were boarded by one Gally, sometimes by two
at once; but plying their Quarter Deck Guns with small shot, and defending
themselves manfully with their half-Pikes, they often cleared their Decks, and
put off the Enemy with great slaughter: the Captain-Pasha being ashamed to see
such resistance made by two such Vessels against his whole Force, resolved to
enter his men at the Gun-room port of one of the Ships, and running the Prow of
the Gally into the Stern-port, the valiant crew of the Gun-room clapped an Iron
Spike into the Trunnel-hole of the Prow, whereby the Gally being wedged fast to
the Timbers of the Ship, they brought their Stern-chase laden with cross Bars,
pieces of Iron, and Parteridge-shot to bear upon them, which raking them fore
and aft, killed the Captain-Pasha himself, with near three hundred out of the
Bastard Gally. At length having spent all their shot, they charged their Guns
with pieces of Eight, and being overpowered by numbers of their Enemies, and
not able farther to resist, they set fire to their Ships, which blowing up,
destroyed two or three of the Galleys which laid by their sides, together with
those men which were then fighting aboard at handy-blows on the Deck with the
defendants; so that none of the English were taken, unless three or four fished
out of the water. An end being in this manner put to the Fight, the Turks
gained the Victory, with the loss of twelve hundred Slaves killed and wounded,
besides Turks, and were forced into Port, where they remained a full month to
repair their Galleys; the which Fight affected all Turks with an astonishment
of the English Bravery, or obstinacy, (as they call it) and is a matter
remembered and talked of to this day, especially by the Son of the Captain-Pasha
who was slain, called Omem, Pasha Ogli, who is Pasha of Rhodes at present, (as
I remember) and commands three or four Galleys; for which reason he is so
inveterate an Enemy to the English, that to satisfy his revenge, he buys what
English Slaves he can get into his Galleys, and sells none out under a double
price or ransom. The News of this Fight coming to Constantinople provoked the
Grand Signior to the height of indignation; howsoever the Officers either being
ashamed of their loss, or entertaining some secret admiration of the English
Bravery, suffered the matter to be compounded for the Sum of forty thousand
Dollars, of which the English paid only their share with the French and
Venetians, whom (for I know not what reason) the Turks equally concerned in the
occasion.

Whilst the Turks were appointing a new Captain-Pasha, and again refitting
their Fleet, the Pasha of Damascus dispatched a Summons to Facardin to
surrender Seida up to him, with other Castles and places of strength. The Old
man resided then at Barut, where pretending to be retired from all business,
answered, that he had resigned the whole Government into the hands of his Son
Ali, as he had already testified by public Acts: that he was but a Subject,
and a Soldier under his Son, and therefore to him they ought to make their
applications. Facardin had at that time an Army of twenty five thousand men,
the which he divided into two Bodies, commanded by his two Sons. Ali his eldest
he ordered with twelve thousand men (a thousand of which were Maronites, and
two thousand Druzes) to march to Saphet for hindering the conjunction of the
Emirs of Ferue and Therabith, and the Pasha's of Gaza and Damascus, whose
Forces being joined together, did not compose a greater number than that of
Facardin. Ali encountering with them, and being a brisk and hot-metled Prince,
engaged and charged them so home, that he defeated them, and killed eight
thousand of their men; but such a Victory as this not costing him less than
seven thousand of his men, was in effect his own overthrow; for being the next
day charged again by the Enemy, both sides fought with that obstinacy, that (as
is reported) The Son of Facardin overthrown,
there remained not above an hundred forty six of all the Soldiers which
followed Ali; and he himself having his Horse mortally wounded under him, and
being out of breath, weary, and faint, yielded himself to a common Soldier who
promised him quarter; but afterward having him in his power he stranged him
with his Match, and cut off his head and is strangled.
and his little finger on which he wore his Seal-ring, and so presented both to
the Pasha. But this proud Conqueror refused to accept this Present without
Ceremony, until first the Head had been perfumed with sweet waters, the beard
combed out, and covered with a rich Turbant, and having kept this Trophy for
some days by him, he sent it afterward to Constantinople. But before the News
of this Defeat reached the ears of old Facardin, the Captain-Pasha with his
Fleet of Galleys arrived at the Port of Tripoli; to whom Facardin being
desirous to show all friendship, and profess loyalty to the Grand Signior, he
caused his Army to retire into the parts of Mount Libanus, whilst he himself
with about three thousand men between domestic Servants and his Guards went to
Scida, from whence he sent two A sort of Vessel or Ship so called by the Turks.
Caramosauls laden with Provisions and refreshment to the Captain-Pasha for a
Present, assuring him that he was an humble Vassal to the Grand Signior, and
was ready to obey all his Commands; and because the Sultan may probably have
received sinister reports relating to the Arms he had taken up, he assured him,
that they were no otherwise designed, than to suppress the Robberies of the
Arabs, and the Incursions of their Kings; and that he was ready to conduct his
Army to any place, where his Master the Grand Signior should think fit to
employ them. But these fair words could not divert the Captain-Pasha from his
resolutions to enter the Port of Scida, nor from his Instructions of demanding,
and upon refusal of forcing possession of the Castle; which as it was the most
considerable Fortress, and the most pleasant Seat of all his Dominions, so he
could not without much regret and sorrow hearken to such a Proposition:
wherefore that the Pasha might not persist in this demand, he secretly
proffered him an hundred thousand Zechins as a Bribe to himself, and his Son
Mansour to be carried for a Hostage and Earnest of his faithfulness to the
Grand Signior. The Captain-Pasha liked well the hundred thousand Zechins and
the Hostages, but still required the Surrender of the Castle with them; on
which whilst Facardin deliberated, News came of the death of his Son Ali, and
the destruction of his Army, with which losing all courage, he yielded his
Castle of Scida to the Captain-Pasha, retiring himself to his City of Barut;
nor could he rest quietly at that place; for being pursued, he was forced to
quit it, and retire with his Maronites and Druzes into the Mountains, lest
being enclosed within the Walls of a City, he should fall alive into the hands
of his Enemies. And now all good Fortune forsaking unhappy Facardin, the
Maronites and Druzes his Subjects revolt to the Pasha of Damascus, his Palaces
and Gardens of Pleasure were all ruined, his Friends forsook him, his two
remaining Sons were lost, one carried to Constantinople for a Hostage, and the
other slain in fight; his Towns of Gazir, Saphet, St. John d'Acria, and others
were surrendered to the Pasha of Damascus: only some sew strong places in the
Mountains remained to him, where living in League with Reba a King of the
Arabs, he committed all the spoils he was able on the Lands belonging to the
Pasha of Damascus. But being hunted from one Mountain to another, and from one
Cave to another, he was at length forced to surrender upon Conditions, that he
should have liberty to proceed unto the Grand Signior with his own Equipage of
three hundred men and Trumpets founding, and that he might carry with him all
his Treasure consisting of a million of Zechins all in gold, together with
other Riches, which were carried by fourteen Camels; and that he should not be
conducted as a Prisoner in Triumph, but that he should with freedom approach
the presence of the Sultan, like other Pasha's, who are in grace and favor.
These Proposals being granted, Facardin with his two young Sons began his
Journey to Constantinople, and being about two days journey from thence, he
dispeeded eight Chests of Gold before him, to prepare and make his way to the
Grand Signior; who being pleased with the gold, and greatly rejoiced to receive
the submission and Homage of one who had so long stood out in Rebellion, he
went out in a disguise and Habit of a Pasha to see and discourse with that
person, of whom there had been so general a rumor: and having accordingly
encountered with the Emir, he sat down in his Tent with him, desiring him to
relate the story of his life, with the several particulars of his late
misfortunes. Emir Facardin well knew the person of the Grand Signior; but
feigning as if he was unacquainted with whom he discoursed, and that he took
him for some Pasha, began to recount the course of his life, the reasons why
his Enemies falsely suggested evil reports of him to the Grand Signior, how he
was forced for defense of his life to take up Arms, and what ill success
accompanied his affairs; all which he represented with such quickness and
eloquence, that the Grand Signior pitying his misfortunes promised to be his
Advocate, and mediate with the Grand Signior in his behalf. The day following
Facardin made his Entry in a Triumphant manner, and received a most favorable
Audience from the Grand Signior; and all the Pasha's and great men in
conformity to their Master, and in hopes of sharing some part of his gold,
showed him a like kind favorable countenance and aspect. But finding
afterward that Facardin increased daily in the esteem of the Grand Signior,
and that the old Rebel was become a new Favorite, and that he was likely to
overtop and out them, they generally conspired together, taking the Mufti on
their side to accuse him of many crimes, and more particularly that he was a
Christian and an Apostate from the Mohammedan Faith. This point of Religion so
sensibly touched the Grand Signior, that he resolved to condemn him in a manner
solemn and extraordinary; for mounting one day on his Throne, he commanded
Facardin to be brought in, and placed on a low chair, where ordering his crimes
whereof he was accused to be recited, he passed a formal Sentence of death upon
him: but Facardin arising to justify himself, was not permitted to speak, only
he obtained a quarter of an hours reprieve to make his Prayers, and afterward
was strangled by the hands of two Mutes.

ANNO 1634.
Morat growing now into years, took into his own hands the reins Cyprus,
consiscating their Estates, for no other reason, than because they had denied
him the use of their Mules and Camels on occasion of his service. He became
extremely severe against Morat exercises several acts of Tyranny.
the Soldiery, crushing them with all imaginable rigor on the least
appearance of reluctance to his Commands, declaring, that he expected blind and
silent Obedience from all, but especially from his Soldiery. He imposed a
great Tax upon Copper; and because he had several Warehouses filled with that
Metal, which had for many years lain by, he forced the people to buy it at his
own rates; at which aggrievance the Commonalty growing desperate began to
mutiny and rebel; but Morat put a speedy stop thereunto by cutting off the
Heads of fifty of the most seditious, and so passed to Prusa with the
attendance of six Galleys. He caused a Kadi to be hanged, to the great
displeasure and universal resentment of the Ulemah, who are Students in the
Law; who to make known their aggrievance, and consult a remedy, assembled in
great numbers at the House of the Mufti. The Queen Mother being acquainted with
this Meeting, and fearing the ill consequences thereof, gave immediate advice
to the Sultan, who with like expedition dispatched a Boat to bring over the
Mufti and his Son to Prusa, who were no sooner arrived than they were
strangled, being not permitted to speak for themselves, or to allege any plea
or excuse for their lives. This act of cruelty beyond the example of former
Ages, and never practiced by the most tyrannical of his Predecessors, struck a
terror on the whole Empire; for men observing the unjust rigor which was
executed on the Head and Chief of their Law, the Oracle and Mouth which
resolved their difficult Problems, and whom the World so reverenced and
honored, that few examples have been of Capital punishment executed on his
reverend Head, feared that innocence was not sufficient to secure their own
less considerable Estates from his fury and violence. There is a particular
death allotted for Mufties, which is by braying them in a Mortar, the which
Mortar is kept in the Seven Towers at Constantinople, and there showed to
strangers; the which Instrument has been seldom made use of.

Morat being greatly addicted to Wine, was sensible of the ill effects of it in
himself, and that the heat of debauchery inclined him to violence and cruelty,
and from hence collecting how dangerous this humor Morat destroys the Taverns.
of drunkenness was in his people, especially in his Soldiery, for that much
of the late Seditions might be attributed thereunto, he published a most severe
Edict against Wine, commanding all Taverns to be demolished, the Butts to be
broken, and the Wine spilt. It was the common custom of the Grand Signior to
walk the streets in disguise, when meeting with any drunken person, he would
imprison him, and almost drub him to death. It was his fortune to meet a deaf
man one day in the streets, who not hearing the noise of the people, nor the
rumor of his approach, did not so readily shift out of the way, as was
consistent with the fear and dread of so awful an Emperor, for which default
he was strangled immediately, and his body thrown into the streets. All people
feared and trembled at these practices, and were as careful to look out abroad
for the Grand Signior, lest they should be surprised with the bluster of his
presence, as Mariners are of being taken unprovided by some sudden Gust or
Hurricane; for there was scarce a day, that one innocent or other was not
sacrificed to his fury and tyrannical sancy. One Thomas Hangs a Venetian
Merchant.
Zanetti, a Venetian Merchant, who had built a losty Jardac, or a high Room of
Prospective on the top of his House, was accused to the Grand Signior to have
designed that place for no other end, than that he might with a Long-glass
oversee the Chambers of the Ladies, and the Gardens, and Walks of the Seraglio:
for which reason, without farther inquiry, he was hanged in his shirt on the
top of his Jardac with a red Streamer in his hand, that so the Grand Signior
might be sure, that the Sentence was executed. The Estate of Zanetti, whether
belonging to himself or Principals, was consiscated; but in regard the Goods
for Security were privately conveyed to the Warehouses of several Frank
Merchants, strict search was made for them; but in regard the Marks and Numbers
were altered, they could not be distinguished: wherefore the Grand Signior
concluding, that all the Frank Merchants had combined together to deceive him,
he imprisoned every man of them, nor would he release them until they paid
forty thousand Dollars for their ransom and liberty. After which upon pretense
of a Plot, or agreement of the Franks to defend themselves from the leviation
of this Tax, the Turks searched their Houses for Arms; in taking of which they
were so rigorous, that they spared not so much as a Birding-piece, nor yet the
Sword of Sir Peter Wych, then Ambassador for England, though he alleged, that
it was the very Sword with which his Majesty had conferred the Honor of
Knighthood upon him.

But from these transactions at home, let us pass to the Wars in Poland and
Persia. That invincible Prince Uladislaus King of Poland had gained such good
success against the Czar of Moscovy, that the Czar was forced to demand
assistance from the Turks. The Grand Signior, though he had lately made a Peace
with Poland, and sworn to maintain the Articles of Chocin concluded by his
Predecessor Sultan Osman; yet the continual depredations which the Cosacks
made, did always administer reasonable pretenses for a War: to which Abassa one
of his chief Counselors, a valiant and presumptuous Captain, did much incite
him; for promising to himself the Conduct of that Army designed against Poland,
did much The Turks make War on the Poles.
flatter the Sultan and himself with the fancy of mighty success. The War being
thus resolved upon, the Turk who commonly strikes before he quarrels, gave
Orders to Abassa to make Levies of men in Moldavia and Valachia, and to put the
Tartars in Arms, and the Militia of Buda, and of the parts along the Danube
into a warlike posture, and with all expedition to enter Poland. Abassa who had
with wonderful diligence put his Troops in readiness, ordered the Tartars with
a Body of sifteen thousand men to enter Poland; which they performed with such
celerity, that passing the River of Tyr above Chocin and Rinczug, they in a few
hours laid all waste for the space of ten leagues round Kemenitz, and so
retired with their Booty into Moldavia; howsoever their haste was not attended
with such good speed, but that they were overtaken on the 4th of July by
Stanislaus Konispolzki, General of the Polish Army, with no greater Force than
two thousand five hundred Horse; howsoever surprising them whilst they were
seeding their Horses, he put them into such confusion and disorder, that he
easily recovered all the Booty, and took five of their Chief men Prisoners, of
which the Son-in-law of Cantemir was one. But this was a faint resreshment in
respect to that terrible storm of sixty thousand men composed of Turks,
Tartars, Moldavians and Valachians, which under the Command of Abassa had
already passed the Danube. Konispolzki the Polish General having not sufficient
Force to oppose them in open sield, nor time to assemble a greater Army,
gathered what Supplies he could from the Cosacks and Lords of that Country, and
therewith encamped himself upon a Hill between the River Tyr and the Town of
Chocin, that he might be the better able to succor Kemenitz, which the Enemy
designed to assault. A Fight between the Turks and the Poles.
Abassa who contemned this weak Force of the Poles, resolved without farther
consideration to attack them in their own Camp, and force them to sight; of
which the Poles being well advised, placed several-Pieces of Artillery, and
lined all the Hedges and Ditches with Musketeers where the Turks were
necessarily to pass, drawing out their whole Army into Batalia; the Turks who
hastened the nearest way to charge the Enemy, fell into the Ambush, where
having lost about five hundred men, they began to make a stand, and to consider
of some more advantageous way to their design. Wherefore Abassa taking another
course, which he judged to be free from all concealed dangers, ordered the
Tartars to charge the right Wing, and the Moldavians and Valachians the left of
the Enemy, and he with his Turks would fight the main Body. The Tartars with
great resolution performed their part, and had wholly deseated that Wing, had
not Wisnovitzki with some Troops and a Train of small Artillery come in
seasonably to their succor: the Moldavians and Valachians sought so faintly
against the Enemy, whom they considered to be Christians, Brothers, and
Neighbors, that they soon turned their backs and fled, but were not far
pursued by the Poles. Abassa receiving this repulse sounded a Retreat, and
immediately repassed the River Tyr, and marched with all the haste he was able,
stopping no where, until he arrived at Rinzur about thirty English miles from
the place of the Fight, and arriving at length on the Banks of the Danube, he
gave license to his Soldiers to disperse into their Winter Quarters; in the
mean time Abassa dispatched Advice to the Grand Signior of the Particulars of
the Fight, and of his great Victory by an entire defeat of the Polish Army. The
Grand Signior believed the report, which none durst to contradict, and which
was confirmed by the rumor of an Ambassador coming from Poland. For the Poles
being at that time engaged An Ambassador sent to the G. Signior from Poland.
in a War with Moscovy, and apprehensive of another with Sweden, judged it not
seasonable to provoke the Turk, but rather by way of Accommodation dispeeded an
Ambassador with a train of three hundred men to make complaints against the
late Acts of Hostility committed by Abassa, as if he had moved his Arms without
the Orders, or knowledge of the Sultan. About that time that the Ambassador
approached near to Constantinople, the Grand Signior had another Son born, but
of a weakly and sickly temperament, howsoever great joy was expressed, and all
the City was enlightened with Torches, Bonsires, and Fireworks; and that the
Grand Signior might evidence his Greatness and Magnisicence to the Ambassador,
he took this occasion of the Birth of a Son to make a solemn Entrance into the
City, and to make the greater show he armed all the Citizens and Inhabitants.

Before the Grand Signior would grant Audience to the Ambassador, he ordered
that Abassa should treat with him, and understand his business and desires:
Abassa carried himself high in the Negotiation, he pretended the damages and
charges of the War, the demolishment of certain Palancas, which were the places
of Refuge for the Cosacks, and the Tribute of ten years past, with security of
payment for the time to come. The Ambassador positively refused to hearken
unto any terms about Tribute, and that for other matters the Presents which he
had brought to the Grand Signior would reasonably answer. His Presents were A
Coach lined with Velvet, with six very fine Horses. A Basin and Candlesticks of
Silver richly gilt. Four Clocks, ten Vests of Sables, six Quivers of Arrows,
with some Hunting Dogs.


Being at length admitted to Audience, and thereunto conducted by the Aga of
the Spahees and the Chaous Bashee, the Grand Signior asked the Ambassador,
which was not usual: For what reason he was come thither? To which he answered:
That he was come to bring his Majesty advice of the Coronation of his King, and
to establish a Peace, if his Majesty should judge fit to accept thereof. To
which the Sultan replied: That all Christian Kings ought either to receive the
Ottoman Laws, or pay him Tribute, or try the sharpness of his Sword. And taking
a Cemiter in his hand which hung by him, he drew it half out, and said: With
this I will subdue my Enemies, and though my War in Persia continues, I do not
fear to undertake another in Poland. To which the Ambassador returning a
modest Answer, was dismissed of the Royal Presence.

And now the Grand Signior, to put a good face on the business, and to make the
World believe, that he designed what he spoke, he proclaimed a War with Poland,
and ordered his Tents to be carried abroad, supposing hereby to draw the Poles
to his own terms of agreement: and in pursuance hereof he mounted on Horseback
and rode in state through the City, his upper Vest was made after the Hungarian
fashion lined with Sables; in his right hand he carried a Quiver of Arrows, in
his left two drawn Swords, on his Turbant he wore a large Plume of Feathers
encompassed with a Circle of Diamonds; and in this manner entering his Tents he
proceeded to Adrianople. But before his departure the Count Puchen, Ambassador
from the Emperor, arrived with other sumptuous Presents, offering Incense and
gifts of Peace at the Throne of this Greatness.

But before we relate the transactions at Adrianople, and the success of
affairs at that place, let us recount several dismal accidents at
Constantinople. The Grand Signior returning by Sea from a place called
Stravosta in the Bay of Ismit, anciently the Bay of Nicomedia, where he had for
some Several mischiefs by water and fire.
time held his Court and great Divan, he was followed by several Vessels
appointed to transport the people, in one whereof were ninety five persons
embarked, all of them Pasha's, Aga's, and chief Officers of the Court; the
Vessel was over-set by a sudden gust of wind, and all the people drowned,
excepting three Seamen which saved themselves by swimming. More considerable
were the mischiefs by fire. For on occasion of some Fireworks made in one of
the Grand Signior's Chiosks or Houses of Pleasure, the fire took so siercely on
the Tavan or wooden Works of the Sieling, that it endangered the whole Palace,
and had consumed all, but that many hands and active men gave a stop to the
farther progress. This fire was but the forerunner of a greater, which began
the 16th of September in that part of the City of Constantinople, which is
called (...), A terrible fire at Constantinople.
being between the Wall and the Port where live Taverners, Butchers,
Fishmongers, and others who sell provisions. The fire took first in one of
those Houses which had been a Tavern, and are Buildings only made of
Deal-boards and Timber, which combustible matter flamed out so violently, that
it took hold on all the Houses round, and was so quick in its motion, as if it
had taken by a train, or that some wicked people with Fireballs had employed
themselves in the mischief; the fire took its course against the wind, burning
on one side and the other to the Historical Pillar, and to the Mosehs of Sultan
Mahomet and Sultan Selim; so that in a short time one third of the City was
reduced to ashes. It is difficult to express the lamentable destruction was
made hereby, what Riches, what Palaces, and Movables were consumed in it,
there being twenty thousand houses reported to be burnt; which misery is best
represented by the remembrance of our calamitous Incendiation at London, the
greatest difference between one and the other was, that that at Constantinople
was more quick in its motion; for it burnt a larger compass of ground in one
third of the time, than ours did at London; for that City for the most part
consisting of slight Buildings of Wood met not the resistance which ours
sometimes did against the Walls of Brick and stones. The fire being
extinguished, and men having time to lament and think, began to impute the
cause and fault to those whom they most suspected; sometimes they accused the
Persians for having fired the City, for which crime one of them the next year
suffered death: some attributed the cause of all to the Janisaries, and that
they out of (...) to the Inhabitants, or for the sake of Plunder, if they did
not begin, yet at least increased the fire; which they the more suspected,
because the Janisaries refused not only to work themselves, (...), that they
expected Orders from their Aga, but likewise hindered and discouraged others.
Howsoever the Grand Signior not wanting on his own part to contribute all
assistance possible, sent four thousand men out of his Seraglio to work about
the fire, not excusing the very Officers of his Royal Chamber from contributing
their authority and personal aid; some of which ventured far into the fire to
demonstrate their courage, activeness, and obedience to the Commands of their
Emperor: but all this was too little against an obstinate and an invincible
Enemy, for the fire slamed and proceeded until it wanted nourishment and food
to consume. In fine, twenty thousand houses were burnt, two hundred Mosehs, and
the library of the Mufti, which for the number of the Arabic and Persian Books
was curious and of high esteem: the Albengs or Habitation of the Janisaries
containing three hundred Chambers, of which each Chamber was capable to receive
four hundred men, were all burnt and reduced to ashes. The which fatal and
miserable spectacle did a little touch the heart of Sultan Morat; so that he
gave out considerable Sums to comfort the distressed who had most suffered by
this calamity, and to raise from its ashes his consumed and languishing
Constantinople, which being revived and slourishing, was again miserably
consumed by flames in the month of April 1660. But such is the benesicial and
commodions situation of that place, and the riches thereof by trade, and the
presence of the Ottoman Court, that the Inhabitants again rebuilt it in fewer
years than could be imagined.

But now to return to the Grand Signior at Adrianople, we find him resolutely
designed to make a War upon Poland, to which he was induced by the persuasions
of Abassa, and the present conjuncture of advantage to join with the Moscovite,
it seeming great Policy not to suffer Reasons for a War with Poland.
the Countries of Moseovy to be overrun, or the Poles, who is a warlike and
dangerous Nation, to grow puissant and powerful by his success and Conquest
over his Neighbors: wherefore preparations were made on all sides for the War;
great quantities of Provisions and Ammunition were sent into Moldavia by way of
the Black Sea and the Danube. The Tartar Han sent word that all his Forces were
in readiness, and expected nothing but their Orders to march; the Beglerbey of
Greece made his Rendezvous at Philippolis with an Army of thirty thousand men,
where he attended to join with the Forces of Bosna, Silistria, and other parts
of Europe; Moldavia and Valachia made an appearance of levying men, and joining
with the Turk, but their hearts were toward the Poles, with whom they kept a
secret correspondence, and would be ready to adhere on the least opportunity.
In short, the Army of the Turks was so great, and all his affairs in that
readiness, that he scorned to incline an ear to Propositions of Peace; in which
opinion Abassa humoured and persuaded him, that the Poles were so fearful of
his Forces, that they had already yielded to Terms of compounding for a yearly
Tribute. All which proved false; for in the mean time Vladislaus King of Poland
remitting nothing of the heat and vigor of his War against the Moscovites, he
was so successful therein, that he forced an Army of eighty thousand men, which
he had besieged in their Camp, to lay down their Arms, and surrender
themselves, which was an action scarce to be credited, The Victory which the
Poles obtained (...) the Moscovites.
at least to be paralleled in any History, and with this Conquest he might have
proceeded to the Capital City of Mosco, and concluded the War and that Empire:
but Gods Providence which governs all things altered this Counsel, and diverted
those victorious Arms to the Siege of Bial; which Town being well fortified and
garrisoned withstood many assaults of the Enemy, and blunted the Spirits and
Swords of the Conqueror; for losing much time in this Siege, other Towns made
use of the opportunity to provide and fortify themselves, whilst the Poles
growing weary, and wanting Pay raised diverse Mutinies and Seditions in the
Camp. These difficulties and inconveniences inclined the King Vladislaus to
bend a favorable ear to the many supplications and instances which the
Moscovites made for Peace; so that the Plenipotentiaries being assembled, it
was agreed, that the Duchy of Smolesko and Czernieschou, which two hundred
years past had been taken They make a Peace.
from Poland and Lituania, with many other Towns and Countries to the extent of
two hundred leagues, should be restored to the Kingdom of Poland.

The News of this sudden Peace coming unexpectedly to Sultan Morat caused his
Bravadoes against Poland to cease, and to turn the style of his fury and
indignation against the Moscovites, whom he vilified with all imaginable terms
of perfidiousness and cowardice, and abused and imprisoned their Ambassadors.
He considered that he had provoked an Enemy who was victorious, valiant, and
powerful, and one who at any time was able to contend with his united Force,
much more whilst it was separated and disjoined by his War in Persia: wherefore
in all haste he dispatched an Ambassador into Poland called Shahin Aga,
desiring to renew the ancient League and Articles of Peace. This Ambassador
The Turk sends an Ambassador into Poland to desire a Peace.
found the King at the Diet in Warsaw, where he publicly endeavored to excuse
his Master for the late Acts of Hostility, assuring them, that they were not
performed according to his Masters desires and original intentions, but as they
were moved and guided by the evil suggestions and artifices of Abassa, who
being solely culpable of this fault by giving ill counsels to his Master, he
assured them in the Name of the Sultan, that he should receive such punishment,
as they should think sit to inflict upon him. Hereunto the King Vladislaus gave
this answer, That since the Grand Signior could so easily infringe the Articles
of that Peace which had been solemnly and sacredly established, it was now his
part, and the wisdom of that grave Assembly to contrive such conditions and
bonds wherewith to oblige his Master, as could not easily and at his pleasure
be broken or avoided: and at the same time the Polish Ambassador being
returned from Constantinople, and discoursing in the Diet of the pride and
perfidiousness of the Turks, and the scorn wherewith they received Christian
Ambassadors, so incensed the spirit of the whole Assembly, that with a general
consent they approved the words of the King, adding, that they would no longer
be subject to the insults and falsities of that Tyrant, whom they would make to
know, that they wore as well offensive as defensive Arms, and were not of that
abject spirit or mean condition to permit the Sultan to violate the most sacred
Articles of Peace, and then at his pleasure to salve them with a fawning
acknowledgment, or a flattering speech. In this manner the Turkish Ambassador
was returned, whilst the King Vladislaus went into Podolia to take a view of
his Armies, which he found to consist of eighty thousand fighting men, all well
accoutred, of good courage, and ready to follow their King to the Walls of
Constantinople.

The fear of the motion of this great Army in a conjuncture when the Wars
broken out again in Persia were not prosperous, affected the mind of Morat with
much terror; so that he became very sollicitous to find out and make some
substantial Proposition in order to an Accommodation. One of the Viziers called
Morteza was very active in this business, plying continually the General
Konispolzki with Letters, Ossers, and Expedients for a Peace; to facilitate
which and show that the Grand Signior did heartily relent, Abassa was strangled
by two Kapugees, and given Abassa strangled.
for a Sacrifice to appease the anger of his Enemies; a person who was a stout
Soldier, and one who had performed great and signal services in the War of
Persia. But the Poles not being pacified with this single act of penitence, but
thirsting farther after the blood of the Turks, desired to spoil and pillage
their richer Provinces. Howsoever at length the Council of Poland entering into
more serious debates, considered that the Troops lately come from Moscovy were
but in a bad condition, that the part of their Army which consisted of
Volunteers would not endure a long and tedious War, and that the expense and
charge of this Articles of Peace agreed between the Poles and the Turks.
great Army was immense and almost insupportable: for which reasons it was
resolved, that a Peace should be made, which was soon afterward concluded and
agreed on these following Articles.

That the Vayvods of Moldavia and Valachia should be confirmed by the Grand
Signior with the consent and recommendation of the King of Poland.

That Cantemir and his Tartars should abandon the Country of Buckzac, and in
case of refusal, that then the Turk and Tartar Chan should join their Forces to
expel them from thence.

That the Poles shall suppress all Acts of Hostility of the Cosacks in the
Black Sea.

That the Turks renounce for ever all demands, or future pretense of Tribute
from Poland: and that they shall build no new Forts on the Frontiers.

That the Navigation on the River Nieper shall remain free and undisturbed to
the Poles. That all other Articles shall remain as formerly in their true force
and virtue.

In this year happened out great differences between the French Ambassador and
the Turkish Officers. The first disgust had its original from the year 1631.
when the Marquess of Marcheville going Ambassador A difference between the
French Ambassador and the Captain-Pasha.
to Constantinople, was in his Voyage met off of Scio by the Captain-Pasha and
his Fleet of Galleys, who immediately sent off a Boat to advise him, that he
should strike his Flag, and make ready the Presents which were due to the Grand
Signior's Admiral: Marcheville duly considering, that this submission would
blemish the Honor of his Master, and the Dignity of his Character, refused
compliance either in one or the other; howsoever that he might testify the
friendship and good correspondence which he came to confirm between the two
Kings, he stood off at some distance and fired five Guns to salute the Grand
Signior's Standard; but the Captain-Pasha not contenting himself herewith,
required the Ambassador to come aboard and speak with him, which after diverse
Messages from one Vessel to another, the Ambassador was counseled to perform,
not knowing how far otherwise he might engage the Honor of his Master.
Marcheville being arrived at Constantinople did greatly complain of the affront
and violence he received from the Captain-Pasha; which though the Grand Signior
and other Ministers seemed not to approve, yet the Ambassador received little
other satisfaction than fair words and promises, that his Honor should be
again repaired. At the Arrival of the Sieur Marcheville the Count Cesi, who was
the former Ambassador, was to return into France; but the debts which he had
contracted by a certain way of living, were so great, that the Creditors would
not suffer him to depart without payment; for default of which he endured many
affronts offered to his own person, and was detained at Constantinople until
this year 1634. during which time the Marquess Marcheville managed all the
Affairs of the Embassy, who keeping still in mind the affront offered him
before Scio, watched all opportunities to disparage the actions and person of
the Captain-Pasha; who at length returning from the Black Sea, where he had
some success against the Cosacks, was graciously received by the Grand Signior;
and being advertised, how during his absence the French Ambassador had
endeavored to blast his reputation by many instances of diminution, which he
often inculcated by his Druggerman, took advantage of the Grand Signior's good
humor, to vent before him the resentment which he conceived thereof: the Grand
Signior to gratify the Pasha, promised to hang the Druggerman, which the Pasha
acknowledged as a singular favor, and returned from the presence of the Sultan
full of joy and contentment: but better to cover his malice, and to ensnare the
poor Wretch, he sent a Messenger to the Ambassador, assuring him that he
desired his friendship; and that there might be a right understanding between
them, he persuaded him to send his Druggerman to him, that by his mouth he
might signify the esteem he had for the Ambassador, from whose spirits he was
willing to take off all jealousies and ombrages of discontent. The Ambassador
not suspecting the perfidiousness of the Pasha, sent his Druggerman to him, who
The French Druggerman hanged
being come within his power, was immediately hanged by the Grand Signior's
express Command, and ordered that he should remain on the Gallows with his
Velvet Cap on his head, which in this Sultan's Reign all Druggermen wore to
distinguish them from others. The Ambassador complained greatly of this
affront and violation of Articles, to the Chimacam and other Officers, but
could receive no other answer or satisfaction than that the Grand Signior might
execute Justice, as he pleased, on his Subjects, without asking leave, or
concerning the King of France or his Ambassador in the matter. But Marcheville
not resting satisfied with this reply, still prosecuted his pique and animosity
to such height, that the Captain-Pasha farther incensed thereat, obtained
Authority from the Grand Signior to dispeed him away: so that sending one day
for Marcheville, and first reproaching his contrivances and designs against
him, told him plainly, that it was the Grand Signior's pleasure that he should
depart at that instant; to which he constrained the Ambassador so
precipitately, that he would not give him time to advertise his Servants, or
make up his Baggage; but forced him aboard a French Ship then in Port, which he
immediately compelled to sail; and the wind being contrary, caused the Vessel
to be toaed abroad by two The Sicur Marcheville forcibly sent away.
Galleys into the open Sea of the Propontis. After the injurious departure of
this Ambassador, the Count Cesi, who had been detained at Constantinople for
the reasons before denoted, took again upon him the function of Ambassador, to
execute which in better advantage of Trade and Commerce, he was advised to a
compliance with the Captain-Pasha, and to use such means as might mitigate that
acrimony of spirit, which this Pasha nourished against the French Nation. These
disputes between the French and the Turkish Officers revived certain disgusts
and aversion against all the Frank Nations, which favored the Latin Rites; so
that in despite to them the Grand Signior restored again Cyrillus the
Patriarch to the Patriarchal Jurisdiction, who had long been persecuted by the
Jesuits, and by their means been deposed, promising that for the future he
should continue undisturbed, in opposition to all those of the Roman Religion.

The Peace (as we have said) being concluded with Poland, the Grand Signior was
more at leisure to attend the Wars in Persia, with the labors and toils of
which the Janisaries being wearied, began new troubles and Seditions in the
Camp; the which disorder Morat attributing to the negligence or cowardice of
the Officers, as wanting courage to suppress Acts of cruelty.
them, summoned the Janisar-Aga to appear before him, and without long process
or excuse cut off his Head, and consiscated his Estate to the Exchequer, which
amounted to a million and seventy thousand Dollars: another Janisary also more
rich than seditions, was in like manner sacrificed, and an hundred and sixty
thousand Dollars of his Estate added to the Treasury of the Sultan. The Pasha
also of Damascus, with several other Officers of the Army enriched with spoils
of the people, fell a Sacrifice to Morat's avarice and cruelty; to whom riches
and blood were so pleasing, that none acquired a higher degree of grace in his
favor, than those who could give him notice of opulent men, who having found
riches he undertook to find them guilty, and to prove their wealth so corrupted
by extortion and violence, that nothing could hallow or purify it but his
Coffers.

The next News from Persia brought advice, that that King at the Head of a
powerful Army was encamped in the Country about Van, with which the Turks not
having sufficient Force to fight, the Vizier wrote to the Grand Signior, that
his presence was necessary to increase the Army, and encourage the Soldiery;
whereupon he resolved to leave Adrianople, and transfer his Court to his
Seraglio at Scutari, that The G. Signior returns to Scutari.
so remaining on the Banks of Asia, he might be nearer to his business, both to
receive Intelligence and administer Supplies; and because Seditions and
discontents in the people do always obstruct the motion of public Affairs, he
not only ruined the Taverns and Tabaco-shops, but forbid Coffee-houses, and
other idle places of concourse; nay into Barbers shops no more than one was
suffered to enter at a time; for those being places of resort, Treason was
frequently vented there, men of that profession being notorious through the
World for their talk and intemperance of language: and farther to restrain
Meetings and secret Conventions strict Orders were given, that after an hour
and half in the night all fires and candles in the City should be extinguished,
which was the general discontent of all people. But what showed much of the
fierce spirit of the Sultan, was a certain fury which he conceived on this
occasion. On a certain day riding on his Horse, thirty Indian Pilgrims met him
in the way to demand his charity, and being in a different habit to what the
Turks wear, and not accustomary in that Country, the Grand Signior's Horse
started at the sight of them; and being spurred for bogling in that manner, the
Horse capred and reared an end, so that he threw his Rider; at which the Grand
Signior being highly enraged, drew out his Cemiter, and with his own hand
killed his Horse, and instead of alms prepared a place of entertainment in the
Galleys for those unhappy Indians.

The Grand Signior being returned to his Palace at Scutari, which is seated on
the Asian side opposite to Constantinople, applied his whole mind entirely to
the Affairs in Persia; and being resolved to march thither The G. Signior
resolves to go to Persia in person.
in person, he put abroad the Horse-tail, which is a signal of departure, he
visited the Sepulchers of his Ancestors, made his Corban, which is a
distribution of flesh to the poor, for a Blessing on his Enterprise. The
Officers of the Army contended to out-vy each the other in their Presents to
the Grand Signior, some furnished him with Royal Tents, others with curious and
light Arms; and others with Horses and Furnitures of value. Great Sums of Money
were extracted out of the Exchequer for Military preparations and payments of
the Soldiery. The charge of Affairs in absence of the Grand Signior was
committed to the Bostangibashee, who was made Chimacam of Constantinople; and
so with a fierce spirit, and aspect full of indignation and anger he mounted
his Horse at the head of an Army of an hundred thousand; he departed from
Constantinople about the end of April.

But before we recount the particulars of what succeeded in Persia, it is
requisite to cast our thoughts back to the troubles of Transylvania occasioned
Stephen Bethlem and George Ragotski for that Principality. Bethlem (as we have
said before) being grieved and discontented at his hard Fortune in being put by
the Government, and resenting the punishment which Ragotski inflicted on his
Son for the Bethlem renews his complaints to the Grand Signior.
crime of manslaughter, he went to Buda, and there renewing his old complaints
to the Pasha, he was with recommendations from him accompanied to the Port,
where being introduced to the presence of the chief Ministers, he at large
declared the Merits and good Services of his Family toward the Sultan: That
for this reason only, in dishonor His reasons to be re-inslated.
and despite to the Ottoman Empire, he was excluded from the Government; and
therefore challenged its assistance to re-establish him therein, in
consideration of which, he promised the same faithfulness and devotion to the
Sultan, which was professed and maintained by his Ancestors, and was natural to
the Family of Gabor. That as to Ragotski it was apparent, that he entertained
different principles; that he was a person of elated thoughts and a turbulent
spirit, and was ever united in combination with the Emperor, Germans, and
other Enemies to the Ottoman State.

The Turks moved with these reasons, resolved to favor Stephen, and to
discountenance Ragotski; and though the conjuncture of affairs was such, as
that any other Engagement in War, besides that of Persia, did not square with
the present designs; yet at all times it was judged convenient to sow the tares
of discord, and promote differences amongst Christians, which have ever
produced advantages to the Mohammedan Cause: and likewise the Pasha of Buda was
commanded to enter Transylvania with a Force sufficient to contend with
Ragotski; and lest the Emperor should be alarmed with this commotion, a Chiaus
was dispatched to give him a perfect understanding of the reasons, why an Army
The Turks send an Army into Transylvania.
marched into Transylvania; the design of which was not intended in the least
manner to impeach the Articles of Peace between him and the Grand Signior, but
only to displace a man of a furious and turbulent spirit, and to ordain another
in his stead of a more sober and quiet temper, by whose moderation and prudence
the Peace between the two Empires may be improved and continued.

Ragotski startled at this design intended against him, assembled the States of
his Country to determine and consult concerning a remedy, and immediately
dispatched a Messenger to the Emperor, to desire Ragotski implores aid from
the Emperor.
and implore his Imperial succor and protection: and though Ragotski was
sensible of the disparity of his strength, in comparison of that of the Turks;
yet neither did his counsels nor behavior betray fear or want of constancy.
The Hungarians seconded those instances which Ragotski had made at the Imperial
Court, and the Party which he had made at Vienna brought the matter to a debate
in Council, which was argued on both sides with solid and convincing reasons.
Those who spoke in disfavour of Ragotski, alleged, That all assistance
contributed to him would be a just cause and pretense to the Grand Signior to
make War with the Emperor. That Ragotski himself was of an uniquiet temper,
not unlike to Gabor his Predecessor, who had often bid defiance It is debated
in Council.
to the Emperor, and overrunning all Hungary and Austria, had often erected
his Standard in the sight of Vienna. To protect and cherish a person of this
disposition, was no other than to nourish a Serpent or Viper in their bosom;
who being elevated at the expense of the Empire in successes against the Turk,
would convert that power which he had gained to the damage of the House of
Austria, combining with the Faction of other Princes to procure its
destruction. Let us therefore, said they, stand at a gaze, and as men on the
shore or in a good Port behold the agitation of Ships in the Ocean; perhaps the
change of a Prince in Transylvania may turn to our benefit, and one may succeed
into the place, of such a mild temper and serene disposition, as may better
agree with the Maxims of this Court, and may cultivate that Peace which can
only render these Countries happy.

Howsoever there were other opinions to the contrary, amongst which it is said,
that D. Annibal Gonzaga, a person acquainted with the State of Transylvania and
of the Turks, and Director of the Imperial Army, delivered himself in this
manner.

May it please Your Sacred Imperial Majesty,

IF Ragotski had been the lawful Son and hereditary Successor of Gabor, who
was an Enemy to your Majesty, we might then apprehend the evil consequences of
a Son, that traces the same path and footsteps of his Father. But here is
another person, another Prince, in emulation different, and by enmity hating
the House of Gabor; wherefore I cannot imagine, how this Prince can possibly
entertain Maxims of like nature with the other. For my part I believe, that it
behooves your Majesty to maintain a good correspondence with the Princes of
Transylvania by a close Union against the Turk; your adjoining Countries being
like contignous Buildings, which are strengthened by a mutual support: let us
therefore support it, for if it depends not on us, it will be overrun, and
remain oppressed without us. To aggravate the faults of Gabor to the
disparagement of Ragotski, is no Logical consequence, unless you will argue,
that the faults of the guilty are to be punished on the innocent. Let us
therefore consider, which agrees best with the security of the Empire; that
Transylvania should remain in the hands of Ragotski, or of the Turk; or that we
had better strike against the rock of jealousy, which we conceive against this
Transylvanian, or on that ruinous rock of the Turkish Power. The Ottoman
Counsels commonly look asquint, they cast their eye on the Prince, when their
sight aims at the Principality, and threaten the person, when they design to
vent their fury to the subjection of his Country. The true intent of the Turk
is to reduce Transylvania to the same condition with Moldavia and Valachia, and
to incorporate this with infinite other Provinces into the gross body of his
Empire. It is notorious to all the World, that the Emperors your Predecessors
have lost a large tract of Land by the Turks, and your losses will every day be
greater, as their Conquests increase; and when their Dominions in Europe are so
enlarged, that they are able to quarter their Asiatick Cavalry in these
Countries, your dangers must necessarily be inevitable and full of terror. For
I compute, that when the Turk designs to make War upon us, he marches with an
hundred thousand men, and perhaps ten thousand Camels, besides other beasts of
burden; so numerous a body as this cannot be maintained until the grass be
fully grown, which is not until the middle or end of June; and from that time
they have more than a month or six weeks March before they arrive upon our
Consines; the which consumption of time prolongs their Enterprises, and
protracts the time of our damages. But if once they become Masters of
Transylvania, and that that Country be laid to Moldavia, Valachia, and other
parts of Hungary, they may then commodiously winter amongst us, and begin their
Wars and Attempts upon us early in the year, and pursue them until the last
season of the Autunin: and in this manner, whilst we are debating and taking
our measures in our Diet, they will fatten themselves, and satiate their
appetites with our spoils. It is good therefore for us to defend Austria in
Transylvania, keeping the eaver as far from the heart, as we are able. Let us
suppose, that Ragotski is the most ungrateful man in the world, and that after
we have supported and succored him, that he will reverse his Arms upon us:
howsoever he is not so strong and considerable as to do us much hurt, and
therefore it were better to have him our Neighbor and our Enemy, than the
Turk, though our Friend: the first can only administer some little causes of
jealonsie, but the other may destroy and supplant us: the first is but like a
putrid fever, which is cured with every small evacuation; but the latter is a
pestilence, which dilates and diffuses it self, and is deadly and
irrecoverable. Let not the seruple neither of breaking with the Turk trouble
us; for we may administer assistance underhand, and without noise effect our
business, without arriving at the extremity of a rupture. It is folly and
weakness in us to be charmed by the statteries of the Turks, and the fair words
of this Chaous, or to imagine, that when they have overrun all Transylvania,
they will stop in the midst of their career, before they arrive at the Gates of
Vienna; no, their intentions are to lull us asleep, and to destroy our
Neighbor first, and then us; they cannot devour us both at once, but husband
their diet, and reserve us for another meal. The Turk is like a Serpent, who
lies quiet and coiled up all the Winter, not because he wants either a sting or
poison, but being benumbed with cold, wants warmth and heat to give it motion
and operation. This is my sense and opinion, which I most humbly tender before
the greater Wisdom of Your Sacred Majesty.

Notwithstanding these convincing Arguments, the result of the Council
determined otherwise, and Ragotski was left to shift for himself, and The
Emperor resuses succor to Ragotski.
to stand upon his own legs, which was a pernicious resolution, and that which
was afterward the cause of the subjection of Transylvania to the Turk, and the
original of many mischiefs to the Empire; but this was the fortune of the
Turks, more favorable to them than to the Christian State.

Ragotski being thus abandoned by the Imperialists, and exposed to the mercy of
an insatiable Enemy, though his courage was good and resolute, yet he began to
despond of his Force, unable to deal with such an unequal Match, as that of the
Turk: and his Subjects being fearful of the event, persuaded him to give way,
and resign his rule to the hands of Gabor his Competitor; Ragotski, that he
might not seem to neglect the counsel of his Subjects and Friends, and to gain
time, pretended to hearken to their advice; and accordingly entered into a
Treaty with Gabor. During which debate he secretly obtained some Forces from
Ragotski obtains succors underhand.
Poland, by connivance of that Government; and the Hungarians being his
friends, privately favored him, knowing that the Conquest of Transylvania
would be a step to their destruction; and being at length well fortified and
recruited, he began to declare openly, that he found no security to himself in
this Surrender, for that a place was denied him, wherein he put his chief hopes
of defense; and therefore that he was resolved to support and maintain his
state and cause in the best manner that he was able. Hereupon the Turks entered
Transylvania with an The Turks enter Transylvania.
Army of twenty five thousand men under the Command of the Pasha of Buda:
Ragotski, to obstruct their March, dispeeded his General Cornis with seven
thousand men to prepossess an advantageous ground, with Order to entertain, but
not fight the Enemy, until he could come up to him with the gross of his Army.
The Turks perceiving their advantage in number, resolved to engage the Enemy
before they were reinforced with new Succors; to perform which they made a
detachment of twelve thousand Horse, and two thousand Janisaries, and some
Fieldpieces commanded by the Pasha himself and Stephen Gabor. Cornis not They
fight with Cornis,
being able to disingage himself or avoid fighting, made a virtue of necessity,
and put his Forces into form of Battle, and exhorting his men to follow his
example, assured them, that Victory was sooner acquired by valor than numbers,
and that Fortune was always more favorable to the valiant and brave, than to
the cowardly and pusillanimous. Cornis unsheathing his Sword fought in the head
of his men, and led them through the thickest of his Enemies, the first rank of
which not being able to sustain the surious charge of the Christians, gave way;
and being disordered, the first Squadrons ran foul of the second, and at length
all of them betook themselves to a shameful flight. The Transylvanians are
overthrown.
took all their Cannon and Baggage with ten Ensigns, and killed three thousand
Turks. The Pasha of Agria was wounded, and Olac Bei of Temiswar was taken
Prisoner; and the whole Army had that day been defeated, had not the
Janisaries, who fortified themselves in a thick Wood, given a stop to a farther
pursuit. Ragotski likewise in diverse succeeding Skirmishes overthrew the Turks,
killing many Pasha's and Soldiers of quality, and at length remained sole
Master of the Field. The Turks retired to Lippa, and Stephen to Temiswar,
whilst Ragotski made his Incursions into the Country of the Turks, burning and
spoiling two thousand Villages; with which being terrified and beaten into
terms of reason, they agreed to suffer Ragotski to enjoy his Government, Peace
is made.
conditionally, that the Goods and Estate of Gabor in Transylvania should be
restored unto him: and thus Ragotski established himself in the Government, and
obtained a confirmation thereof from Constantinople to his Son, accompanied
with Presents and Ornaments of a Prince. And this example shows us in what
manner we are to deal with Turks; resolution and rigor are better Arms against
them than complements, and with an Enemy it is more advantageous to make Peace
with weapons in our hands, than to condescend to the hard terms which a Tyrant
pleases to impose on an easy and an unprovided People. So soon as this News
arrived the ears of the proud Sultan, he was so incensed, that in a fury he
would have desisted from his present War in Persia, to vent his revenge upon
Transylvania; but the cooler and more moderate counsels of wiser friends
advised him to defer the execution of his anger, until he could discharge it
more to the purpose, and in a conjuncture when it would fall more easy on
himself, and more heavy on his Enemy: howsoever in the mean time Ragotski made
such use of this remote diversion of the Ottoman Arms, by advantaging himself
of an Alliance with the Cosacks, and by the ill correspondence and diffidence
which at that time intervened between the Tartars and the Port, that he not
only avoided the revenge threatened by Morat, but obtained an establishment of
the Inheritance to his Son.

By this time Sultan Morat was arrived at Erzrum, which is a City belonging to
the Turks on the Confines of Persia; where the first Act Morat at Erzrum.
which he performed of Justice, was to cut off the Head of the Pasha for his
oppression and extortions inslicted on the people. Entering into Armenia, he was
grieved to see the upper and lower Provinces so miserably destroyed and wasted
by the War; to recover which he commanded the people under pain of death to
return again to their ancient habitations within the space of twenty days; but
they being settled in other Cities, where perhaps they had purchased Houses and
Lands, could not possibly comply with the severity of this Decree; and
therefore were constrained to buy a dispensation and release from the penalty
for a Sum of money.

About the beginning of July in the parts of Erzrum, Morat made a general
review and Muster of his whole Army; with which those he brought from
Constantinople joined to Recruits by the way, and those Forces which had waged
War in Persia amounted to near the number of three hundred thousand fighting
men, but such as were admirably well disciplined, not only by the severity of
their Sovereign, but by the example he showed them of frugality and patience:
for he often marched afoot in the midst of the heats, he was extremely
temperate in his diet, though he was naturally of a gluttonous and luxurious
palate; for several The Grand Signiors patience and labors.
months he made use of no other Pillow for his head than his Saddle, nor other
Blanket or Quilt than the Covering or Foot-cloth of his Horse. Being arrived
near to the City of Revan he bestowed that largess on the Soldiery of a Dollar
a man, which is accustomary to be given at all times, when the Grand Signior
marches in person, and then made known to them his intentions of besieging that
place; and in case he took it not in the space of ten days, that then he would
leave it begirt with forty thousand men; and dividing his Army into three
Bodies, he would enter the bowels of Persia by diverse ways. The Tents of the
Grand Signior and of all the Camp were pitched, Batteries raised, the Trenches
opened, and all matters laid in the formal manner of a Siege. The Garrison
within commanded by Emir Gumir consisted of Revan betrayed and surrendered by
Emir Gumir.
fifteen thousand men, sitted and provided with all sorts of Ammunition, and
wanted neither courage nor provisions; howsoever at the end of nine days the
City was surrendered to the Sultan, upon terms of quarter to the whole Garrison
both for life and freedom of Estate; and because this Governor Emir Gumir, a
principal Nobleman of Persia, had by corruption thus voluntarily delivered up
the City, he acquired a place of high grace and esteem in the favor of the
Grand Signior, to which his courtly manner of indulging his humor, and
complying with him in his Wine and Feasts (to which the joy of this present
success privileged him to return) gave him daily a new Title to receive
extraordinary Honors from him. The news of this prosperous success was posted
to Constantinople, as the first essay of the good effects of the Sultan's
presence, and was there celebrated with Feasts, Joy, and Lights, according to
the Turkish fashion, called Danalma; to perform which the Turks obliged
Rejoicing and a Festival kept for it at Constantinople.
likewise the Christian Ambassadors, saying, that if they were friends, they
ought to evidence their satisfaction by demonstrations of joy in the prosperity
of their Ally: the Festival was kept for the space of four days, during which
two Brothers of the Sultan, viz. Bajazet and Orchan were strangled; the latter
of which, as is said, was so brave, and of that courage, that he killed four of
his Executioners before he submitted his neck to the fatal Cord.

The Turk entering farther into Persia, inconsiderately fell into an ambush,
where twelve thousand of their men were defeated; howsoever the remainder of
the Army not being discouraged with this Encounter, proceeded on their March,
making most miserable havoc and destruction of all before them, carrying that
dread and terror to the Countries round, that all people fled, leaving their
houses and things The Turks enter farther into Persia.
not portable to the possession of the Enemy. Howsoever the Turks found greater
difficulties than they expected; for meeting frequently Parties of the Persian
Cavalry, which were practiced to manage their Horse and Sword, were often
defeated, at least endured and sustained the shock of bloody Skirmishes; and
then the Persians retiring into the Mountains known to them, but unknown to the
Turks, which served them better than fortified places, returned again when any
advantage or Booty appeared, which perpetually vexed and wearied the Enemy; and
burning all things which might afford them relief, rendered that fruitful
Country more desolate and barren than the Deserts of Libya, or the Sands of
Arabia. In this manner the Turkish Army being destitute of all sorts of
provisions and refreshments, were forced to retire to the Country of Tauris;
which being harassed and impoverished like other Provinces, caused a miserable
famine in the Camp, whereby multitudes of Horses and Camels perished for want
of nutriment; at which the Grand Signior being highly incensed against the
Inhabitants of Tauris, committed their City to the will and mercy of the
Soldiery, who having Tauris destroyed.
pillaged and sacked it, left it a miserable spectacle of fire and sword.

The King of Persia seeing in what manner the Troops of his Enemy were wearied
and consumed, took hold of this opportunity as seasonable to propose certain
Articles of Peace by an Ambassador, to which Morat seemed to incline a
flexible ear; but lodging his Soldiers in their Winter Quarters in the parts
of Damascus and Aleppo, he took his way toward Constantinople, with intention
to ease the hardships and labors of the Summers War, by a voluptuous ease and
Winters pastime in the delights and softness of the Seraglio. The 16th day of
December he arrived at Constantinople, having passed from Ismit through the
Gulf of Nicomedia with the attendance of fourteen Galleys: he made his Entry
by the Jews Gate, and not by that of Adrianople, as was accustomary; he was
mounted on one of the best of his Horses, and clothed with a Coat of Mail, a
Casket on his head with three Feathers adorned with Pearls and precious Stones,
his Sword was girt to his side with his Bow and Quiver, his beard was in a
rough and neglected manner, which made him appear more fierce and Martial; the
Chimacam came after him, accompanied with the Traitor who surrendered Revan.
This Festival for his return Festival for return of the G. Signior.
was celebrated for the space of a whole week, during which time the Shops were
shut, the doors and outsides adorned with green Boughs and Paintings, and by
night the streets with Torches were made as clear as the day: howsoever the
people secretly murmured, that the War was not prosecuted, and the advantages
taken when Fortune began to smile and favor their Enterprises; and that now
desisting in the middle way, offered a Sum of money to Mortesa Pasha to
surrender Revan; which he refusing to accept on principles of fidelity and
honor, they prepared to lay close siege to the place: the Janisaries were also
displeased to see themselves neglected, and cast out of the Guard, and their
places supplied by the Bostangees; nor less disgusted were the Lawyers to see
several of their Judges and Kadies hanged, and their heads cut off, upon
pretense of Sedition and Faction. His ill humor more increased to the height of
Tyranny, by reason of certain twinges which he suffered of the Gout, which is
not usual in persons of his age, not surpassing twenty six years; and because
his Physician a Jew forbid him wholly to drink wine, as poison to his disease
and complexion, he was so enraged, that he drove him from his presence with
indignation, and immediately conceived such anger and prejudice against the
whole Nation, that he caused their Houses to be searched, and their Jewels
taken from them. But what was most strange, was his horrid aversion to Tabaco,
the taking His aversion to Tabaco.
of which by any person whatsoever he forbid upon pain of death; which sentence
he so rigorously executed, that he caused the legs and arms of two men, one
that sold Tabaco, and the other that took it, to be sawed off, and in that
manner exposed to the view of the people: he also caused two others, a man and
a woman to be impaled alive, for the same offense, with a Roll of Tabaco about
their necks.

As the Gout caused him to be froward and ill-natured, so more especially when
ill News came from Persia, he was observed to be more raving and tyrannical
than ever: his Army in Persia wanting provisions disbanded; Mortesa Pasha
Governor of Revan being killed, the Soldiers Revan regained by the Persian.
rebel, open the Gates, and yield themselves to the Persian; for which offense
the Janisaries fearing the Justice of their Master the Grand Signior, two
thousand of them took up Arms in service of the Enemy: the sense hereof vexing
Morat to the soul, he caused the Register of the Janisaries to be hanged, and
another of their principal Officers to be beheaded, The Grand Signiors severity
and cruelty.
and strowed the streets of Constantinople with dead bodies, some for one
cause, and some for another, which struck the whole City with a general dread
and consternation. He often walked in the night, punishing quarrels and
disorders of the streets, and meeting two women wandering in the dark, he caused
them to be cut in pieces. He put his Cook to death for not dressing his Meat
well, or not seasoning his Sauces according to his palate. In his Seraglio
sporting with his Arms, he wounded himself with a Dart in the thigh; and by
accident wounded the Son of Mehmet the late Vizier with a Carbine-shot, of
which in a short time after he dyed.

The Persian having taken Revan (as we have said) instituted Chambers of
Janisaries in that place after the Turkish fashion, paying them in the same
form as at Constantinople; and to allure the Spahees to enter into his Service,
he offered to all that came in twelve Aspers a day of constant Pay, and
declared, That their Faith and Law had no difference from the Mohammedan. The
Grand Signior receiving these Advices with extreme indignation, proclaimed his
intentions to return again into Persia; and though the design pleased not the
Militia, who were weary of the War, yet his power was too great to be resisted,
and his humors too violent to be diverted by sober counsels; for having
subjected and absolutely subdued the insolence of the Soldiers, and suppressed
the arrogance of the Lawyers and Churchmen, he ordered every thing according
to his arbitrary and uncontrollable pleasure, which being rendered extravagant
and unsupportable, by reason that in his Cups, and at the time of his
debauchery he would often take his Counsels and determine his resolutions, were
notwithstanding with more patience endured upon hopes that they would not be
lasting, and that excesses would accelerate his death, and the end of their
oppressions. The Pasha's of greatest note and richess he put to death, and
consiscated their Estates to his Exchequer; and whereas avarice and cruelty
were equally predominant in his nature, there was scarce a day wherein he made
not some demonstration of those dispositions: the English Ambassador making
some instances for the releasement of English Slaves from Captivity, was forced
to purchase their liberty by giving two Russians, or other Slaves in the place
of one Englishman. He took a singular delight to sit in a Chiosk by the
Seaside, and from thence to shoot at the people with his Bow and Arrows, as
they rowed near the Banks of the Seraglio, which caused the Boat-men afterward
to keep themselves at a distance from the Walls of the Seraglio. And as he
likewise took pleasure to go from one Garden to another on the Bosphorus, so if
he observed any so bold, as to put forth his head to see him pass, he commonly
made him pay the price of his curiosity by a shot from his Carbine. In all his
Gardens and places of pleasure his chief recreation was drinking, in which his
principal or almost sole Companions were Emir Gumir the Persian who betrayed
Revan, and a Venetian of the Family of Bianchi, who having been taken by the
Turks, when he was young, was placed in the Seraglio, and educated in all the
Learning and Customs of it, and becoming as well a Proficient in drinking, as
in other vices, he was made a Favorite and Companion to Morat. And thus did
they follow this trade of drunkenness so constantly, that the health of the
Grand Signior began to impair, and at length he became so sensible of his
extravagancies, that he incharged the Chimacam not to obey him after dinner:
and when in the heat of his Wine he took a humor to ride through the streets,
the Janisaries and Officers would sometimes run before to advise the people to
withdraw, and sometimes drive them away with stones, that so they might escape
the hazard of this capricious Tyrant. As it cannot be expressed in what dread
and fear the people stood of him, so neither in what Veneration he was with his
Servants, who observed the looks and every cast of his eyes, had learned his
nods, and the meaning of every motion and gesture of his body. It happened
once, that a paper falling casually from his hand out of a window, the Pages
ran in all haste down the stairs, striving who should be the first to take it
up; but one more desirous than the others to evidence the zeal of his service,
took the nearest way and leaped out of the window; and though with the fall he
broke the bone of his thigh, yet being the first that took up the paper, he
came halting to present it with his own hand: this bold readiness in his
service so pleased the Grand Signior, that being cured, he was afterward
preferred to one of the most considerable Offices of the Empire. Thus was Morat
revered in his Seraglio, as he was feared abroad, his Servants having the same
awe of him, as Bagotes the Eunuch had of Alexander the Great, who holding the
Pot of Incense and Perfumes whilst his Master slept, suffered his hands to burn
to the bone, rather than to awaken him by moving out of his place. Q. Curtius.

But it is time now to leave off farther discourse of the Extravagancies of
Morat, and to return to the Wars in Persia; howsoever before the departure of
the Grand Signior, it will be requisite to recount somewhat of the state of
affairs in Europe. On the Frontiers of Hungary and Poland Disturbances in
Poland and Hungary.
there wanted not Exercises and Skirmishes to employ and practice the
Soldiery, and keep them in breath. The Poles heightened with their good
successes, would not longer endure the Incursions of the Tartars, complaining
against the Turk, that he had given Orders, and secretly abetted them in their
Robberies and Invasions against the Articles of the last Peace; and therefore
to avenge themselves, the Poles appeared on the Frontiers with forty or fifty
thousand Horse; but the Grand Signior not willing in this conjuncture to break
with the Poles, absolutely disowned any such Order or permission given to the
Tartars, and being willing to continue the League, that he might oblige the The
Turks confirm the Peace with Poland;
King of Poland, gave liberty to all the people of that Nation, and to the
Russians, who had been taken since the last Treaty, positively prohibiting all
people from buying or keeping any of the Subjects of that Country for Slaves,
during the continuance of this Peace. In Hungary, though the Ambassador had
but lately brought a Confirmation of tho Peace from Constantinople; yet the
Turks pretending that the Articles were not complied with, continued to trouble
and disturb those Frontiers; for four thousand of them being gotten into a Body
burnt certain Villages, made diverse Slaves, and battered the Castle of Raab;
but being repulsed by that Garrison, and by that of Komorra, they again made
Head, and encamped within three leagues of Presbourg: the which gave great
trouble to the Emperor, both because he had lately declared a War against
France; and because he apprehended, that those Commotions of the Turks were
designed to no other end, than to engage him Send Forces against Ragotski.
to renounce all assistance and succor to be given unto Ragotski. We have
already recounted in what manner the Turks had espoused the quarrel of Stephen
Gabor, and resolved to establish him in the Principality of Transylvania with
the ruin of Ragotski; which now being designed to be done by open Force,
several Troops were sent to the Frontiers of Transylvania; which so alarmed the
Hungarians, that they put themselves on their Guard, and obliged the Estates of
Austria and Hungary to contribute toward the succor of the Transylvanian
Prince. The Emperor remained long in suspense what course to steer, until at
length the persuasions of the Confederate Princes, the shame of abandoning a
Friend and an Ally for a prey to the Turks, and the fear of displeasing his
hereditary Dominions in Hungary, who considered Transylvania as the Bulwark of
their Country, induced him to promise secretly and underhand assistance to
Ragotski. As to the Turks themselves, the effects did not correspond with their
menaces; for though they had gathered an Army of twenty thousand men at Buda,
they not only were disappointed of their design upon Newhausel, but were openly
repulsed, and shamefully expelled the Frontiers by the Palatine of Hungary: and
Ragotski being recruited by Succors from the Emperor, and by an Alliance with
Poland desied the Forces of the Turk, and contemned the reports of sixty
thousand men, preparing to march against him.

For indeed the Grand Signior had too great an encumbrance on his shoulders by
the War in Persia, to attend unto a perfect and studied revenge against
Ragotski; for Revan being recovered by the Persian, (as we have already
declared) was a matter of high moment, and what distracted all his counsels and
weakened his hopes. When News came first of the Siege of Revan, Orders were
given to the Vizier to besiege Bagdat, as a means to cause a diversion of Arms;
but the Soldiery entertaining Mutiny in the Turkish Army.
an aversion to this Enterprise, unanimously refused to march, or to proceed
farther than Erzrum. Jambolat Ogli, who commanded the Army before the arrival
of the Vizier, had strangled a Pasha, and taken his Estate to supply the wants
of the Army, and had likewise put to death several Spahees and Janisaries for
Mutiny, and because they had declared an unwillingness to this War. The
Soldiery prepared to address themselves to the Vizier for justice against
these violent proceedings; but he not willing to hear them, endeavored to
divert their complaints, which caused a greater commotion and storm than
before. And though Jambolat pleaded his Orders and positive Commission from the
Grand Signior for what he had acted; yet that allegation not being accepted by
the multitude as a justifiable plea, the Vizier was forced to condescend to
their desire, and strangle Jambolat, as he had done the others, being the only
means to quiet and compose this trouble of his Army. But as after some great
storm there is always remaining for a while a swelling and fluctuation in the
waters, so there still remained on the spirits of the Soldiery discontents and
unquietness of mind: wherefore the Vizier fearing lest the Enemy taking
advantage of the present Seditions, should charge them at a time of disorder,
he retired at a distance from them into the Plains of Erzrum: but he was not
able to continue long in those parts for want of fuel, and of wood and planks
to secure them against the rains and snow; for it being Winter, which is
rigorous and cold in that Country, their Tents were not sufficient proof to
defend them against the extremity of the weather.

Whilst the Turkish Army remained at this place, advice came, that the Persians
had besieged Van, which is a strong Fortress situate on an inaccessible Rock on
the Frontiers of the Province of Diarbequir. And Van befieged by the Persians.
though the Persians were not able to take this place neither by storm nor
famine; yet during this Siege they made use of their time to ruin all the
Country of Diarbequir, which they left so desolate, that the Turkish Army could
not quarter there, nor extract the least provision or subsistence from thence.
To all these misfortunes a greater was added by the treachery of a certain
Curd, one who pretending to be ill-satisfied with the Persian Party,
voluntarily offered himself to the service of the Turks; and having done them
some little services by being their guide through certain difficult passages,
he gained a confidence so far with them, as that designing to surprise a
quarter of the Enemy, they committed themselves to his guidance and conduct;
who having brought them into Fifteen thousand Turks killed in an Ambush.
a narrow passage, where an Ambush of the Enemy lay, he then turned his Coat,
and fought against the Turks, of whom fifteen thousand were killed and taken in
this snare. In short, all matters of this War proceeded cross and unfortunate
for the Turks; for besides their unlucky Fights with the Enemy, their own
Seditions in the Camp were greater mischiefs; Mutiny of the Soldiers.
for now enduring no longer these pungent miseries, under the pretense of
wanting Pay, they cut in pieces the Treasurer of the Army, two Aga's of the
Spahees, and the Chaousbashee of the Janisaries.

This News arriving at Constantinople, when Morat was asslicted with a grievous
accession of the Gout, served to redouble his pains, in which raving against
the conduct of his Officers, he immediately deprived the Vizier of his Charge,
and ordained Biram Pasha, late Chimacam, to succeed him in his Employment. The
new Vizier immediately set forth the Horses Tail, which is a signal of
departure, with sound of Drums A new Vizier sent to the Army.
and Trumpets, making Corban, which is a distribution of Mutton to the poor, in
diverse places: his Retinue was speedily equipped with such sumptuous
Magnificence, that it looked rather like the Train of an Ambassador, which
intended to make Peace, than to the Troops of a General, whose business was
nothing but blood and destruction. And indeed matters seemed to be inclining
that way, the Persians having far advanced in this Negotiation; for they wisely
pondering the immense Force of the Ottoman Empire, with which they were now
contending, judged it the most politic course to make Peace under the
auspicious Planet of their good Fortune; for not knowing how long that might
remain constant, they might so soon as the wheel turns on the other side, be
forced to accept terms of less advantage, than at present they might promise to
themselves under their happy Stars. Wherefore a Proposition being made of
sending an Ambassador to the Grand Signior, he accepted of it; and accordingly
arrived at Constantinople in the A Persian Ambassador sent to the Grand
Signior.
month of August, when the Vizier was scarce in the middle of his Journey. The
Grand Signior entertaining some real inclinations to Peace, laid aside
something of his usual Grandeur and State, giving the Ambassador Audience in a
few days after his arrival: and as nothing mollifies the hard mettle of a Turks
spirit, like a gentle shower of Gold, and the emulgent softness of rich
Presents; so Morat understanding of Gifts with which he came accompanied,
afsorded to the Ambassador an easy ear and a pleasing countenance. The
Presents for the Grand Signior, besides those for the Court, were these that
follow. Eight Indian Horses of great price. Forty Dromedaries. An hundred and
fifty Meticals of Musk. As much Ambergriese made up in several Bags, all sealed
up with the Kings own Seal. Thirty Bundles of the best black Sables. Eight
large Carpets mixed with Gold and Silver, with diverse others of Silk very rare
and precious. Many Pieces of the finest Linen to make Turbants. A great number
of the rarest Girdles. Porceline to a great value. Diverse Pieces of Satin and
Velvet with golden Flowers. Fifty Pieces of silken Stuffs. Eight Bows of
excellent work.


These Presents so well disposed and prepared the mind of the Grand Signior
toward an Accommodation, that he bestowed a kind aspect and gentle words on
the Ambassador, so that all the World expected that a Peace would have ensued.

And indeed one might well have believed his reality in this intention, since
the ardent passion he had to be revenged of Ragotski, availed more with him
than all other considerations in the world: his Honor also called him to give
a stop to the progress of the Moscovites, who had taken Asac; and the Tartars
and Cosacks gave some ground of jealousy, that before long they designed some
Action on the Turkish Territories, the reasons whereof we shall discourse in
this following Year.

We have already related some Years past, on what Terms the Tartars stood with
the Turk, how they refused to accept that King which the Port recommended to
them, though the eldest and first of the true Line; how they fought and
overthrew the Forces which the Grand Signior sent to compel them to the
Election he desired, and this last Year Troubles in the lesser Tartary.
upon pretense of a War with Cantemir they refused to send their Army against
the Persian, as had always been accustomary to do against the Enemies of the
Sultan, whenever required. The Pasha, Muftee and Kadi of Caffa (which is the
Grand Signior's Town in Tartary) urged the Tartar Han to prepare and forward
his Forces according to the duty and obligation which was incumbent on him; and
enlivening their arguments with reproaches of cowardice and ingratitude, so far
provoked the Han, that he caused them all three to be strangled.
Notwithstanding this high provocation, the Grand Signior dissembled the injury,
lest a due resentment should raise them into an open Rebellion; and dissembling
an approbation of the Fact, as done with reason and justice, sent to the Tartar
Han a Sword and a Vest, as signals of his favor: and farther suspecting, lest
in prosecution of so sensible a blow, the Tartar joining in League with the
Cosacks and Moscovites, should make himself Master of Caffa, he prudently
touched the wound with a gentle hand, offering to ordain such a Pasha, as
should be warranted with his assent and approbation. The Tartar being overcome
by such lenitives as these, protested that he never entertained other thoughts,
than to maintain his Faith and Allegiance inviolable toward the Grand Signior,
and that the Alliance he had made with the Nogay Tartars, and the Forces now
raised were maintained with no other design, than to suppress the rebellion and
insolence of Cantemir.

This Cantemir being a person of a bold spirit, and daring in all his actions,
did oftentimes, by virtue of his own Authority, lead a strong Party to the
field, being followed by the bravest and stoutest Soldiers of Tartary; for
which reason being hated by the Tartar Han, and his life often attempted, and
his own spirit not supporting a subjection to Cantemir makes a new Colony.
any other, he passed the Niester and retired with his own Troops, and such
others as would follow him into the Country of Budziak, near to Beliegrod and
Kilia, confining on the Frontiers of Moldavia: where he intended to plant and
form a new Colony and Government. In a short time diverse chief Captains being
desirous to follow the Ensigns of so famous a General came in to him, and
multitudes of people forsaking the sands and barren rocks of Tartary, came
crowding into this Country, that the Plains of Budziack not being capable to
contain them, they passed into Moldavia, where incroaching on the Lands of the
proper Inhabitants, gave a jealousy as if they intended to take possession of
the whole Province. The Poles being jealous of these ill Neighbors which lay
at the Gate of their Country ready to enter on all occasions, had made
provision in their last Articles of Peace with the Grand Signior, that he
should force them to return, and urged that point by the Ambassador with all
earnestness. The Tartar Han also finding his Countries depopulated and weakened
by so large an evacuation, male also his complaints and addresses to the Port:
but the Grand Signior looking on this Colony, as an increase of his Dominions,
and to be composed of such people whom necessity must render obedient; and that
they could easily at his command make irruptions into Poland, Hungary, and
Transylvania, seemed deaf to all applications in this business; and as if they
were a people in whom he had no part, showed no concernment for them, though
secretly he promised them his protection. Hereupon Vladislaus King of Poland
being wearied with delays, resolved by force of Arms to drive out this
detestable Neighborhood: but the Tartar Han whom this business more nearly
concerned, being more speedy in execution He is overthrown by the Tartar Han.
than the Poles, having raised an Army of thirty thousand men, encountered
Cantemir with twenty thousand, and charged him so furiously, that he killed
seven thousand of them on the place, and put the rest to flight, pursuing them
through the Plains of Dobruc on the other side of the Danubc. The Grand Signior
who had all this time remained a Spectator of this success, began now to take
the part of Cantemir, and severely to reprove the proceedings of the Tartar
Han, for having disturbed Cantemir whilst he was preparing to serve him in the
Wars of Persia. But the Tartar Han having shaken off much of his respect and
reverence toward the Grand Signior, despised the menaces which he vented
against him, and proceeded in his own business, compelling his people to return
again to their Country, and to their ancient Habitations. Morat being forced to
suffer what he could not remedy, summoned Cantemir with all diligence to render
himself at Constantinople, where being arrived, he was at first regarded with a
favorable eye; but his Son soon after having in a private quarrel killed a
Tartar near the Walls of the Seraglio, was for that fact justly strangled by
Order of the Grand Signior; the day following Cantemir was also imprisoned, and
in a short time underwent the Cantemir put to death.
like Fate with that of his Son.

During these troubles a Nephew of Cantemir feigning himself to be disgusted
with his Uncle, revolted to the Party of the Tartar Han with no other than a
treacherous design to take away the lives of the two Brothers; the which he
compassed at a time of their Hunting, when being far remote from their
Attendance, following their Game in untrodden paths, he set upon them with an
hundred Villains, and perfidiously The King of Tartary killed.
took away their lives. The News hereof was highly applauded at Constantinople,
and the Traitor extolled as a person of mighty courage and wonderful ingenuity,
so that now different counsels and new measures were taken concerning the
Affairs in Tartary.

Beehir Gherey Brother to those Princes of Tartary which were killed, was then
at Jamboli, a City in Thrace, retired thither under the Protection of the Grand
Signior, for fear and jealousy of treachery from his Beehir Gherey ordained
King of Tartary.
elder Brother. Morat caused him to be brought to Constantinople, where he was
sumptuously received and conducted to Audience by the Chimacam, who gave him
the upper hand, which is the left amongst men of the Sword, as the right is
amongst men of Learning or of the Pen; for as the right hand governs the
latter, so the first is appendent to the left side. The bodies of the two dead
Brothers were brought to Constantinople, where fetulent or stinking, they were
exposed to the sight of Morat, who to gratify his own humor of revenge, caused
them to be thrown into the Sea.

This good News from Tartary was attempered with a worse from Asac., which the
Moscovites and Cosacks had besieged. This Town is situated Asac besieged.
at the mouth of the River Tanais upon the declining of a Hill; it is in form
apiece, and may be of about twelve hundred paces in compass. Before it
fell into the hands of the Turks, it was a famous Scale for all sorts of
Merchandise, especially for Butter, Cheese, salt Fish, Leather, Slaves, and
other Commodities brought hither by Turks, Tartars, and Moscovites. The
Venetians when they addicted themselves more to Traffic and Commerce than they
do at present, took this Scale for their way into Persia. This Town was
fortified with ancient Walls flanked with capacious Towers, and with a Castle
which being in the middle and on the side of the Water, divides the Town as it
were into two equal parts. The Garrison consisted not of above three or four
hundred men; for being a place remote from powerful Enemies, it fell not under
any great jealousy, nor was it deemed worthy the charge of numerous
defendants. The City being in this weak condition, the Cosacks soon made
themselves Masters of it, which after they had sacked and pillaged to the
utmost, they considered it as a place worthy of better Fortifications; and
therefore applying themselves to raise new Works, and repair the old, they soon
made it a Fortress of strength and consideration. Is taken by the Cosacks.
This happening at a time, when the Turks were diverted by the Persian War, the
Cosacks enjoyed this new Conquest for the space of four years without
molestation, until that in the Year 1641. it was recovered with much blood and
slaughter by the Arms of Sultan Ibrahim, as we shall hereafter recount in the
sequel of this History. And now because the taking of this place was the
original from whence the Divisions and Civil Wars between the Poles and Cosacks
derived their beginning, and was the occasion that the Cosacks revolted from
their just Obedience, to the Protection of the Turks; the relation will not
only be curious, but a digression necessary to the clearer light of the present
History.

Uladislaus the Fourth King of Poland being wearied with constant The cause of
the Civil War between the Poles and Cosacks.
complaints of the Robberies and Incursions made by the Cosacks upon the Turks
contrary to Articles and Treaties of Peace, was at length persuaded by his
Barons and Counselors, that the only means to suppress the violence of this
unruly people, was to disarm them; and taking away their Weapons of War to
supply them in lieu thereof with the Shovel and Mattock, with Ploughs and
Pruning Hooks: by which industrious diversion from a wicked life of blood and
robbery, to honest Husbandry and lawful Arts of living, they might with time be
rendered useful to their own Prince, and capable of faith and just communication
with their Neighbors. It is not one Age past since these people were The
Cosacks Country described.
called Cosacks, derived, as is supposed, from Cosai, a word in their Language
which signifies a Goat, perhaps because of their agility of body, or because
their garments are chiefly made of Goats skins. Pellibus and laxis arcent mala
frigora bracchis,
Oraque sunt longis horrida tecta comis.
The Country inhabited by them was at first on the banks of the River
Boristhenes, about fifteen leagues in length to the entrance into the Euxine
Sea, where it is reported, that Ovid was banished; and some say, that from him
a Village thereabouts called Ovidona derives its denomination; and hereunto we
may afford the greater belief from one of his Elegies in his Book De Tristibus,
which seems to describe this Country, and the fierceness of the Inhabitants.
Eleg. 8. lib. 5. Quam legis a Scythica tibi venit Epistola terra,
Latus ubi aequoreis jungitur Ister aquis.
Mista sit haec quamvis inter Graecosque Getasque
A male placatis plus trahit or a Getis;
Sarmaticae major Geticaeque frequentia gentis,
Per medias in aquis itque reditque vias.
In quibus est nemo, qui non Coryton, and arcum,
Telaque vipereo lurida fell gerat.
Vox fera, trux vultus, verissima mortis imago,
Non coma, non ulla barba resecta manu.
At present the name of Cosacks and their Country also is of a far greater
extent than it was formerly; for they call now all such in Poland Cosacks that
are light Horse armed with Bow and Arrow and Firearms: and their Country since
the late Commotions is measured from the farthest parts of the Palatinate of
Chiovia for the space of an hundred and twenty leagues on one side, and the
other of the Boristhenes, which comprehends likewise all the Country of
Ukrania. This Country was always inhabited by the most warlike people of
Russia; for that being subject to the frequent Incursions of the Tartars,
necessary defense and constant practice in Arms endued them with a bold and
Martial spirit. Ukrania is a Country so fertile, that it may compare with the
most fruitful soil in the World, producing such quantities of Corn with little
labor, that the Husbandmen being made negligent by their abundance, produced
with little toil, have leisure to apply themselves to violence and rapine: they
have no Wine, but use themselves much to Strong Water: their houses are not
built of wood or stone, but of Osiers interwoven and daubed over with Earth and
Lime; so that they use no nails or iron: they have no Merchants unless in Kiow:
nor do they serve themselves of Physicians or Aporhecaries. Their learned
Language or the Tongue wherein they write is the Sclavonian, anciently called
the Illyrian: so that in all things this people is rude and barbarous; and
though their manner of Government and Policy is not refined or methodically
disposed, yet nevertheless it is solid and of deep foundation, appropriated to
the nature and disposition of that people.

This honest design of King Uladislaus to reduce this people to a just and an
industrious course of living, not agreeing with their temper and customs, they
rather resolved to leave their Country, and betake themselves to various
fortunes; some of them passed into Moscovia to plant a Colony in those
uninhabited parts: a Body of them to the number of six thousand joining
together, resolved to pass into Persia to offer their service unto that King;
and being on their Journey as far as the Tanais, they encountered with a Party
of Moscovite Cosacks, who inhabited certain Islands of that River, with whom
entertaining discourse, they understood that Asac might easily be surprised by
them, if they could agree to unite Forces, which together might compose a Body
of ten thousand men: the importance of the place being well considered, it was
resolved, that the March into Persia should be shortened, and this City be
ordained for the ultimate end of their travels and place of repose. According
to this counsel Asac being assaulted and taken, (as we have already intimated)
the Cosacks fortified it in the best manner that they were able, making an
Arsenal for their Boats and Saiks, whereby afterward they did much more infest
the Turks than before.

The other Cosacks who continued in their Country, being much persecuted by the
Polish Nobility, chose Kilminieschi for their General (the Son of a Noble
Family in Lituania, but banished and degraded of his Honor for his criminal
offenses) and rebelled against the Government. At sirst not being able to
resist the Force of Poland, they retired within the Woods; but joining
afterward with other Cosacks, they issued forth at the beginning of the
Spring, beat the Poles, and carried away a considerable Booty: afterward
joining with the Tartars, they made their Incursions as far as Zamosca within
twenty leagues of Warsaw; and so matters continued with various successes not
appertaining to this History. Only thus far it is pertinent to the matter
discussed for us to have shown, That the Counsels of Poland were in a great
error, when they resolved to change the life, and alter the humor of this
warlike people, which being protected in their Privileges, and encouraged in
their Wars, would at all times, as occasion served, have been ready to have
ejected great numbers of good Soldiers into the Ottoman Territories, and might
still have been conserved to balance the Power of the Tartars, which now daily
infest and ruin the Borders of Poland. These people were like ill humors,
which being vomited out into the Dominions of the Turk, eased and made healthy
the Body politic of Poland; but being conserved within the stomach, caused
Syncopes, Convulsions, and such Commotions, as have of late years shaken the
whole Body of the Polish Kingdom: and at length withdrawing themselves entirely
from all Obedience, together with that large Province of Ukrania, as they have
weakened that Government; so now of late years seeking protection from the
Turk, have added to his Kingdom, and enfeebled that of Poland.

When the News arrived first at Constantinople that Asac was besieged, the
Captain-Pasha going then to instate Bechir into his Kingdom of Tartary,
received Orders to relieve Asac, and if possible, to raise the Siege; but the
Succors coming too late, and the Town being taken, the loss thereof was not
esteemed important enough to divert either thoughts or Forces from the Persian
War.

For now Morat resolving to prosecute the War in Persia, which could not be
successful without the united Power of his whole Empire, conducted by his own
person, he resolved to make a second journey into Preparations for the War in
Persis.
those parts, and with his own hand to knock at the Gates of Babylon. To
prepare and dispose all matters in order hereunto, he in the first place
countermanded his Decree, which prohibited a farther increase of the number of
Janisaries; for now being desirous to augment his Army beyond the account of
ancient Registers, he opened the Janisaries door, (as they call it) and
enrolled six thousand more into that Order. To conserve still the Order of this
Militia, he appointed Officers strictly and severely to take the Decimation of
the Christian children in Europe, and lest (as was usual) they should be
corrupted by the parents, who often give Presents, whereby to blind the eyes of
the Ministers, that so they may oversee their children, or in lieu of the
comliest and most fit for service, accept of the sickly and impotent, or such
as are unworthy of the bread and education given them by the Sultan, he most
severely enjoined this service, and under a thousand menaces encharged the care
hereof to be executed without favor or partiality to any. He carefully
reviewed the Books of the Timjar-Spahees, counting the number exactly that
every Country yields, and comparing them with those mustered in the Field, he
consiscated the Lands of those that wanted, being forfeited for nonappearance:
he would admit of no excuse or delay to the matter in hand. The Superintendant
of the Ordinance but making a seruple about the proportion of some Guns, as too
weighty and unwieldy for so long a March, lost his life for doubting or making
a difficulty in what the Grand Signior proposed or designed. And that no
commotions at home might divert or call him back before his business was
perfected, he encharged his Pasha's of the Frontiers to live quietly with their
Neighbors, and to be sure to give no occasions of complaint, or cause for War
during his absence, recommending to the prudence of the Pasha of Silistria the
care of composing certain differences between the Princes of Moldavia and
Valachia. Having secured matters as well as he could at home, he ordered the
Horse-tail to be set forth at the gate of the Divan, and all Pasha's and
Officers of the Army did the like at their own doors. His Troops began now to
grow numerous; the Spahees and Timariots appointed for the Guard of the Grand
Signior's Tents, together with other Cavalry which hold their Lands under
Service, amounted unto two hundred thousand. From the hundred seventy two
Chambers of Janisaries he drew forth thirty thousand. From the Topgees or
Gunners, whereof there are no more than twelve hundred in their Chambers at
Constantinople, yet make up twelve thousand in other parts, he drew out three
thousand for the present Service. The Shepherds and Plough-men of Dulgaria made
up twenty thousand, which with Water-bearers, Smiths, Bakers, Butchers, and all
other Tradesmen which followed the Camp, were in vast numbers; so that the
whole Army with the Attendants belonging thereunto were at a moderate calculate
computed to amount unto near five hundred thousand men, whereof three hundred
thousand were fighting men.

The Pestilence which is the Epidemical disease of Turkey, and which abates the
numbers and pride of that people, raged this year greatly in Constantinople,
and in the parts of Romagnia; it entered into the Seraglio, and amongst others
took-away the only Son of the Grand Signior of two or three years old. This
caused Morat to pass most part of the Summer at a Palace on the Bosphorus,
where he recreated himself with his drunken Companion the Persian Traitor, and
hereby he contradicted the Proverb, That Princes love the Treason, but not the
Traitor; for Morat it seems loved them both, entertaining this Fellow in his
bosom: his Clothes, his Garb, his Horses, and Equipage might rival with that of
the The extravagant pleasures and cruelties of Morat.
Sultan's; he took place of the Chimacam in all public appearances, and what
was most strange, he preceded the Mufti; which was a new form, never before
practiced, and would have afforded matter of wonder and discourse, but that the
World considered this Novelty as a method agreeable to the extravagant humor
of the Sultan. Amongst his pastimes nothing was more pleasing than some
divertisement acted with blood; he shot the Son of a Pasha with his Gun, for
daring to approach near the walls of his Seraglio, supposing that he came with
curiosity to discover his pleasures and manner of voluptuous recreations; for
the same reason he would have sunk a Boat laden with women, as it glided slowly
by the banks of his Garden. He would himself behold two Thieves impaled, which
were condemned to die for robbing something out of his Seraglio: he commanded
the Head of the Treasurer of Cyprus to be cut off in his presence; as also the
Master of his Music, for daring to sing (...) certain Air which seemed
Persian, and to praise the Valor of that Nation. The Pasha of Temiswar he put
to death at a full Divan, for fighting unfortunately against Ragotski. To these
severe Acts of Cruelty, which he called Justice, he added one not unpleasant. A
certain Greek called Stridia Bei or Lord Oysters, who had been Prince of
Valachia, and one whom we have before mentioned, having by his oppression and
harassing that people amassed a considerable Sum of money, essayed a second
time by force thereof to obtain the Principality, and making his offer and
request before the Grand Signior, he was heard with some raillery; at length
the Grand Signior told him, that he was too proud and aspiring, and therefore
ordered the tips of his nose and ears to be cut off, telling him, that that was
to clip the wings of his ambition. But that before his departure for Persia he
might consummate his Acts of Tyranny, he practiced one upon his Brother, a
Youth of twenty two years of age, of great hopes and good endowments. He was
conducted to the presence of his Brother at the Biram to pay his respects, as
is usual at that Festival; and having performed the Ceremony, he enlarged
himself in high praises and admiration of the Grand Signior's Generosity and
Bravery, who for recovery of Bagdat, was contented to expose his Person to the
inconveniences of a long Journey, and the dangers of a hazardous War, and that
therein he equalled, if not surpassed the Glory of his Ancestors: which courtly
and rational manner of discourse did not please Morat, but rather administered
subject of jealousy, fearing that he knew too much, and that as he could speak
well, so he might act accordingly; wherefore the same day he caused him to be
strangled, to the great sorrow of the people, and detestation of his abominable
Tyranny: but to amuse the minds of the multitude, and cease their murmurings,
he caused it to be divulged abroad, that fourteen of his Women in the Seraglio
were with child; which was all false, there remaining none of the Ottoman Race
besides his Brother Sultan Ibrahim, who was weak as well in body as
Understanding, and whose imperfections secured and compounded for his life; and
to suppress the discourse about his Brothers Murder, he changed it into a talk
about his Preparations for War, and his departure for Persia. Wherefore the
Forerunners and Harbingers of the Army being sent away with Laborers to
repair Bridges, and to level the ways for the more easy passage of the Cannon,
Morat passed over to his Tents at Scutari clothed in a Coat of Mail, and with
a Headpiece set with precious Stones, and his Sargoutch or Feathers clasped to
it with Buckles of Diamonds. As he landed at Scutari he was received by three
Squadrons of Soldiers, each Squadron consisting of four thousand men well
armed, and richly attired; the garments of one Squadron of which were provided
at the expense of the Grand Signior, and of the other two at the charge of his
Favorite and of the Captain-Pasha; the latter of which presented to the Grand
Signior thirty Purses of Money, for bestowing on him the honor to command that
Gally which transported him to the Asian Coast. The Ambassador sent from
Persia was detained at Constantinople until this time, and after the Turkish
fashion not permitted to depart at his own liberty; but being now ordered to
follow the Camp, his Port and Quarters were assigned, that so he might be a
Spectator of that Tragedy which was now to be acted. All things were now
disposed in good posture with much Solemnity in order to a March; the Conacks
or days Journies with their places of Quarters were laid out in an hundred and
twenty days of March from Scutari to Babylon, and seventy days of Otorack or of
repose: the Journies with the gross Body of such an Army could not be long, and
the joining with other Forces in the way required leisure and time.

In short, the Horse, after the Turkish manner, having eaten their Scutari
about the end of May. The sirst day of Otorack or repose was appointed at The
March of the Turkish Army.
Ismit, where the Grand Signior made a review of his Army; such as were aged,
and unable to endure the fatigues of a long March he dismissed, giving them
half Pay for their lives with the name of Otoracks, which is the same with
Milites Emeriti amongst the Romans: with exact Order therefore and severe
Discipline, to which their fierce Monarch had reduced them, marched this
numerous Army; no Villages were abused, nor Country People plundered, and all
things were purchased with ready money: and the Grand Signior himself being
rendered more gentle and tractable in the Field than in his Seraglio, heard all
complaints, and distributed Justice with an equal and an impartial hand.

In the mean time at Constantinople due care was taken to keep things quiet and
in order; the Bostangibashee like Lord High Chamberlain, had the Charge
committed to him of the Seraglio and the Movables of it; he frequently made
his Rounds both by Sea and Land, punished those whom he found in Taverns; nor
would he suffer any Candles to be lighted after two hours in the night: the
Chimacam and the Captain-Pasha likewise executed their Offices with all care
and severity in their respective stations.

At this time, to the great dissatisfaction of the Greek Nation, Cyril Cyrillus
the Patriarch strangled.
the Patriarch, who had been in England, and greatly affected with the
Discipline of our Church, was deposed, imprisoned in the Seven Towers, and
strangled: in his place one Carsila was ordained Patriarch, and his Commission
or Baratz obtained from the Grand Signior at the expense of fifty thousand
Crowns, one moity whereof was paid from Rome, the whole design against Cyrillus
being managed by the Jesuits and other Religious living at Galata, who accused
him before the Turks of keeping a secret correspondence with the Moscovites and
Cosacks; for which losing his life, Carsila a pretended Friend to the Roman
Faction was instituted Patriarch.

The Grand Signior marching with his potent and numerous Army, all the world
remained at a gaze what the issue would be of this mighty Enterprise; yet most
were of opinion, that the Honor and Riches of the Ottoman Empire being now at
stake, the War could not otherwise conclude than with the Conquest of Babylon.
All that could be feared was some diversion by the Christian Princes, who
taking hold of the present conjuncture, should enter the Frontiers with a
powerful Army, and thereby force the Sultan to return; but as to Poland the
jealousy soon vanished. When the News came of a Civil War between the Poles
and the Cosacks, and that ten thousand of the latter were slain in a Battle,
this Intelligence came most seasonable and grateful to the Port, expecting now
a Meslage from the Cosacks, desiring succor in their extremity; for such
accidents as these have nourished the Turkish Interest, which has grown out of
the Civil discords of Christian Princes.

By this means as the apprehensions of War by Land ceased, so there appeared
some clouds of storm at Sea, which doubtless might have produced a War with
Venice, had the Turks been at leisure to attend it; for sixteen Galleys
belonging to Algier, Tunis, and Biserta well armed with Slaves and Soldiers,
and provided sufficiently with Cannon, Powder, The Pirates of Algier and Tunis
insest the Gulf of Venice.
and Bullet, commanded by Ali Picenin, united together and formed a small
Fleet, with design to rove over the Adriatic Sea, and infest the Coast of
Italy. Their intentions were to plunder the Riches of Loretto; but being
hindered by contrary Winds from entering so high into the Gulf, they made a
descent in Puglia, and sacked all the Country of Nicotra, carrying away a great
Booty, with Slaves, and amongst them several Nuns which they prostituted to
their lust; thence they passed over to the side of Dalmatia, and in sight of
Cataro took a Vessel, and made Prize of all Ships which they met in those Seas,
the rumor of which made great noise over all Italy, the people exclaiming
against their Princes for suffering their lives and Estates to remain subject
to the petty Force of a few Pirates. For the Vessels of Malta and Florence were
disjoined, and roving after purchase in the Archipelago, took little notice of
what was acted in the Gulf. The Spaniards after their fashion were slow in
arming, and spent the Summer in preparations, till the Pirates laden with
Booty, were departed toward the Winter; so that none remained to take care of
Italy and the Venetians Gulf, but Venice only, to whom the Dominion of those
Seas are rightly appropriated. To suppress therefore the insolence of these
Pirates, the Republic set forth a Fleet consisting of twenty eight Galleys and
two Galleasses under the Command of Marin Capello, with Instructions to sink,
burn, and destroy those Pirates, either in the open Seas, or in Harbor of the
Turks; for that by the Articles of Peace between the Grand Signior and the
Venetians, it was agreed, That no Port or Harbor of his should be privileged
to afford entertainment or protection to any Free-booter or Pirate of that
nature. It happened about that time, that the Malteses and Florentines crusing
in the Archipelago, had done great mischief to the Turks in those Seas; to
revenge which, and to prevent farther damage, the Captain-Pasha sent Orders to
these Vessels of Barbary immediately to come to his assistance; to which they
were now more easily persuaded; for being already laden with Booty and Spoils,
they contented themselves with a change of their station: but to give a farewell
to those parts, they first resolved to spoil and plunder Lissa alias Lesina, an
Island belonging to the Republic; but being overtaken by the Venetian Fleet in
their Voyage thither, near to Valona, a Port and Harbor belonging to the
Turks, they put themselves under the defense of the Town and Castle, which
received them willingly to their protection, notwithstanding all Articles and
Agreements to the contrary. The Venetian Fleet saluted the Castle without a
shot, desiring, that according to the Capitulations of Peace the Pirates might
be rejected, and capello blocks up the Pirates in Valona.
commanded to abandon their Port: in answer hereunto the Turks replied with a
shot, making known their intentions to defend their friends: wherefore the
Venetians retiring at some distance came to an Anchor, designing to block up
the Port. Many days had not passed before the Pirates endeavored by help of
their Oars and a gentle gale to make their escape; and being with the gray of
the morning, advanced without the Port, they were espied by the watchful
Venetians, who dividing their Fleet into two Squadrons charged them with high
courage; the Fight continued for the space of two hours, during all which time
the Castle of Valona fired at the Venetians, and shot down a Mast of one of the
Galleasses, a splinter of which wounded Lorenzo Marcello the Commander; at
length five of the Galleys of the Pirates being disabled, and many of their
people killed, they began to fly and retire again under the protection of the
Town; as also did the Venetians to their place of Anchorage. A distinct Advice
of all Particulars being dispatched to Venice, the Senate wrote to Capello,
That since the respect which the Republic owes to the Ottoman Court was not
unknown to him, he should by no means make any attempt against those Pirates
upon the Land, but meeting them fairly at Sea, he ought then to make use of all
the valor and force he was able. In the mean time the Duke of Medina las
Torres Vice-King of Naples dispatched an Express to Capello, with Letters
applauding the generosity of the design, wherein he was now engaged for the
Glory of his Republic, and the common good of all Christendom, proffering to
supply him with refreshments and Ammunition, and what else might supply his
occasions; expecting that by such encouragement as this, he might be induced to
assault the Enemies in Valona, without respect to the Grand Signior, or any
inconveniences which might arise thereby. On the contrary the Governor of the
Castle and Kadi of the Town wrote a Letter to Capello, putting him in mind,
that he was within the Grand Signior's Dominions, and that he should be careful
how he offered any violence to those places, which would certainly prove a
violation of the Peace, and be the Original of an inevitable War.

Capello had now lain a whole month before the Port, having all the time
enjoyed fair weather and a smooth Sea, against the hope and desire of the
Turks, who expected, that by means of some storm the Enemy would be forced to
remove their Quarters to some secure Harbor, and thereby afford them an
opportunity to escape. But Capello growing weary of such tedious attendance,
resolved to expect no longer, nor He assaults them in the Port.
yet to lose the present advantage of rendering himself Master of the Vessels of
the Enemy: wherefore dividing his Fleet into several Squadrons, he advanced
near the Port, firing several shot at the Tents of the Pirates, of which one
from a Galleass struck a Mosch; and arming with store of men the Galeotes and
Brigantines they entered the Port, and to the astonishment and vexation of the
Turks possessed all the sixteen Vessels, and brought them to their Admiral:
which though they had disfurnished of all their chief Booty, yet their Cannon
and Arms remained, of which there were twelve Pieces of great Brass Guns,
besides others of Iron, with diverse Falcons and lesser Arms.

The Intelligence hereof being carried to Venice, Orders were given, that all
the Vessels should be sunk in the Port of Corfu, excepting only the Admiral of
Algier, which was to be brought to the Arsenal of Venice, there to remain as a
Trophy of Victory, and for a perpetual Memory of this glorious Achievement.
Howsoever this Exploit was variously interpreted at Venice, and approved or
disproved according to the diversity of humors. The younger men applauded it as
an action of great Gallantry, excusing his transgression of the Senates Orders
by a transport of passion and zeal toward his Country, and desire of Glory.
But the Senators and men of mature Judgments highly resented this breach of
their Orders, which as they are strictly enjoined, so they expected that they
should be punctually obeyed. That this action was a sufficient and just cause
alone to kindle a War, and that it was a matter intolerable, that a single
Citizen should of his own head and humor presume to act such things, as must
necessarily involve the Public in a War contrary to their pleasure, and in
opposition to their express commands. For which crime and other subsequent
defaults Capello was afterward forced to justify himself, as will be
signified in the sequel of this History.

The Particulars of this Advice were by an express Messenger dispatched to
Luigi Contarini the Bailo or Ambassador for the Venetians at Constantinople, a
Person of great reputation and esteem, having been conversant in the principal
Courts of Christendom, and employed for the space of seven years at Munster,
where he was assistant with the Nuntio Chigi afterward Alexander VII. in the
general Peace of Europe. The Turks also receiving this News aggravated to them
with all the foul circumstances imaginable, the Chimacam immediately summoned
the Bailo to Audience, and with an angry countenance began to exclaim: That
taking advantage of the Grand Signior's absence in remote parts, the Venetians
had in a perfidious and hostile manner assaulted and destroyed the Fleet of
Barbary, which were his Subjects, and such as he had called to his assistance
against the Corsaires of Malta and Ligorne. That being accidentally compelled
by storm to enter into the Port of Valona, they were forcibly taken thence, and
violence offered to the Grand Signior's Port and Castle by way of a manifest
and open breach. If this presumption were grounded on the long distance of the
Grand Signior from these parts, the Venetians would do well to consider, how
that they provoke an angry Prince, and one who esteems neither expense,
hazards, nor labors to complete his revenge. If this were a design to divert
the Grand Signior's Arms from Persia, they would do well to consider, that the
Sultan was not so far advanced, but that he could turn a current, if he
pleased, sufficient to drown, and in an instant to overwhelm the Dominions of
Venice; or could at least collect Forces from nearer parts able to revenge his
quarrel, and vindicate his Honor from the disdain and scorn of such petty
Neighbors. Hereunto the Bailo or Ambassador made this Reply: That this
Piratical people was the same which the year before had landed in Candia, and
made spoil of the Estates of the Inhabitants, and carried many of them into
slavery; and not contented with this Booty they entered the Gulf, and
penetrated into the very bowels of Italy, with design to sack and plunder the
Island of Lissa, which was under the Dominion of the Republic. That the
Venetian General friendly saluted the Castle of Valona, which was returned with
several shots from thence; that had it been his intention to have attempted the
Port in the beginning, he would not have lain thirty seven days in expectation
of the forthcoming of those Pirates, it being only respect to the Grand
Signior, which obliged him to that attendance. At length being wearied, and
provoked by the insolence of that people, he forcibly entered the Port, knowing
that by Capitulations with the Grand Signior, it was agreed, that all Ports
should be forbidden, and that to these Pirates, unless they first gave security
and caution not to injure and make Prize of the Subjects of the Republic. The
Chimacam replied hereunto, That there were ten thousand Soldiers and Slaves
belonging to those Galleys, which had taken their refuge in Valona; and
therefore he required the Venetians to permit them free passage into their own
Country, and to restore their Galleys, unless they intended to come to an open
Rupture with the Grand Signior.

The Chimacam also pressed more urgently for restitution of the Galleys, in
regard that having advised the Grand Signior of this disaster, he had at the
same time given him hopes and almost assurance to believe, that by his
Negotiations he should recover them out of their hands: but the Senate was of a
different opinion; and therefore gave express Orders to their Officers of the
Marine Affairs immediately to sink all those Vessels, that so the expectation
of the Turks being disappointed by an impossibility of recovery, might not by
the rude instances and threats of Morat oblige them to a dishonorable and an
undecent restitution.

The News of this misfortune made greater noise and disturbance in the Divan of
Algier than at Constantinople, that rude rabble raved and The (...) angry at
this News.
railed and threatened, laying the blame sometimes on one, then on another,
being ready to come to blows amongst themselves; but that being obliged by
order of their Divan to keep their thumbs within their girdles, they durst only
express their anger by punches and thrusts of their elbows. At length coming to
cooler Terms, they charged all the fault on their Admiral Ali, and resolved to
make applications to the Grand Signior for redress, and reparations on the
Estates of the Venetians in his Dominions.

The News also hereof overtaking Morat in his March into Persia angered The
Grand Signiors anger against the Venetians.
him to the heart, and transported him to that heat of indignation, that he
immediately ordered, that the Venetian Bailo with all his Nation in the Ottoman
Dominions should without exception be cut to pieces; but the Great Vizier and
his Favorite suffering him for some time to vent the impetuosity of his fume
and rage without contradiction, gave a stop for thirteen days to the dispatch
of these fatal Orders; until taking him in a more gentle mood, they persuaded
him to change this sentence of death, to the imprisonment only of the Bailo;
and such care was taken, lest the News of a War with Venice should fly into
Persia, and thereby prejudice the Terms of Peace, that this accident was kept
as a secret and communicated to none, but such as were nearly concerned in the
Government. The Command for the Bailo's Imprisonment being arrived at
Constantinople, he was summoned to Audience by the Chimacam; and though at that
time he was exceedingly afflicted with the Gout, yet the Turkish obedience to
Imperial Commands admitting of no excuse, he was forced to an attendance; and
being brought in his Sedan, he was carried to the Chamber of Audience, where he
expected some time until the Chimacam came to him; in the interim being
entertained by some Aga's, whom the Chimacam had employed to sound him touching
the restitution of the Vessels; who finding by his discourse that they were
sunk, without possibility of recovery, and that there could be no compensation
made for them, they returned with this answer to the Chimacam; of which being
now informed he came in, and having no farther to expostulate on this matter,
produced the Grand Signior's Command for his Imprisonment, and kissing it first
caused it to be read The Venetians Bailo imprisoned.
The Bailo replied, that he was ready to submit, being not only willing to
suffer Imprisonment, but also Martyrdom, accompanied with the severest pains,
for the sake of his Prince and his Country.

To soften and mitigate matters, the other Christian Ambassadors then resident
at the Port, had made Arz to the Grand Signior, wherein with all reverence and
respect they offered themselves for Mediators in this difference, engaging
themselves but not the parole of their Princes, for the person of the Bailo,
that he should not fly from the Port, nor yet refuse any reasonable Terms by
way of Accommodation. This Mediation of the Ambassadors seconded with some
Presents from the Bailo to the Turkish Ministers, so facilitated matters, that
the Bailo at first was conducted to the (...).
Kahya's Chamber, and afterward was confined to his own House in Galata,
guarded by four Chiaouses, with free liberty to all Visitants whatsoever. There
was now no other rumor or discourse in Constantinople, but of a War with
Venice, so soon as that with Persia was concluded; and in the mean time the
Grand Signior gave Orders, that ten Galleys should be built in his own Arsenal
at his charge, and presented to the Barbarouses, with condition that they
should stay until the Spring, and accompany his Fleet to Sea. But Ali Picenin
the Admiral suspecting that this was only a snare to engage him and his men for
ever in the Grand Signior's service, refused the obligation, and set two
Galleys on the stocks for his own account.

Advice of the Bailo's Confinement being come to Venice, with a report of the
passion and rage of the Sultan, they expected nothing more than a War with the
Turk, which they communicated to all Christian Princes, requesting their
succors and assistance against the common Enemy. These addresses produced
rather compassion of their case, than substantial Contributions, Pope Urban
himself giving them great assurances of some help from the Ecclesiastical
Revenues, besides Processions, Masses, and Benedictions for their good success,
in as great a number as they could desire: notwithstanding which due care was
taken to make ready and provide against all Encounters. Letters were wrote to
the Captain General in the Levant to make due Preparations against the Enemy:
sixteen Galleys were armed out of Candia, to which were joined other Galleasses
under the Command of Antonio Pisani and Sebastiano Veniero: Soldiers were
levied in every place, and all Garrisons provided with Ammunition and Victuals,
and reinforced with numbers of an auxiliary Militia. Howsoever it was not the
business nor advantage of the Venetians to make a War with the Turks, but
rather whilst they feared the worst, and made provisions against the utmost
extremities, they endeavored to enter into Treaties of Peace, and to qualify
the hot Spirit of the Grand Signior with the gentle lenitives of fair words,
and proffers of making atonement with the Sacrifice of Gold and other
Presents: in order unto which they wrote a Letter to the Grand Signior to this
effect. That being provoked by the insolence and frequent robberies of the
Pirates of Barbary, who did not esteem faith or obedience to his Majesty, nor
the Commands which he had often sent to restrain them, they were induced out of
natural defense of themselves, to chastise and correct them; but as this was
acted without intention to disoblige his Majesty, so they were ready to
maintain and cultivate that ancient friendship and correspondence which was
ingrasted on the firm root of his glorious Progenitors. Morat, though he
received this Letter in a huff, and gave an Answer to it with disdain, which
breathed nothing but threats of revenge and total destruction; yet he sent it
by an Express of his own to Venice, couching something within the terror of
his words, as if there was place left for an Accommodation, if the Venetians
knew what salve was to be applied to obduct the skin of this bleeding wound.
The Venetians quickly apprehended, that Gold was the only remedy, of which they
were ready to contribute freely; since they could make no better a purchase
with their money than Peace, nor could make a better bargain than with such a
Sum as would serve only to make the first Preparations of War, to evade all
hazards, troubles, and calamities by a happy and safe conclusion of Peace. The
which notwithstanding took no effect, until the return of Morat from Persia;
and therefore we shall defer discourse thereof to its proper place. Amurat
marched now at the Head of a formidable Morat marches to Persia.
Army, clothed in the Habit of a Janisary, to render himself acceptable to the
Militia, whom having subdued by rigor and severe Discipline, he would now
oblige by courtesy and fairer treatment: with courage and great patience he
marched through sandy Deserts and unfrequented places; and being the first who
offered to expose himself to dangers and sufferings, the Soldiery followed
willingly his example, esteeming no attempts either hazardous or tedious, in
which they saw themselves preceded by their valiant General. In this March he
was overtaken by one who rode hard to demand Mostaluck, which is the reward of
good News for the (...) of a Son, of which one of his Sultana's was delivered
at Ismit: the Messenger was secured until the News was confirmed; which being
afterward turned to the Birth of a Daughter, the poor man suffered death,
being cruelly impaled for his unadvised haste and excess of officious respect
toward his Prince.

The Great Vizier met his Master at Iconium with a moderate Equipage to give
more room for the Quarters of the Army; and rendering himself more gracious in
his eyes by a Present of fifty thousand Dollars, he was again remunerated with
a Cemiter and a Vest of Sables, which are the usual signals of the Sultan's
favor. All Asia was now in Arms, and the Princes and Great men came in to
perform their duty, accompanied with their Forces and Attendance: only
complaints were made of a certain Shegh, Santone or Preacher belonging to the
Mountains of Anatolia, who A Shegh rebels.
had refused to do Homage, or serve in the War; he was one, who by a feigned
Sanctity had acquired a great reputation amongst his people; and having
declared himself to be the Mehedy or the Mediator, which according to the
Mohammedan Doctrine is to fore-run Antichrist, for reducing all the World to one
Unity of Faith: he had persuaded his people, that he and they under him were by
Privilege of his Office exempted from all Taxes, Contributions, or Impositions
by any Secular Power whatsoever. The Grand Signior who could not understand or
believe this Doctrine, presently detached a strong Body with some Cannon under
Command of the Captain-Pasha (who, as we have said, was to accompany the Grand
Signior in the War) to confute the Principles of this Rebel, and to reduce him
to obedience. These Forces being entered on his Dominions, Proclamation was made
to the people, that they should deliver up their Impostor into the hands of
Justice; which if He is overcome and punished.
they refused to do, then Fire and Sword was to be their portion, and
destruction to extend even unto their children of seven years of age. This
terrible denuntiation of the Sultan's Sentence struck all the people with cold
fear and amazement; howsoever the Shegh availing himself on certain Prophecies,
which he interpreted in his own favor, adventured to stand a shock with the
Grand Signior's Forces; but being overcome by them, the Shegh was taken alive
and carried to the Grand Signior; who having given a stop to his March at
Iconium, until the end of this business, he condemned him to be flead alive;
and in this guise being a horrid Spectacle to all Beholders, he was carried
upon an Ass to the Wheel, on which he seemed to endure the remainder of his
punishment without any sensible touches or pangs in the torments.

This success being attained, Morat proceeded in his March, and passing through
Alexandretta or Scanderone, he was there saluted by the Guns of all the English
and Dutch Ships then in Port, and presented by the Merchants and Consuls,
especially by the Venetian called Marco Foscolo, whose Presents were computed
to amount unto the value of ten thousand Dollars. Thence he proceeded to
Antioch, where he refreshed his Army for a few days, observing the Antiquities
of that place. At Aleppo he was met by the Pasha of Grand Cairo, who brought
with him a rich Tribute, accompanied with an Army of twenty four thousand
Soldiers, all choice men well armed and well clothed; at the same place also
the Forces of Palestine joined with him, so that his Army was now increased to
a vast number. Proceeding forward new Sangiacks came in daily belonging to the
Countries through which they marched, and a strong Party of Tartars despairing
of being able to act any considerable matter against Asac, offered themselves
to the service of the Grand Signior.

The King of Persia entered the Field at the Head of an hundred and twenty
thousand Horse; but being inferior in force, made only use of them to
reinforce his Garrison of Bagdat with an addition of thirty thousand The
Persian Army dares not give battle to the Turk.
men; which now being well provided, he judged that the Force within and the
strength of the place would be able to endure a long Siege, and with time
weaken, if not destroy the vast numbers of the Turks, of which there were
former examples: with the rest of his Forces he returned to encounter the Great
Mogul, who (as we have said) promised Morat to assist him in this War, and
attack the Persian on the other side of his Dominions, which served for an
advantageous diversion to the Turk. This was the reason that no memorable
Battles succeeded in the Field, there being none of greater note than a Fight
which Quinan Pasha had with two thousand Persians belonging to Revan, with whom
accidentally encountering, he killed fifteen hundred of them on the place, and
took the rest Prisoners, which being five hundred in number were brought before
Morat, and all barbarously put to death by him.

During the time of this March Morat often exercised himself in Feats of Arms,
to show his strength of body and dexterity of hand; amongst other things
wonderful to the Soldiers, he pierced a Suit of Arms of Musket-proof with a
Dart, called by them a Gerit, thrown from his hand; for evidence of which the
Armor is placed on one of the Gates of Aleppo with an Inscription under it.

About the beginning of the month of August the Turkish Army passed the River
Euphrates by means of a Bridge, which was not so well built, The Turks pass the
River Ellphratis.
but that it sunk under the weight of Horses, Camels, and Baggage, by which
disaster many perished in the water, which great rains had swelled above the
bounds of its Banks. As this numerous Army proceeded, so all petty Princes
applied themselves to perform their Homage; amongst which one Tarpos a King of
the Arabs came with his Wife, Mother, and Son to prostrate himself before the
Sultan: he was entertained in the Tent of the Favorite, who being always in
company with Morat, was never suffered to separate from him, and his Tent more
for ostentation than to serve his occasion. Tarpos being admitted to Audience,
was received with respect and a favorable countenance, and presented with a
Vest of Cloth of Gold lined with Sables and a small Purse of Gold: in
recompense whereof the Arab Prince returned certain choice Horses and two
Leopards. In like manner the Georgians and Mengrelians, who are Tributaries to
Turk and Persian, and commonly incline to the strongest side, whose Nations we
have described in the present State of the Ottoman Empire, would not be wanting
at this time to bring their Tribute of eighty thousand yards of Linen-cloth,
which they pay every three year, with some Children of both Sexes chosen out of
the comeliest and most healthful amongst them.

At Mosul the Army lay encamped for some time, where was a general Rendezvous
and confluence of people from all parts, and every thing The Turkish Army at
Mosa.
ordered and modelized for a War. Severe Discipline was kept amongst all,
Offenders were impaled, flead alive, their bowels ripped out, and thrown into the
public ways: nor did Takers of Tabaco escape with less punishment than the
rest. In the mean time Wine was forbid to his whole Camp, unless to himself and
his Favorite, being a Royal drink; and when the chief Physician commended the
admirable virtue of Opium, advising Morat to use it in the place of Wine, he
enjoined him to make his words good by his own example and thereby forced him
to take so much, that he was overcome, and died by swallowing too great a
quantity.

From Mosul the Army marched in due order to Babylon, where the Great Vizier
arrived with thirty thousand men about the 19th of October: The description of
Babylon or Bagdat.
but by reason of the great weight of Artillery, and the many impediments which
attend such vast numbers, the Grand Signior came not thither till the 5th of
November, and on the 9th the whole Turkish Army presented it self before the
Walls of Babylon.

Babylon the ancientest City of the World, reported to be built by Nimrod on
the Banks of the River Euphrates, and afterward beautified and enlarged by
Semiramis the Wife of Ninus, is recorded in History for the vastness thereof to
be one of the seven Miracles of the World. Afterward the furious Inundations
of the River, and the Iron teeth of devouring time, and the subjection thereof
to the Macedonian Empire, did much eclipse the glory of that City, and caused
Seleucus Nicanor, one of Alexander's Captains, to build a new one where the
Tigris and Euphrates meet, forty miles more Northwards than the old Babylon,
which he therefore called Seleucia after his own Name. In the year of our Lord
753. Abugiafer Almansor an Arab King enlarged this City to the Eastern side of
the Tigris, as being less subject to the Inundations of the River, giving it
the Name of Bagdat, or the place of Gardens; but his Son Almolied being more
pleased with the Western side, encouraged people to build the stateliest
Palaces and best Fabrics near the place where he delighted to keep his Court,
so that the River Tigris divided the City. The which with the Country
thereabouts was subdued by Solomon the Magnificent; and afterward in the Year
1625. it was recovered by Abas King of Persia, until at length in this of 1638.
it was vanquished by the mighty force and prowess of this Magnanimous Sultan,
as we shall now understand.

The numerous Troops of the Ottoman Army covering all the Plains, Bagdat
desieged.
a general Council of War was called of the chief Commanders of the Janisaries
and Spahees, especially of such who had been practiced in the Sieges of the
strong Fortresses in Hungary. After some debate and long consideration, it was
agreed, That the City should be battered in three places. One Battery of twelve
Pieces of Cannon commanded by the Great Vizier was to be erected against the
Bright Gate: the second against the Dark Gate of ten Pieces of Cannon, under
the Command of the Captain-Pasha: and a third of eight Pieces directed against
the Gate of Persia, under the Government of Chusaein Pasha Beglerbei of
Anatolia. The Grand Signior in the mean time habited like an ordinary Soldier,
that he might be the less exposed to danger, visited all Posts and places,
encouraging them with his words and presence, protesting that he would not
change his Clothes for ever in any place but within the Walls of Bagdat. In the
space of three days the Trenches were opened, the Batteries raised, and the
Cannon planted; and Morat having made Korban, gave fire to the first Cannon
with his own hand, as he had brought the first Basket of Earth to raise the
Works. The Defendants within consisted of eighty thousand fighting men, with
which they made frequent Sallies of four and five thousand men at a time, who
being retired were again seconded by another of the like number, which put the
Turkish Camp into much confusion, and into danger of having their Trenches
levelled, and their Cannon spiked; but the Turks valiantly fighting, the
slaughter proved bloody on both sides: and being guided rather by the bravery
of their courage, than by Art or Experience in War, they carried their Works
forward to the very brink of the Ditch, having an Italian and a Candiot for
their chief Enginiers; who though they were not persons of that ability, as our
modern times have produced, yet they were such, as for want of better, served
the presented occasions, where force and numbers, with small additions of Art,
were the most available. For in this Siege the Sword was more exercised than
the Spade or Matock, and there was more need of Arms than Works; for the
constant Sallies kept the Turks always watchful and employed, and perpetually
disturbed them, until at length they were forced with great labor to raise a
high Circumvallation with a very deep Ditch defended by several Redoubts;
whereby the Besieged being kept in, their numbers decreased by former Sallies,
and their courages abated by despair of Relief, they began to grow cold in the
Acts of Bravery, and to reserve their men for the ultimate and last efforts of
defense. In the mean time the Turks plied their Batteries so hotly, that in a
few days the Walls were laid open almost fifty paces wide. In this condition
the Defendants having no other refuge than some small Retrenchments, which they
had made during the Siege, were exposed to the open force of the Enemy. For now
the Turks having filled up the first and second Ditches with Sacks of Wool,
Faggots, and other Rubbish, crowded in vast numbers to enter the Breach, which
the Persians defended as stoutly with Stones, Bullets, artificial Fires, and
all Instruments of death, which fell like showers of Hail on the heads of the
Enemy. The Great Vizier signalizing himself above all by his undaunted courage,
commanding with his hand and voice, was unhappily shot by a Musket-bullet, and
fell on the heaps of the dead, amongst whom there is no distinction between the
common Soldier and the bravest Captain. This Fight within the Breach continued
for five days, where both sides fighting like men in despair, the dead bodies
lay in heaps, and blood was stagnated like a Pool to wade thorough. At length
the numbers of the Turks prevailing, commanded now by Mustapha the
Captain-Pasha, entered the Town by force of Arms on the 22th day of December
about the time of Sunset, when the Royal Standard of the Turks was planted in
this City. Howsoever twenty four thousand of the Persians remaining still
alive, and united in a Body capitulated for Quarter, otherwise threatening not
to die unrevenged: Pardon and Quarter for their lives was readily granted, on
confidence of which the Persians threw down their Arms, and submitted to the
public faith or the Sultan's clemency. But the Grand Signior afterward
considering, that the granting Quarter Bagdat taken.
at Revan had been the cause of the loss of the City, he repented him of his
promise, and gave Order to the Janisaries most inhumanely to open a torrent of
blood, and make a barbarous Massacre of those who had newly thrown down their
Arms at his feet, not sparing either woman or child, either sex or age; the
which slaughter, like a work of darkness, was acted in the night by the light
of Torches and Lanthorns, and appeared a horrid spectacle to all, especially to
the Persian Ambassador, who being conducted like a Prisoner in the Camp, was a
sad Spectator of his Countries destruction on the horrid Theater of its capital
City.

So soon as Bagdat was taken, Morat dispatched away Posts immediately with the
News into all parts, and wrote a Letter with his own hand to the Chimacam,
ordering a Dunalma or Feast of Thanksgiving, and rejoicing for the space of
twenty days; during which time no business was to be acted, the Houses were to
be adorned both without and within with the best Furniture, and every House was
to set forth Lights, Torches, and Fireworks agreeable to the condition and
ability of the person. The people exclaimed hereat as too great an expense, and
the vacation from business seemed too long for those who lived by their daily
labor. The chief Ministers and Grandees evidenced external actions of joy, but
inwardly feared and trembled, suspecting that the fierce and cruel humor of
their Sultan would be elated, and rendered more tyrannical, and untractable by
success and a favorable Fortune. The Christian Princes received this
Intelligence like bad News, and as an Alarm to awaken them from the easiness of
Peace, to expectations of War: for War with Persia was like an Ulcer in the
Bowels of the Turkish Empire, which gangrened and consumed the strength and
marrow of their Power; which now being cured, and the Body politic rendered
healthy by such a seasonable success, would convert it self to Enterprises
pernicious and dangerous to the neighboring States.

After the Conquest of this City Morat gave out, That he resolved to proceed
with his Army into Persia, and to enter the Walls of Spahan; but having some
indispositions of health upon him, and recalled by the charming Letters of a
Favorite Mistress, whom he had left at Diarbechir, he inclined to return again
to Constantinople. Wherefore mustering first his Army, he found that it was
abated near an hundred thousand men, two thirds whereof being killed in the
War, the rest perished by the Pestilence, and other diseases and maladies
incident to Camps; a great part of the slaughter fell on the most veterane
Soldiers of the Janisaries and Spahees, of which many of the Chief being
slain, their Lands and Revenues returned to the Grand Signior, and gave him
both opportunity and ability to reward many with such Offices and Gifts as came
by the death and fall of other Commanders. Thus the Captain-Pasha, whose Valor
had rendered him famous, was made Great Vizier in the place of him that was
slain, and the Persian Favorite was constituted Captain-Pasha; and though many
repined at this advancement, as conferred on a Stranger, and a Person without
Merit, yet the Grand Signior considered him as one whose Experience in that
Country, and the Information he had given him of the situation and strength of
Babylon, had made abundant compensation for the favor and honor he had
bestowed upon him.

The Grand Signior having left a Garrison of thirty thousand men in Bagdat,
dispeeded the Great Vizier with a considerable Army to penetrate Persia. And
having now released the Persian Ambassador, giving him liberty to return to
his Master, wrote by him this braving Letter.

I That am Lord of Lords, and Conqueror in the parts of Arabia, Persia, and
Greece: King that commands with eminent Rule in the World, exalted by Divine
assistance to the Empire of the Universe; the most Invincible Possessor of the
White and Black Seas, and of all the Cities and Fortresses which encompass
them. Lord of the Divine and Prophetic Temple, that is, of Mecha and Medina,
as also of Jerusalem, Aleppo, Damascus, and of all those Holy and Venerable
Countries, of Grand Cairo, Salutiferous Babylon, and of Van, of Ethiopia,
Balsora, and the Lesser Asia; of all the Countries of the Curds, Georgians, and
Tartars; of Moldavia, Valachia, and universally of all the Provinces and
Regions of Greece and Anatolia. And in sum, Supreme Lord of the Seven
Climates, the Victorious and Triumphant King in the Service of God Sultan
Amurat Han, to the Valiant Sofi, to whom may God give peace, if he deserve it.
This Imperial Letter worthy of Obedience being come to thee, Be it known unto
thee, That the Ambassador which Thou did send to my happy Port with desires
of Peace, I have detained until this time in which I have subdued Bagdat, by
means of the keen edge of my Invincible Cemiter. If thou desire Peace,
surrender those Provinces which belong to the Dominions of my Victorious
Predecessors, into the hands of my Beglerbeys, who are now marching at the head
of my Victorious and Inexpugnable Army: otherwise expect me next Spring with my
Troops more numerous than the sands of the Sea, within the bowels of thy
Dominions; where I will appear on Horseback to unkennel thee from the Caverns
wherein thou now lurkest, not daring to manage those Arms, which are unworthily
girt to thy side. That afterward shall succeed, which was determined from all
Eternity. Peace be to him who directs his ways aright.

This Letter being dispatched, the Grand Signior recalled the forty thousand
men which he had lent, from the Service of the Great Mogul, which he quartered
about Bagdat to hinder the attempts of the Persians, in case they should design
to pursue him in the Rear, and disturb his return into Europe. By reason of the
rigor and extremity of the Winter, and a certain defluxion which falling on
his Nerves, made him something paralytical, the Grand Signior departed not from
Bagdat until the 15th of April, and then for recovery of his health, and to
soil the Horses The Grand Signior returns to Constantinople.
by the way with convenience of grass, short days journies were appointed. The
Grand Signior's indisposition increasing with some cold and shivering sits,
gave the first Symptoms of a Fever; but afterward it plainly appearing to be
a paralytical distemper, suspected by the Physicians to end in an Apoplexy, it
was rumoured abroad, that Morat was dead; but it was whispered with such
caution, as if they had feared lest the Grand Signior would have overheard
them, and risen from his grave to punish their secret and inward joy. Being
somewhat recovered from the last accession of his Palsy, the humor fell into
his legs, and swelle so much, that he could scarce sit upon his Horse;
howsoever he hastened us fast as he could to Constantinople to disprove and
confute the falsity of that (...) concerning his death. In the mean time it is
not to be expressed with what sear and terror the Chimacam and other great
Ministers of State expected the return of their formidable Prince, not knowing
where the Thunderbolt of his cruel disposition would strike, until at length it
fell on the head of the poor Sultan Mustapha, whose weakness, as it rendered him
unable for Government and Command, so it made him stupid and insensible of
death.

At length on the 10th of June the Grand Signior arrived at Constantirople: the
Favorite Soltana, which had accompanied him to the War, passed by water from
Ismit attended with six Galleys, and took her The Grand Signiors Entry into
Constantinople.
Lodging the first night of her arrival at a small Chiosk or House of Pleasure
under the Wall, so as to make a magnificent Entry the day following. Her Coach
was covered with Cloth of Gold, and the Spokes of the Wheels were gilded, and
the Wheels shod with Silver; she was followed by twelve Coaches, and the Mufti,
Pasha's, Kadees, and other Officers went before to conduct her to the Seraglio.
The Grand Signior, who arrived the same day attended with fifty six Galleys,
made not his solemn Entry until two days after, being performed with all the
Ceremony, State, and (...) which could be contrived. The Grand Signior in his
own Person appeared in the Persian Habit, with a Leopards skin thrown over his
shoulders, after the manner of a Kausee (as they call them) or a brave husting
Champion, having his Stirrup attended with twenty two of the chiefest Nobles,
whom he had reserved at Bagdat purposely to lead in Triumph when he made this
Entry. The Treasure brought to Constantinople was landed at the Seraglio out of
ten Galleys, and calculated to amount to a greater Sum than that which was
carried from thence; for besides the Riches taken in the Plunder of Babylon,
seizure was made in diverse places of the Estates of Pasha's and other Great
men, which by death, or for crimes escheated to the Grand Signior.

After the Grand Signior's departure out of Persia, little of action succeeded,
as if by mutual agreement, a Truce or Cessation of Arms had been contrived. The
Persians desired a Peace, because they were enfeebled and tired with the War:
The Turks had regained their Honor by the Conquest of Bagdat; and being
unwilling to lose it by change of unconstant Fortune, and longer consume their
riches and men in a tedious and remote March, were attending to receive
Propositions of Peace first offered by the Persian. To effect which the Great
Vizier, who was left at Bagdat to command the Army, intimated to the Governors
of the Frontiers, that a proffer of Peace should be accepted; An Ambassador
sent from Persia to the Grand Signior.
which being made known to the King of Persia, he immediately dispatched an
Ambassador to the Grand Signior to propose Terms of Accommodation. The
Ambassador being arrived at Constantinople, was grateful and acceptable to
all, and his day of Audience appointed after the usual manner on the Pay-day of
the Janisaries, when the floor of the Divan is covered with Sacks of Money:
before the door of the Chamber of Audience stood the Persian Captives all
clothed in rich Vests. The Ambassador being conducted to the Royal Presence
with the usual Ceremonies (of which we have given an account in another place)
was received by the Sultan sitting upon a Saffaw covered with Crimson Velvet
embroidered with Pearl; his Turbant was encompassed with a Chain of Diamonds,
clothed with a rich Vest lined with Sables; he cast no pleasantness of aspect
on the Ambassador, but beholding him with a fierce and scornful look, received
the Letter in a kind of careless disclain, behaving himself in every motion, as
if he neither esteemed the King, nor his Ambassador; or as if the Persian had
been wholly conquered by him, had sent to beg Peace, and pardon for his life:
The Ambassador was soon dismissed from his Presence; and matters being
referred to the Negotiation of the Chimacam, no other difficulty arose besides
the dispute concerning Revan, which at length was agreed by another Ambassador
A Peace concluded.
sent to the Vizier on the Frontiers to remain unto the Persian, as Bagdat was
consirmed to the Turk: and so Peace was without long debate clapped up; the Grand
Signior, by reason of his indisposition which increased upon him, being not
inclinable to trouble his head with the burden of business.

Peace being thus concluded with Persia, there appeared a perfect Sunshine and
fair weather in the Ottoman Court, neither dissentions at home, nor Wars abroad
troubling the quiet and repose of the Sultan; until some differences happening
between the Princes of Moldavia and Valachia exhaled the first cloud of
disturbance. At that time Lupulo was Prince of Moldavia, a Person of evil
Principles, covetous and unjust. Matthew was Prince of Valachia, a good man,
zealous for the Christian Religion, and one who administered equal Justice to
his people. Lupulo not contenting himself with his own, but desirous also of
his Neighbors possession, made instances to the Port to have the Principality
of Moldavia conferred upon his Son, alleging that thereby he should be better
enabled Troubles in Moldavia and Valachia.
to balance the power of Ragotski in Transylvania, and on all occasions be
rendered more serviceble to the Grand Signior's designs and interest: and
seconding this Proposition with a Present of fifty thousand Dollars to the
Chimacam, and promise to increase the annual Tribute, he obtained the
Chimacam's friendship, at whose instance the Grand Signior was persuaded to
write unto Matthew to surrender up his Province into the hands of the Son of
Lupulo; declaring, That it having been accustomary to change the Princes of
those Countries every three years, he ought after an enjoyment of above seven
years to content himself with a quiet and voluntary resignation, unless he
would desire to draw upon himself a ruin by the anger and displeasure of the
Sultan. Matthew having no posterity, resolved not to surrender his Government
but with his life; and having a particular animosity against Lupulo, could by
no means incline his mind to make his Enemy happy with the Spoils of his
Estate. Wherefore having obtained assistance from Ragotski, he resolved to
withstand the Forces of young Lupulo, and engage with them: and being ready to
mount on Horseback and begin the Battle, he first dispatched an humble Message
to the Grand Signior, acquainting him, That he was ready at his Command to
resign his Principality into the hands of the meanest Greek his Majesty would
appoint; who being the source of all Equity and Justice, he hoped that he would
not oblige him to such Terms as would raise his mortal Enemy upon his ruin; a
man so intent to his own interests, and so unconscionable to compass them, that
all late Revolutions, Wars, and Commotions have been raised either by him, or
by his Instruments. This Letter being received and read by the Grand Signior,
was seconded in a few hours after, with News of the total defeat of young
Lupulo; which put the Grand Signior so much into choler, that he immediately
committed the Chimacam to the Seven Towers, for being the Projector and Author
of this Counsel. It was supposed however, that Morat's anger would not proceed
to that degree, as to extend to his life; but being informed, that he was rich,
and that he was possessed of two millions of Dollars, which lay by him in ready
Money, it was concluded, that so vast a wealth could not in a short time be
honestly gained; which appearing as an undeniable evidence and testimony of his
violence and oppression, the Grand Signior made no difficulty to pass the
Sentence of death against The Chimacam put to death.
him, nor to condemn the Money to his own Exchequer. His Office was given to
Sinan Pasha, and the Principality confirmed unto Matthew.

During all this time, the quarrel which the Turks conceived against the
Venetians for violating their Port of Valona, was not yet composed; but now
having time to peruse and consider old accounts, the Venetian Bailo was called
by the Chimacam to Audience, and to a Conference with him concerning this
matter. In the first place therefore the Bailo alleged, That the Pirates of
Barbary had for the space of twenty years roved in the Venetian Gulf, and made
Prize in that time of so many Ships and Goods belonging to Merchants, that the
Republic had been prejudiced by them in several millions; which also did in
some manner prejudice the Customs of the Grand Signior, to whom the Venetian
Merchants pay for the most part yearly the Sum of an hundred thousand Dollars
in Custom for their Goods, besides the benefit which the Ottoman Dominions
receive by so profitable a Commerce. Hereunto the Chimacam replied: That the
damages which the Turks received by the Corsaires or Free-booters at Sea under
the Colors of Malta, Ligorn, Majorca, and other places were greater and more
dishonorable to the Majesty of the Ottoman Grandeur, than the depredations of
the other side were to Venice: and therefore it would be necessary for the good
of the World, that such violences were prevented in all places; and that men of
such wicked profession should be esteemed for universal Enemies, and to have no
other Quarter, nor Articles granted them, than what we give to wild and hurtful
beasts, whom we destroy by snares and gins, and all advantages. The which also
was never denied to the Venetians, whilst they encountered and took them in the
open Seas; but to enter into privileged places, and violate a Sanctuary of the
Grand Signior's, without respect to the mighty Power of so dreadful a Monarch,
was an act so insolent, as could never obtain pardon without a due compensation
for the offense; which could not be done, but either by a restitution of the
Vessels, or else of a like number in the places of them. Hereunto the Bailo
replied: That if an Accommodation could not be made on other Terms, nor Peace
maintained, but by a submission to Pirates, and supportation of all their
injuries and robberies, a War must inevitably ensue; for the good success of
which they depended on the Blessing of God Almighty, and the general assistance
of all Christendom, which will esteem it self universally concerned in this
Cause, and obliged as well to make good this quarrel against Pirates, as to
preserve Venice for their main Bulwark and defense against the Ottoman Force.

You make me smile (answered the Chimacam) when you tell me of the power of
Christendom, which contains nothing more of terror than the name. Do not I
know, who have been Pasha of Buda; that the Emperor has no money; and that
when the Swedes, a small and inconsiderable people, have made War upon him,
they have almost overrun his Country? As for France, if they understand their
own Politics, they will scarce be persuaded to lend assistance to the Empire,
when we make war against it. The Spaniards have so much to do at home, and to
conserve themselves from the encroachments of their powerful Neighbor the
French, that they are wholly unable to lend Forces to wage a war at such a
distance from their Dominions. Wherefore considering the advantage we have upon
you, which we well know and understand; you must either have war on these
hazardous terms, or else purchase your peace with a considerable Sum of money.
In making of which bargain you must consider, that you have to deal with a
mighty Prince, and not with a Merchant; and therefore your offer ought to be
large at first, so as it may gain credit, and be received with a favorable
ear; for a small Sum to him is like a little morsel given to an hungry stomach,
which serves only to increase the appetite. And you know, that we our selves
are often forced to sacrifice to the avarice of our Prince, by effusions of
vast Sums of money, which are always best compounded for, when they are done
readily, and at first, before we give our Master time to consult with his
pillow, and to make up our accounts according to the calculate of his own
reckoning. Let me therefore exhort you to follow the like example, and
immediately make an offer of three hundred thousand Zechins of Gold, which if
you will do, and employ my interest to make this composition for you, I hope,
though with some difficulty, to gain its acceptance. To talk and reason of
things past is but to beat the air, because the time is vanished and gone; but
you may consider of the present, that you may secure the future. We sell you
peace at this price, if it be worth your money take it; if not, refuse it, as
you judge the purchase most agreeable to your interest.

At this time Christendom was embroiled in its usual combustions, so that
assistance from other Princes was not only uncertain, but without all
foundation; so that the Venetians could have no sure trust to any other than
their own Force. In regard that many were desirous at that time to see the
Venetians engaged with the Turk, that so they might not be able to concern
themselves in the War of Italy, which then grew hot by the Wars of Savoy,
Modena, and Matona, favored by the protection of the Spaniards, by whose means
all the differences arose about the Valtoline. Considering which, the wise
Senate being willing to purchase so great a blessing to their Country by a
moderate price, gave liberty to their Bailo to compound for it at what rate and
terms that he was able; which by the Bailo's dexterity in the management was
concluded for the Sum of two hundred and fifty thousand Zechins, which was
esteemed for a great service, and redounded much to the reputation of the
Bailo: after which conclusion, the former Articles were ratified, and these
which follow added thereunto.

That the Ambassador or Bailo should be set at liberty, and permitted to
return to his own habitation: That Commerce be renewed as formerly between the
Subjects of both Countries. That all Controversy about the matters happened at
Valona, for ever be silenced and forgotten. When at any time the Pirates of
Barbary shall happen to enter within the Ports of the Grand Signior, they shall
give security, that they will commit no damage or spoil on the Subjects of
Venice. And in case they shall have taken any Prizes belonging to the aforesaid
State, they shall not be admitted nor protected in the Ports belonging to the
Grand Signior. Wherefore in virtue hereof all Aga's, Captains of Castles, and
other Ministers who shall not obey and observe this Capitulation, shall be
deprived of their Office; and if the Venetians shall then enter violently into
the Port, where such Enemies have taken refuge, it shall not be imputed to them
for a crime, or esteemed a breach of the Capitulations. And farther, if the
Venetians shall at any time encounter the aforesaid people of Barbary in the
open Sea, it shall be lawful for them to assault, take, and destroy them
without notice, or exceptions of the Ottoman Port. And lastly, the new Bailo
lately elected shall pay unto the Grand Signior five hundred thousand Pieces of
Eight, which make two hundred and fifty thousand Zechins of Gold. This Writing
was firmed and ratified about the middle of the Moon Rebiul in the Hegeira or
Year of Mahomet 1049. Hereof September 1639.
authentic Copies were immediately dispatched to the Beglerbeys, Sangiacks,
and Kadi's on the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, and to the Pasha of Bosna,
for better publication of the Peace, and free Traffic and Commerce between the
Subjects of both people.

The Baron Chinski arrived at that time from the Emperor in quality of Envoye
Extraordinary to congratulate the Grand Signior's success in An Envoye sent
from the Emperor to the Grand Signior.
taking Bagdat, and making a Peace with Persia; but not bringing with him
Presents to that value, which on this occasion were expected, he was not looked
on, nor considered with that favor and respect, as was agreeable to his
Character and Quality. And there happening a dispute between this Envoye and
the English Ambassador concerning precedence of place; the Turks yielded it to
the English, being made to understand the difference which Christian Princes
make between the Title of an Ambassador and that of an Envoye, though the
Turks use but that one word of Elchi to express both. And though the Baron
Chinski labored to diminish the Dignity of an English Ambassador at
Constantinople, by alleging, that he was elected by the Company of Merchants
for conservation of their Trade only, and afterward confirmed and honored by
the King: yet this Argument was in no wise prevalent with the Turks, who
esteeming the Commission of the Prince, and the charge of an Office the only
qualification to ennoble a person, made no difficulty to determine the point in
behalf of the English. And though some Italian Writers say, that the English
Ambassador gave fifteen Purses of Money or seven thousand five hundred Dollars
to the Chimacam for this favor; yet those who understand how unwillingly the
Turkie-Merchants part with their money on defense of such punctillios and
niceties, especially where the Ambassador might have avoided the bringing them
into dispute, will more readily believe, that the Turks from free motives of
their own Justice and Reason judged this Honor due to the Ambassador, than
that he should purchase this indisputable point by the disgraceful means of
money.

ANNO 1640.
Persia, and the black clouds blown over from the Venetians, the Grand Signior
studied how and where he might turn his Arms with most advantage: he The
Turkish Counsels uncertain about a War.
had conceived an irreconcilable pique against Ragotski and Matthew for the
causes before related; but having an intention to make use of their Force
against Poland or Germany, or against them both together, he dissembled the
passion he conceived against them, and rather deferred his revenge, than
pardoned the liberty which they had exercised without his license or assent.
Sometimes he resolved to recover Asac out of the hands of the Cosacks;
sometimes he thought of making War upon Poland, judging himself much affronted
by that King, for not sending an Ambassador to congratulate his late
successes: then he supposed, that a War in Germany would be more easy, and the
Conquest more profitable by reason of the richess of the people, and the
fertility of the soil, to which pretenses could never be wanting on the score
of those differences which always arise amongst the people of the Frontiers.
During these debates and counsels, preparations were made for War both by Sea
and Land, as yet uncertain where they should be employed: to command them the
Great Vizier was ordered to hasten his journey from Persia, The Vizier returns
from Persia.
whose arrival was celebrated at Constantinople with a solemn Entry; and for a
particular and distinguishing Honor, the Grand Signior sent him a Vest from
his own Back to wear on the day of his Triumph. This Vizier was a person very
austere in his behavior, bold and valiant, as he evidenced by his actions in
taking Bagdat, zealous for his Master's interest; and what is rare in a Turk,
not much addicted to his own: he had acquired a great share in the esteem of
his Master, and his Authority increased, as the daily decay of the Grand
Signior's health rendered him less able for Government. For now the strong
complexion of Morat began to grow feeble by excesses of frequent debauchery,
his stomach was become cold and weak, not able to digest the lightest meats,
his hand shook, and a paralytical distemper seized him in every part: so that
his Mother and the Physicians persuaded him to forsake the use of Wine, as
poison and destruction to his health: and he, whilst he was sensible of his
languishing condition, like a true Penitent, made many protestations and vows
against it, forbidding the accursed poison to be received within the Walls of
the Seraglio: howsoever his kind heart could not possibly withstand the
temptation of a Banquet, to which his Pot-companions did sometimes invite him:
amongst which the Great Vizier would not be wanting also to please and cajol
the humor of his Master with the liquor that he loved. But his chief and
constant Camerades in drinking were his Persian Favorite and Mustapha Pasha of
Bosna, one educated in the Seraglio, promoted to the place of Selictar Aga, to
whom he gave the stately Palace of Ibrahim Pasha on the Hippodrome, together
with his eldest Daughter in Marriage. These two stout Sons of Bacchus persuaded
the Grand Signior to appoint one solemn Drinking-day in time of the Biram,
which is the great Festival of the Year, and introduced by their Prophet in
imitation of our Easter. Morat being at this time possessed with the spirit of
debauchery, accepted the motion, and invited the two Drunkards to dinner with
him. The Persian provoked his pleasure of drinking by salt Meats, and by
peppered and spiced Dishes; the sort of Wine they most used was a sweet
Malvoisia, sometimes twisted, and encouraged with the strong Waters, called
Rosa Solis, of which they sucked so long, and with such excess, that falling
under the force of it, they were insensibly carried away to their several beds.
This dissolute repast became fatal to the Grand Signior; for a fire being
kindled in his veins and bowels, he fell into a violent and continued Fever.
The Physicians being called, were fearful to administer Remedies, lest proving
The death of Sultan Morat.
unsuccessful, their lives should pay for the ineffectual operation: at length
they agreed to let him blood, but this hastened his death. For he died the
fourth day of his Fever, being the 8th of February, in the seventeenth year of
his Reign, and the one and thirtieth of his Age, having ruled in the height of
all disorders and irregular excesses, which his youthful years enabled him to
support. With his death all his thoughts and designs of making War against
Christendom perished, having sworn after his return from Persia to reduce all
his neighboring Countries to the Mohammedan Law. He was of a most cruel and
implacable disposition, having amongst his other Acts of Tyranny imbrued his
His Character.
hands in the blood of his two Brothers, Orchan and Bajazet; as also strangled
his Uncle Mustapha, whose innocent weakness had been sufficient to secure his
life against any, but the most horrid Monster of humane Tyranny. He left no
Son; for though he had diverse, they died in their infancy, notwithstanding
which his Kindred were so detested by him, that he envied the descendence of
Monarchy on his Brother Ibrahim, who was preserved by a strange providence from
his fury: often saying, that he wished that he might be the last of the Ottoman
Line, that the Empire of that Family might end with him, and devolve unto the
Tartar. He was certainly the most absolute Prince that ever swayed the Ottoman
Empire: but of no Religion, seldom fasting in the month of Ramasan, contemning
and laughing at the Santones, and others of their Religious Orders. He was very
inquisitive into all Actions of the City, for which he maintained his Spies,
and oftentimes took his rules and measures from discourses of people concerning
his Government. He was a great Dissembler, ready, active, and revengeful,
covetous to extremity, having left fifteen millions of Gold in his Treasury,
which was empty when he entered upon the Sovereignty. In short, he was so bad,
that he had scarce any allay of Virtue; being so great a Tyrant, that at length
he became his own Assasinate, and fell unlamented by all but the two Companions
of his bestial excess.

The End of Sultan Morat's Life.
Sultan IBRAHIM Emperor of the Turks Anno Dom. 1640
I That of Ottman Blood Remain Alone
Called From a Prison to ascend a Throne
My Silly Mind I Bend to Soft Delights
Hating th'unpleasant thoughts of Nauall Fights
Till Mad With Wanton Loves I Fall at First
Slave to My Own Then to My Peoples Lust


THE REIGN OF Sultan Ibrahim, TWELFTH EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
Sultan Amurath, or Morat, after a Fever of eight days continuance, February,
1640. according to the New-Style, expired his last Breath: His Mother, called
Kiosem, comforted her self with the thoughts that her Son Sultan Ibrahim still
lived, Vid. the (...). State.
and was the sole Surviver, and undoubted Heir of the Ottoman Family; to whose
Succession, that She might make the more facile, and undisturbed Entrance, She
consulted with all the Viziers; requesting their consent and assistance in the
lawful promotion of her remaining Son to the Throne of his Ancestors: For She
had understood, that Morat, who always abhorred the ill-shaped Body, and weaker
mind of his Brother, envied him the Dignity of the Ottoman Scepter, and
therefore had bequeathed the Succession to the Tartar, having, in the heat of a
Debauch, and fumes of his Wine, compelled his Pashas to swear to the
performance of his Testament. Wherefore the Queen, assembling them together,
with gentle words desired them to remember, That Ibrahim was the lawful Heir,
and their true Emperor; that the Tartar Han was a Stranger, odious to the
Soldiery, and not beloved by the People; that an alteration of this nature
could never be contrived and executed without danger to the Actors, and that
they to whom She assured the continuance of the same Honors and Offices in
reward of their constant Allegiance, would be in hazard of losing all, by the
coming of a Foreign Prince, who having Confidents of his own to prefer, and
grand necessities to satisfy, would make bold even with Estates and Provinces
to prefer his Favorites, his Kindred, and Countrymen; and establish the
firmness of his Government on their ruin: Yet, setting aside those
considerations, touching their own safety and interest, She promised, That if
they would reach out their hands unto her Son, for to lift him unto the Throne,
he should acknowledge his Empire from them, and accordingly love, tender, and
esteem such faithful Subjects. The Viziers, after some reflections on the tie
and obligation which Sultan Morat had caused them to make to him, declared, and
published it to be unlawful, and void; protesting, that they were resolved to
maintain inviolable the Allegiance they owed unto Sultan Ibrahim, descended
from the Ottoman-bloud, which they reverenced and adored with an awe equal to
the religious esteem which their Forefathers had of it; and therefore with one
voice they cried out, Let Sultan Ibrahim live. Herewith the Council breaking
up, the Viziers, accompanied with all the Officers and Attendants of the
Seraglio, went with Shouts and loud Acclamations to the Prison of Ibrahim, to
salute him Emperor; for he, poor Prince, had now for four years remained a sad
Recluse in a dark room, where he had received neither light, nor Air, but what
came from a little Window, which sometimes in favor was opened to him, from
above; and what was worse, the continual expectations, and fear of Death,
without Friends, Conversation, or Hope, rendered those apprehensions worse than
Death it self, which daily were represented to him in that solemnity, as might
terrific a mind more constant and firm than his: So soon as he heard the Shouts
and Voices of a Multitude near his Door, he immediately conceived, that the
Fate was now come which he had so long expected, and therefore he barred his
Door, and denied to give entrance; and when the Viziers proclaimed him Emperor
(fearing it might be some artifice of his Brother to see with what joy he would
entertain the News) he answered, that he did not so much as think of the
Empire, nor desire it, but only prayed, that Sultan Morat might live, to whom
he pretended not to be a Brother, but a Slave; and when he perceived that they
began to force the Door, though with terms of Respect and Observance, he still
endeavored to keep it close; for Nature had taught him to conserve a Life,
however miserable, and void of consolation. He continuing thus resolute not to
open, Reverence to his Person commanded them to forbear any ruder violence,
until the Queen Mother over-hearing all this stir, descended her self in
Person, and first causing the dead Corpse of Sultan Morat to be extended before
his Door, with gentle Compellations, and confident Assurances, averred the
Death of his Brother. The voice of his Mother began to dissipate his fears, and
being in part already convinced by his Ears, he adventured to peep at the Door,
and giving then entire Credence to his Eyes, his heart and spirits consented to
revive, and so retiring back into his Chamber, he willingly received the
Congratulations of the Ministers and Soldiers; which being past, he readily
applied his Shoulders to the Coffin of his dead Brother, and having bore his
share of that dear burden to the Gate of the Seraglio, he there resigned it to
his Domestic Officers, who buried him in the Sepulcher of Sultan Achmet. From
thence he took Boat, and passed to the Mosch of Jubs Seraglio, where in the
space of eight days, he completed all the Ceremonies of his Coronation, and
afterward, according to the custom of his Ancestors, he rode through the City
to his great Palace; but whether it were for want of practice, or by reason of
a posture natural unto Fools, he sat so ridiculously on his Saddle, as moved
rather the Laughter than the Acclamation of the People. In fine, being entered
the Seraglio, he began to breathe, and enjoy the Air of Liberty with so much
contentment and satisfaction, that he unwillingly would empair the least
Particle of his late acquired Freedom, by thinking, or attending to business,
and as if he enjoyed sufficient, committed all to the management of his Mother;
howsoever, being desirous to handle something of the Government, he did it with
so little grace and dexterity, that it plainly appeared, that that Soul
animated a Body not fit to sway or wield a Scepter.

The Queen Mother, to maintain the word She had given to the Viziers, continued
them all in their respective Offices, so that, though there was great
disproportion in the mind of the two Princes; yet the Ministers being the same,
there seemed to be little or no alteration in the Government. The Great Vizier
remembering well the thoughts of War which Sultan Morat meditated against the
Cossacks, and being desirous of Glory, and continuance of his Power, resolved
to prosecute the same design, hoping to meet a spirit in Ibrahim equal to the
generosity of his Brother: To this War many and various were the motives, as
first, a natural desire of revenge on the Cossacks, for having infested the
BlackSeas, that they might thereby provoke Poland to a War, which when Reasons
for a War with the Cossacks.
they had reduced to some extremity, the Emperor would consequently fall in to
their assistance, and thereby create quarrels, which must necessarily open a
large Field of troubles, which being sown with the seed of discord, could not
fail to produce causes, and pretensions for a War. It being thus resolved, to
which the Vizier neither wanted Eloquence nor Reasons to persuade; Great
preparations were made for a War, which was intended to be maintained for many
years: during which time, God, who disposes all things at his pleasure,
permitted a false report to fly, that the Persians were providing a great Army
to besiege Bagdat, to which the Turks giving entire credence, it was resolved
in the Divan, that those preparations against Christendom, should be diverted
toward the Parts of the Eastern Countries. By this vain rumor only were all
these grand designs disappointed, and all farther thoughts vanished for the
present, of molesting the Christians. From whence it is observable, how
necessary are the foreign Residences of Ministers, and how absurdly the Turks
err, who, by reason of their pride, vouchsafe not to entertain Ambassadors in
the Court of Strangers, being beholding to the Jews, or Armenian-Merchants for
all their intelligence they receive touching the Affairs of Neighboring
Kingdoms.

The Wars being thus suspended, the Great Vizier had time to cast his Eyes
about him, and contrive the ruin of such whom he suspected most dangerous to
his Condition. Amongst the rest, none appeared more formidable than Mustapha
Pasha, Captain Pasha; a young brisk Person, and Favorite of the Queen Mother,
whom to remove was difficult and dangerous, being a Vizier as well as he, and
in one of the most eminent degrees of dignity in the whole Empire: and
therefore that he might touch him with smooth and gentle terms, he practiced
upon him the ordinary decoy of Preferment, proffering him the Government of
Buda; which whilst the one seemed out of modesty to refuse, the other with the
greater force of Complement, and obliging expressions of friendship pressed him
to accept. At length, overcome with importunity and kindness, Mustapha received
the proffer, whereby being divested of the Queens Protection, he was soon after
overtaken in his Journey toward his Principality, and by another Mandate
required to take his way to the Province of Silistria, the smallest, and most
inconsiderable of the Empire: in which he was no sooner invested, than a second
Edict took off his head.

But another Mustapha, more fortunate, was sent Pasha to Grand Cairo in Egypt;
he was a mortal Enemy to the Crim Tartar, of whom he showed his hatred at
Rhodes, by putting his Son to death, for having said, that Sultan Morat, and
Sultan Ibrahim dying without Issue, the Empire was to descend to his Family:
This Son of the Tartar was then at Rhodes, it being a custom always to have
one of them as a Hostage for the Fathers obedient Comportment toward the
Turks, their place of Residence being either at Rhodes, or some Town on the
Black Sea, as we have elsewhere declared.

The Sultan in this Interim had little regard unto the Government, both for
want of Capacity, and by reason of his luxurious and wanton Appetite, to which
he indulged in the highest excess of sensuality; for having been accustomed to
a Prison, and restraint, he knew not how to enjoy that freedom he had
recovered, but by subjecting it to the imperious servitude of his Lusts. This
humor the Vizier and great Ministers cherished in him, by continual Banquets,
Feasts, and Entertainments, in which he always took high contentment and
satisfaction. His other Recreations were, Horse-races, and Shooting with the
Bow, rewarding the most dexterous Archers. Business was a stranger to him, he
knew not what it meant, nor thought there was other employment for an Emperor
than to study those pastimes, which most corresponded with his Youth and
Nature: only the Vizier would sometimes in matters of high importance demand
his Assent, which was either out of formality, or else to secure himself with
the Name and Authority of his Master.

The News of Sultan Ibrahim's promotion to the Throne being arrived at Venice,
the most Serene Republic dispatched Pietro Foscarini as their Ambassador
extraordinary to complement the Sultan: The Prince of Transylvania in like
manner, sent his Tribute, which was some Hawks, Ambassadors sent to complement
Sultan Ibrahim.
and twelve Vessels of Gilded Plate, as feudatary acknowledgments for the Lands
held, and for his Confirmation in the Principality.

The Ministers of other Princes having passed the like addresses, which were
customary, The Ambassadors of Poland made Complaints of the Tartars, whose
incursions against them, the Turks by Conditions of Peace were obliged to
restrain; but in this, as in other occasions since that time, the Poles could
obtain no redress from the Turks, who willing to have the Christians oppressed
or ruined, either seemed not to give credit to the subject of Complaints, or
else to find out excuses to acquit the Tartar; which being so known and common
a Practice with the Turk, it is to be wondered, why the Poles have sent so many
late Messages of this nature, which in former, as well as in this present Age
have proved fruitless; a pregnant example of which, we shall find Sultan
Mahomet, Son of this Ibrahim.

Amongst other Corruptions of these Times, Aspers were so cut and clipped, that
the Dollar rose from 80 to 120 Aspers; which irregularity being complained of
in the Divan, all moneys were reduced to their intrinsic value, and the Aspers
called in to be coined in the Mint, to the great damage of the people. But this
matter will not appear strange, if it be compared to the Vellion of Spain, and
to the permission in Turkey, of the base alloy of Temins, by which never any
Nation before was ever so cheated and abused. And now the storms of War, which
threatened from Persia, being blown over, it was judged seasonable to reassume
the thoughts of War so long mediated against the Cossacks; in order unto which,
Galleys were commanded to be built, which should draw little Water, and
purposely made to pass the shoals of the Black Sea, near Asac, for the recovery
of that place out of the hands of the Enemy: Another Squadron also of Galleys
was designed for the Archipelago, to oppose the Galleys of Malta and Naples,
which much infested those Seas. To the first enterprise the Tartar much excited
the Turk, by reason that Asac did not only hinder his Incursions by Land, but
rendered his Navigation in the Black Seas, very unsecure. To the second, The
Galleys of Malta much provoked them, under the Command of Frederick the
Landgrave of Hesse; who by the persuasions of the Cardinals of Savoy, and
Barberini, from a Protestant was become a Roman Catholic, and had obtained the
great Cross of Malta; and with several Galleys and Ships, performed some
exploits at Biserta, and at the Golleta near Tunis.

The Year 1641. being now entered, the Sultan passed a most Luxurious Life in
his Seraglio, consuming an immense Treasure on his Women; and whilst these two
Fleets were preparing to proceed on their respective Expeditions, that intended
for Asac had almost been diverted by the rumors and disturbances on the
Frontiers of Hungary; but they were soon afterward appeased by an appearance
of an Envoy from the Emperor, and return of a Chiaus to Vienna, with
Ratification of all the former Articles and conditions of Peace: Howsoever the
German Internuntio was braved at the Port, for not appearing sooner with his
Presents and Complements of congratulation, for the happy Entrance of Sultan
Ibrahim to the Ottoman Throne; so apt are the Turks to believe Acts of
Civility, or Ceremony to be parts of Obedience and Submission; and what
Christians have once given them voluntarily, is afterward exacted as a matter
of Debt or Duty.

And being thus freed from a suspicion of Troubles in Hungary, and exempted
from the fears of waging two Wars at once, (which the Turks always studiously
avoid) they dispatched a Letter into Poland, to demand passage for their Army,
through that Country to the Siege of Asac; but that not being consented unto,
the Turks prepared to open their way by Force, and the Poles to defend the
passage. In which interim, many disasters concurred, sufficient to discourage
the Turks in their design; who are a people, that superstitiously calculate the
success of their Enterprises, by the difficulty or smooth success of their
first beginnings: For when the Vizier was ready to depart, a dreadful Fire
happened in Constantinople, to the quenching of which, applying not only his
Orders, but his own Person; he adventured so far, that he burned both his
hands, and sindged his Beard in that manner, that he was forced to take his Bed
for several Days, where he was honored with a Visit of the Sultan. News also
came at the same time, that Tauris, or Ecbatan, on the Borders of Persia, was
miserably ruined by an Earthquake; and what was worse, the Sultan himself was
seized with an Apoplexy, which turned to a Paralytical Distemper, the cause
whereof was attributed to his excessive use of Women; to whom he was so
immoderately addicted, that he consumed his Days and Nights in their
Apartments. This Disease, which is rarely or never Cured, being joined to a
report given out by his Ladies, that notwithstanding his Venereal heat, he was
yet impotent as to Women; created a belief, or at least a strong probability,
that he might die without Issue, which caused high confusion in the Counsels of
the Grandees, that no design could make any cheerful progress, until provision
was first made for supply of the Ottoman House; for the Succession of the
Tartar was in no manner convenient or secure; but rather that the Throne should
be furnished with the Son of a Sister, or of a Niece, than to subject
themselves to the Rule and Passions of a Foreign Prince: And though the Sultan
did afterward recover his health, yet all suspected and feared, that by the
immoderate heat of his Venereal Inclination, he would dye without Children;
every one discoursing, as moved by his Passion, or his Interest.

About this time arrived an Ambassador at Constantinople, from the Sofia of
Persia, bringing a Ratification of the Peace; who was so much the more welcome,
by how much more the present Conjuncture rendered it advantageous; and being
ushered in with exceeding rich presents, ravished the hearts of the Turks,
whose good nature melts and dissolves with the sight or hopes of Gifts.

In Dalmatia, near the Confines of Zara, the Turks made Incursions on the
Venetian Territories, and caused some disturbances: but being chastised by an
Ambush laid for them, whereby about 200. of them perished; all matters were
again reconciled, and the Peace renewed.

And now one would imagine, that the design against Asac, by such diversity of
obstructions, were absolutely laid aside; which though they were of that
importance, and especially the fear of Ibrahims Death, to detain the Vizier at
home; yet he thought fit to prosecute the design under the Command of the Pasha
of Silistria, to whom he had committed the Conduct of this War. The Pasha proud
of his Charge, rejoiced to The Siege of Asac.
be employed in a War, wherein he apprehended so little difficulty, and
prognosticated to himself nothing but Glory and Victory; esteemed the
Defendants for no other than Fishermen, and better experienced to sail their
Boats, and govern their Sayks in the Black Seas, than to draw up an Army in the
Field, or defend their Walls. This confidence was farther increased by an
Embassy at the same time from the Moscovite, who not only renounced all
assistance, or concernment for that Town, but renewed with them his Friendship,
and Articles of ancient Agreement. The Ottoman Army, besides Janissaries, and
other Turks, consisted of Moldavians, and Valachians, and a great number of
Tartars, which at first entered into their Trenches, and besieged the Town; but
here they rested not securely, by reason of the frequentSallies the Besieged
made upon them; and more especially by the Mines which they sprang to the
terror and damage of their Enemies. The Turks moved hereat, made furious
Assaults, but were as valiantly repulsed by the Defendants; who threw scalding
Water, and Pitch, and burning Sulphur, upon the Assailants; so that not being
able to take the Town by force, they retired to their Trenches, and deliberated
in what manner, by fair promises, and money, they might invite them to
surrender: Hereupon the Captain Pasha, the Tartar Han, and others, tried the
efficacy of large Proffers of Privileges to the Town, their Country, and
Inhabitants; with a gratuity of twelve thousand Hungers of Gold: but these
promises could make no more entrance into their hearts, than the Turks could do
into their Walls, which they seemed resolute to defend, wanting neither
Provision, nor Ammunition, nor Courage for the War; but on the contrary side,
all these were wanting in the Turkish Camp; so that 15 days passed without any
action, until they were supplied by the arrival of certain Brigantines, and
light Vessels, dispatched with all expedition with the necessaries of War; At
the coming of which, the Turks prepared for another Assault, which they
continued uncessantly for the space of seven days, but were received with that
vigor by the Besieged, that they could not gain one palm, or inch of ground,
so that at length with disgrace, and discouragement, they were forced to give
over their attempt, despairing to gain the Town in the time, and with the Force
which was allotted for this enterprise. With this ill success, extremity and
Famine pinched the Turks in their Trenches so much, that an Ox was sold for 15
Zaichins, a Lamb for three, and a Measure of Barley which served a Horse for
one time, for a Dollar, so that at length they were forced to raise the Siege;
and the Captain Pasha by tempestuous weather was constrained to shelter his
Fleet in the Port of Caffa. In their return home, the General was fearful of
having forfeited his head; the Commanders were silent, and ashamed of their
success, and the Soldiers discouraged, famished, and poor; for they had lost
3000. Spahees, 7000 Janissaries, and 800 other Soldiers, besides Moldavians,
Valachians, and Tartars; those that survived of the Foot were naked, and many
sick; the Spahees were without Horses, with which they were supplied by the
Tartars; and in fine, so unsuccessful were all matters, that the Veterane
Soldiery avouched, that they never endured a more cruel, nor a more miserable
War.

And now we shall end this Year 1641. with the ruin of Emir Gumir, The just
punishment of a Persian Traitor.
a Persian by Birth, a Favorite, and yet Traitor to his natural Prince. This
Emir in the last Wars which Sultan Morat waged against Persia, was entrusted
with an Embassy, and with Conduct of part of his Army, but he betrayed both to
the Turk, under whose protection he took Sanctuary, and obtained great Gifts
and Preferments, for a reward and price of his Treachery. Sultan Morat
afterward bestowed a magnificent Seraglio upon him, situated on the Bosphorus,
enriched him with a vast Treasure, and what is more, with his Favor; making
him his Companion in his Pastimes, and his Confident in his serious Counsels;
it was he, that first persuaded the Sultan to drink Wine, in which both of them
were beastly intemperate, and mighty and valiant to bear, until the heat
thereof having extinguished the natural heat of their Stomachs, it became too
cold and crude, unless corrected, or fortified with Rach, or distilled Spirits.
The fumes of such strong Drinks, were the cause of the extravagant actions,
which Morat practiced in his Life, and afterward became the means to hasten
his Death; whose days being ended, it was time also for prosperous wickedness
to expire, and to meet a punishment equal to its demerit. Wherefore one day,
(having desired License of the Vizier to return to his own Country, where it is
believed, he had by Sultan Morat had bestowed upon him, though there wanted not
many causes to render him suspected, and obnoxious to the present Government;
first, because he was too well acquainted with the Secrets of the Seraglio, and
of that State, to live in any other Country than the Turkish Dominions; then it
was feared that the Persian Ambassador might make use of this person to act
what Treason he pleased on the remainder of the Ottoman Family, on promise that
such an attempt should expiate his former Villainy, and regain the favor of his
natural Prince. But such signal actions as these are commonly wrote in such
large Characters of Divine Justice, which never left Treason unpunished, either
in this Life or the other; that we need not to search or enquire for a further
cause, or occasion of this punishment.

The Year 1642. being now entered, and the Turks desirous to repair their last
Years disgrace, resolved again with better preparation and Conduct, to attempt
Asac; but before they would engage, according to their usual Custom, they
determined to conclude all Ombrages, and matters of dispute arisen on the
Confines of Hungary. To which end, the Emperor deputed the Baron of
Questemberg, with other Barons; and the Turks on their side commissionated the
Pashaws of the Consines, with instructions not to insist too strictly on the
Conditions, lest it should retard the Peace, and obstruct the other design of
War: Wherefore the Turks condescending to matters reasonable, and yielding up
part of their Usurpation, a Peace was concluded for twenty Years, much to the
Advantage and Favor of the Christians.

And now to give farther courage to the Prosecution of higher Attempts, The
Birth of Sultan Mahomet.
the whole Turkish Empire was replenished with joy, for the Birth of a young
Prince Sultan Mahomet, that now reigns; so that the supposed impotency of the
Father (whereby the Ottoman-Family might have been extinguished) was proved
otherwise by plain Effect; and the fear of those that ruled the Empire
vanishing by the Rising of this new Star, all places were filled with Joy and
Triumphs; only the Tartar Han sinding himself thus disappointed, was supposed
not willing to concur heartily in this common Joy. In this manner vanished
the appearance of Civil Dissension in that Family, which now flourishes and
increases every day, and insensibly creeps forward to the design (which they
hope) of an Universal Monarchy. Pardon me, O Christian Kings, if I say
insensibly, for methinks you are sensible of the least touch you receive from
one and the other, but feel not the gripes and pinches of your Common Enemy,
who like a Hectic Fever has mingled with your Blood, and stolen into the
Marrow of your strength, where he will lurk until he has dissolved the Fabric
of your Christian World, unless expelled by Concord amongst your selves, and
the Divine Assistance favoring your united Forces.

But now to return again to the famous Siege of Asac; It being the The War
renewed against (...).
custom to cast all miscarriages in War on the General, the Vizier displaced
the Captain Pasha, taking upon himself that Office and Title, of which there
was never any former example. In the Place likewise of the Pasha of Silistria,
was constituted Mustapha Pasha of Egypt; which Government, though much
inferior to his former, yet was received without sense of disgrace, it not
being the Riches or Power of any Office that confers Honor, but favor and
good will of the Sultan. Nor did only the miscarriage of the late War tend to
the disrepute of the former Pasha of Silistria, but the report of his having
poisoned the Tartar Han increased the difficulty of reconcilement with his
Superiors, which being a matter rather suspected than proved, excused him from
farther punishment than only a deprivation of his Office.

The new Pasha of Silistria thus taking upon himself the Command of the Army,
and Conduct of this War, assembled a Force of Turks, Tartars, Moldavians, and
Valachians, far exceeding the number of the last Year. At the News of which,
and of the Fleet of Galleys designed to besiege them by Sea, they apprehended
their danger so great, that without the assistance of the Moscovite, they
concluded it impossible to defend their City; to him therefore they made
applications for succor, representing unto him the extremity their affairs
were in, by reason of that powerful Enemy which threatened them; and that having
always acknowledged him for their Protector, there was no refuge lest them but
under the defense of his Arms. But hereunto the Moscovite gave a brief reply,
That he had lately concluded Peace with the Turk; since which, having received
from him no occasion of breach, he could not with any Justice engage so soon
against him in a War. The Cossacks being The Inhabitants abandon Asac.
thus disappointed of their principal hopes, resolved to abandon their City;
but to make the best advantage of their flight, they carried with them all
their Movables; and demolished their Walls, and ruined their Houses, leaving
the place a notorious spectacle of despair and ruin; and no other possession
to their Enemies, than the compass of so much ground pestered with Rubbish, and
rude heaps of Stones: The Pasha howsoever abundantly contented, that his very
name was sufficient to affright his Enemies, entered the City with Triumph,
where he began to repair the Walls, and invite the Inhabitants to return, with
all assurance of security, and protection. This gentle treatment recalled many
back to their homes, so hardly are men weaned from their Native Country; and in
a short time the City beginning to sill, all matters seemed to return to their
pristine state and condition.

About this time the Persian by his Ambassador renewed his League The Persian
renews his League.
with the Turk, and confirmed it in the name of the new King, which was
performed on condition, that the Softi should demolish the Fortress of
Fortrina, which he had contrary to Articles built on the Frontiers, not far
from the Caspian Sea; which that it might assuredly be performed, a
Capugibathee was dispatched to see it effected.

And in this manner, Asac being subdued, and a Peace secured with the Persian;
The Turks who can neither live in quiet with their Neighbors, nor observe
Capitulations longer than they turn to their advantage; contrived to take
Giavarine, alias Rab, a strong Fortress on the Confines of Hungary, by a
Stratagem which they designed in this manner: Certain Soldiers habited like
Peasants, were crowded into several The Turks seek to take Rab by a Stratagem.
Carts, covered with Hay, which being entered within the Walls, were
immediately to leap forth, and surprise the Sentinels and Guards at the Gates
(which might easily be Executed on men, whom 20 Years before of Peace had made
secure) these were to be seconded by 4000 Soldiers, which lay ready in a
Neighboring Valley; but it happened, That an Officer of the Garrison returning
from Hunting, had by chance discovered this strong party of Turks, which caused
him to quicken his pace toward the Town, and overtaking in his way certain
Carts of Straw, which appearing to be laden in a form different to what was
usual, increased in him a farther suspicion of Treachery; howsoever, he
proceeded forward with the more haste, yet without any appearance of Jealousy:
until being entered into the Town, he declared what he had seen, at which the
Garrison was immediately in Arms; and having permitted the Carts to enter, the
Bridge was drawn up, and the Carts being searched, the whole fraud and
treachery was discovered; and having made the Turks Prisoners, and Armed the
Walls with Soldiers, the whole design was disappointed; so that those who lay
in Ambush returned to their own Cities. The Emperor hereupon resolved to send
an Ambassador to Constantinople, to complain of this Treachery; whereof the
Turks being ashamed, and the more because it did not succeed; refused to admit
the Ambassador, unless the Emperor would first agree to pay a Yearly Charge
of a hundred thousand Rix-Dollars to the Port; not by way of Tribute, but of
Present; in which unreasonable demand, they took more confidence, in regard
they perceived that the Emperor was engaged in a War against the Smede. Upon
this dishonorable demand, the Emperor deferred the Embassy intended,
supposing it less perilous to adventure a War in Hungary, than dishonorable to
condescend unto a Proposition, so derogatory to the Majesty of his Cesarean
Greatness.

The Year 1643. being now entered, the Prince of Transylvania conveyed Bethlem
Gabor; not by way of Gratuity or Recompense for his Services, but in Exchange,
or as the price of two Cities, which the Prince had yielded to the Sultan, out
of his own proper Estate in Hungary; with which Answer the Vizier remained
satisfied, being Jealous of the Turbulent and Active Spirit of that Prince.

During all these Wars and Revolutions in Kingdoms and States, Sultan Ibrahim
contained, and contented himself within the Precincts of his Seraglio; where
becoming a Faithful and Valiant Soldier of Venus, he consumed more Treasure in
that War, than his Brother Morat did in his Foreign Conquests; and being as it
were entered into the Mahometane Paradise, where the Company of fair Women is
the chiefest felicity promised, he labored to increase the Ottoman Family, and
to acquit his people of the apprehension they had of wanting an Heir to succeed
in the Throne; so that on the 15th of February, he had a second Born, and a
third Son on the 12th of March following; which absolutely took away the
reproach of his frigidity or impotence, proving afterward the most lascivious,
and devout Sultan, that ever aspired to the Mohammedan Heaven.

This Year the Turks Armed out 20 Galleys more than usual, besides 30 Sail of
Ships, and Gally Grosses; in the beginning of June, riding at the Seraglio
point (where the Commanders in Chief came to take their leave of Sultan
Ibrahim) they divided into two Squadrons; one of which consisting of 20
Galleys, under the Command of Beker Basha, took their Voyage into the Black
Sea; the remainder under the Captain Pasha, sailed for Cyprus, with intention
to do Justice on the Pasha of that Island, whose Riches gained by Oppression,
had (...) him from due Obedience toward his Prince; and being arrived there,
without rumor or noise, giving signs of good will and respects toward the
Pasha, one day he sent to invite him aboard to banquet with him; where the
Pasha foolishly coming, and having well eaten and drank with him, his
entertainment had not time to digest, before he breathed his last; for being on
his departure, the Slaves assaulted him, and strangled him by Order of the
Captain Pasha. No other matters remarkable did the Turkish Fleet perform this
Year at Sea, before they returned again to their Winter Quarters. Howsoever
this Year proved favorable to many poor Christians in Slavery; for there
happening a most miserable Plague in Alexandria, which relaxed the spirits of
men, and rendered every one so negligent in his Office, that about 4000 Slaves
taking advantage of such remissness in their Guardians, seized a Ship in Port,
and crouding themselves therein, set Sail, and landed some of their people at
Candia, others at Malta, the rest at Marseillia, by which means they happily
regained their liberty: on which encouragement 800 more adventuring to perform
the like, and fighting in a body at the Gate of Alexandria, 300 of them were
slain, the rest leaped into a Gally, which though without Oars, had yet her
Sails to the Yard, and having the fortune of a favorable wind, arrived safe at
Candia; in like manner they became free, taking convenient passage from thence
to diverse parts of Christendom; these Slaves were all redemanded by the Grand
Signior from the Venetians; in which no satisfaction being given, was one
cause, and original of that War which afterward ensued.

And now the Year 1644. being begun, Ragotski who was never contented Moravia,
situated within the Mountains which he challenged as the Inheritance of his
Son, besides other pretenses, which he made in right of Bethlem Gabor. To
forward which designs, moved with an inveterate enmity to the Austrian Family,
he endeavored to win the hearts of the Commonalty with a plausible Declaration
for Liberty, and to throw off the Yoke which had so long gauled the neck of
Hungary; whereby having raised an Army of 20000 Horse, and 30000 Foot, he
entered, and spoiled the Country of his old Enemy and Neighbor the Count of
Humanay an Hungarian, took Solnock by Force, and Besieged Filek, and Cassovia;
for suppression of which Insurrection, and Rebellion of Ragotski, the Emperor
was forced to a War, and having Rendezvoused his Army at Presburg, the Conduct
thereof was committed to the Charge of Count Puecaim. The Turks having
intelligence of these Preparations for War, Commanded 20 thousand men to march
into those parts, to oppose these Combustions on the Frontiers; with 6000 of
which the Count Puecaim Encountering furiously, Assaulted and routed them. And
in the mean time Ragotski laying aside all care for the War in Hungary, applied
himself to Relieve Olimz in Moravia, but in his March thither he was recalled
by the Inhabitants of Sendar, which is a Castle erected on a Hill near
Cassovia, offering to surrender unto him; but the Governor Forgatz, and the
German Garrison opposing this Mutiny of the People; a Civil War began amongst
themselves, but at length the advantage falling unto Ragotski, the Gates were
opened unto the Transilvanians; with which success their spirits being raised
to higher matters, they proceeded forward, until General Getz with a strong
Body, gave a stop unto their progress. And thus was the Fire of War rekindled
again in Hungary, by means of Ragotski, to whom notwithstanding the Turks would
never adhere, being well acquainted with his turbulent and unsteady humor. In
the mean time the Emperor dispatched his Ambassador, with rich Presents to
the Sultan, desiring him to forbear giving farther assistance unto Ragotski;
but what between skirmishes, propositions, and treaties, matters were not
composed until the fourteenth of August, 1645. at which time all Articles were
concluded, and signed between the Emperor and Ragotski.

But to return now to the Affairs of Constantinople; Sultan Ibrahim having the
Fortune of active and prudent Ministers, attended entirely to his Pastimes and
Pleasures without prejudice to his interest, and the state of his Empire; for
the first Vizier being faithful and vigilant, immediately cut off those Members
with the Sword which he suspected in the least manner inclinable to Sedition;
amongst which were the Pashaws of Aleppo, and Caffa. For by this kind of
seasonable and speedy remedies, the Plethory of the Ottoman Empire is commonly
evacuated, and the Body Politic thereof restored to its pristine state of
health and safety.

In like manner the Valede Sultana, being a Woman of great courage and
abilities, attended carefully to the welfare of her Son, whom She sometimes
decked up, and set forth as a property of Majestic Gravity to the People,
whilst She her self assumed the Authority, and carried all things with a high
and imperious spirit; and being ambitious to be feared as well as honored, She
laid violent hands on the first Vizier, called Mustapha, and strangled him; for
though he was an active and faithful Minister, yet because he passed something
on her which She imagined did favor of Neglect, and because she apprehended
his power, which was greatly confirmed by the interest and favor he had with
the Janisaries, and their Favorers, she resolved to make him an example, as
well of her revenge, as of her Power; after whose death the charge of first
Vizier was conferred on Mahomet the Pasha of Damascus.

The same Fate befell the Captain Pasha, who was likewise strangled for having
over boldly, or peremptorily made answer to some impertinencies of the Grand
Signior; and his Office was afterward conferred on Beker Pasha of Rhodes. With
such rigor as this, do the Sultans govern, who resolve to be obeyed, and to
have their Commands executed without delay or contradiction.

Whilst these matters were in agitation, the Tartars forgetful of their The
Tartars make incursions into Poland notwithstanding the Peace.
late Peace, made another incursion with thirty thousand Men into Russia,
against whom Konispolski having made head with twenty thousand Men only,
overthrew them, and killed twelve thousand, and took three thousand Prisoners,
pursuing the rest to the Borders of Wallachia. In like manner Wisnowick, a
noble Polander, happily encountered another Party of Tartars, as they were on
their return from spoiling the Countries of Moscovia, of whom, having killed
ten thousand Men, he recovered their Booty, and sent the rest home naked and
empty. This was the true and most effectual means for the Polanders to avenge,
and right their injuries, and more prevalent than Ambassies, and Messages of
Complaint unto the Port, which we have experienced since, and in the present
Reign of the Son of Ibrahim, to have been so far from producing matter worthy
so much as the Charge of the Ambassador, that they have been retorted with
ignominy, and affronts. But here Ibrahim perceiving how the Poles had avenged
themselves with their own Sword, would seem to approve of the action, which he
could not hinder; and to appear a sincere observer of the peace, he deposed the
Tartar Han for his unlawful incursions, which was such a satisfaction to the
Crown of Poland, as they never could obtain by force of Justice, Complaints,
and Virtue of passive Valor, until their active fortitude took their cause in
hand, and pleaded for them.

On the 19th. of March of this year a fourth Son was born to Sultan Ibrahim,
and on the 19th. of February following, being in the year 1645, notwithstanding
all the Reports of his impotency, was born a fifth Son, named Solomon, to the
Great Contentment of his People.

The Turks Galleys this Year under the Command of Beker their new Captain Pasha
made an attempt on the Coast of Calabria, bringing from thence two hundred
Slaves; and attempting the like near Corton paid for their former Booty, with
the loss of five hundred Men.

Howsoever, the Galleys of Malta being six in number, had better success as to
themselves, though the consequences thereof proved fatal to the Venetians,
having given the first occasion of that long War, which afterward ensued
between the Turk and them. The truth of which Story is this, free of all
Romance or Fable, which the Knights of St. John or Malta would mix therewith:
It happened that the Kuzlir Aga, The story of the Kuzlir Aga, his Slave and Son
taken by the Malteses.
or Chief Eunuch which governs the Women in the Signiors Seraglio, having cast
his Eye on a fair Slave, then set to sale by a Persian Merchant, became so
enamoured of her that he purchased her for himself, under the notion of a
Virgin, at the price of 450. Dollars; but the Eunuch had not long entertained
this Lady in his service, before she proved with Child, not by him (you may
conceive) if you understand how the Eunuchs of this Country are disarmed of
their virility: at which he was so greatly offended, that he banished her from
his Society, and confined her to the house of his Steward. The time being come
for her to be delivered of her great Belly, it proved a Son, and some months
after, the Aga being desirous to see the Babe, was so pleased with the Aspect
of it, that he resolved to adopt it for his own, ordering it Clothes, and other
necessaries agreeable to its Condition. It happened that about that time Sultan
Mahomet (which now reigns) was then born, and there wanting a Nurse for the
Child, this beautiful Slave was preferred to the honor; so that she was
entertained near two years in the Seraglio: during which time Sultan Ibrahim
took such an affection to the Nurses Boy, that he loved him better than his own
eldest Son, who was of a bad Complexion, and of no better air in his Face than
his Father, and took great delight to play and sport with him, at which the
Mother of Sultan Mahomet was so displeased, that She could not longer endure
either Nurse or her Boy, and for her sake took so much displeasure against the
Kuzlir Aga, who preferred her, that neither his presence nor service were
acceptable; and so violent she was in her passion, that one day, when Sultan
Ibrahim was playing with his Women and Children in the Garden, according to his
usual Custom, throwing them one on the other into the Water, the Queen grew so
furious, that she could not contain longer from venting her Anger in unhansome
terms, and Jealousy against the Nurse and her Son. At which the Sultan being
much displeased, and being ill natured (if we may speak boldly of an Emperor)
took her Son which is now Sultan Mahomet, out of her Arms, and with some few
Curses swung him into a Cistern, where he had been certainly drowned, had not
every one in that instance applied themselves to say him; at which time he
received the mark or scar he wears at this day in his Forehead. All these
matters served for farther fuel to nourish the implacable Spirit of the Queen,
which the Kuzlir Aga well observing, judged it prudence to give way to her
Fury, and so begged his Dismission from the Court, together with his Slave and
Son, and that having visited Mecha, according to his Law, he might enjoy a
retirement in Egypt, which is the Portion of banished Eunuchs.

The Queen easily consented hereunto, nor was it difficult to procure the
License of the Sultan, who was as easily persuaded to any by those who were
about him; wherefore the Eunuch having provided to be gone, Shipped himself
with his great Treasure, on the Fleet which was now designed, and ready to
depart for Alexandria, which consisted of three Ships; one a great Gallion, and
two others of lesser burden, and 7 Saiks; these having at the beginning of
their Voyage found contrary Winds, put into Rhodes; from whence loosing with
more favorable weather, they unfortunately met with 6 Malta Galleys,
excellently well The Engagement of the Turkish, with the Malta Galleys.
Manned, and provided. The Admiral Gally immediately Boarded one of the Saiks,
and took her, Manned only by Greeks; by whom they were informed of the
condition, quality, and Cargo, of the greater Ship, which gave heat, and
resolution to the Soldiery. In like manner, with little Opposition, the
Galleys called the St. John, and Joseph, possessed themselves of one of the
lesser Ships, which being laden only with Timber, brought from the Black Sea,
to build Ships at Alexandria, was of little value, having 40 Turks aboard, 8
Women, and a Child which sucked at the Mothers Breast. In the mean time, the
three other Galleys, called the St. Mary, St. Lorenzo, and Victory, attacked
the great Gallion, and having cast their Iron Graples into the Ship, with the
motion of the Ship, the Irons gave way and broke, only that of the St. Lorenzo
held fast, so that the whole force of the Ship, both of small and great Shot,
was poured in upon the Gally, to their damage and loss of men. In the mean time
the Admiral Gally came in to their assistance, and Assaulting the Ship on the
other Quarter, made a Diversion of their men, and having thrown in their
Graples, they scaled the sides of the Gallion, as if it had been a Fortress;
where being entered, they remained for some time at handy-blows with the Turks;
but at length, all the Galleys coming to their help, having made an end of
subduing the other Ships, the Turks were forced to retire under Covert of their
Decks, which they defended still with singular valor, wounding the Christians
with their half Pikes through the Gratings. But in fine, the Captains of the
Galleys, perceiving that this was not the way to compel them to a speedy
Surrender, ordered several Musketeers out of every Gally, to fire in at the
Windows, and loop-holes of the Ship; by which having killed their Commander in
Chief, their Valor and Constancy began to fail, and desirous to save their
lives with loss of Liberty and Estates, they cast down their Arms, and begged
mercy.

In this Engagement were killed the Captain of the St. Mary, and seven
Gavaliers, of which five were French, one Italian, and one German; the Admiral
himself and the Captain of his Gally were both wounded; 79 Soldiers and
Mariners killed, and 132 wounded; of the Turks it is not certain how many fell,
in regard as they were killed, according to Custom they cast them Overboard;
the Eunuch himself though always educated in the softness of the Seraglio, and
in the Conversation of the Female Court, yet in the end concluded his days like
one of the Masculine Sex, fighting valiantly with his Sword, until overwhelmed
by his Enemies: by which it is observable, that those persons loss not their
Courage with their virile parts; for it has been known in former days, how
that Eunuchs have been Generals in the Turkish and other Armies, and Conducted
their affairs with admirable Courage and Success.

The prize which the Christians had gained in this manner, was very
considerable; for besides the Gold, Silver, and Jewels, which were theTreasure
this Eunuch had amassed in the Reign of three several Sultans; they gained 350
Slaves, besides 30 Women, some of which were young and Virgins; so that there
was not a Soldier or Seaman who had not a considerable share of (...)
proportioned unto him. With this Fortune, towing their prizes, they in a short
time came to an Anchor in the Port of Calismene, in the Island of Candia,
called anciently Phenice, on the South Side of the Island, remote from all
Venetian Garrisons; and where (as it is reported) they were supplied with no
Provisions, excepting a small quantity of Biskot, which was furnished by a
Country Fellow, who for that very cause was shot to death: Front hence the
Galleys departing, arrived in Malta with their Prizes, where they were received
in great Triumph. The young Son of the Eunuch (for so we call him) was reported
to be a Son of the Grand Signior, sent into Egypt to be Educated, and was
accordingly saluted, (...) and reverenced by the Grand Master; the same Opinion
was dispersed and confirmed in all parts of Europe, and the Error for many
years maintained at the expenoe of the * Of the h nights of Malta.
Religion, until the Boy growing up to a good Age, and not judged worthy of a
Ransom, or enquiry after by the Turks, it was thought convenient for him to put
off his State, and Greatness, and become a Friar, and I think a Dominican, and
this is he who now goes under the name of the Padre Ottomano.

The news hereof arriving at the Ottoman Court, Sultan Ibrahim was transported
with Anger, threatening Destruction and Ruin unto Malta; besides he showed a
most inveterate Passion against the Venetians, for not guarding the Seas from
his Enemies, and for relieving them in their Ports. In which Rage and Fury, he
put his own Captain Pasha to death, and Summoned the Christian Ambassadors,
braving them all for the little respect was shown to his proper Shipping; and
in short, was angry with all, but reserved the effect of his wrath to be poured
on the Venetians, to which this accident administered the first original, and
will afford us ample matter of discourse in this ensuing History.

For the Grand Signior first made his Complaints against Venice, to their
Minister, or Bailo, then residont at Constantinople called Soranco; alleging,
that contrary to the Articles of Peace, they had afforded Provisions and
Entertainment to his Enemies in Candia, and at a time when having made prize of
his own Ship, and Domestiques of his Seraglio, they seemed with more
extraordinary demonstrations of Hospitality than usual, to receive them into
their Harbors. To which the Bailo made Answer, That his Majesty was ill
informed of the true state of those matters; for that the Port to which the
Malteses came, had neither Castle nor Fortress belonging to it; but was an
open, wide, and unfortified place; for if the Grand Signior is not able to
defend those Ships from careening as they have often done, before Rhodes it
self, how was it possible for the Venetians to drive them from the Seas, and
deny them the use of that Salt Water, which has neither Fort nor Castle to
reach and Command them? With which Answer Ibrahim seemed to remain satisfied;
and matters appeared so appeased on the side of the Venetians, that Soranco,
though a person of a most acute and penetrating judgment, imagined nothing less
than a War: and though he was assured otherwise, by something that the English
Ambassador had discovered in that matter; yet because it came not first from
the report of one of his own Interpreters, he would not seem to believe, or
give credit thereunto, notwithstanding the strong probabilities that might
persuade it. Indeed Christian Ministers must necessarily, with much
difficulties, and less inspection govern, and penetrate affairs in the Turkish
Court than in any other; because access to the great Ministers is seldom
privately, or familiarly admitted, from whence wise men most commonly take
their measures, and observations; but on the contrary, are forced to act all by
the Negotiation of their Druggermen or Interpreters; and as they hear with
their Ears, so are they oftentimes beholding to their reflections; which how
subject they may be to error, is best known to those Ministers, who have
practiced much, and long in that Court.

And in this manner Ibrahim covered his design against Candia, by pretense of
making War upon Malta, to which he had lately received so just a provocation.
To this enterprise none instigated him more, than a certain Hagia, or Tutor,
which had accompanied him in the time of his solitude, and had instructed him
in the first Principles of the Mohammedan Doctrine; he was a subtle, and
understanding Man, and one who kept a secret correspondence in the Christian
Courts; for being Master of what Gold he pleased, he paid for his intelligence
with liberality and secrecy; and though he was no Prophet, yet he pretended to
be a Magician, or Conjurer, or one that had a Command or Sovereignty over
familiar Spirits; an excellency greatly admired, and reverenced by the Turks.
This man had for a long Season attended an opportunity to promote a War against
Venice; esteeming their Territories very convenient to be laid to the Turkish
Dominions, and their force an under-Match for the puissance of the Ottoman
Empire. And now this accident provokeing the desire of the Turks to this War,
and the opportunity appearing commodious to cover the design, under pretense of
Assailing Malta, it was secretly resolved to attempt the Island of Candia; for
as its strength and situation made it the Key to all the other Isles of the
Archipelago, so it would be the Bullwark of the Maritime Countries, from whence
the passage would be short and easy into Africa; from whence the Galleys might
advantagiously relieve Cyprus, and guard the Fleet from Egypt, and from thence
might be opened a Door to invade Sicily, and the other Parts of Italy. On these
Considerations War being resolved against Candia, reports divulged the design
only against Malta, and for that end, orders were issued for building and
fitting a hundred Galleys, and as many Ships of War; and Commands sent into
Barbary for assistance of all their Naval Forces, and the day appointed for
Rendezvous, and departure, all which time the enterprise was kept secret, and
by no more symptoms suspected, unless by the unusual caresses the Turks at that
time over-acted in their officious kindness toward the Venetian Bailo.

The report of these great preparations slying over all Parts of Europe, was
entertained at Malta, with some apprehensions, as being the Place on which all
the storm was to refund its fury. Whereupon the Cavaliers or Knights of that
Place summoning a Council, resolved to cite all the Fraternity to repair to the
defense of their Capital Seat, and of their order and patrimony: Likewise
Letters were directed to the several Officers, to prepare and send Powder,
Match, and Lead, iron Buckets, Timber to make Carriages for Cannon, and for
other uses, as also Corn, Biscuit, Salt, Flesh and Fish, Vinegar, Wine, and all
other sorts of Ammunition. They likewise instituted some Officers over the
waters, to see that the Fountains and Conduits should be made clear, which were
to serve the City, and that those without, that were to remain in the
possession of the Enemy, should be carefully and artisicially poisoned, all the
Mills remaining in the Fields were transported into the Town, the Doors and
Windows of Wood belonging to the Peasants houses were taken down, and carried
into the City, with all their Utensils, and what else was portable, so that
nothing remained but the wide Fields, and an open Air to breathe in.

In the mean time, the Venetians being a wise and jealous State, suspected the
worst of all Events, and feared what their Minister at Constantinople could not
discover, which caused them to make some preparations; but yet with that
dexterity and secresy, as not to render them diffident of the Turks
proceedings. For to be jealous of a Friend, is sometimes to make him an Enemy,
and distrust always argues disaffection, which Prudence teaches to conceal from
those who are more powerful than our selves. Some were notwithstanding of
opinion, that the Complaints of Ibrahim were only artisices to extract the
Blood of Gold, which they judged sit to administer, if it were possible to
satisfy the Appetite of those Leaches. Others were of a contrary sense, and
would by no means admit it for good counsel, or policy, to buy their Peace of
the Turk; for besides that it was disagreeable to the Crandear of Venice, it
was but a shadow that they purchased, since their Enemies could on every slight
occasion reassume what they had sold, and make the menaces of War, and the Sale
of Peace serve them for a perpetual Fountain, and Mine of Gold and Treasure;
and that since it was necessary at one time or other to cast off this yoke of
Tyranny, the sooner it was done, the advantage would be the greater, and the
honor more apparent to the World, seeming to make War rather their choice than
their last remedy. Howsoever, orders were given to the Bailo, with all Prudence
and Art to touch gently the Pulse of the Turks, to discover if money would
redeem the present quiet of their State. But the resentment that the Turks had
conceived was grown apparent in the comportment toward the Bailo; for having
one day demanded Audience, he attended several hours without admission; yet
when the Ambassador of Ragotski come to the Vizier, he no sooner entered the
house than he was received: and at the same time it was told the Bailo, that he
might retire, for that there was no place nor season at present to afford him
Audience. In the mean time, Ibrahim himself walked often to the Arsenal, to
forward and hasten his preparations, laying an Embargo on all Strangers Vessels
in all Ports of the Ottoman Dominions. Orders were likewise dispatched to
Thebes, Negropont, and other Parts of Greece for making Biscuit, and to Morca
for cutting and squaring Timbers, and sacking Wools to fill up Trenches; in all
which rumor and stir there was no other discourse but of Malta, and of
throwing that Island into the Sea with the Shovel and Mattock, and rendering it
the most dreadful example in the World of the Ottoman Rage and Greatness.

With such preludes as these began a War of long continuance, maintained with
various successes for diverse Years, the fatal issue whereof we our selves have
seen and heard. But it is strange to consider, that an Exploit so Martial as
this should commence in the Reign of a Sultan wholly given up to his Pleasures,
and so swallowed in sensuality, that all those luxurious and wanton actions
which are recounted of Sardanapalus and Heliogabalus are flat and faint
Similitudes of that prodigious effeminacy, in which this Sultan outdid all
other examples of former Ages.

Amber was the common perfumes which burned perpetually in the Women's
Apartments, and the common Sauce to most of his Viands; not perhaps because it
so much pleased his Palate, as that it was a provocative, and incitement to his
Lusts. And this puts me in mind of a story I have heard of an English Merchant,
living then at Galata, who was master of a rare piece of Ambergriese, which was
in form like a Pyramid; the News whereof was told to the Grand Signior late at
Night, when the smoke of the Perfumes began to abate: Which so soon as he
heard, though it was near Midnight, he dispatched a Messenger to call the
Merchant with his Ambergriese; who being knocked out of his Bed in haste, by
the importunity of the Officer, came to the Seraglio Gate two hours before day,
where he attended until it was broad light, and then without more words found a
Market for his Amber, and before his departure received thirteen thousand
Dollars. The Female Court was then extremely rich and splendid, all Italy was
scarce able to supply it with Silks, and Cloth of Gold; so that the Trade was
in those days flourishing above other times, and gave great employment to
English Shipping; and so impatient were the Women for their Gay Clothes, that
so soon as the news of a Ship from Italy came, and that she was arrived within
the Castles of the Hellespont, but there detained by contrary winds, Galleys
were immediately dispatched to bring up their Silks, which they oftentimes
forced away without any account or price made with the Merchant; of which that
worthy Gentleman, Sir Thomas Bendysh, then Ambassador, complaining to the
Vizier, and finding no other relief than good words, resolved on an expedient
of making known his cause to the Grand Signior, which was this. In Turkey they
have a Custom, that when any one receives a notable injury, or injustice from
the Chief and great Ministers of State, they put fire on their heads, and
running to the Grand Signior, no man can hinder or deny them access to his
presence. In like manner the English Ambassador not being able to obtain
satisfaction from the Vizier, in return to his many Complaints, drew out all
the English Ships in Galata, which were then 13 in number, and drawing in their
Guns, and shutting the Ports, put fire on every Yard Arm of their Ships, and
came to an Anchor just before the Seraglio. The Customer being the first that
espied this unusual sight, immediately apprehended the reason, and sent to
acquaint the Vizier thereof in all haste; the Vizier likewise fearful lest the
Complaints should by this means come to the Grand Signiors Ear, sent the
Customer aboard with a considerable part of the money, and desired that the
Fires might be extinguished, promising faithfully to comply in payment of the
rest; hereupon Consultation being had between the Ambassador and the
Merchants, the Ships returned to their Stations, not seeming to have been taken
notice of by those in the Seraglio.

And notwithstanding the great number of Women within the Seraglio, all which
were at the Devotion of the Sultan; yet Ibrahim not being contented herewith,
passing one day to Scutari, had by chance cast his eye on an object which much
pleased him: what it was, becomes not the modesty of my Pen to relate; but
being returned to his Seraglio, he sent Orders to the Vizier, to seek out for
him the biggest, and best proportioned Woman which was to be found in all
Constantinople, and the parts thereabouts. Hereupon Emissaries were dispatched
into all Quarters of the City; at length they happily procured a huge tall
Armenian Woman, well proportioned according to her height, and a Giantess for
her Stature; which being found, she was presently washed and perfumed in the
Bath, and as richly Clothed and Adorned as the shortness of time would permit:
There was no great difficulty to persuade her to become Turk, having so high
preferment in her prospect. So that being introduced to the Grand Signiors
presence, he became immediately Enamoured, and was so pleased with her Society,
that he preferred her before all the Women of his Court; an Evidence whereof he
gave, in that he could not deny her in any request she could make, and
particularly about that time the Pashaluck of Damascus being void, this Woman
begged it for her self, substituting another in the Office, who was accountable
to her for all the profits and emoluments thereof: By these particulars of
favor the Queen Mother becoming jealous, one day inviting her to Dinner,
caused her to be Strangled, and persuaded Ibrahim that she died suddenly of a
violent Sickness, at which he poor Man was greatly afflicted.

But not to insist long on these luxurious pastimes, we shall return again to
matters of higher concernment: Ibrahim had now understood, that the Venetians
growing jealous of his Preparations, began likewise to Arm, and provide for the
worst; which being in no wise pleasing to the Turks, who were apprehensive that
their Marine Forces consisted most in surprise, caused Ibrahim to complain of
the defensive posture, in which they Arrayed themselves, alleging that
suspicions of this nature argued no hearty disposition toward their Friends,
nor was any thing more contrary to a good correspondence, or more disobliging
than such like Jealousies, which often times beget that enmity which was never
designed; and farther it was judged necessary if possible, to dissuade the
Bailo from a belief of any Hostility designed against his Republic; to
inculcate which none was esteemed so proper an instrument as the old cheating
Hogia, who was the first motive to the War; a Preacher who imagined that the
excellency of his Religion afforded him a privilege to falsify, lie and
commit any act for advantage thereof, though never so contrary to truth and
Morality. This Santone with the testimony of one or two more grand Professors,
with many Asseverations and Vows, endeavored to persuade the Bailo, of the
Grand Signiors good intentions toward Venice, and his fixed resolutions to
destroy Malta. And though the concernment which those godly Elders showed, and
the earnestness they used, whereby to inculcate a credence to what they
affirmed, were enough to discover their contrary intentions; and though it is
said, that the Venetians could not heartily believe what they so strongly
suspected; yet hereby, and by the common vogue of the people, they abated much
of their caution and heat, which they otherwise had used in due preparations
and provisions against an evil so fatal and destructive in the sequel. The
first Act of Hostility was committed by Giacomo da Riva, who The beginning of
the War.
being sent for Sopraveditor to Tino, was in his way to touch at Candia, there
to deliver Ammunition and Provisions for War; but being encountered by some
barbarous Vessels, who assailed him for a Merchants Ship of small force, were
received so warmly that he sunk one of them, with which the rest left him and
fled, relating at Constantinople that they had been ill treated by the
Venetians, and that they gave the first Assault upon them, because that they
were called to the assistance and service of the Grand Signior.

The Fleet and Land Forces being already put to Sea, the report and opinion
still continued, that the War was designed against Malta; wherefore such as
apprehended the hazard, and were acquainted with the difficulty of such an
enterprise, began to inform the Grand Signior how impossible it was, that this
action should be accompanied with good success. To which arguments he made no
other reply than by a seeming obstinacy, resolved with the Ottoman Sword to cut
all those knots and difficulties which opposed him in the work. At length one
Salee Efendi, a Preacher, who had obtained some more than ordinary esteem with
the Grand Signior, advised him, that before he commenced a work of that
importance, he should inform himself of the true state of that place, from a
certain Aga, who was lately returned from Malta. The Grand Signior being very
willing to hear any thing of this nature, called the Aga, who related to him
how impregnable both the City and Castle were; how the Knights were provided
against all Assaults; that the Island it self is only a Rock, not containing
Earth enough for an Army to entrench; that the approaches must be made by the
Pick-Axe and Mattock, it being all Stone. In short, it was not a place to be
taken in one Summer, and the Winter coming on, it affording no shelter, nor
provisions of it self, was not capable of relief in Seas so stormy, and from
Countries so remote, without hazards, losses, and frequent Shipwracks. Ibrahim,
who had designed all along to make War upon Candia, seemed little concerned or
moved at this Discourse. The Galleys and Ships which were now all in a
readiness, being come forth to the Seraglio point, the Grand Signior entered
his Grand Chiosk, situated on the Bank of the Sea; where the Selictar Aga,
General, and all the Chief Commanders, came to perform the usual Ceremonies of
Obedience and Duty before their departure. At this solemn Assembly the Grand
Signior declared, that his intentions were to make War upon the Infidels,
according as every one should understand by his respective Commissions, which
should now be delivered unto them: That he expected the highest demonstrations
of Courage in them imaginable, and what was agreeable to the Conductors of the
Ottoman Armies: That reward and punishment were in his hands, and that he
resolved to dispense them according to their merits: That they should not doubt
of all due assistance and succors; for he had so well contrived, and so justly
fitted all his measures, that he was already provided of Men, Timber,
Ammunition, and money sufficient to maintain and carry on this War for seven
Years. At which they all gave a shout, and declared, that they were ready to
spend their Blood and Lives in Execution of his Commands. Whereupon every one
received a rich Coftan, or Vest, and the General a Scimitar set with Diamonds;
who being a young Man of about 26. or 27. Years of Age, had a Council of six
graver Pasha's allowed him, and then the Commission for the War was brought
forth sealed, with Orders not to open it, until they were past the Dardanelli.
Hereat the noise of great and small shot from the Galleys and Ships, resounded
through all Constantinople, and the Commanders repairing to their Vessels, the
Assembly broke up, and every thing was put in a posture to make Sail.

It was now the last day of April, 1645. old style, when the Fleet first
Barbary, 2. Mahons, or Galleasses, one great Gallion called the Sultana, 10.
Ships of Alexandria, 2. of Tunis, and 10. of English and Dutch Ships, which
coming to Constantinople for Trade, were there pressed into the Service, with
about 300. Saiks, and Caramussals, which carried Soldiers, Provisions,
Ammunitions, and Utensils for War. Their Militia consisted of 7000. Janisaries,
14000. Spahees, and about 50000. Timariots, and other Soldiers, with about
3000. Pioniers; these all were to Rendezvous at Scio; where they arrived the
7th of May. But before their departure from Constantinople, the Bailo Soranco,
or the Venetian Ambassador, thought fit in Complement, and for discovery, to
make a visit to the Captain Pasha, by whom he was received with frank courtesy
and assurance of Friendship; so that though he suspected the worst, yet could
he collect no certain assurances of Peace, or War; however he advised Signior
Cornaro, then Governor of Candia, that though he could not certainly penetrate
into the bottom of the Turks design, yet he apprehended that the storm might
fall on that Kingdom, understanding that the Captain Pasha was not well
inclined toward the most Serene Republic: wherefore, he ought to be watchful
and circumspect, yet with as little demonstration of jealousy as was possible;
so that if the Turks should there arrive, he should afford them all
conveniences of Watering, Provisions, and other refreshments.

The Fleet being departed from Scio, for Napoli di Romagnia, the Northern Wind
so freshned, and blew so hard, that the Galleys were separated, and forced to
put into diverse Ports, and the Saiks and Caramussals to Anchor at Micono, and
Tino. At the latter of which belonging to the Venetians, they had license to
Water, and were refreshed with such Provisions as the Island afforded; and now
after this slurry of Wind, the Fleet being again united, they were seen off at
Sea from Cerigo, an Island of the Venetians at the Mouth of the Archipelago,
and sailing toward the Channel of Braccio de Maina; and the next day 9.
Galleys, a Gallion, and a Brigantine, made toward the Isle of Cerigo, and sent
a Letter ashore by a Boat to the Proveditor, from the Pasha of Rhodes,
demanding their usual present of Coffee and Sugar, which was given them, they
assuring all friendship, and real good intentions toward the People, and
Dominions of Venice. But in the mean time a Satia laden with Arms and
Ammunition from Venice, bound for Retimo, unhappily falling into the Turkish
Fleet was intercepted by them, and taken, which unmasked all the design, and
made the Turks appear in their true colors, notwithstanding all their
religious Protestations, and outwardly fair Comportment, the usual disguise of
the Mohammedan sincerity.

Toward the end of May the Turkish Fleet was discovered from Carabuso, a small
Fortress of the Venetians, some distance off at Sea, standing to the Westward,
which gave some jealousy to them at Candia; and being compared with some
precedent Acts, as that of sounding the depth of water about St. Theodoro with
a Brigantine, (which is a small Rock lying off of Canea) which pretended to
come from Sancta Maura with Turkey Merchants, afforded undeniable grounds of
assurance to those in Candia, that the War was designed against them;
howsoever, the Ottoman Fleet rendezvousing again at Navarino, a place far
distant from Candia, altered their apprehensions at Venice, and elsewhere of
this War, deeming it now certain, that this design had no other aim or mark but
that of Malta. But this opinion was no sooner entertained, than it was confuted
by open acts of hostility; for the Captain Pasha being arrived at Cape Colonna,
by some called Sunio, immediately dispatched a Brigantine to Constantinople,
with advice of his proceedings and intentions to pass directly for Candia;
whereupon it was thought seasonable to publish the War against Venice, which
was performed with committing the Ambassador Soranco to Prison, and giving
orders through all the Archipelago to destroy or enslave all the Subjects of
that Republic. And here the Turk practiced his usual beginnings of War with
more than ordinary caution; for though with other Princes, whose Territories
border on him by Land, he usually endeavors to strike at the same time when he
gives the salutations of Peace; Yet here being to contend at Sea, where he is
conscious his Forces are inferior to those of Venice, he practiced all those
feigned artisices, confirmed with as many holy Vows and Protestations, as their
Religion hallows, and makes lawful, when they can bring advantage and increase
to the Mohammedan Faith.

But though the Venetian Republic was so politic as outwardly to demonstrate
a religious confidence of their potent Neighbor, whom they were conscious not
to have provoked by any breach of Capitulations; yet were not so secure of his
Faith, and so easy to believe his fair dissimulations, as not prudently to
provide against the utmost effects of his power and treachery. Wherefore,
whilst the Turk prepared, they armed likewise secretly, made considerable
Levies without noise, commissionated thirty extraordinary Commanders of
Galleys, took up seventeen English, and Dutch ships into their service, armed
out two Galliasses extraordinary, and when the Turk had unmasked his design,
they then imparted their condition to all the Christian Princes, craving their
succor and assistance to maintain the common Bulwark of Christendom against
the common Enemy. The Galleasses were commanded by Girolamo Morosini; the
Galleys, of which fifteen were made ready, and afterward put to Sea, all
commanded by Noblemen, were under the Conduct of Antonio Capello. Francesco
Molino was made Proveditor General, a Person of untainted Justice and Honor,
and extraordinary zealous and vigilant in the Public Interest, whose
undefatigable labors and care of his Country promoted him afterward to be
Doge of Venice. By his order and counsel extraordinary Proveditours were sent
to Candia, Cerigo, and Tino, as Places most feared, and in danger, and orders
were dispatched to Andrea Cornaro, then General and Inquisitor in Candia, to
arm out twenty Galleys from the Arsenal of Canea; and to promote this design
the better, he hired two English, and one Dutch Ship, then in Port of
Malomocco, to carry unto Candia Timbers sitted, and already squared at Venice,
for building Galleys; besides which he sent Cannon, Corn, and all Ammunition of
War, with fifty thousand Zecchins in Gold for encouragement of the Militia,
with a recruit of two and twenty Companies of Foot, formed and collected out of
diverse Nations. Intelligence being come of the imprisonment of the Bailo at
Constantinople, the Senate by a common and unanimous suffrage elected Francesco
Erizzo, then Doge General of the Sea, judging, that their Arms would prosper
under his Command, which had formerly been successful under the auspicious
Conduct of his Ancestors; and he, though a person of seventy four years, worn
out with Age and Cares of the Public, did yet cheerfully consecrate the
remainder of his days to the service of his Country. But whilst he prepared to
crown the end of his Life with the Glory of this important and generous
enterprise, Death terminated all his intentions, leaving him with the
honorable memory of his past actions, and with a Laurel hanging over his head,
which had his Life continued, had been planted on his Brows. But that this
accident might not give interruption to the weighty Affairs now in hand, Molino
took his place, and proceeded in his Voyage and designs, and arrived with the
Venetian Fleet at the Island of Corfu. In the mean time the Turkish Fleet
careened and fitted themselves at Navarine with all necessaries to assault
Candia; in which interim advice came to Canea, that the Bailo was imprisoned at
Constantinople, by a Letter from Soranco himself; which he had dropped from the
Window of his close restraint, and dispatched by one of his Confidents with a
Vessel, express; which was not sooner arrived than it was that Night confirmed
by all the Beacons or Watch-Towers of the Country; who having discovered the
Turkish Fleet far distant at Sea, gave a general Alarm by the Fires they made.
The next Morning being the (...) of June, they discovered the whole Fleet, near
Cape Spada, which being drawn up in the form of a half Moon, took up a vast
tract of Sea; and sailing slowly with fair Weather, and a smooth Sea, displayed
themselves with the greatest terror imaginable to the Islanders. At length the
lighter Vessels began to edge in with the Bank of Gogna, (which is a place
distant about eighteen miles from Canea) and were followed by the grosser and
heavier part of the Armata. And now before I proceed farther I should make a
pause, and describe the antiquity, the Geography, and the present state of this
famous and renowned Island, but that is already performed so distinctly and
elegantly by other Pens, that it shall be sufficient for me to declare here in
brief terms, how this Kingdom became the Patrimony or Possession of Venice. In
the year 1204. a Sale thereof was made to this Republic, by the Marquis
Bonifaccio of Mont serratto, by an Instrument sealed the 12 th of August at
Adrianople, and signed, and delivered, in the presence of Marco Sanudo, and
Ravano, du Verona, Ambassadors in the time of Enrigo Dandola Doge; but the
people of this Island not consenting unto the sale, opposed themselves against
it, until the Venetians by force of Arms procured their Obedience, and
confirmed their purchase by a double Title. Hereupon such noble Citizens as
adventured their Lives in this acquisition, obtained the Estates of the
Rebellious Greeks, being obliged in proportion to the Lands they held, to
maintain Men and Horse at their own charge, and are therefore called the
Feudatary Cavalry. So that the whole Country is divided into three parts; viz.
the noble Venetians or Cavalry; secondly, the noble Candiots, or Colony, which
were Infantry that came to inhabit from Venice; and thirdly, the Greeks or
Natives of the Country which never rebelled, but took part with the Venetian
State: the first two speak Italian, and are of the Roman Church; the others
speak Greek, and conserve the right of that Religion.

The Ottoman Fleet now touching the shore at Gogna, took Livery and seizin
quietly of that flourishing Isle of Candia, where they Encamped a while to
refresh their Forces, and prepare all things in order to their Conquest. In the
mean time, the news hereof Alarmed all Venice, and not only hastened them in
the expedition of their Fleet, but warmed their applications to all Christian
Princes, from whom they craved help in the general defense of Christendom:
which some at first imagined would have been granted as it was once in the time
of the holy War; or that those whom the Declaration of a common Crusada, or
Devotion, or sense of Religion could not move, yet at least the consideration
of their Countries defense, or the maintenance of a Bulwark of Christendom,
might persuade to wage Arms against the Turk, as a Common Enemy: but what cold
apprehensions the Christian Princes entertained hereof, both the faint supplies
and assistances they administered, and their bloody and vigorous Wars one
against another, have abundantly testified, to the fatal loss and ruin of that
Country. And though in the beginning there were better hopes, by means of the
Popes earnest intercession with all the Princes of Italy, to whom he showed a
fair Example, by uniting his own Galleys with the Venetian Fleet, and amongst
the rest prevailed also with the Republic of Genoua, to employ their Galleys
in this noble enterprise, which tended to the Glory of God, and the common
safety and preservation of Italy: yet that leaven of vain punctilio's, which
has so often betrayed the Christian Cause to the advantage of the Turk, gave a
stop for some time to these proceedings. For before they would enter into
Arms, they desired the Genoeses, that the right of bearing the Flag should
first be determined in favor of their Admiral, before that of Toscany, or
Malta: and though the Pope to take away this occasion of dispute, proposed to
have no other Flag worn besides his own, under which all Italian Princes
without impeachment of their honor, as Auxiliaries, and Military Adventurers
might promiseuously wage War; yet this could not appear satisfactory to the
Genoeses, who not only took this occasion to demand the precedence before
Toscany and Malta; to which the G. Duke (who was not inferior in State, and
superior in Title) and the Malteses (who time out of mind, and by Decree of
Charles the Fifth, claimed Precedence on the Seas before them) would never
assent; but also thought sit to avail themselves in this Conjuncture, to obtain
from the Pope the Grant of a Royal Court; and that treatment which is given to
Kings, or Crowned Heads. But because these demands seemed to contain those
difficulties in them, which could not be granted without the manifest
displeasure of other Princes; the Pope resolved to afford what assistance he
could from himself, and therefore granted a Leavy of a thousand Foot out of his
own Dominions, with free liberty to buy what Ammunition, and Provisions were to
be found in the Ecclesiastical State, with imposition of a double tith or tenth
on the goods and Dominions of the Clergy; so that these succors of the Pope,
and the Auxiliary Forces of Naples, Toscany, and Malta, under the Command of
Prince Ludovisio, General of the Church, being united to the Venetian Fleet,
did speedily compose a most puissant and formidable Force; however by reason of
dissentions amongst the Commanders, and other misfortunes derived from thence,
to the Christian Arms, nothing succeeded fortunately this Year. For the Turks
having gained their landing at first without opposition, overthrew the
Christians in several small Skirmishes, and afterward forced Canea, the second
City of that Island, which they took with much blood and slaughter of the
Christians.

The Turks having made so successful a progress this first Year, as to Retimo;
in defense of which, the General Andrea Cornaro, lost his Life by a Musket
shot. Nor more successful were the Venetians this Year at Sea; for what with
quarrels amongst the Commanders, and with their coldness, and negligence in
their business, they suffered the Turkish Vessels to pass freely, without
giving them that interruption which was very facil to men resolute and
concerned: Nor was the opportunity which presented to ruin the Turkish Fleet
made use of, then lying half disarmed, and ill provided, at the Isle of St.
Theodoro, (which is a Rock opposite to Canea) where at that time it is believed
they might all have been burned, had the occasion been improved, agreeable to
that advantage which then offered: so that toward the latter end of the Year,
the General Molino returning home, either by reason of some distemper, or by
revocation from the Senate, which seemed to be ill satisfied with his ill
fortune, or his ill management of the public Affairs; he was dismissed from
his high Charge. And Gio. Cipello, Procurator of St. Mark, was constituted in
his place.

This new General early in the Year departed from Venice, having under

Whilst Capello remained with the best part of the Fleet at Candia, Tomaso
Morosini, Admiral of the Ships, showed himself in a Bravado Moro ini braves the
Turkish Fleet.
with 22 Sail before the Castles of the Hellespont, called the Dardanelli,
defying the whole Turkish Power, with Colors flying, and Drums beating; nor
did they dare to answer the bold Challenge, until in a dead Calm, some few
light Galleys presented themselves in a seeming Battle, with whom for want of
Wind, the ships were on the disadvantage, and rather received prejudice than
gave it; so that both sides were contented with the action. Morosini withdrew
from that station and returned to his General at Candia, to whom having joined
his Forces, he earnestly persuaded him, together with the Proveditor Grimani,
to engage the Turkish Fleet, which they assured him was much inferior to them,
both in number of Vessels, and in Skill, and Courage of the Combatants; and
that the success of this Year consisted in the cutting off the Enemies
succors, which was their sole relief and dependence, without which they could
not longer maintain the ground they possessed, but must deliver up that and
themselves to their pleasure. But the cautions General would not assent to this
resolution, judging it overrash and precipitate; for that the fortune of
Candia, and other Isles of the Archipelago was not to be hazarded on the
success of one Battle. During which dispute, and irresolution of affairs, the
Turkish Fleet consisting of 300. Sail, arrived at Canea, where they landed
40000. fighting men, which turned the scale of the War, and rendered the Turks
so powerful, as not ever more to be expelled, or their offspring extirpated
from the Confines of that Island. By this time the Pope's and Malta Galleys
were come to their assistance, and united with the Venetians; so that Capello
setting Sail from the Port of Suda, resolved to engage the Enemy at St.
Theodoro, which was effected accordingly, though with little success; for the
Turks had fortified themselves, and secured their Galleys with that advantage,
that they could not be assaulted without great hazard of the Christians; and
when they endeavored to burn them, their 4. Fireships took fire too soon, and
proved of more fear and astonishment to the Turks (to whom this invention was
as yet unknown) than of real damage. After this the Venetians returned again
to Suda, where having intelligence that 30. Turkish Galleys, with men and
Provision (which they had collected in several parts of the Archipelago) were
on their Voyage to Canea, Capello preparing to intercept them with a force of
Galleasses and Galleys, and leaving Grimani and Morosini to Gommand the main
body of the Fleet, he in person bent his course toward Cerigo.

In the mean time Mustapha Pasha departed from Canea, in order to his return to
Constantinople, with 57. light Galleys, 2. Ships, 2. Galleasses, and many
Saiks; but meeting in his passage with a hard storm of Northerly Winds, he lost
7. of his Galleys, and several other Vessels, so that he resolved to divide his
Fleet, and send part of them to Scio, and himself with the other part to make
for Negropont. This Fleet was followed by some other Vessels under the Command
of Mahomet Celebee, Brother of the Pasha of Algier, who being as far in his
way, as the narrow Streights of Andra; he was there stopped by the fury of the
Northern Winds (which are the Master Winds of those Seas) and by the impetuous
rage thereof, was carried to the Island of Zia; where having given License to
the greatest part of his Soldiery to Land, they carelessly strayed abroad, and
without suspicion of surprise, merrily passed their time in eating and
drinking. In the interim, advice hereof being carried to Tomaso Morosini, then
with some Ships in the Port of Milo; he immediately without loss of time
applied himself to assault the Turks, and being followed by the Proveditor
Grimani; he took two of their Ships, whilst Mehmet Celebce with about 200. of
his men, betook themselves to the weak shelter of an old demolished Fort, and
afterward surrendered themselves to the discretion of the Conqueror.

Morosini and Grimani, encouraged with this success, resolved to pursue the
Enemies Fleet; in order unto which, Morosini first putting out to Sea, was
instantly carried away by a sierce gale of Wind toward Ambro, and separated
from the rest of his Fleet, and thence again was tossed by the impetuosity of
the storms unto Rafti, of which Mustapha Pasha having intelligence, made haste
to attack this single Vessel, with 40. Galleys; giving order to the Bey of
Rhodes, to lay him aboard with 15. Galleys, the strongest and best armed of all
their Squadron: Morosini nothing dismayed, bearing the same constancy of mind
in the midst of his Enemies, as at a distance, boldly showed himself on the
Quarter Deck, encouraging his men with his words, and by his example, to
actions worthy their Religion, Faith, and Country, for which they contended.
The Turks continued for some time to batter the Ship at a distance with their
Cannon, but with little damage to the Christians; who returned their shot to
better advantage. Hereby the Turks perceiveing that blows given so far off did
little Execution, resolved to Board the Vessel, and subdue her by force of
Arms, and being come to the side of the Ship, the Soldiers were fearful to
enter, suspecting some trains of Powder to blow them up, until Emurat one of
the Captains struck off the Head of one or two of his own men, whom he
perceived backward in the Assault, which affrighted the rest into the greater
danger, and forced them to enter the Ship, who were soon followed by the
Galleys of the Bey of Rhodes, of Milo, of Mehmet Bey, and others; so that now
200. of the Enemy were Combating with Swords and Half Pikes upon the Deck; in
which storm, Morosini sighting amongst the thickest, was shot through the Head
with a Musket Bullet, and so gloriously finished his days in the service and
defense of his Country; gaining to himself a Laurel, and an Immortal name of
Glory and Renown. The Christian Soldiers little regarding all this time the
fall of their General, stoutly maintained their Fight, in which they received
encouragement from the prospect they had of 2. Galeasses making haste to their
succor; at whose nearer approach, the Turks desisted from their farther
attempt; being unwilling to purchase a Victory at the dear rate it would cost
them. The Body of Morosini was transported to Venice, and his Obsequies
Morosini slain.
Celebrated in a manner more Triumphant than Funebrous; the Proveditor Grimani
was likewise declared Captain General in the place of Capello; who having as it
were Besieged the Castles at the Mouth of the Dardanelli, taken several places
in the Archipelago, and put the Enemies Fleet often unto flight; he thereby,
and by other acts of Valor, rendered him justly renowned through all
Christendom.

These were the chief and most memorable actions by Sea, performed this Year;
Those by Land were acted chiefly in Dalmatia, where the Turks poured in their
Forces on the Venetian Dominions, but were bravely repulsed by Leonardo
Foscolo, who took Ali Bey Prisoner, the Commander in Chief of the Sangiac of
Licca, and slew his Son; besides which, he took Saccovar, Polissano, Islan, and
other Fortresses and Castles, full of Arms and Ammunition, which were the
Magazines of the Country; he also recovered Novegrade out of the hands of the
Turks, which was afterward demolished by Order from the Senate; which
Victories were followed with other successes; nothing being able to oppose the
Valiant and Prosperous Arms of Foscolo; for besides the taking and sacking of
several other Forts and Castles in Dalmatia, Obraozzo, Carino, Ottissina,
Velino, Nadino, Urana, Tino, and Salona, in the Confines of Croatia, and Bosna,
became a prey to the Venetian Arms.

But to this successful Progress of the War, a stop was given for some time by
the sickness of Fosiolo; in which interim, the new Pasha of Bosna, called
Mahomet Techli, a Circassian born, a person both Generous and Valiant, with an
Army of 4c. thousand men, besieged the strong Sebenico Besieged.
Fortress of Sebenico; but was bravely repulsed by the Valor of the
Inhabitants, the very Women exceeding the imbecility of their Sex; and
Children and old Men, with the weakness of their Age, strengthened themselves
with resolution against their Enemies, and so valiantly behaved themselves in
defense of their City, that the Turk was sorced to raise his Siege, having
gained nothing but the loss and slaughter of many of his people, and the best
of his Soldiery; whereby he gained an assurance of the invincible strength of
that place, and the valor of the Inhabitants. Foscolo in like manner
recovering his health, continued the un-interrupted course of his Victories,
and thereunto added the taking of Scardona; so that in Dalmatia the Venetian
affairs ran so prosperously, that nothing could be desired to render them more
happy and glorious. For the Turks not only were expelled from the Confines of
Dalmatia, but likewise that Province became more quiet and secure than ever it
had been in the times of Peace.

But the joy of these successes was very much allayed by the unhappy fate of a
great part of the Venetian Fleet, at the Island of Psara; which The ruin of
the Venetian Armata at Psara.
being lanched from Candia with intention to assault the Turks within the
Dardanelli, unfortunately were driven by contrary Winds to that unsecure shore;
where contending with a most furious storm, a great part of the Fleet was cast
away, and the General Grimani himself drowned. About which time, the Turks for
the greater terror of the Christians, laid close Siege to the City of Candia,
and made many and various attempts thereupon, carrying on their Assaults with
the height of bravery and resolution, the particulars of which require a
distinct History; but by the invincible Fortitude and Courage of the
Christians, they were repulsed with that slaughter, and with the loss of so
many men, by sallies and other stratagems of War, that the Turks were at length
constrained to raise their Siege with dishonor and confusion; during which
time many of the Nobility and persons of Quality lost their Lives; amongst
which, the principal were, Vicenzo della Marra, Governor General of the Arms
of Candia, and Count Remorantino, natural Son of the Duke of Loraine, Commander
in Chief of the Forces that came from beyond the Alps.

General Foscolo encouraged by the many glorious Enterprises that he had
obtained, resolved to consummate all by taking the strong and famous Fortress
of Clissa, situate in the Confines of Dalmatia, and Borders clissa taken.
of Bosna, on the top of a sharp and craggy Mountain, environed with Rocks and
unaccessible passages; the difficulty of the attempt rather inflamed than
abated the Courage of Foscolo, so that he Valiantly Besieged and Assaulted that
place; during which time, the Priest D. Stesano Sorich, Captain of the
Morlachs, intercepted the succors which were sent thither, and Georgio the
Proveditor, overthrew Teccheli Pasha in a Field Battle; so that the Inhabitants
despairing of relief, surrendered up themselves to the mercy of the Venetians;
and thus Clissa being taken, the Senate Commanded that it should be more
regularly Fortified.

And here the Christian Arms met some interruption. For the Morlachs desirous
to cast off the Turkish Yoke, and return to the protection of the Venetians,
designed to surprise Scutari; and at the same time the Archbishop of Durazzo,
with 7000. Albanians, was to seize upon Croia, and Allessio; but the design
being discovered by the traitorous practices of some false Brethren, before
matters were maturely grown, or the time of Execution, it had certainly cost
the Life of all the Morlachs, and 700. Venetian Soldiers joined with them, had
not the increase of the Waters hindered the speedy March of the Turks, who
resolved to cut them all off without mercy, or regard to any; so that having
time to disperse themselves, and take refuge in the Mountains, the most of them
preserved their lives from the Cruelty of their Enemies; only some certain
Ecclesiastical Persons falling into their hands, they imputed unto them the
cause of the Rebellion, and in a barbarous manner impaled them on Stakes.

The Turks enraged for the loss of Clissa, dispatched Dervis Pasha into the
parts of Bosna, with a potent Army threatening to Assault Spalatro; whom to
divert, Foscolo, together with Priest Sorich, Captain of the Morlachs, entered
into the Enemies Country; spoiling, burning, and destroying wheresoever they
came. The Morlachs more greedy of prey than ambitious of glory, divided
themselves into small parties to rob and pillage; in which interim they were
assaulted by the Turks, but being scattered, were so far from making a stout
resistance, that they committed themselves to a shameful flight, in which great
numbers of them were miserably Butchered; nor could the valor of Sorich, nor
of the Governor Possidaria, reduce them by their Examples into any Order;
whilst together with some few valiant Dalmatians, and Morlach Captains, they
endured the shock of all the Enemies Fury; in which Skirmish the Turks lost 7.
Agas, and about 70. Soldiers: On the Christians side were killed 400. some few
Slaves, and about 70. Ensigns taken; amongst the rest the good Priest Sorich
scorning to turn his back, had the misfortune to fall into the Enemies hands,
whom they flead alive, and afterward impaled; and though they subdued his
Body, yet he was still master of his mind; bearing the same constancy in his
torments, as he had showed Magnanimity and Courage in the Face of his Enemy.

Whilst these Martial Affairs were transacting with the blood and life of many
thousands on both sides, Sultan Ibrahim, like a stout Soldier of Venus, waged
another War in the Elysiums of Cupid; and casting aside all thoughts of Candia,
remitted the sole care and management thereof to the Vizier and Pashas of the
Divan; following a life so lascivious and sensual, as can neither be imagined
with a chaste fancy, or described by a modest Pen. A principal instrument of his
delights, and Engine to compass his Amorous Designs, was a certain cast Wench
of his, which he named Shecher Para, which signifies a little piece of Sugar;
for it seems she was so complaisant and dulcid in her humor and discourse, as
meritted that apt name to express the sweetness of her Conversation; this Woman
having the convenience to visit all the Baths in Town, took notice of every
Woman which she saw of more than ordinary Features and proportion, and having
enquired her condition and dwelling, presently reported the same with all
advantage to her Sultan, who having heard the beauty described, became
passionately Enamoured, and could find no repose in his fancy, until his
instruments, either by fair words or violence, had seduced her, or forced her
to his Bed. But growing now extravagant and over-wanton in his Amors, he fell
in love with the Sultana, or Widow of his Brother Sultan Morat: To win her
affections he had recourse to his Dear Shecher Para; who used all her Arts in
this service: but her pretty wheedling terms could prevail nothing on this
Lady, who answered her in short, that at the Death of her Lord Sultan Morat,
she had resolved upon a perpetual Widdowhood, for that the memory of him was
still so lively in her, that she could not entertain the thoughts of admitting
any new Embraces. This repugnancy and opposition inflamed the heat of Ibrahim
like a Fever, so that he resolved to assault her himself one day by force, and
took his time just as she came out of the Bath; but she being a bold Woman, and
disdaining the wandering loves of Ibrahim, laid her hand upon her Dagger, (which
Sultana's and great Ladies usually wear) threatening to wound him in her own
defense; the noise and brawling hereof being overheard by the Queen Mother,
called her from her Retirements, and concerned her in the Quarrel; who whilst
she reproved her Son, for the rape he intended on his Brothers Wife, gave
opportunity to the Sultana to escape; and so delivered her out of the hands of
this Satyr. But Ibrahim mad with love, and fuming with disdain to be checked
and opposed by his Mother, Commanded her immediately to the old Seraglio, where
he confined her to several days Imprisonment, during which time he understood
in what manner she had treated his large-sized Armenian, of whom we have
already spoken; whereof the Queen Mother being conscious, submitted her self
with all humility to her Son, begging his favor and pardon; and so well acted
her part by those who carried her Addresses, that she overcame quickly his easy
nature, and was again restored to his Grace, and her Lodgings in the new
Seraglio.

In the mean time Shecher Para traveling over all the Baths in Town, to
discover new delights for her Master, at length had the fortune to cast her
Eyes on a Daughter of the Mufti, a Maid of Incomparable Beauty and features of
Countenance, and proportion of Body, which she reported to Ibrahim so sensibly,
as if she her self had been in love; and after she had praised every part and
member of her, she concluded in sum, that she was the most Excellent and
admirable piece that ever Nature framed. The Sultan had no sooner heard the
story, but according to his usual custom, fell most desperately in love, and
had immediately without farther consideration or counsel, dispatched his
Emissaries; or without other preamble, ceremony, or Courtship, to have fetched
her to him; had not the sense of the late rebuff he had received from his
Brothers Wife, made some impression of fear in him; and the apprehension he had
of the power of the Mufti, created in him a certain caution and respect in the
treatment of his Daughter: wherefore he rather resolved to send for the Mufti,
with whom he treated of honorable terms concerning Marriage; promising to take
her into his Bosom, and prefer her in honor equal to any other of his
Sultana's.

The old Man who was tender of, and doated on his Daughter, knowing well the
wandering humor of the Sultan in his Amors, intended rather to marry her to
some great Personage, with whom she might be more happy, than in being a
Soltana: for he considered, that Ibrahim having already other Sons, her Issue
would either be Sacrificed for security of their Brothers, or else spend their
days in a Prison, and become Grey-headed, whilst they breath in a medium
between Life and Death, and are sad Recluses in the Grave of their unhappiness.
These considerations were well imprinted in the mind of the Mufti: but because
he durst not deny his proposal, he dealt with him as Inferiors usually do with
their Lords and Superiors; that is, he returned him thanks, expressing
insinite Obligations, that he would vouchsafe to cast his Princely Eyes on the
unworthiness of his Family: however he advised him, that according to the
Canons of their Law, of which he was the Expositor, and obliged to be a severe
and precise Observer; it was great Impiety in a Father to impose on the
affections of his Child; so that though he could heartily wish that his
Daughter would embrace this honor, to which he would exhort her with all the
earnest persuasions of a Father; yet if she proved refractory thereunto, it
would not be becoming his power to force her; and therefore hoped his Majesty
would believe, that in proceeding thus far, he had performed that duty which
became him, both as a Father, and a Loyal Subject. Ibrahim supposing that by
this Concession he had gained his design, thanked and embraced the old Man,
whom dismissing with plenary satisfaction, he remained now with an impatient
expectation and hopes of enjoyment. Next Morning the Mufti returned early to
the Grand Signior, and having sirst sufficiently instructed his Daughter to
refuse the Sultans proffers, told him plainly, that he had used all his
paternal authority and interest with his Daughter, that he might induce her to
accept this mighty Fortune, which cast it self upon her; but that it found not
that ready acceptance with her as he expected; what could be the reason he knew
not how to conjecture, since Women are commonly irregular, and unreasonable in
their Affections.

Ibrahim being in this manner disappointed, and more angry to encounter any
boundary or restraint to the imperious violence of his Lusts, than opposition
against the puissance of his Arms; dismissed the Mufti with some neglect and
disdain, whom he resolved to treat with rigor, and his Daughter with
Courtship. In order to the first, he banished him the Court, and forbad him his
presence in any other place; grew sullen and unsatisfied at all his
administrations of Justice, intending thereby to induce him to a resignation of
his Office, there being nothing more irksome to an ingenuous spirit, than to
serve and not to please. On the other side he dealt with the young Lady in a
different manner, by the crafty and flattering insinuations of his trusty
Shecher Para, who so forcibly managed her tongue full of curious words mixed
with threats, representing the storms and fury of the Sultans rage, and again
the glory, splendor, and happiness of the Seraglio; where she should Reign as
Empress and Sovereign of the World: all which she expressed with that passion,
and lascivious enticement, as would have shaken a firmer Constancy, than the
Virtue of a Turkish Maid: but she being well admonished by her Father, remained
obstinate in her denial: but to quiet the importunity of this Seducer, she
begged her not to solicit her Father in this request, but rather that she
would intercede in her behalf with the Sultan; supplicating him with all
humility to pardon her Childish refusal, and to leave her unto her own liberty
and choice, and a single Life: to obtain which favor from her, she produced a
Diamond of considerable value, desiring her to accept of that from her, and to
become her Friend, her Assistant, and Protectress. Shecher Para being overcome
by her Maiden Modesty, could no longer resist such forcible entreaties; and
having her Eyes obscured with the luster of the Jewel, promised to change her
note, and excuse her refusal with all the advantageous and compassionate terms
possible; and so taking her leave with a courteous farewell, repaired to the
Sultan, to give an account of her Negotiations. Ibrahim having with more
doubtful fear attended the Issue of this last Conference, than he did the
success of his War with Venice; received his Shecher Para with exceeding joy,
who being come in, began to recount all the particulars that had passed: but
the sum of all was, that this silly Maid was sufficiently sensible of the
honor of being a Soltana, of being Courted by his Majesty, of the joys,
delights, and glory of the Seraglio; but that when she reflected, how that she
was to bring forth Children to die by untimely Deaths, and to end their Days by
poison, or the Bow-string, or at least to live miserable lives separated from
Mankind, and immured within Walls, and Intombed whilst they breathed; she could
not but tremble with some horror, and judge that all the blandishments of
Worldly Fortune were but a transient Paradise; which could not possibly
recompense, or outweigh the sense and tenderness she conceived for the misery
of her unfortunate Offspring. Howsoever she so couched her Discourse, that she
gave Ibrahim some hopes to overcome at length; by which she appeased a little
his fury and despair, and extracted some Jewels and Gifts in reward of her past
labor, and encouragement for her future service. In this manner Ibrahim had
patience awhile, expecting something farther from the industry of Shecher Para;
but finding no effect of all his expectations and gentleness, at length
resolved to break through all considerations of respect, either to the Father
as the Mouth and Oracle of the Law, or to the simple and foolish innocence of
the Maid; and therefore ordered the Great Vizier to cause a Watch to be set on
the Girl, either going in or coming out of the Bath, and without farther
Ceremony to bring her unto him. This Order being executed accordingly, and the
Maid hurried to the Seraglio; Ibrahim possessed and enjoyed her for some days,
but with those tears, reluctance, and sullenness, as took off from the edge and
appetite of enjoyment; so that he returned her back again with scorn and
contempt unto her Father; who at first dissembled the injury with the same
Countenance as he did before, when he was interdicted the Sultan's presence;
suppressing his revenge like a concealed fire, which bursts out afterward with
more violent Flames. But though the sense of obedience and duty toward his
Prince allayed much of the choler he conceived against him for the Rape of his
Daughter; yet he knew not how to pardon the Great Vizier, whom he termed no
other than a Ruffian or Pandor; the Minister of his Masters Lusts, and not of
his Laws, and of Justice. Thus full of indignation he applied himself, and made
his complaint unto one Mahomet Pasha, a principal Member of the Divan; one of
great wisdom and practice in the conduct of affairs, and one with whom he had a
particular Friendship and intimacy. Nor less interest had he with Janisar. Aga,
or General of the Janissaries; to Ibrahim; and for the same reason to cut off
the first Vizier; agreeing amongst themselves that Mahomet Pasha should receive
the Seal, and the Office. To effect which, they deemed it necessary to draw the
Queen Mother into the Conspiracy, being a Woman of great Authority, and having
as it were the Reins of Government in her hands, by reason of the weak judgment
of her Son. But because it was difficult to persuade the tenderness of a Mother
to the ruin of her Son; the Wise Mufti resolved first to sound her
inclinations and disposition toward this design: and being well informed of
her fierce Circassian nature, and the jealousy and anger she conceived against
Shecher Para, obtained License to be heard by her, as if he would beg her
intercession with her Son in his behalf; and being admitted to discourse with
her, he thereby plainly discovered her most inverterate hatred and displeasure
against her Son; not only for this, but for many other actions of like nature.
This discovery which the Queen had made, gave him the boldness to propose the
confinement again of Ibrahim to his old Prison; not that he should be
absolutely laid aside and deposed, but only corrected awhile, and being put in
remembrance of his past condition, might be taught wisdom, and instructed for
the future, what moderation and justice Sultans are obliged to exercise in the
administration of Government; and so subtlely did he insinuate his discourse,
that the Queen Mother assented to the proposal, and that the Seal should be
conferred on Mahomet Pasha; for she had conceived an irreconcilable hatred
against Achmet the G. Vizier, by whose counsel she was sent to the old
Seraglio, and was united in Confederacy with the detested Shecher Para. The
Mufti greatly satisfied to have gained so considerable a Conspirator to the
party, communicated the whole business, with the Progress of it, to the two
Kadileschers, or Lord Chief Justices of Romelia and Anatolia; who approveing
thereof, and promising their utmost assistance, the 7th of August was the Day
appointed for the Insurrection of the Janissaries, who being all in a readiness
on that day, went in a tumultuary way to call the Mufti, the Kadileschers, and
other Officers and Ministers of the Law, whom they seemingly forced to
accompany them to the presence of the G. Signior, of whom they demanded, that
the present Vizier Achmet should be deprived of his Office, and that Mahomet
Pasha should be constituted in his place. The G. Signior at first refused their
demand, but being persuaded by his Mother that it was necessary to content the
Militia in that tumult; he consented thereunto, and having called Achmet, he
took from him the Seal, and conferred it on Mahomet Pasha, and therewith the
Office of G. Vizier. Achmet trembling at the consequences hereof, resolved to
commit himself to the mercy of the Mufti, and therefore hastened to his House to
attend his return, hoping to find him his Protector, under whose shadow and
roof he fled for Sanctuary. The Soldiery having thus obtained the first fruits
of their Insurrection, accompanied the Mufti unto his home, where finding the
deposed Vizier Achmet, the Janisar. Aga immediately Commanded him out of Doors,
from whence he had no sooner drawn his Foot, than that he was seized upon and
strangled, and his Body thrown before the Gate of the new Mosch.

The next day being the 8th of August, 1648. the Janissaries again arising in
the like tumult as before, came to demand of the Mufti, whether that according
to their Law, Sultan Ibrahim as a Fool, and a Tyrant, and unsit for Government,
ought not to be deposed? To which the Mufti giving answer in the affirmative,
sent to cite Sultan Ibrahim the day following to appear in the Divan, to
administer Justice to his Soldiers and Subjects, who expected it from him. But
Ibrahim supposing that he had sufficiently satisfied the Soldiery, by putting
the Vizier out of Office, laughed at the summons which the Mufti made him;
which being seconded by a Fetfa, which is a point of Law resolved by the Mufti,
who is the Mouth or Oracle thereof, viz. That the G. Signior being called to
account, is obliged to appear before the Justice; the Sultan in high disdain
tore the Paper, threatening the Head of the Mufti: but it was now too late, he
having already sufficiently fortified himself with the power and strength of
his Rebellious Companions. This Fetfa was immediately seconded by another of a
higher nature, which declared, that whosoever obeyed not the Law of God, was
not a true Mussulman or Believer; and though that person were the Emperor
himself, yet being become by his filthy actions a Kafir or Infidel, was ipso
facto, fallen from his Throne, and no farther capable of Authority and
Government. This Fetfa being seen by Ibrahim, he tore it in pieces, Commanding
the G. Vizier instantly to put the Mufti to Death, as guilty of Treason against
his Prince: but having now lost his Authority, his Commands were not longer
regarded, nor any reverence had of his person: For the Janissaries being again
assembled about five a Clock in the Afternoon, came with their usual tumult to
the Gates of the Seraglio. And now Sultan Ibrahim losing all Courage at this
third attempt, fled into the Arms of his Mother, begging her assistance and
protection. She being a bold and subtle Woman, employed all her Rhetoric and
Eloquence to persuade the Soldiery not to offer violence to the person of
their Lord and Master; promising that he should relinquish the Government, and
retire himself with a Guard into his old Lodgings. Ibrahim comforted a little,
that he should save his Life, shrunk himself willingly into his old Shell,
wherein he had so long conserved his Life. In the mean time the Conspirators
taking forth his eldest Son Sultan Mahomet, set him on the Throne of his
Father, and planting the Sargouch, or Imperial Feathers on his Head, saluted
him for Emperor with loud Acclamations. Ibrahim continued his Imprisonment for
some days with great patience, but at length growing desperate and furious,
often beat his Head against the Wall, until at length, he was on the 17th
strangled by four Mutes.

In this manner Sultan Ibrahim ended his Days, which puts me in mind of the
saying of a wiser and a better King than he, That there is little distance
between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes. And this Example made a great
Officer understand how King Charles the Glorious Martyr was put to Death. For
he, I think it was the Great Vizier, falling into discourse with the Chief
English Interpreter at Constantinople, not then calling to mind the Fate of
Sultan Ibrahim; demanded, How, and when King Charles was put to Death? Sure,
said he, Your King must have no Power, or your People must be more Rebellious
and Mutinous than other Nations of the World, who durst commit an act so horrid
and vile as this. See, said he, How our Emperor is revered and observed; and
how submissive and obedient half the World is to the nod of our Great Monarch.
To which the Interpreter replied, that to recount unto him the History and
occasion of this prodigious fact, would be too long and tedious for him to
hear: but that the time it happened, was some Months after the Death or Murder
of Sultan Ibrahim; which was an Item sufficient to give him a perfect
understanding of what he required.

Sultan Ibrahim having in this manner ended his Days, the Government was
committed into the hands of the G. Vizier, and the old Queen Mother (which is
she whom we call Kiosem in the Ottoman State) and of 12. Pashaws; who were to
manage all Affairs with supreme Power, during the Minority of Sultan Mahomet,
who now Reigns.

Ibrahim was the sifth Son of Sultan Achmet, born of the same Mother with
Sultan Morat, Educated like the other younger Sons of the Ottoman Family,
within the Walls of an obscure and unhappy Prison; so that it is no wonder, if
wanting the advantages of seeing and practicing in the World, he should neither
have studied Men, nor been experienced in the Art of Government. Nor less
strange is it, being natural to humane insirmity; for men who have lived under
restraint, afsliction, and fear of Death, to become licentious and immoderate
in all kind of pleasures, whenever they pass on a sudden from the depth of
misery to some transcendent degree of happiness and prosperity; which as I say
all men are naturally subject unto; so more especially those, whose Religion
indulges them all kind of sensual Carnality in this Life.

Ibrahim was in his own nature of a gentle and easy temper, of a large
Forehead, of a quick and lively Eye, and ruddy Complexion, and of a good
proportion in the Features of his Face; but yet had something in the air of his
Countenance, that promised no great abilities of mind. And giving himself up to
all kind of Effeminacy and softness, attended not unto the Government of his
Affairs; and therefore it was his greatest misfortune to be served by wicked
and faithless Officers to whom he trusted, and to whom he gave credence,
wanting in himself the talents of wisdom and discretion to discern their
malice. The continual apprehensions that he entertained of Death during his
Imprisonment, had so frozen his constitution with a strange frigidity toward
Women, that all the dalliance and warm embraces of the most inflaming Ladies in
the Seraglio, could not in a whole Years time thaw his coldness; which was the
occasion at sirst of that report, which spoke him to be impotent toward Women:
during which time he attended to his Ministers of Justice, and to a management
of the affairs of his Empire, which in the beginning of his Reign gained him a
credit and reputation, and raised a great expectation of his goodness and care
of his Subjects welfare; an evidence of which, he gave in his Charge to the
Great Vizier, that he should put no Man to Death unless for Capital and
enormous Crimes. But at length losing himself in Lusts and Sensualities, he
forsook the Helm of his Regency, committing the guidance of his Empire to other
hands: and as he was ignorant of War, so he foolishly sported in the calms of
Peace; and suffering himself to be guided only by Fortune, felt the stroke
thereof in his last Unhappy Fate.

Sultan MAHOMET the 4th the Present Emperor of the Turks
When I an Infant in my Cradle Lay
And Called The Ottinan Scepter for to Sway
My Troops Revolt, Seditions Men Incline
To Rage, and need a Stronger Head Then Mine:
But as my years, So does my power increase
My Wars Succeed, and Trumphs Never Cease
By Christian Discords Helped, my Mighty State
Grows great; Still Living I attend my Fate.


THE REIGN OF Sultan Mehmet, OR MAHOMET IV. THIRTEENTH EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
ANNO 1649.
SUltan Ibrahim perishing in this manner, by the mutinous violence of the
Soldiery, his Son Mehmet, or Mahomet, being a Child of seven years of Age,
succeeded in the Throne: During whose Minority, (which was to continue for the
space of ten years longer) his Mother, who was the first Sultana, assisted with
the Counsel of twelve Pashaws, took upon her self the Regency, and in the first
place resolved to continue the War against the Venetians, which Ibrahim
intended to conclude, having engaged himself far in a Treaty of Peace with the
Bailo or Ambassador, which resided at the Port for that Republic.

Whilst these matters were transacting, and preparations making to prosecute
the War; the malignant humors of the Empire began to ferment unto that degree,
as affected the Body Politic at first with unnatural Sultan Ibrahim; and in
order thereunto demanded the Head of the Great Vizier, as the Chief Author and
Contriver of the death of his Lord and Master. The others being conscious to
themselves of having by their Arms carried on the Conspiracy, not only
declared their resolutions to defend the Vizier, but owned that what he had
acted was by their order, and at their request and instigation. The Spahees
being highly provoked with this declaration, swelled with anger and malice
against the Janisaries; and both sides being equally proud and rich could not
bear each others reproaches. The Spahees being Men of Estates in Land, looked
on themselves as the Gentry, and to have the greatest share in the concernment
of the Empire. The Janisaries living regularly in their Chambers, or Martial
Colleges, looked on themselves as the better Soldiers, and the more
formidable Party; and the truth is, both of them were proceeded to that height
of Command and Authority in Government, that had they not been suppressed by
the cruel hand, and bloody disposition of Kuperlee, as shall be more largely
related hereafter, this Empire was then in danger of falling into as many
Divisions, as there were at that time Pashaws, or great Captains. The cause
hereof proceeded from the warlike disposition of Sultan Morat, who being the
most Martial Man of his Age, preferred none but Men of great courage, and such
as had signalized their valor by undoubted proofs; And such Men as these he
loaded with honor, and raised them to the highest, and most eminent charges in
the Government. But Morat dying soon afterward, these Great Men had time to
enrich themselves during the gentle and easy Reign of Sultan Ibrahim; which
being seconded by the Minority of this Young Sultan, their pride knew no
bounds, either of Modesty toward their Commanders, or Reverence toward their
Sultan. Hence it was that the Soldiery dividing, so great a Sedition arose
amongst them, that at last they came to blows, resolving to decide the
controversy by the Sword. But the Quarrels of Turks amongst themselves not
being commonly of long durance, the Care and Vigilance of the Magistrates
prevented all open defiance in the Field; but yet could not so pacify their
Animosities, but that several Skirmishes, or Rencounters passed between them in
the Streets, wherein the Spahees were always worsted, and at length were forced
to abandon the City, scarce daring for some time to own the name of Spahee
within the Walls of Constantinople.

These disturbances gave the Venetians some hopes to accomodate their Peace
with better advantage; but the Reply to this Proposition was more fierce and
positive than ever, and so ill resented that the Bailo going from his Audience,
was on the 27th. of April seized on, and with all his Retinue clapped into
Prison and Chains; being sent to those Castles which are situate on the
Bosphorus, in the middle way between Constantinople and the Black Sea. But this
furious severity by the intercession of other Christian Ministers continued not
long, before the Bailo received more gentle Treatment, by the Sacrisice which
the Turks made unto themselves of Grillo, his Interpreter, who being called
down from the presence of the Bailo, was immediately by two Officers strangled,
and his Body thrown out at the Window of the Castle; the which act, though it
may seem unjust and barbarous to us, has yet been frequently practiced amongst
the Turks, being to this day their common use to threaten the Druggermen or
Interpreters; which is the cause that they often mince, or wholly alter the
sense or meaning of their Masters, on those occasions when words are spoken by
them ungrateful to the Turks.

The Turks bearing this disdain to the Venetians, labored to re-enforce their
Armies in Candia, and supply them with Ammunition and Provisions; and though
the Venetians lay before the Mouth of the Dardanelles to intercept all succors
which might be carried thither; yet the Turks notwithstanding their Divisions,
having recruited their Fleet with forty Galleys, and ten Great Ships, broke
through the Venetians, and in despite of them, convoyed five Galleys laden
with Soldiers and Ammunition, and landed them safe at Canea; and about the
same time six Galleys, and ten Ships of Barbary, entered into the Port of Suda.

The General which commanded in chief was named Chusaein Pasha, a Person of
great courage and experience; he had for some time besieged the City of Candia,
but for want of Men and Ammunition was forced to rise from that place, and
retire to Canea and Retimo, whilst in the mean time the Candiots received
recruits of Men, and supply of Provisions, improving their leisure time to
fortify their Town with such works as rendered it almost impregnable, and made
it become the Wonder and Discourse of the World after some years succeeding.

Nor was the War only carried on in Candia, but also in Dalmatia, Morea, Bosna,
and Albania. For Foscolo, the General of Venice, designing to force some Corn
from the Parts of Castel-nuovo, he landed some Men there, but was so ill
received by the Turks, that he was forced to retreat unto his Vessels with
great disorder, and no less dishonor. But he had better fortune in the Parts
of Bosna, where he repulsed the Enemy to the very Gates of Sarsay, the Capital
City of that Province, and took upon composition the Fortress of Risano, which
is situate between Cataro and Castel-nuovo; but at length the Turks receiving
an additional aid of fifteen or sixteen thousand men, the Venetians were forced
to quit their new Conquests, and retire into their own Country.

During the time that these Affairs were in agitation, the young Emperor was
proclaimed, and his Inauguration celebrated with the usual Ceremonies, but with
rejoycings, and hopes extraordinary; who being yet scarcely arrived to eight
years of Age, many mutinies and troubles arose in diverse Parts of the Empire,
as in Damascus, Syria, Anatolia, and other Countries, where the Pashaws refused
to pay in the customary Taxes and Tribute, declaring that they would keep the
money in their hands during the minority of the Grand Signior; and that when he
came to Age of Government they would be accountable to him both for the
principal and for the improvement.

The Turks in Hungary making incursions into the Territories of the Emperor
were overthrown by the Count Forgatz, near Buda, where the Pasha was taken
Prisoner, and his Son slain. Nor better fortune had they in the Assault they
made on the Fortress of Clissa, where having lost five thousand Men, they were
forced to retire with great dishonor.

The Cossacks also in this conjuncture grew more bold, so that they covered the
Black Sea with their Boats, doing great damage to the Saicks, and other
Vessels, which traded in that Sea, and at length came up the Bosphorus above
Therapea; giving a great Alarm with much fear and confusion to all
Constantinople.

Amidst these misfortunes, intestine troubles and new disorders arose in the
Ottoman-Empire; For as commonly all the blame of miscarriages and ill successes
in Turkey, are cast upon the head of the Commander in chief; so the Enemies of
the Great Vizier took the advantage in this conjuncture to reproach his ill
Government, and carried the accusation so far, as to depose him from his Charge
and Office; in whose place the Aga, or General of the Janisaries succeeded.

The Spahees in Asia, being displeased with this Election, assembled in a Body
of seven or eight thousand, and marched toward Constantinople, pretending to
revenge the death of Sultan Ibrahim; their numbers daily increasing, the Divan
very much feared lest the Party which favored the Spahees in Constantinople,
should join themselves to the Asian Mutineers; to prevent which it was judged
good reason and policy, to anticipate the Justice they demanded, by taking away
the Life of the deposed Vizier; which being easily assented unto, and without
much hesitation performed, gave some little stop to the fury and heats of the
Spahees. Notwithstanding all which, as the Divisions which the Turks entertain
amongst themselves were never so great as to afford the Christians any
advantage thereby; so the Venetians did not reap any benefit from these
Quarrels; but on the contrary, the Turks studiously attended to their Affairs
in Candia, passing thither with sixty Galleys, thirty great Ships, and twenty
five other smaller Vessels, laden with Men, and all sorts of Provisions and
Ammunition for War; so that in this year 1649. the Affairs of the Turks
remained in that Island in this happy and hopeful posture. Amongst these Ships
were thirteen English, which the Turks took up at Smyrna, and forced into their
service. For though the Ambassador, Sir Thomas Bendysh, then resident at
Constantinople, opposed the engagement of these Ships what was possible, and
also the Commanders and Seamen were very unwilling and dissatisfied to
undertake the design; yet the Turks with menaces, and promises of reward forced
them to carry Men and Ammunition to Candia, so that, making a Virtue of
Necessity, they complied with that which they could not resist.

ANNO 1650.
CHusaein Pasha, Governor of the Island of Candia, having received these
succors and recruits, resolved to besiege the Chief City of Candia; to which
intent, drawing out from the Ships, and Garrisons of Retimo and Canea what men
he was able, he formed an Army of thirty thousand Men, with which he marched,
and pitched before the Town. He was provided also with twelve pieces of Cannon,
four thousand Sacks of Wool, three thousand Ladders, and with a good quantity
of viz. on the Forts of Martinengo, and Mocenigo; and pressed so hard on the
latter, that notwithstanding the generous resistance of the Defendants, he won
the Fort, and there planted the Ottoman Colors; fortifying it with more
Cannon, and a good number of Men.

Count Coloredo, Governor of that place, was then sick, the Garrison very
weak, and things reduced to the last terms of extremity; when General Balbiani,
Admiral of Malta, arrived with six Galleys, and there landed 600. Men, and 60.
Knights; which with great Courage mounted the Guard of the Fort Martinengo,
which was the place of most danger and honor. The Turks excited with a desire
to welcome the new Guests, made three desperate and furious assaults on this
Fort, but were with equal valor repulsed by the Defendants; at which disgrace
and foil being highly enraged, they resolved on a fourth attempt, which they
pursued with that Courage and Success, that the Venetians were forced to give
way to their violence, with the slaughter almost of all those which defended
this Fort; until the Cavaliers of Malta, who having no greater glory, nor
readier will, than to spill their blood for the Christian Cause, rallied all
the force they were able, and made so prosperous an Attaque upon the Fort, that
they recovered it again with the blood and destruction of all those who
defended it; but they enjoyed it not long, before the Turks regained it with
the like success and slaughter; which variety of Fortune the Venetians being
sensible of, and that they could not bear such costly interchanges with the
Turk, had recourse to their ultimate remedy of Mines, which succeeded so
happily, that the whole Fort was carried into the Air, and therewith 2000. good
Soldiers of the Turks; with which destruction, and other repulses in diverse
places, they were so weakened and discouraged, that they raised the Siege on the
sifth of October, new Style.

In this Interim, the Tartar Han, called the Krim, demanded the Guardianship of
the young Sultan, as of right belonging unto him; but the Council answered
hereunto, that their Master was already in better hands than those into which
they desired to transfer him; and that his Grandmother, and the Divan, wanted
neither wisdom nor fidelity to direct his affairs: with which answer the Tartar
being forced to remain satisfied, was able to revenge himself no farther, than
by exciting the Cossacks to infest the Seas; which gave some diversion to those
Arms, which otherwise had all been employed against the Venetians.

But these designs from Tartary did little trouble the Council, in comparison
of that spirit of Discord which was arisen between the Spahees and the
Janisaries; for both parties being emulous of each others greatness,
endeavored on all occasions to elevate their Chief Commanders to the highest
and most profitable places of the Empire: which dissension touching the
principal Ministers of State, who were all ongaged on one side or the other;
administered great troubles, and retarded the execution and success of all the
grand designs of the Empire. Nor was it of less importance and dishonor to the
Divan, that their Fleet was hindered passage by the Venetians, who blocked up
the Mouth of the Dardanelles; whereby all intercourse with Candia was
interrupted: but being resolved to remove this obstacle, they commanded the
Captain Pasha to force his passage; which he accordingly performing, was so
warmly received, that he quickly lost two Galleys, and after much blood, and
loss on both sides, was forced at length to retire again within the Streights.
But what was of worse consequence to the Turks, was the inveterate discord
between the Spahees, and Janisaries; who having been unadvisedly embarked
promiscuously together, came oftentimes to words, and then to blows; which
ended not without the blood and death of diverse of each party. These mischiefs
increased the rage which the Turks at Constantinople conceived against the
Venetians; who were all thereupon (not excepting the Bailo Soranzo, nor his
Secretary Ballarino) interdicted the Territories of the G. Signior; and sent
back into their own Country.

The Captain Pasha, that he might be in a capacity to make a second attempt to
force his passage, sent to Constantinople for new recruits: when News came that
the Siege of Candia was raised, and that the Turks had lost the Fort of St.
Theodoro; which so angered the spirit of the Queen Mother against the Vizier,
that she immediately deposed him from his Charge, and therewith had taken away
his Life, had not the Faction of the Janisaries protected him in this extremity.

The Pasha of Buda was introduced into his place, a person of a turbulent and
ambitious spirit, who to increase his savor with his Mistress the Sultana,
evidenced his heat and zeal against the Venetians, and to that end sent
immediately express Orders to the Pasha of Bosna, to invest Clissa with all the
power he was able; and therewith he presented him with a Cimeter, and a Halter;
the former to be his reward in case of good success, and the latter to be his
punishment in case of misfortune. But this furious Vizier continued not so
long, as to experience the Issue of this Command; for he was in a few days laid
aside, and Chusaein Pasha, the General of Candia, was placed in his stead;
howsoever his Orders were to remain with the Army, by which means, much
emulation and contest was prevented, which might otherwise have happened
between the Spahees, and Janisaries, at the Election of a new Vizier; and
thereby all excuses taken from the Soldiery of absence from the War, who could
now pretend nothing of reason to withdraw themselves, on score of attendance on
the Viziers person; and to supply his Authority at the Regal Court, a Chinacam
was substituted to administer Justice in place of the Vizier, which is usual on
such occasions.

Notwithstanding all which, affairs succeeded not extraordinary well for the
Turks in Candia; for being straightened for provisions in Canea, by the near
approach of the Christians, the Turks were forced to make a diversion, by
appearing in great Troops before Candia; which they were enabled to do, by the
supplies they had lately received, with the arrival of their Fleet of Galleys;
for the Winter season approaching, the Venetians were constrained to abandon
their station before the Dardanelles, and to leave the passage open for the
Enemy. And so this Year ended rather with advantage than disgrace to the
Christians.

ANNO 1651.
WIth these great succors and supplies sent to Candia by the Turks, affairs
must necessarily have succeeded prosperously to their designs, had not
intestine discords at home interrupted their proceedings, which arose from a
Jealousy and Emulation between the Grandmother, and Mother of the young
Sultan. For each of them pretending to the Constantinople, from whence all that
trouble and combustion arose, which we have at large related in the third
Chapter of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire. So that now it was no time
to talk to the Soldiers or People of a War in Candia; For the first thought
themselves engaged to contrive a settlement and determination of Disputes at
home, and the latter being irritated with a new Tax laid on them, for want of
money in the Treasury, exclaimed, and talked loud, and at length, instead of
paying, broke out into open Rebellion, which by assistance of the Soldiery,
was appeased, under no less terms than the death of several principal Ministers
of State.

During these Divisions, the Venetians had time to arm out a very considerable
Fleet for defense of Candia; Foscolo, who had been General in Dalmatia, being
sent thither with title of Generalissimo in the place of Mocenigo: But these
Dissentions amongst the Turks, according to their usual custom, lasting not
long before they came to a Conclusion, by the entire destruction of one of the
Parties; the Chief Ministers began to reassume again the thoughts of
prosecuting the War in Candia, and to send Recruits to reinforce the Army under
the Command of Chusaein Pasha, who was returned with new Forces and courage to
assault the City of Candia. At this time a certain Greek, pretending to be a
Person of Quality, and discontented with the Turks, fled from them to the
Christians, where being received with all kind and obliging entertainment, he
had thereby liberty of seeing and visiting all the Fortifications of the Place.
After he had observed and discovered as much as he desired, this traitorous
Fugitive fled again to the Turkish Camp, where he revealed what places were
most strong, or best fortified, and where the Town was weakest, and most easily
to be assaulted. The Venetian General being awakened at this discovery, and
considering the numbers of his People to be few, in respect of the Enemy, and
that the Outworks could not be maintained without a more numerous Garrison, he
resolved to destroy some of those Forts; and accordingly blew up with Mines
four Bastions, which being at a distance could not be relieved without much
danger. The Turks hereby making conjectures of the weakness of the besieged,
cheerfully assaulted the Fort of St. Demetrio, thinking to carry it without
much trouble, but contrary to their expectation, they encountered so bold a
resistance, that they lost three thousand men on the place.

At Constantinople they were still so intent to carry on this War, that having
prepared, and laden on the Fleet great quantities of Grenades, Bomboes, and
Mortar-pieces, with other Fireworks, the Captain Pasha, with hopes agreeable
to his Force, set forth to Sea, with eleven hundred Sail, consisting of
Galleys, Ships, Galleasses, Saiques, Brigantines, and smaller Vessels, with
resolution to engage the Venetian Fleet, whose. Commanders also were equally
desirous and ready to consent with them to a Battle. On the 7th. of July, the
Venetians being at an Anchor in the Port of St. Ermina discovered the Turkish
Fleet, to which as they were much inferior in number, so they were superior
to them in the agreement and experience of their Commanders. The Turks having
passed forward on their way, the Venetians pursued them, and the better to draw
them to a Battol, Mocenigo ordered two Ships, commanded by Barbaro and Dolphino
to cross the Turks at the point of the Island; and his Vice Admiral, Bataggio,
with four Ships to engage the main Body of the Turkish Fleet; to whose
assistance many other Vessels coming in, he so rudely treated several Galleys,
that they were forced to seek harbor in the Port of Chios, now Scio, with the
loss of Mahomet, Pasha of Anatolia, who was sent to succeed in the Office of
Chusaein Pasha, the General of Candia; but Night coming on, the rest of the
Fleet retreated to the Isles of Naxia and Paros. On the tenth day the Turks
having watered their Fleet, gave a signal of desiance to the Venetians, by
discharge of two pieces of Cannon; and the Venetians accepting the challenge,
both Fleets gave a furious charge one to the other; but the Turks were not able
to withstand the courage and skilfulness of the Venetians; for the Captain
Pasha having lost many of his men, and the poop of his Gally being carried away
with a Cannon shot, the whole Fleet was put into disorder, and then unto
flight, so that the Galleys began to employ themselves in toaing the Ships. But
one of their Mahones being separated from the rest, was assaulted by two
Galleasses, and some Ships, and finding none to come in for succor, the
Captain was killed, with four hundred Soldiers, and two hundred were taken
Prisoners.

In the mean time Mocenigo, the General, gave chase to the Galleys, which two
to a Ship were toaing the heavier Vessels as fast as they could; but being
hardly pursued, were forced to cast off the Hauser, A great Victory obtained by
the Venetians over the Turk.
and shist for themselves as well as they were able. The Turkish Ships seeing
themselves thus abandoned, fired whole Broadsides upon the Enemy; but the
Venetian Galleys leaving their own Ships astern, that they might pursue their
advantage, Querini boarded a Great Galleass, called the Soltana, upon which
were three hundred Soldiers, who offered to surrender upon promise of Quarter
for their Lives. But the Christian Soldiers heated with fight, and not then
understanding any thing of Conditions, desperately boarded the Vessel, whereby
the Turks being reduced to an extremity of despair, gave fire to the Powder,
and therewith carried as well the Vanquishers as the Vanquished into the other
World. According to this example four other Vessels burnt themselves, one of 60
brass Guns, and three others of 40 to 44. Fifteen Vessels of the starboard wing
saved themselves by good sailing. Of the larboard wing, Captain Nicolo, a
Renegado, with his ship was taken by the Admiral of the Galleasses, likewise
another Great Vessel by Lazaro Mocenigo, and another by Proveditor Melino. In
short, there was not one Vessel which remained in sight of the Venetians, which
was not either taken, sunk, or burnt. Notwithstanding all which, considering
the Vessels which were escaped, and the three thousand men which the Turks had
landed at Naxia, in order to their being transported unto Candia, the Victory
seemed to be very imperfect; wherefore the Venetians attending another
encounter with the Turkish Fleet, did happily meet them in a few days after;
and being encouraged with the late success, as the Enemy was low in their
spirits and resolution, they bravely attaqued the Turk, and took 39 Galleys, 23
Ships, three Galleasses, together with the three thousand Soldiers, which were
then embarked from Naxia: Those which escaped took Refuge in the Port of Rhodes.

After this great loss, the Turks entertained no great designs of the Conquest
of Candia; but only to conserve Canea, and the footing that they had won in
that Island: nor did ever the Turks after this, dare to stand a formal Battle
with the Venetians at Sea, but rather contriving to escape than to fight, did
ever after build light Galleys, for transporting of Men and Ammunition, with
intention to wage their War only at Land, and not at Sea; it being a saying
ever after common in their Mouths; That God had given the Sea to Christians,
and the Earth to the Turks.

To these ill successes abroad, were added great dissentions at home; for the
mutinous Spahees in Asia, having united into a strong Body, marched toward
Constantinople, to join with their other Brethren in those parts. The
Janisaries on the other side not less diligent to oppose their Enemy, to
revenge the outrages committed on their Brethren, whom the Spahees had ill
treated, having cut off the Noses and Ears of several of them; besides all
which, they proceeded to that height of Insolence, as to demand the Heads of
the Great Vizier, and of the Aga of the Janisaries; and being now by their
numbers rendered formidable to the Court, it was judged agreeable to the
present Conjuncture, to satisfy in some measure these Mutiniers, by discharging
these two Officers of their employment, which did in some degree for the
present qualify and appease these Tumults.

ANNO 1652.
THE seditions at Constantinople were scarce quieted, before advice came of a
Rebellion of the People of G. Cairo and Damascus, who both at the same time
conspired, as if they intended to cast off subjection to the Ottoman Family;
the which mutiny and disturbance arose to that Head, as gave great cause of
fear to the Divan; and employed all their Counsels and contrivances for this
whole Year, in what manner they might reduce this people to their Duty and
Obedience. During which time, the Christians in Candia had time to breathe, and
opportunity to provide themselves with all Ammunition and Provisions; and to
repair their old, and add new Fortifications to their Town.

ANNO 1653.
BUT these troubles being with time composed, the G. Vizier desired greatly the
Conquest of Candia, which being by experience proved to be with difficulty
gained by the Sword, he endeavored to win it by fairer terms; and to that end
wrote a Letter to the Republic of Venice, in Letters of Gold; wherein he
declared, that it seemed strange to him, that the Senate had not dispatched
their Ambassador to him with the surrender of Candia, in regard that thereby
they might assure themselves to purchase a certain Peace, which they vainly
retarded by such delays. Howfoever in these Letters no mention was made of the
causes, or reasons, why Signior Capello, who was an eminent Person, being
Procurator of St. Mark, and sent thither for Bailo, was so ill treated with
Imprisonment at his Arrival, not withstanding the permission and encouragement
which was given for his kind reception obtained at the instance of the French
Ambassador; but this restraint continued not long upon him, before he was
released with a daily allowance (which continued for some time) of 1200. Aspers
a Day; and afterward the Court returning from Adrianople to Constantinople, he
was permitted to lodge in the Palace which belongs to the Bailo's of Venice.

The Venetian Fleet being Victorious at Sea, made it their work to keep the
Mouth of the Dardanelloes always blocked up, whereby they hindered all succors
from Candia: notwithstanding which diligence, the Venetians being sometimes
forced for the sake of water and provision, to abandon that Station; the Turks
took hold of the opportunity to escape forth; but being eagerly pursued by the
Venetians, they were forced to take Sanctuary in Rhodes, where being again
blocked up, the affairs in Candia suffered much, and the complaints from thence
were loud at the Court. So that Orders were sent, and often repeated unto the
Captain Pasha, that he should spend no longer time in Rhodes, but that in
despite of all difficulties, he should immediately proceed to Candia, and
fight through the Venetians in case they remained in the way to interrupt his
passage; but theCaptain Pasha notwithstanding these Orders, and Menaces which
accompanied them, could not persuade himself to the hazard of a Battle; till at
length the season of the year spending, and being wearied in the Port of
Rhodes, he resolved to adventure abroad; but instead of going to Candia, he
plundered the Islands as he passed, and returned to Constantinople, with 40.
Galleys, where he hoped with the booty he had plundered to appease the anger of
the Divan against him; but this Sacrifice did not much avail, for he was not
sooner arrived, than his person was seized, and Goods sealed up for the use of
the G. Signior; the which Seal his Sons broke open, and taking with them the
richest and most considerable part of their Fathers Estate, laded it on one of
the Galleys, and fled therewith into Foreign Parts, little regarding that
danger in which they had left their Father to perish. During which time the
Venetians still maintained their Guards on the Coasts of Candia, not suffering
any Recruits of Men, or Provisions for War, to be transported thither; so that
if the Turks designed to prosecute this War, it must be by new Forces, and such
as were able to encounter the Marine Power of the Enemy; the which being
resolved upon by the Council, a heavy Tax was laid on the people to carry on
the design, which they not willingly supporting, made a public Insurrection in
the City; and at the same time also the ancient quarrel between the Spahees and
Janisaries, began again to ferment; which troubles being added to a Rebellion
raised by the Pasha of Aleppo, who increasing in strength and number, came
marching toward Constantinople, put that great City into a horrible fear and
confusion.

ANNO 1654.
THE Venetians judged that these troubles would naturally produce some
advantage to them, and much facilitate the Peace which they had long desired;
but as Seditions among the Turks are always too violent to continue, so these
discontents evaporated in a short time, and new resolutions were taken to
prosecute the War in Candia; for notwithstanding that Monsteur de Ventelay, Son
to the French Ambassador, mediated with agreeable prudence to compose matters
in order to a Peace, yet his endeavors were all insignificant; for neither had
Signior Capello Audience granted him, nor that liberty which was promised
before his Arrival; the Turks still insisting on the surrender of Candia,

To effect which by force, which could not be performed by composition; the
Pasha of Buda was Elected for Captain-Pasha, or Commander in Chief of the Seas;
and Orders given to equippe a new Fleet of Ships, and Galleys, for transporting
the succors of Men and Provisions to Candia: where Chusaien Pasha the General,
being wearied with his long Siege of the Town, withdrew his Men at some farther
distance for their better refreshment; for they wanting all conveniences in
their Trenches, began to Mutiny, and to refuse the performance of their duty,
until the General satisfying their pay, and dispensing liberally Largesles to
the Officers, gave them new encouragement and satisfaction; with which, being a
little enlivened, Chusaein sent a Herald, with a defiance to those in the City,
challenging them to sight a pitched Battle with him; but the Christians refused
the offer, thinking it more prudence not to accept, than loss of honor to deny
an Answer to the Challenge. Then the Turks sought some means to effect their
design by treachery; to which end, they treated with a certain Captain for
delivery of one of the Gates of the City, which he promised to do unto the
Turks, but gave Advertisement unto the Governor. The Pasha the night following
advanced with some Troops, hoping to find one of the Gates opened to him; but
instead thereof, the Defendants having prepared a Mine to receive them, sprang
the same so opportunely, that it carried away the most of those who were
engaged in the design, and therewith their hopes of becoming Masters speedily
of that impregnable Fortress. Wherefore they resolved for a while to repose,
and attend those succors which were now preparing at Constantinople.

The Fleet being put into a readiness, the Soldiery departed with their usual
hopes of success; but meeting with their Enemy again at the Mouth of the
Dardanelli, the Fight was furious and hot for a long time between them, but
concluded to the disadvantage of the Turks, who there lost 6000. Men, two
Galleys, three Ships, and a Mahone: howsoever they broke through the Venetians,
and landed 12000. Men in the Isle of Candia. The News of this defeat, and the
confirmation thereof, by the wounded Men which were landed at Constantinople,
made a great noise amongst the people. Howsoever the Turks persisting constant
to their intentions of prosecuting the War, sent Orders to the Captain-Pasha
again to sight the Venetians so soon as the Fleet was resitted, and restored to
a condition to engage in another Battle; but the Venetians scarce gave them the
leisure to repair, before they attacked them again, whereby they put them to
such disorder, that they were forced to take refuge in the first convenient
Port; where having attended a favorable Wind, they hastened to Constantinople;
and from thence were dispeeded into the Black Sea against the Cossacks, who
very much infested those parts.

The Captain Pasha being arrived, extolled his own great services and
adventures, and on the contrary vilified the Great Vizier, disparaging all his
actions, as mixed with weak counsels, and prosecuted with cowardice, or want of
true resolution; the which took such deep impression in his absence, having
none to answer for him; that all being given for granted which was alleged
against him, orders were dispatched to Candia by an Officer, to take off his
head, in whose place this Captain Pasha succeeded.

Amidst of all these combustions of War, the mediation of Peace was carried on
by the French Ambassador: For though Signior Capello was actually Resident on
the place, qualified with the Character of Bailo for the Republic of Venice;
yet the Turks would scarce vouchsafe to treat personally with him; and indeed
his sufferings by imprisonment, and other barbarous usages had affected him
with such a melancholy, as rendered him incapable for some time of administering
public Affairs; for having lost his reason by giving way to sad and black
thoughts, he laid violent hands on himself, by wounding himself in two or three
places of his Belly; but the Wounds proving not mortal, he was in a short time
restored again to a sound estate both in Mind and Body; as I shall some few
years after have occasion to relate from the words of his own mouth, which he
was pleased to utter to me on his deathbed, and the day before he departed
this life.

ANNO 1655.
THE Great Vizier after all his evil insinuations against Chusaein Pasha, fell
very sick and insirm; so that the Court considering him as a person incapable
of farther service, cast their eyes on the Pasha of Aleppo, who being a daring
Martial Man, was esteemed to be the better Chief in such a hazardous War, which
for being on the Sea, was unusual and displeasing to the Turks. Against him
nothing could be objected besides his rebellions and contrariety to the
Government; but hereunto it was presently answered, that the extravagance of
his humor proceeded only from his Ambition of being Great Vizier; which when
he had attained, that thirsty desire of Glory, which he exercised for acquiring
this office, would be busied in thoughts to advance and improve his honor in
actions beyond his Predecessors. Letters being arrived at this Pasha's hands,
which called him to Court to accept this charge, did secretly please the humor
of his haughty spirit; howsoever, he remained for a while in some suspense and
irresolution, not being assured whether some deceit might not be concealed
under this specious appearance of Preferment: But considering, that the way
unto gains and advantage was by daring adventures, he resolutely accepted the
proffer, and put himself in his March toward Constantinople with a glorious
Equipage of forty thousand Men, thinking therewith to make good his retreat,
and secure his person in case that deceit were discovered which he rationally
suspected. Being arrived near unto Constantinople, he received from the Great
Signior several messages of kindness, and a good welcome; and was accordingly
received into the City, and invested in the office, with all the circumstances
of favor and honor imaginable.

Having thus taken possession of his charge, he promised the Grand Signior that
he would employ all his endeavors to restore the decayed Estate of Affairs,
and reform the Government. And as an earnest thereof, he began to remove such
Ministers from the Court which were suspected by him; and to render himself the
more absolute, he cut off several others, whom he imagined might in any wise
disturb or control him in the management of his Affairs.

After which he dispatched his orders to all Maritime Towns of the Empire, to
sit and make ready what Galleys and Ships were possible to be provided;
intending thereby to set out the greatest Fleet that ever was seen in the
Levant; but to complete this work, two great difficulties arose. The first was,
to find a wise and well experienced Commander, and the next was, in what manner
to persuade the Spahees and Janisaries to embark; for they having heard and
seen in what manner their Companions had perished in this miserable War,
absolutely refused to go, and though the Animosities of these two orders of
Soldiers were irreconcilable one to the other, yet in this common Cause being
united, they raised so horrible a Sedition, that they assaulted the Mufti in
his very house, and pursued him within the Gates of the Seraglio with a
thousand reproaches and injuries, as an Author of evil Counsels, and a
Disturber of the common Peace and quiet of the Empire. Nor was it possible to
appease this Tumult, but by anticipating to them four months Pay; with which
their minds being made more pliable, they gently yielded to Obedience, and
suffered themselves to be embarked for Candia.

Zarnozau Mustapha was made Captain Pasha, or General of the Fleet, which was
very numerous, and well equipped, consisting of sixty Galleys, eight Mahones,
thirty great Ships of War, and sixty one Galleys, belonging to the Beys. After
having remained three days at the mouth of the Dardanelles near the Castles,
they went out in this order; The Beys Galleys were the first, then followed the
Ships, next the Mahones, and the Rear consisted wholly of the Grand Signiors
Galleys. The Van of the Fleet being the Beys Galleys, which are always the best
manned, and provided, were ordered to attack the main Body of the Christian
Fleet, for that being seconded with the Ships they would be able to sustain the
shock until the Mahones could come up, which were directed against the
starboard Wing of the Enemy, composed of Galleasses. The Venetians, though much
inferior in number, yet as great in courage, gave evident signs of their
desire to fight, with hopes, by Gods Blessing, to obtain a Victory. The
Venetians whilst the Turks passed, remained still with their Anchors apique,
which the Turks interpreting as a token of their courage and boldness, were so
daunted that they began to ply toward the Coast of Greece; but being forced to
pass under the Guns of the Venetian Admiral, they were so ill treated by his
Broadsides, that they were discouraged from making a second charge. The Ships,
and other Vessels fared little better, being forced to pass under the Guns of
the Enemies Fleet. The Captain Pasha attempted to pass on the Coast of
Anatolia, with his lighter Galleys, but being hindered by a strong party of the
Enemy, he was forced to follow the rest of the Fleet, taking his Course with
them by the Coast of Greece. In this Charge one of the Turks Mahones was sunk,
and two disabled: But the greatest Fight happened between a Squadron of the
Turks Ships, and four of the Venetians, which had been hard put to it, had not
the Captain Mocenigo come in to their assistance; howsoever, the Venetian
Captain of the Ship, called the Crown, was slain by a Musket shot. In short,
the Christians boarded the Turks with so much vigor and resolution, that they
took several of their Ships, and mixing with the thickest of their other
Vessels, they put many ashore, and others escaping in their Boats, left their
Slaves and Galleys to the disposal of the Enemy; so that the Venetians obtained
that day a hundred brass Guns, with a signal Victory, having had no other
important Loss, unless the Ship called the David and Goliath, which being
overpowered, was burnt by the Turks.

The People of the Turks, who were in daily expectation to receive
Constantinople, attributed the misfortune of all to the ill Government, and
want of experience in the General. Wherefore to appease the People, especially
the Merchants, who were weary of this marine War; from whence they reaped
nothing but losses of their Ships and Goods; It was thought fit to enter into a
Treaty with Signior Capello, the Venetian Bailo, concerning a Peace; but he
having his Commission taken from him, for the reason beforerelated, his
Secretary Ballarino supplied his office; and in order to an accommodation, had
two Audiences with the Great Vizier, to whom, and to others of the Divan, he
made Presents of rich pieces of Cloth of Gold, in the name of the Republic.
Howsoever the Turks thinking it dishonorable to accord unto other terms, than
the entire resignation of Candia, proceeded in their preparations as formerly;
at which the Merchants and Tradesmen at Constantinople received such matter of
coffeehouse, that in tumults they cried out for Peace at the Gates of the
very Seraglio; and behaved themselves with that insolence, that the Janisaries
were called to drive them from thence by force of Arms; howsoever this Tumult
and Riot of the People ended not without the Life of the Great Vizier, to whose
fury he was made a Sacrifice. And though his Son appeared at the Gates of the
City with forty thousand men, to demand Justice on the Murderers of his Father,
yet the People were so far from being dismayed thereat, that their fury and
rage increased to a greater height, and required the Authority of the Divan to
keep things from running into the inconveniences of a Civil War.

ANNO 1656.
THese disorders induced the chief Ministers to enter into another Treaty with
Ballarino, proposing to withdraw their Forces from Candia, and make a peace,
upon the payment of ten millions for the charge of the War; and to incline the
Venetians hereunto, the Turks gave severe orders to their people living about
Corfou, to molest the Inhabitants of that Island with all acts of Hostility
imaginable; and farther published, that their intentions were to set out a more
numerous and stronger Fleet than any which from the beginning of this War had
failed on the Seas; and in order thereunto, great numbers of Slaves, consisting
of Cossacks and Moscovites, were bought of the Tartars, and transported to
Constantinople.

The Venetians were not in the least affrighted at these boastings of the Turk,
but on the contrary, knowing that their Affairs in Candia were well secured and
provided, gave orders to Ballarino to desist from farther Treaties, and to
procure his License to depart. And the Turks to evidence their intentions to
prosecute the War, entered into Canea with twenty eight sail laden with Arms
and Provisions, on which also were fifteen hundred men. By this conveyance was
sent a Janisar. Aga with Orders from the Grand Signior to constitute Chusaein
Pasha, in the place of Captain Pasha, or Admiral of the Seas; but he judging
this to be a design, or lure to draw him from his Post, or Office, wherein he
was more strong and secure, acknowledged the honor of the employment,

Whilst new preparations were making against Candia, so horrible a storm of
Mutiny and Sedition arose at Constantinople, as constrained the Grandees of the
Council to quit for the present all thoughts of providing for the War against
the Enemy, that they might defend and save themselves from the fury of their
own People; For the Spahees and Janisaries joining together, pretended to
reform the abuses of the State; to perform which, in a furious tumult, putting
themselves in Arms, they ran to the Divan, where they deposed the Great Vizier,
and discharged diverse other Officers of their employment; The Mufti was
constrained to fly A Rebellion at Constantinople.
to Jerusalem, and the Queen Mother scarce remained secure in her old Seraglio.
And to so great a height their Rebellion proceeded, that they proposed even to
dethrone the Grand Signior himself. And having thus cast off all respect and
duty to their Prince, they entered the Imperial Palace, and forcing the Guards,
broke up the Treasury, and carried two millions from thence. Amidst of this
horrid and affrighting Confusion, Merchants and well-meaning Citizens remained
in the most astonishing apprehensions imaginable; for all Laws being broken,
and Justice unregarded, the whole City laid open to be pillaged and sacked by
the licentiousness of an unbridled Soldiery. For several days the Offices both
of the Mufti, and Great Vizier remained vacant, by reason that the two Factions
of Janisaries and Spahees could not agree upon the Election. At length the most
seditious amongst them wearying out the others with Quarrels and Contests,
advanced a Fellow of no understanding or reputation to the eminent degree of
Great Vizier; in which condition he remained not long. For the fire of the
multitude being with time quenched, and the popular heat abated, this new
Vizier was displaced, all things returning to their usual Channel, and
Authority to its Fountain. And that matters might more easily be restored to
their ancient order, the Grand Signior called for the Pasha of Damascus to
receive the Dignity of Great Vizier, for he being a Person of eighty years of
Age, and of long experience in Affairs, having managed the most weighty Charges
of the Empire, was looked on by all as the most proper person to compose, and
heal these great distempers in the State; and this was that famous Kuperlee,
who was Father to him who succeeded him in this Office. The Pasha of Silistria
was also constituted Captain Pasha, and Chusaein was confirmed in his
Government of Candia. And now the bright Beams of Justice and Government having
dissipated the storms and fury of popular sollevations; the Grand Signior in
Person mounting his horse, accompanied with his principal Ministers of State,
visited all the Parts of Constantinople, where making Inquisition for the
principal Leaders and Fomenters of this Rebellion, he seized on some, and
without further process, boldly executed them in the face of the People. But
before things were reduced to this condition, four Months were spent in this
horrid Confusion; and what is most strange, this Great Empire for so long time
remained without a Pilot, tossed on the Waves of popular Commotions; all which
served to give ease, and respite to the Venetians in their War, but not to
operate toward a Peace; so resolute were the Turks in their design of making
an entire Conquest of Candia.

For having again Equipped a most formidable Fleet, consisting of 60. light
Galleys, 28. Ships, and 9. Galleasses; they attempted to make their way for
Candia, and therewith to fight the Venetians in case they should oppose them in
their Voyage, to which they were the more encouraged upon sight of the
Venetians, who appeared at the Streights of the Dardanelli, with no more than
29. Galleys, and some Boats, or Brigantines; howsoever the Turks were not so
confident in their numbers, but that they judged it requisite to fortify
themselves with two Batteries; one on the Coast of Anatolia, and the other on
the European shore; whereby they imagined, that they might cause the Venetians
to give way, and open a passage to their Fleet: But notwithstanding the
continual shot Engagement between the Turks and Venetians.
which the Turks made upon them, they still kept their Station from the 23th to
the 26th of June; when the Wind coming about to the North, which was favorable
for the Turks to Sail out, and to bring them nearer to their Enemies, they
began gently to approach; and the like the Christians endeavored, being
desirous to join Battle; at which firmness of resolution, the Turks being a
little startled, became willing to avoid the sight, and to creep under the
shelter of the point of Babiers, which locks in one of the Bays between the
Castles and the Mouth of the Dardanelli. But the Wind on a sudden turning
favorable for the Venetians, the Prior of Rochelle with his Squadron, and
Mocenigo with three Ships under his Command, made up toward the Castles, with
design to cut the Turks off from their Retreat; the others valiantly assailed
the Turks, who defending themselves like those, whose chief security consists
in their Arms, there ensued a most miserable slaughter on one side, and the
other; at length the success of Victory happened to the Venetians, who were
animated by the courageous Example of their General Marcello, though he having
Boarded, and become Master of a great Ship called a Soltana, with the Gally
which attended her, was shot in the thigh with a Cannon Bullet, and thereby
gained the glory to die Conquering, and Triumphant. After whose Death the
Proveditor taking upon him the Command of the Fleet, prosecuted the Victory so
close, that excepting 14. Galleys which escaped with the Captain Pasha, and 4.
Galleys of the Beyes; all the whole Fleet was either taken, sunk, or burnt. The
Venetians not being able to Man all the Vessels that they had taken, The
Venetians obtain the Victory.
set many of them on fire in the Night, excepting only 12. Galleys, 4. Ships,
and 2. Galleasses, which they reserved for a demonstration, or evidence of
their Victory. With this glorious success 5000. poor Christians obtained their
freedom, and had their Chains and Shackles knocked off. What number the Turks
might have lost is uncertain; but as to the Venetians, it is reported, that
besides their General, there were not above 300. Men in all killed and wounded.

The Venetians being encouraged by this success, attacked the Island of
Tenedos, and in the space of four days became Masters of it; as also in a short
time afterward of Stalimene, anciently called Lemnos; the which shameful
losses, and overthrow, so irritated the mind of the G. Signior, that he gave
Orders to carry the War into Dalmatia, intending the next Summer to go thither
in person; and in the mean time Commanded by the Pasha of Bosna, that the City
of Ragusa should be put into a readiness to receive his Troops, being judged a
convenient place for the Seat and Magazine of Arms for those Countries. But the
poor Republic greatly apprehending this misfortune, than which there could be
no greater mischief, nor ruin to their Country; dispatched certain Deputies
with their yearly Tribute to the Port, with instructions, that in the way
thither, they should supplicate the Pasha to intercede with the G. Signior in
their behalf, representing to his Majesty, that they paying their annual
Tribute for protection, ought not in justice to be exposed to the
licentiousness of an Army, which their little Territories were not capable to
receive, nor provide with convenient Quarters: at which Message the Pasha being
highly incensed, answered rudely, and imprisoned them; threatening to strangle
them, in case their Government did not obey the Commands of the Sultan.

ANNO 1657.
BUT the Chief Ministers at the Port, taking into their consideration the
present State of Affairs; that the City of Constantinople was full of
discontents; the Persian on one side, and Moscovite on the other, ready to
invade diverse parts of the Empire; that there were designs to depose the G.
Signior, and set one of his Brothers on the Throne; besides a multitude of
other dangers; the resolution of the Courts removal, and of the G. Signiors
March into Dalmatia was suspended; his presence and authority being esteemed
most requisite in such a Conjuncture of troubles at the heart and center of his
Empire. After which, the appearance of the G. Signior in public was less
frequent; for that he might hasten the departure of the Spahees and Janisaries
for Candia, he deferred his Journey to Adrianople for some time; but they being
averse to this War, refused to march, until first they had received all
Arrears, which were due to them; the which audacious proposal so inconsed the
G. Signior, that he caused the heads of two of the most forward Mutineers to be
cut off in his presence.

This unseasonable rigor rather provoked the spirits of discontented men, than
abated them; and the continual prizes which the Venetians made on the Turks,
and stoppage of provisions, which did usually supply Constantinople from the
Archipelago, raised the price of Bread, and of all Victuals in that populous
City, so that the people murmured and exclaimed, as if they had been reduced to
their last extremity. The G. Vizier considering that the loss of Tenedos was
the cause of all these inconveniences; promised the Inhabitants of
Constantinople, that he would regain it in a short time; in order to which, he
set forth a very numerous Fleet, to besiege that Fortress; but contrary Winds,
and bad weather, forced them into a Neighboring Port, where they attended the
Conjunction of the Beyes Galleys with them. The General of the Venetians having
received advice hereof, put to Sea, that he might hinder these two Fleets from
joining; and was no sooner in the Channel of Scio, than that he met with 10.
Sail of Barbary men of War, convoying a great number of Saiques, and other
Vessels, of which 14. were laden with provisions, carrying also with them 200
thousand Crowns, which was the Tribute of Rhodes: these the Venetians assailed
with such Courage and success, that they burnt the ten Ships, and many of the
Saiques; killed a thousand Turks, took 400. Prisoners, delivered 300.
Christians; with the loss only of 100. killed, and 300. wounded.

This and other losses augmented the discontents at Constantinople, so that the
G. Vizier to hold up the spirits of the people, resolved to go in person to
Tencdos; and accordingly Equipped a Fleet of 18. Ships, 30. Dardanelli, on the
17th of July, having first received intelligence, that Mocenigo was not
returned from the Morea, where he had been for some time in chase of certain
Ships; Howsoever the Turks found not the passage so clear, but that they
encountered with a Squadron of 18. Sail of Men of War, under the Command of
Signior Bembo; the which seeming an inconsiderable number to the Turks, they
assailed them with undoubted hopes of Victory. The Admiral and Vice Admiral of
the Turks, with five other great Ships, charged the Venetian Admiral, who
defended himself so bravely, that for three hours they lay Board and Board; the
rest of the Turkish Fleet assailed the other part of their Enemies Fleet so
close, that the Fight became terrible and bloody, both for one and the other,
until at length the Turks being worsted were put to flight, and in the pursuit
a great Turkish Sultana was put ashore near Troy; one of their Galleasses was
disabled, two of their Ships sunk, and the rest were chased as far as Metylene,
being put by the Island of Tenedos.

In this Interim, the General Mocenigo was on his Voyage toward the
Dardanelli, and being come within the noise of the Cannon, he hastened with
more diligence; and arrived so seasonably to the assistance of Bembo, that at
his appearance most of the Turkish Galleys began to turn their sterns, and make
toward the shore of Anatolia with such disorder, that of twenty eight Galleys,
and two Galleasses, there were but five only which kept company with the
Bastard Gally of the Captain Pasha, and entered with him under the defense of
the Castles. The rest of the Fleet was chased by Mocenigo, but the Turks being
to windward, the Christians were not able that day to come up with them. The
next day the Wind being more favorable, a Council of War was held aboard the
Venetian General; during which consultation, they espied five Galleys making
toward the Point Baba, there to secure themselves under the Shore; and
thereupon resolved, that whilst the Captain General with the Squadron of Malta,
attempted those 5. Galleys, and others which had taken the same place of
refuge; the rest of the Fleet should keep siring at those without. Accordingly
the Captain General made toward the Point Baba, where passing within
Musket Shot, and under the reach of five Batteries, an unfortunate Shot in the
powder-room blew up the Ship, and therewith ended the days of this valiant
Mocenigo, who died full of honor and glory; his brave actions continuing his
Memory in all the Histories of Venice. The Proveditor succeeding in his Command
prosecuted the same design, and as if he would imitate the ancient funeral
piles, he celebrated the Obsequies of his General, by burning the Admiral Gally
of the Turks, and thence retired toward Tenedos.

After the Turks had refitted their Vessels, and put their Fleet in a
reasonable posture, they departed from Metylene the 28th. of July at night, and
on the 30th. were on the Coast of Tenedos, where immediately Tenedos retaken by
the Turks.
landing five thousand Men, and great numbers approaching ready to set their
Foot on shore, the Defendants of the Fortress summoned a Council of War, at
which all agreeing that the Island was not tenable against so great a force,
embarked their Men, Ammunition, and Artillery, and resigned their place to the
Disposal and Command of the Enemy. After which success the Turks in like manner
landed ten thousand men on the Island of Lemnos, where, having laid a formal
Siege to the Castle, they made a general assault, but were repulsed with the
loss of five hundred men, leaving their sealing Ladders to the Besieged. They
made afterward diverse attempts, but in all were beaten off with considerable
loss; so that they had abandoned the Enterprise, had not the greater fear and
apprehension of the Divan at home confirmed their courage against the Enemy;
until at length the Christians being wearied with two Lemnos retaken.
months Siege, without hopes of relief, were forced to a surrender, which was
performed on Articles, That they should depart with Arms, and Baggage, and
have free liberty to embark themselves for Candia.

These two important places being regained by the Turks, were the subject of
great joy to the Court, and of courage and satisfaction to the Inhabitants of
Constantinople: So that the Grand Signior apprehending that by these successes,
the Seditions and Mutinies of the City were appeased, he took his Journey to
Adrianople; where to evidence his Grandeur to the Bailo Capello, and the
Secretary Ballarino, he made his entry with an Army of twenty thousand men,
besides the ordinary attendance of the Court, and usual Concomitants of the
Ottoman Train. After which Ostentation, the Grand Signior encharged Ballarino
to write to the Senate, That though he was able to overrun all their Country,
and take from them their Capital City, yet such was his clemency, that he was
contented to grant them peace, on conditions that they surrendered to him all
the Island of Candia, with the Fortress of Clissia in Dalmatia, and payment of
three millions of Gold for the damages of the War. But these seemed to the
Senate to be such unreasonable propositions, and so prejudicial to their
honor, that they resolved to maintain the War, and to defend themselves more
vigourously than ever.

ANNO 1658.
NOtwithstanding the designs of the Turks against Dalmatia, they were not less
intent to their Affairs in Candia, designing to try their fortune once again in
the Siege of the principal City of that name, for that that falling into their
hands, the whole Island would quickly be reduced, and with that Conquest an end
would be put unto the War. The Venetians on the other side, attended to their
business with all diligence, not neglecting any provisions which might secure
their interest in that Country; and that they might regain what they had lost,
they held intelligence with some persons in Canea, hoping by their means to
surprise the Town; but the Turkish Governor, being very vigilant, reinforced
his Garrison with five hundred men; and Chusaein Pasha coming to his assistance
with thirty Galleys, disappointed the Venetians of landing at that place.

The Rendezvous of the Army which was to march into Dalmatia, was ordered to be
at Adrianople, where the Brother in Law of the Pasha of Aleppo, who was
Commander of the Forces of that place, arriving later than the day presixed,
was for that reason put do death by the Great Vizier. This severity so enraged
the Pasha, that immediately he raised The Rebellion of the Pasha of Aleppo.
an Army of forty thousand men, and marched toward Scutari, threatening
Constantinople it self, unless the head of the Great Vizier were given him by
way of reprizal for that of his Brothers. The Divan being startled hereat,
returned him a gentle message, neither denying nor granting Constantinople; and
the Plague raging at the same time in the City, affected the Inhabitants with
such sadness and discontent, that the chief Ministers apprehended more evil
from thence than from the Enemy without. The Army of the Pasha daily
increasing, and being grown from forty to sixty thousand men, caused the Vizier
to abandon all other thoughts and designs but those which tended to the
destruction of the Pasha, and his Accomplices; so that there necessarily followed
a revulsion of the Forces from Dalmatia; the Vizier himself diverting them from
thence and Transylvania, marched with the whole Army toward Constantinople.

Yet before the Great Vizier departed from Adrianople, he persuaded the Grand
Signior to set the Bailo Capello, and the Secretary Ballarino at liberty, that
thereby he might give some jealousy to the Rebels, as if he designed to make a
Peace with Venice, to have more power, and better leisure to make his War
against them. This Counsel, though prudently given, had yet little influence on
the humor of the Pasha, who continued his March, fortifying himself in the
most advantageous Passes of the Country: But what was most bold of all his
actions, and rendered his pardon beyond the clemency of his Sovereign, was the
proclaiming a Youth of twenty years of Age, then with him in his Army, to be
the Son of Sultan Morat, and consequently the lawful Heir of the Crown; and
that in right of him, he had taken possession of a great part of Asia, and was
marching toward Constantinople, with resolution to dispossess Sultan Mehmet,
and exalt this lawful and undoubted Heir on the Throne of his Ancestors.

This and other rumors from Persia, that that King taking the advantage of
these disorders, was making preparations to regain Bagdat, or Babylon, and
revenge himself of all those cruelties which the Turks had inflicted on his
Subjects and Country, increased the fears and cares of the chief Ministers of
State. Notwithstanding which, Chusaein Pasha prosecuted his business no less in
Candia than formerly, in hopes to put an end to the War there, before the end
of the Summer; and in order thereunto, he received a Recruit of five and twenty
thousand men, from the Morea. But the daily increase of the Pasha's Forces, and
his approach toward Constantinople, as it was a matter of the highest
consequence, so it required the most prudence and caution in the management. In
the first place therefore by Fetfa, or Resolve from the Mufti, the Pasha was
declared a Rebel, and guilty of High Treason against the Sultan,
notwithstanding which, a Chaous was dispatched with Letters of Pardon, if now
repenting of his fault, he would disband his Army, and return to his former
obedience, he should be received into grace and favor. The Pasha received the
Chaous with the same Ceremony and honor, as if he had been an Ambassador,
being willing to consider him under that Character, rather than under the
notion of a Pursuivant, or Officer sent to affright him into his Duty; and in
answer to the message replied, That it was not in his power to condescend to
any conditions, for that since he had assumed the Cause of this Youth, who was
the Son of Sultan Morat, concealed to that Age by his Mother, for fear of the
power of his Uncle, he could not assent to any terms or conditions less than
the Exaltation of him to the Ottoman Throne: and so carrying this Young Man
with him, as a property, whereby to cover his Rebellion with the Guise of
Justice and Duty; he maintained a Court for him after the Ottoman fashion; and
causing the Tagho, or Standards to be carried before him, he permitted him to
give Audiences, send Dispatches, and to take on him all the royal marks of
Empire. The Army of the Pasha was by this time increased to seventy thousand
Men, one Part of which he sent toward Scutari, and another toward Smyrna,
which alarmed all the Countries round about, and gave the Grand Signior such
cause of apprehension, that he tried diverse means, and made many propositions
of honors and benefits to the Pasha, whereby to allure him to obedience; One
while he offered to him the Government of G. Cairo, but that being rejected, he
endeavored to raise men in Asia to oppose the progress of his Arms; of which
some numbers being got into a Body, and perceiving the formidable Force of the
Pasha, revolted, and joined themselves to his Party. This extremity of Affairs
caused the Grand Signior not only again to proclaim the Pasha a Rebel, but to
give liberty to his people to destroy him and his Soldiers in any parts where
they should encounter them. In pursuance of which License, a Village in Asia
having killed twenty five or thirty of the Pasha's men, which came thither to
refresh themselves; the Pasha was so enraged thereat, that he caused his
Soldiers to put Man, Woman, and Child to the sword throughout the Village. And
in this manner the Affairs of the Turks remained in the greatest Confusion
imaginable through the whole course of this year 1658.

ANNO 1659.
NOR did this Year begin with better Omens of success, for to the other dangers
was added a report, that the Persian had taken the Field with two hundred
thousand Men, for recovery of Bagdat, or Babylon, which was the Ancient
Patrimony of his Forefathers; so that the Grand Signior being rendered thereby
more willing to agree and accommodate Affairs with the Pasha, proffered to him
the Government of the Province of Soria for ever, paying only a yearly homage
of a hundred thousand Sultanees, in lieu of three hundred thousand, which that
Country always yielded. But the Pride of the Pasha scorned a proffer of so mean
a consideration, having nothing less in his thoughts than the entire enjoyment
of the Empire, or at least to partake an equal share thereof with the Sultan.
Forth hopesof the Pasha increasing with his Army, which was now grown to
eighty thousand men; he took up for some days his Headquarters near the
Fortress of Tocacaia, within ten days March of Smyrna; and thence approaching
toward Constantinople, the chief Ministers concluded that there was no other
safety but in their Arms, and that the Pasha was not to be reduced to any
terms of gentleness or moderation. Accordingly the Great Vizier passed into
Asia with a numerous Army, and speedily joined Battle with the Pasha, which
continued for some hours with great slaughter on one side and the other; but at
length the fortune of the day turned in favor of the Pasha, and the Viziers
Army being routed, he lost all his Cannon and Baggage, and he himself was
forced to save himself in the neighboring Countries; where not Constantinople,
to which being added the motion of the Persians, and that they were to join
with the Pasha, as also some troubles in Transylvania caused by the unquiet
spirit of Ragotski, together with the ill humor of the malcontents in the
City, made all things appear with equal, or greater danger at home than abroad.

Wherefore, as the ultimate remedy of these imminent dangers, it was resolved,
that the Grand Signior should go in person to the War, on supposition that
Reverence to his Royal Person would produce that awe on the spirits of his
Subjects, which was not to be effected by violence, or force of Arms.
According to this resolution the Grand Signior passed into Asia, and joining
his Forces with those of the Vizier, composed an Army of seventy thousand Foot,
and thirty thousand Horse, with which marching boldly toward the Enemy, the
heart of the Pasha began to fail him; so that calling a Council of his
Officers, he proposed his inclinations toward terms of agreement, rather than
to hazard all on the uncertainties of a Battle; the spirits of the Soldiery
being now become tractable by the appearance of so great a Force, assented to
the proposition; and thereupon Articles being speedily drawn up, were sent to
the Grand Signior for his approbation, who, though he would not seem to refuse
any thing therein contained, yet declined a personal Treaty, as being a matter
too mean for his Imperial Person to capitulate with his Vassals; and therefore
ordered, that Mortaza Pasha should treat in his behalf, promising to confirm
whatsoever Act Mortaza Pasha should conclude in this matter. Mortaza being thus
made Plenipotentiary, refused to treat with the Pasha, until such time as he
had retreated with his Army at a distance of some days March from the Grand
Signior's Camp; which being performed near a Town called Alexandria, he
foolishly suffered himself to be separated in a private place from his Army, on
pretense that Peace was more aptly concluded in a free retirement, than under
the constraint and force of the Soldiery. Here Mortaza meeting the Pasha
forcibly strangled him with 17. of his Accomplices, whom he had brought with him
for Witnesses to his Capitulations with the Grand Signior. With the news hereof
the Army of the Pasha soon disbanded, every one with shame and silence shifting
for himself, retired to his own Country and home. And herewith easily ended
this Civil War almost in a moment, which but now threatened the Extirpation of
the Ottoman Race. The cruel Vizier retained his thoughts of revenge, which we
shall shortly hear in what manner he vented on the great Spahees and rich Men
in Asia, who had joined themselves with the Pasha in this Rebellion. This good
service promoted Mortaza, and rendered him more considerable to the Grand
Signior; so that he was employed in the assistance of the Tartars, against
Ragotski in Transylvania, and afterward preferred to the important Charge of
Bagdat, or Babylon, of whose success, and Fate we shall hear in the Sequel of a
few years.

But as yet the Commotions of Asia were not so wholly extinguished, but that
the Nephew of the Pasha of Aleppo, in revenge of the treacherous death of his
Uncle, took up Arms, and was followed by the people of the Territories
depending on Aleppo. To his assistance came in also the Son of Chusaein Pasha,
late General in Candia, whom the cruel Vizier had put to death, notwithstanding
the merit of his late services, which might seem to atone for his former
misfortunes, and make satisfaction for noncompliance with instructions; but
this Vizier, who never pardoned any Person, would not begin with an Act of
clemency toward one who was none of his Creatures, or Confidents depending on
him. To these joined the Bey of Torgue, who casting off his Obedience to the
Pasha of Cairo, entered into the Cabal with ten thousand Horse; so that a
formidable Army being composed by this Union, gave a new subject of fear and
apprechension at Constantinople. But the Great Vizier so dexterously managed his
Affair, by sowing Dissension between the Chiefs, and bestowing Largesses to the
Soldiery, that the Army unsensibly mouldred away, leaving their Generals, and
Commanders to shift for themselves, and exposing them to the Justice of a
Vizier, who was unacquainted with mercy, and never pardoned any who was either
guilty of a fault, or suspected for it.

Toward the end of this Year the Vizier built the lower Forts, which are
situated at the entrance into the Dardanelles, commonly called by the name of
the Queen Mothers Castles. And dispatched a Chaous to the Pasha of Canea, to
put all things in a readiness for the Siege of Candia: Orders were also given
to the Pashaws of the Inland Countries to prepare themselves for the Wars
against Dalmatia, and Transylvania.

ANNO 1660.
THE Rendezvous of the Army being appointed at Belgrade, the Vizier hastened
thither in Person to quicken the preparations, and March of the Soldiers,
which were flocking thither from all parts. This Vizier Kuperlee, though aged,
was yet very active and vigorous, by which he created so much confidence of
himself in his Master, that he acted nothing in all the Government but by his
counsel and direction: which being always jealous and bloody toward those who
had any power in the Empire; he for that reason cut off the Casir of Damacus,
who though he was a good Governor, and a faithful Servant, yet because he was
a Favorite of the Queen Mother, and conserved the. State of his Affairs in a
laudable posture, he grew jealous of his power, and therefore sacrificed his
blood to his own security and bloody disposition. The which act of unjust
cruelty so enraged the Queen Mother, that she for ever after bore a mortal
hearted to this Vizier, and continued the same to his Son, which was the famous
Kuperlee; but his moderation and discretion was so well tempered with respect
toward her, that She at length not only pardoned the sin of his Father in him,
but became his Friend, and relished the services which he performed for his
Master.

The Venetians having about this time received considerable succors, namely
4000. French Foot, which his most Christian Majesty after the Conclusion of
Peace at the Pyrenean Treaty, had most generously spared to that Republic,
were enabled to attempt some notable enterprise; and thereby so hardly pressed
the Pasha of Canea, that he earnestly wrote to the G. Signior for succors;
assuring him that without present relief, he should be forced to surrender his
Town to the mercy of the Enemy. The G. Signior promised him speedy relief, and
for his better encouragement sent him the Present of a Sword and a Vest of
Sables; in the mean time the Venetians took three Forts, viz. Calamo, Calegro,
and Epicarno, and proceeded to lay Siege to Canea; but the Enemy having
received a supply of 3000. men into the Town, the Christians quitted this
enterprise Candia; which was lately built near to the old Candia, with design
to keep that Town straightened by perpetual Alarms, and by the vicinity of so bad
a Neighborhood.

The G. Vizier being very Aged, was subject to many infirmities, and falling
sick at Belgrade, he was advised by the Physicians to change the Air, as the
best remedy for his Disease; and indeed they were all careful to give him the
best and safest Counsels, for that he often threatened them, if he died of that
Sickness, he would send them all to the next World before him. The Vizier
following the advice of his Physicians, returned to Adrianople, where having in
a good measure recovered his health, he sent Orders to Hali Pasha, then General
of the Forces in Hungary, to hasten the Siege of Varadin, being esteemed by the
Turks an advantageous Fortress for carrying on their Conquests in that Country;
of the taking of which Town, and of all the troubles in Transylvania, caused by
the ambitious humor of Ragotzki, we shall treat at large in the following
History. For being come to that time, in which Providence allotted me a charge
at Constantinople; I was thereby somewhat elevated on a rising ground, whereby
I could with my own Eyes survey the Transactions of that great Empire; and for
that reason I call them my Memoirs; which for being matters transacted in my
own time, I have thought fit to introduce them with a short Advertisement to
the Reader.

THE MEMOIRS OF PAUL RYCAUT, Esquire Containing the HISTORY OF THE TURKS, FROM THE
YEAR 1660. to the YEAR 1678. With the most Remarkable Passages Relating to the
ENGLISH TRADE In the space of Eighteen YEARS.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre near Temple Bar, M DC LXXIX.

TO THE READER
Courteous Reader,
THis following History is some part of those fruits arising from my vacant
hours of eighteen Years residence in Turkey, seven whereof I completed at
Constantinople, in quality of Secretary to the Lord Ambassador, and for eleven
Years I exercised the Office of Consul at Smyrna. In the first times of which,
I had great advantages to observe, and make my Annotations; having for the most
part been acquainted with the persons as well as with the affairs of those
concerning whom I write; and indeed the incumbence which was then upon me,
obliged me to a knowledge both of persons and business. My latter time, which
was that of being Consul, constrained me to an attendance on matters relating
to the government of our Trade; and therefore it is not to be expected, that at
that distance from the Court, I should lay down Transactions so positive, and
particular, as in the preceding Years; yet the acquaintance, and
correspondence I afterward continued at Court, and the care I took to inform
my self of what occurred, qualified me in some measure for an Historian; at
least put me into a condition to make a Breviate, or Collection of certain
Observations occurring in the Turkish Court.

When I first entered on this work, I was carried with a certain emulation of
French and Italian Writers, of whose Ministers few there were employed in the
parts of Turkey, but who carried with them from thence, Memoirs, Giornals, or
Historical Observations of their times. In which our Nation has been so
defective, that besides some scattered and abrupt Papers, without coherence, or
method, adjoined to the end of Knoll's History of the Turks (which is an
excellent collection from diverse Authors) one shall scarce find five sheets of
Paper wrote by our Countrymen in way of History. At which omission having often
wondered, I resolved from my first entrance in those Countries, to note down in
a blank Book what occurred in that Empire, either as to civil, or military
affairs; with what Casualties and Changes befell our Trade, that so both one and
the other might serve for Examples and Precedents to future Ages; the which
after some years afforded me materials to compose and frame this following
Discourse. In which, having by Gods assistance thus far proceeded; As it may be
an Example to my Successors, to spin and draw out the thread of this History
through Ages to come; so it will be a good part, and office, of those who
reside there at present, by a more diligent enquiry to correct, and amend what
I have mistaken, or misunderstood.

For next to the immediate attendance to the Charge and Trust imposed upon me,
I judged it a chief duty toward my Country, to denote and Record certain
Transactions relating to Trade, which is the grand Interest that bath engaged
England to a Communication, and Correspondence, with these remote Parts: nor
does the World perhaps expect much less from me, than that I should add
something to the History of the Turks in our time, which howsoever imperfectly
I may perform it; yet the Of. fices which I have exercised, and the
impartiality with which it is wrote, may gain it some credit and reputation in
the World. For in the writing hereof, I cannot be taxed with animosity to any
person; nor am I to be esteemed as possessed with affection, or partiality to
any side; which is a point of sobriety, and good temper, necessary for all
Historians: For we who lived in those parts, were little concerned for the
House of Kuperlee, or for the Favorites of the Court; nor was it of any moment
to us, whether the Faction of the Spahees, or Janissaries prevailed; or whether
the Courtiers, or the Soldiers, ruled the Empire: only we esteemed it our
duty, to speak best of that Government under which our Trade thrived most. And
though the times of Sultan Ibrahim were the golden days for Merchants, which
employed our Navigation beyond the memory of any times, either before, or
since; and consumed of our Manufactories (though not in greater quantities) yet
perhaps with better advantage and profit to our Nation: Yet I ought not to be
so injurious, or ungrateful to Sultan Mahomet the Fourth, as to accuse his
Government of Oppression, or Violence toward us, or of any breach of Articles,
and Privileges, which he had granted to his Majesty's Subjects; but shall
rather applaud, and be ready to own that Justice which our Complaints have
found, and met at the Ottoman Court, under the protection of those worthy
Ambassadors sent by his Majesty to stand Sentinel on the Guard of their
Country.

For whereas in the time of Sultan Morat, when the Military men bore the sway;
Injustice and Violence, which mingled in all the actions of Rule, had an
influence also on the English affairs: And when in the time of Sultan Ibrahim,
that the Female Court had gained the predominancy; and that vast Treasures were
expended in Riot and Luxury; the prodigality of great persons made it necessary
to be rapacious and unjust: But in these more moderate times of this present
Sultan, when neither excessive Wars abroad, nor Luxury nor immoderate expenses
at home, exhausted the Coffers. We may easily imagine, that the disorders of
State did not drive the Rulers to a necessity of exercising unjust Arts, which
are always most certain Sym ptoms, either of a bad Government, or a vicious
inclination in the Prince.

The English Trade according to the Chronicles of Sir Richard Baker, was first
introduced into the Country of the Turks, in the Year 1579. but Sagredo an
Italian Writer, accounts only from the Year 1583. perhaps before that time
Overtures were only made for a Trade, which might be so inconsiderable, as that
until then it was not esteemed worthy to be adorned with an Ambassador, or to
be opposed by the Ministers of Foreign Princes. For so soon as an Ambassador
from England appeared at the Ottoman Court, with Credential Letters from Queen
Elizabeth, the French and Venetian Ministers took the Alarm, and opposed his
reception, especially the French, who (as Sagredo reports in his History of the
Turks) represented unto the G. Vizier, how much this new Friendship with the
English would obstruct that ancient Alliance which was made with his King, and
would impeach and lessen the Privileges and Trade which they enjoyed in those
parts: To which the Vizier answered, according to their usai phrase and style;
that the happy Imperial Seat where his Master resided, was called the Port,
because it was free and open to all such who desired to take refuge and
Sanctuary therein, and therefore the English without just reason ought not to
be excluded. That the Sultan ought not to be denied that freedom of love and
hatred, which was common to all Mankind; and that he was as well resolved to
choose and cherish his Friends, as to prosecute and destroy his Enemies.
Whereunto the French Ambassador urged, that since it was the pleasure of the
Grand Signior to admit the English; that at least they should be obliged to
enter Constantinople under the French Colors. But the English Ambassador
replied, that his Mistress who was so potent, scorned all Dependencies on other
Nations, and would rather abandon the Friendship of the Sultan, than admit the
least diminution of her own honor: and embellishing his Discourses (as Sagredo
proceeds) with the representation of that advantage and profit, which the
English Trade would bring to the Ottoman Empire; he so ensnared the hearts of
the Turks, that they preferred the admittance of new Guests, before the
Alliance of ancient Friends. Since which time our Commerce and Trade with the
Turk has been in its increase, and being governed by a Wise and Grave Company
of Experienced Merchants, has by Gods blessing brought an inestimable Treasure
and advantage to the English Nation, which that it may still continue,
increase, and flourish in all Ages and times to come, is the hearty desire, and
Prayer of him, who is a true, and faithful Servant to that worthy Society, and
a sincere Wellwisher to his Country.

Farewell.

THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROR OF THE TURKS, Beginning
in the NINTH YEAR OF HIS REIGN.
The First BOOK.
Anno Christi, 1661. Hegeira, 1072.
IT was now the beginning of this Year, when the Earl of Winchelsea arrived at
Constantinople, the first Ambassador sent abroad from His Majesty of Great
Britain, Charles the Second, after his happy Return to the Glorious Throne of
his Ancestors, to Sultan Mahomet, the Thirteenth Emperor of the Turks; it
being judged fit, that amongst other Alliances which were to be contracted with
Foreign Princes and States, this of Turkey should not be omitted, but rather in
the first England's richesse depends absolutely on her Foreign Trade, so on
none more particularly than on that of Turkey, which consumes great quantities
of her most staple and substantial Manufactures, and makes returns in
whatsoever Employes, and gives Bread to the poor and industrious of the Nation.

At the arrival of this Ambassador, the important affairs of this vast and
still growing Empire, were governed by the Great Vizier Kuperlee; The Vizier
Kuperlee.
a person decrepit and infirm in body, by reason of his great Age, but of a
solid and subtle judgment; by Nature cruel, and by Years froward; which
disposition was singularly well fitted to do service to his Master, against the
impetuous storms of the Faction of those times, in which the Pashaws, and
Chiefs of the Soldiery (as often it happens in Empires, whose Body is grown
too vast to be ruled by a weak Head) became rich and powerful, and by the long
Vacations of Peace, insolent and wanton; for as then the Wars with Venice were
carried on faintly, only by sending forth an Armata of Galleys in the Spring;
and the preparations became rather accustomary, returning with the Year, and
made for exercise of the Arsenal, and amusement of the people, than designed
with any probable expectation of success or Victory, proportionable to that
Treasure and trouble which maintained them. So that to encounter so many
difficulties, and predominancy of Ambition and Avarice, the Prince himself
being young, the Fortune of his Empire had more than urgent necessity of such a
rough and cruel disposition as was found in Kuperlee; who so seasonably made
use of it, to the destruction of all such, who might either endanger his
Prince, or himself; that in two or three Years time he became Master of the
Lives, and Estates, of the Grand Mutiniers; confiscating their richesse and
fortunes to the use and security of his Master; having in his time put to
Death, thirty six thousand persons, whom he proscribed in several Countries;
and privately strangled in the City, by virtue of his absolute and
uncontrollable Authority, without giving the Offenders liberty of Processes, or
Pleas for their Lives, or the solemnity of Scaffolds, or applause of a Funeral
Oration at the Gallows, whereby to win the affections and compassions of the
vulgar, but went through with his bloody and tragical business, without noise,
or rumor, or knowledge almost of all the Soldiery, or the people; whilst the
great Personages, whose rapine and pride had contracted them envy and hatred
from their inferiors, stood confused and amassed, not having power to rebel,
nor Sanctuary to fly unto.

Such is the effect of an absolute, and arbitrary power, which is Master of
times and affairs, and rather fits and squares Enterprises to Counsels, than
Counsels to Enterprises. Reges Hercule non liberi solum impedimentis omnibus,
sed Domini rerum, temporumque trahunt Consiliis cuncta, non sequuntur. Live.
lib. 9. The Grand Signior in the mean time applauded the diligence and
circumspection of his Minister; and though yet trembling with the memory of
late sollevations amongst the Janissaries; yet being young, and active, addicted
himself wholly to the delight of Hunting, and to follow the Chase of fearful,
and flying Beasts; whilst his Vizier so closely followed his game of blood,
that he left no person considerable in the Empire, who was not a Creature made
by, or depending on him; unless the Kahyabei, or Lieutenant General of the
Janissaries; Mortaza Pasha of Babylon, now called by the Turks Bagdat, and the
Pasha of Magnatia; Men, whose bravery, and generous Justice, or else their
Guards, or Fortune, had only seated beyond the reach and Sword of this Tyrant.
This was then the State of the Turkish Affairs amongst themselves: As to
Foreign, and Christian Princes; The Emperor, the King of England, the French
King, and the States of Holland, had their Ambassadors and Residents at the
Ottoman Court, with whom as yet passed a fair and amicable correspondence,
excepting with the French; whose Ambassador had then lately obtained his
release from Imprisonment, to which he was confined contrary to the Law of
Nations, and the Custom of the wisest, and most generous people of former Ages;
and compelled to return into France; an Agent being there settled by the
Merchants, to Negotiate their Affairs; the occasions and grounds whereof we
have at large signified in another place: which unlawful treatment of a person
sacred, none will much admire, who considers the humor of supreme Ministers
that judge themselves under no restraint or limits of Law; either Civil, or
National. The Venetians notwithstanding the War, had two Ministers there
resident; the Eccmo Capello, Procurator of St. Mark, a right worthy and noble
person; and Signior Ballarino, a person vigilant, and subtle, who omitted no
opportunities to advance his own Fortunes, and with that the benefit of his
Republic. The Emperors Resident, called Simon Renninghen, a person sincere,
free, and open hearted, agreeable to the nature of the Germans; had for some
Years, though with some difficulty, continued the Peace, or rather matters from
breaking out into an open War; the Incursions on the Frontiers, and other
accidents, always administering occasions of discontent, and complaints to both
parties.

But that the series of this History may be continued with an even thread, and
clear light to the Reader, we must cast back our Eyes to the Year 1657. when
the Ambition of George Ragotzki, Prince of Transylvania, The History of Prince
Ragotzki.
began new troubles in his own Principality, and laid the Foundation of a
future War between the Emperor and the Turks. For now Poland was so wearied
with the incessant Wars of Moscovy (the inveterate Enemy of that Crown) with
the frequent Rebellions of the Cossacks, and the invasion of the Swedes; whom
the traitorous Vice Chancellor, and his Adherents, had invited to the spoils
of their own Country; that King Casimirus was reduced to the ultimate extremity
of his Affairs; the public Exchequer, and private Treasuries were exhausted,
the Villages dispeopled, the Fields uncultivated, Traffic, and Commerce
ceased; nothing but Wars, Robberies, and confusion filled the Diurnals with
News, and the hearts of the Inhabitants with Sorrow and Calamities: wherefore
Casimir King of Poland, vexed on all sides, and not knowing where or how to
apply a remedy, dispatched his Great Chancellor Albertus Pravesmoski, in
Quality of Ambassador, to demand assistance from Ragotzki, promising in
recompense thereof, to adopt his Son to succeed him in that Kingdom. No Message
could arrive more grateful to ambitious Ragotzki, who by so desired a proffer,
seemed to arrive the Zenith of his Prosperity; which like the Land of Promise,
being only showed to his Father in a long Prospective, seemed now as it were,
by Inheritance, to devolve upon his Son; in order unto which, many days of
Treaty and Conferences were held between Ragotzki, and the Polish Ministers;
but Ragotzki insisting on certain particulars, which were not in the Power of
the King or his Commissioners to grant without the approbation of a Diet, the
Treaty was dissolved, and Ragotski remained displeased, and angry; pretending
himself to have been deluded and slighted, resolved to avenge the Affront, and
by his Arms gain to himself the Crown of that Kingdom; so that raising a
strong Army, and joining himself in a Confederate League with Sweden, he
invaded Poland, wasting all the Frontiers with Fire and Sword. The Ottoman Port
growing jealous of Ragotski joins with the Swedes against Poland.
the successes of these Affairs, and not so much of the Advance of Ragotski, as
of the growing greatness of the Swedes, with whom unwillingly they would be
Borderers, issued an express Command, That without contradiction or delay, he
should immediately give a stop to his March, and return with his Army into
Transylvania. And though the Emperor of Germany, and the Krim Tartar declared
their dislike of his proceedings, threatening to invade his Principality at
home, unless he retracted himself, and desisted from this enterprise; yet
Ragotski having his understanding blinded with Ambition, and the lust of Rule
and Government, stopped his ears to the menaces of his Enemies, and the counsel
of his Friends. This Ragotski enjoyed a State most happy, large, fertile, and
populous, in Power inferior to few, superior to many; so that he might have
passed peaceably and honorably with all, could his great spirit have bowed to,
and complied with his Potent Neighbors. For on The difficulty of Ragotski's
Affairs.
the one side the Puissant power of the Turk threatened him, to whom the least
Ombrages of displeasure administer occasion of War; On the side of Hungary the
Emperor overawed him; On the side of Valachia, and Moldavia he lay open to
the incursion of the Tartars: So that a man might rationally expect, That this
Prince should have esteemed it honor enough to have conserved his own without
rendering himself obnoxious to the jealousy and suspicion of his Neighbors.
But his great spirit was so enamoured of a Crown, and so bewitched with the
hopes of obtaining it, that nothing seemed difficult or improbable to the
acquisition of his longing desires, which were the occasion of all those
calamities and miseries in Hungary, which afterward ensued.

In contemplation of all which foreseen evils, his Cesarean Majesty sent a
Message to the Ottoman Port, declaring against the temerity and audaciousness
of Ragotski; who in the mean time subdued the Fort of Bristia, invaded with
Fire and Sword the Province of Russia, plundered Podolia, and advanced as far
as Camonitz, a Fortress strong by Art and Nature; and joining afterward with
the Swedes, assisted them in the subjection of Cracovia. About this time the
Emperor Ferdinand the third began to send succors into Poland, and to protest
against the proceedings of Ragotski, but being surprised by sickness, soon
after passed to a better life; which for some time, giving a stop to the
assistance of Poland, was interpreted by Ragotski, as a happy Omen of his good
Fortune.

But how vain and deceitful are humane hopes, whose foundations are Ambition
and Violence! For Leopold succeeding in the place of his Father to Hungary, and
the Empire, immediately prosecuted the design in favor of Poland, and in the
first place besieging Turone, one of the chief Cities of Prussia, taken by the
Swedes, forced it to a Surrender. The King of Denmark also growing jealous of
the increasing greatness of the Swedes, nourished by ancient grudges, and
National Emulations, took up Arms in defense of Poland, and being at first,
flush of money, gave constant pay and large donatives to mercenary Soldiers,
which increased his Army, drawing great numbers from the Swedish Colors; so
that being stoutly recruited, he entered into the Enemies Countries, possessed
himself of the important Fort of Olme in Norway; overthrew the Swedish Army at
Vorgast, and obtained a victory over their Flect in the Baltic Sea. The Poles
also themselves, who at first revolted from their Prince, and favored the
Swedish proceedings, perceiving the Wind change, and become contrary to that
Party, began to abandon the interest they prosessed, and by degrees to return
to the due obedience of their King. Zerneski also the General, and Lubomiski
the Great Chancellor of Poland met the Swedish Forces near Cracovia, where
giving them Battle, discomfited the whole Army, killed fourteen thousand upon
the place, took all the Cannon and Baggage, and won that day a most signal
Victory.

Ragotski perceiving the face of things thus changed, and being by Command of
the Ottoman Port abandoned by his Moldavian and Walachian Forces, began to turn
his face toward Transylvania, where now he wished himself and Army lodged in
safety. But being overtaken by General Zerneski near the Mountains of
Transylvania, he was, though unwillingly, engaged to fight, and was with that
fury assaulted by the Polish Horse; that though according to his usual Bravery,
he charged in Person at the head of his Troops: yet he was not able to
withstand a violence so disadvantageous in number, but that his men being first
put into disorder, then to a Retreat, and then to open flight, his whole Army
Rigotski overthrown by the Swedes.
was defeated, many of them perished by the Sword, others flying through the
Woods and Mountains died with famine; and he himself obliged to buy a shameful
Peace, engaging by Word and Oath to the payment of a great sum of Money, was
permitted with a mean Retinue to return into his own Country. Nor did these
misfortunes end here; but the Tartars commanded by the Turks, in revenge and
chastisement of Ragotski's Enterprise without their consent, entered into his
Principality with considerable Bodies of Horse, against whose sudden Invasion,
an Army under the Conduct of his General Kemenius could not be so soon
collected and disciplined, as to be able to resist that fury of Tartars, who at
their pleasure, burned the Towns and Villages, and carried away multitudes of
people of both Sexes, and all Ages for Captives into their own Country, amongst
which some were of Quality and Condition. Amidst which troubles came Letters
from the Ottoman Port, directed to the Nobles of Transylvania, declaring
Ragotski a Rebel, and The Turks threaten Ragotski.
commanding that according to the laws and privileges of that Principality,
they should proceed to the Election of a new Prince, and in case of refusal,
all the ruins and calamities were threatened, which they might justly expect in
punishment of their disobedience from a severe and angry Emperor.

Ragotski being well informed what was designing against him at the Ottoman
Port; and knowing that his power was not able to oppose so much puissance,
resolved to give way to necessity, and voluntarily depose himself, before he
should be engaged thereunto by the Imperial He deposes himself.
Decree; so that he calmly receded from his Principality, hoping that his
humility and submission might procure his pardon at the Court. The Nobility of
Transylvania being as well desirous to evidence their affection to their old
Prince, as their obedience to the Grand Signior, did immediately appoint a day
for Election, but with Proviso, that a general Petition should be made in
behalf of Ragotski, that he might be again restored unto ancient Grace and
Favor with the Port, who in the mean time swore to live peaceably in a quiet
and private condition, without making disturbance, or innovation in the
Government, and that when this Grace should accordingly be obtained, then that
the new Prince should recede, and suffer things to return to their former and
pristine Estate. For which purpose there was choice made of one Francis
Redeius, Redeius made Prince of Transylvania.
a Person of a peaceable and gentle temper, who would easily condescend to the
terms agreed, and as willingly resign up his Government again, as he
unwillingly received it. But though Ragotski had renounced, promised, swore,
and in appearance seemed to recede from his Government, and surrender all at
the irresistible Decree of a superior power; yet his high Spirit, and working
Brain could not dislodge that Ambition of his heart, which at first privately
countermined and enervated the Power of the new elected Prince: but afterward
his towering thoughts swelled too big to be suppressed under the cover of
dissimulation, yielded just reason to the Ottoman Port to suspect his designs;
who not being ignorant of what was past, dispatched Orders to the Pasha of Buda
to demand the strong Fort of Janoua for caution and security of the good
Behavior of the Transilvanians.

Ragotzki feeing himself thus discovered, unmasked himself openly, and Ragotzki
again declares himself Prince.
threw away his Vizard, and with a vigourous force and courage reassumed the
Rights and Standard of his Principality, forcing Redeius not only to relinquish
his Power, but to swear never again to usurp it, though enforced upon him by
the Authority of the Turks.

These extravagances so exasperated the minds of the Turks, that whereas before
they began to entertain tender thoughts toward Transylvania, they now
meditated its entire Ruin and Conquest; and so laying aside Arguments and
Treaties, they made Levies of Horse and Foot both in Europe and Asia. Ragotski
foreseeing how unable he was to resist a Force so unequal as the puissance of
the Ottoman Empire, without the succor of Foreign Force, resolved, like the
Prodigal Son, to throw himself into the compassionate Arms of the Emperor, as
his Father, earnestly supplicating, That whereas before, his disorderly and
disobedient Life had rather merited punishment than favor; yet in this Cause,
wherein the interest of Christendom was concerned, he would compassionate the
common Good of the Christian Church, rather than chastise his particular
misdemeanors. With this message Michel Misces, his Chancellor, being
dispatched, was graciously received by the Emperor, and readily assured of
powerful aid and protection.

Ragotski elevated with this courteous Treatment and promises had his whole
mind enflamed with hopes and desire of revenge; so that assembling such Forces
as he could, he entered boldly into the Field against the Pasha of Buda, who
with a considerable Army, was ordered to march before, and enter the Confines
of Transylvania, and there unite with the Pasha of Temiswar.

In the Transaction of all these passages, July was well entered, when Ragotzki
full of his wonted Courage and heat, so vigorously assailed the Enemy, that he
quickly broke and disordered their Ranks, put them to flight, and killed three
thousand upon the place. But little did this advantage benesit poor
Transylvania, for the Great Vizier soon after following with the gross of his
Army, consisting of little less than an 100. thousand men, provided accordingly
with Artillery, and all other Military Ammunition; seconded by the Tartars, and
assisted by the Moldavians and Valachians, and a Rout of other barbarous
Nations; laid Siege to the strong Fortrefs of Janoua; The Vizier besieges (...).
of which and of several others, in a short time he rendered himself Master,
laying waste and desolate, all the Countries round with Fire and Sword. The
Nobles of Transylvania sensible of these imminent and approaching mischiefs,
dispeeded three persons of considerable Quality amongst them, in an Embassy to
the Vizier; viz. Francis Daniel, John Lues, and Acatius Berclay, who greatly
labored by their Oratory to persuade the Vizier, that they were in no wise
consenting to the disobedience of their Prince, but did always readily submit
to the Ottoman servitude; imploring his Clemency and Commiseration of their
distressed and ruined State. The Vizier inclining his Ear to their Petition,
stopped the progress of his Arms, but increased their Tribute to such an
excessive rate, that the burden of it became insupportable; and appointed
Berclay, one Berclay made Prince of Transylvania.
of the Ambassadors to be Prince; taking thereby from the People, the free
privilege of Election; Commanding them to accept him without farther dispute,
or repugnancy. It is uncertain whether Berclay designed the Principality to
himself by any instance he made to the Turks, or whether his Election proceeded
merely from the Vizier himself; yet this is certain, that returning home
Berclay applied himself to establish his own Dominion, and to disappoint the
designs of his Predecessor, and his party.

The Turks being satisfied with this submission, with the subjection of several
places of importance, with deposing of Ragotzki, and establishment of a new
Prince, began to disband a great part of their Forces; and the Great Vizier,
with the remainder, returned toward Constantinople; supposing the fire of this
War to be totally extinguished.

In this condition of repose, matters continued for about the space of two
Years; when Ragotzki impatient of his losses, and of the exchange of his
public State to a private condition, inveterate in his hate toward his Rival
and Competitor, resolved to tempt fortune once more, and make his ultimate
Assay, either to establish himself in his Principality, or at least to render
himself equal with other mortal Princes in the Grave; and so relying with much
confidence on the zealous affection of his Subjects, and the promise of
powerful Adherents, he once again justled himself Ragotzki makes new Troubles.
into the Government, by the expulsion of his Rival; whom he could not behold
with other than with an emulous and unpleasing eye. Berclay perceiving himself
thus ensnared, neglected, and persecuted by all parties, represented these
innovations to the Ottoman Port, with the most aggravating circumstances
imaginable; beseeching them to afford him aid, and vindicate their own honor
in maintenance of him, whom they had constituted a Prince, and was a Creature
formed by their own favor. The Turks immediately touched with the sense
hereof, Issued out Orders to Ciddi Ahmet, the new Pasha of Buda; Commanding him
without delay, to gather what Forces he could to interrupt the designs of
Transylvania; and to put matters unto a stand, until a greater Army could
fecond him, under the Command of Ali Pasha, appointed General for this
Expedition. The Pasha of Buda readily obeyed, and assembling what Forces he
could in Hungary, and joining with the Pasha of Temiswar, passed the Danube,
and with a very considerable Army entered Transylvania. Ragotzki undaunted at
the near approach of his Enemy, boldly entered the Field with his Forces, and
joined Battle with them in the Month of May, 1660. between the Cities of
Clansemburg, and Giulia Alba. At first the Christians endeavored to have
intercepted the Enemies passage, by some Ambuscado, or stratagem of War; but
the Turks still advancing, were at length met by the Vanguard of the
Christians; to assistance of which several Bodies following one after the
other, it became a general Engagement of both Armies: in which Battle, Ragotzki
gave his usual proofs of valor; declaring by his actions, that he was resolved
to die, or. to Triumph. But being at length wounded in four parts of his Body,
and his Army overpowered with numbers, he was forced to yield the Fortune of
the Day to the Turks; leaving 8. pieces of Cannon, and his Standard in their
hands; and the greatest part of his Army being either killed or taken; he
himself with a few of his Attendants, recovered Varadin; where after 18. Days
distemper of his Wounds, he expired his The Death of Ragotzki.
unquiet and troubled Soul. This was the end of that vain Icarus, who attempted
to fly with feigned Wings and borrowed Feathers; this is the fate of ambitious
Spirits, whom Pride elevates and exhales like a vapor, unto that height, until
it dissolves them into Showers, or precipitates them into the abyss of all
Confusion. This George Ragotzki was of a His Character.
tall and well proportioned Stature, black Hair, and a frisled Beard; his Eyes
quick and lively, of an active Body, and healthy Constitution; his Spirit was
high and great, which betrayed him to extravagancies; his Comportment was
generous and courteous toward all, which rendered him exceedingly beloved and
esteemed by his Nobility; he was free in his Speech, and eloquent in his
Expressions, prudent in his Counsels and Enterprises; had not the quickness and
vivacity of his Soul made him something rash and violent in his Attempts; he
was of the Protestant Religion, leaving behind him a Widow, and a Son of
hopeful and happy endowments.

After the Death of Ragotzki, it might well be expected that these storms of
War should be dispersed, and that Transylvania should at length enjoy the
Sunshine, and calmer Weather of Peace and Repose. But Ali Pasha, General of
the Turkish Camp, being by this time arrived the Confines with his powerful
Army, resolved not to return empty or in vain, without advantaging the Ottoman
Interest, and making some satisfaction toward the expense and trouble of so
great an Army. Wherefore taking pretense against Varadin, for receiving
Ragotzki after his Defeat, abetting his party, and following his Interest,
designed to summon that important Fortress to surrender, which is situated at
the foot of those Mountains which open a passage into Transylvania.

The Inhabitants of Varadin terrified at the approach of this formidable The
people of Varadin crave aid of the Emperor.
enemy, dispatched a Messenger to the Emperor, imploring with most effectual
Arguments his Sacred Protection and powerful Assistance against the Common
Enemy to Christendom, representing to his Cesarean Majesty, how that the Turks
in their Capitulations with him, had agreed to build or erect no new Fort on
those Frontiers: and whereas it was the same thing to force and usurp a
Fortress already made, as to form a new one; the taking of Varadin was to be
esteemed a real violation of the Articles of Peace. That his Majesty would be
pleased to reflect on the fatal consequences which the loss of Varadin might
prove to Hungary as well as Transylvania; being that Gate, which obstructed,
cuts off all intercourse between them and Germany. These considerations with
several others, were exceeding prevalent in the Imperial Council; so that it
was resolved, that General Souches should prepare his Army, and put all things
in readiness to afford the assistance which was desired; supposing that with
the German Regiments, and Hungarian Forces, might be formed an Army of about
25. thousand fighting men. But in regard in those instructions given to
Souches, there was a Clause, that he should be careful not to engage his Forces
in any attempt, where the event might be doubtful, he assembled the principal
persons of that Country, and the Militia, to consult whether succor and relief
might be given to Varadin, without hazarding the Army in a doubtful and a
dangerous adventure: in consideration of which point, a true computation being
made of all the Imperial Forces, they were found much inferior to that
calculate which was made of them at Vienna; For that since Tockai, Zatmar,
Kalo, and other places belonging to the State of Ragotzki, had been Garisoned
by German Soldiers, there remained not of them above 4000. effective Men; the
Hungarian Forces which were supposed to have consisted of 2000. Men, could not
form 600.; the Haiduchs which were computed to be 6000. Men, did not appear in
the person of one; being all dispersed and retired to their own homes. The
additional Forces from the Princes of the Empire were as uncertain, as the
expectation of them long and tedious; The difficulty of making war with the
Turk.
for though the Imperial Forces united are of puissance sufficient to bid
Battle, and defiance to the numerous Troops of the Ottoman Power; yet in regard
the union of that Body depends on the Assembly of Diets, Treaties, and long
Debates, which are subject to time and delays, caused by different Factions,
(which are impossible to be avoided amongst different States) whose Disunions,
Competitions, Emulations, and Pretenses, always in such meetings abound, and
prejudice the common cause and benefit of the Empire; the raising of such a
formidable Army, becomes a matter always of time and difficulty. Howsoever the
Emperor whose Hereditary and Elective Possessions bordering on the Consines of
the Enemy, is necessarily engaged to be the standing Bulwark of the rest, and a
Bank against the inundation of barbarous Nations; whilst other Princes whose
Dominions are more remote and secure, apprehend not the premures and storms
that the Emperor sustains, and is enforced to expel with the loss and
diminution of his own people, and impoverishment of his peculiar Treasure: To
these considerations, which rendered these pious intentions toward Varadin
almost impossible; there wanted Money, which is the Sinews of War, and the Soul
of all Enterprises: And that which farther retarded those succors and
prosecution of the design in hand, was the departure of his Cesarean Majesty
from his Court at Vienna, on occasion of a Progress as far as Trieste, to take
Homage of his Provinces of Stiria, Carinthia, and Cragno; which was an action
much against the Counsel and advice of the Archduke Leopold his Uncle; who
foresaw how great disorders would ensue by the Emperors absence in this
Conjuncture from his Imperial Court. Upon which considerations, Count Souches
sent a true List of all his Forces, with an account of the strength of his
Enemy; remonstrating that it was impossible to convey Forces into Varadin,
without hazarding a Battle with Ali Pasha, which would prove an absolute breach
of the Peace; which in this Conjuncture, and want of preparation, was neither
honorable, nor safe for the Empire.

In the mean time Ali Pasha proceeded and encamped with his Army before
Varadin, breaking first ground the 4th of July, 1660. and beginning a Formal
Siege, he soon begirt the Town, and continually laboring Varadin besieged.
in making Trenches, Batteries, and Approaches, they arrived in a few days to
the Counterscarp of the Wall. But the better to describe the Siege and Assaults
on this famous City, it will be necessary first to explain the Condition and
Situation of the place.

Varadin therefore is seated in a Plain, on the Banks of the River Chryse; To
the East it is environed with such craggy, and rough Mountains, as render it
almost on that side unaccessible; To the South the Town extended it self most;
To the North it is washed with the River, over which some small, yet fruitful,
Hills raise themselves; it is encompassed with a Wall filled with Earth, after
the fashion of Modern Fortifications, and strengthened with five main Bulwarks,
and a very deep Ditch filled with the River Water: it was well provided both of
Victuals and Ammunition, and armed with Ordnance both great and small, as was
sufficient to have repulsed a puissant Enemy, and have sustained a long and
strait Siege. But the Garrison within consisted only of eight hundred and fifty
Soldiers, an inconsiderable number, both in respect of the Circuit of the
Fortress, and of that gross Army which emcompassed it.

The Enemy being now, as it is said before, under the Counterscarp of the Wall,
they perceived that the Ditch was so deep, and filled with Water, that though
their great Guns had made open Breaches in the Walls, yet there was no
possibility to storm them, or bring the Soldiery to sealing Ladders, or handy
blows. The besieged also made such continued Sallies, with success and
slaughter of the Enemy, that after three and twenty days of vain labor to few
the Ditch, Ali Pasha was at length almost resolved to have raised his Siege,
and given over the Two ill accidents to the Garrison.
Enterprise; upon which whilst he considered and ruminated (as ill Fortune
would have it) a certain Maid, which formerly had been a servant to the
Governor of the Garrison, then a Captive in the Turkish Camp, having observed
how on occasion the Citizens used to empty and drain the Ditch, revealed the
secret to the Turks, hoping thereby not only to purchase her Liberty, but with
that also a Sum of Money for price of her treachery; so that discovering where
another Ditch was to be opened, the course of the Water was soon diverted, and
the Walls of the Town laid dry and open to the Assailants. As this happened
without, so another accident within, equally dangerous, befell the Besieged; for
one day an Officer of the Ammunition going into the Stores with a lighted
Candle, by chance dropped a spark of fire from his Lanthorn into the Powder,
which taking fire, blew up the Powder, Grenades, Fireworks, and all other
military Stores, with the neighboring houses, and above a hundred men; which
loss alone was sufficient to have dejected the minds of frail men; yet they so
valiantly bore up their courages, that they seemed not in the least abated, but
rather animated with the height of anger and despair. The Turks having now free
Access to the Walls, undermined some small Forts, which they blew up, and
thereby made so great a Breach that with facility hoping to gain the Town, if
they made use of the occasion, they poured in such multitudes of people as the
Besieged were scarce able to withstand; and the Turkish Soldiery being also
weary of their sufferings, and irksomness of their tedious leagure, resolved
now or never to put an end to their labors; so that advancing with their open
Breasts to the top of the Battlements, without fear either of Cannon, or Musket
shot, they entered within the Walls, and planted the Turkish Banners on the
Works; but being afterward received by a resolute Company of the Defendants,
they were again thrown from the Walls, and tumbled back into the Ditch with an
incredible Slaughter. It is impossible here to describe the anger, the courage,
the despair which was apparent in the faces of the Besieged, enflamed by the
love of their own Country, and hatred of the Turks; so that three or four
sustained sometimes the Assault of a Troop, and a small number united opposed a
whole Sangiack of the Enemy. The Women also forgetting the imbecility of their
Sex, renewing in themselves the Courage and Vigor of the Ancient Amazons,
exposed themselves without fear upon the Walls, throwing sealding Water,
Stones, burning Pitch, and whatsoever came next to hand, upon the Assailants;
whom they so valiantly repulsed from the rising of the Sun till twelve at Noon,
that after much slaughter on both sides, the Turks growing faint, retreated,
and took breath a while within their Trenches. And now the Soldiery
considering the Obstinacy of the Christians, began to mutiny, and resolving
not to cast away their lives in vain, motioned to raise the Siege, and be gone;
which when the General opposed, they threatened to sacrifice his Life to the
Ghosts of their departed Brethren. But see, how many times the Devil ruins the
fortune of the Christians! for whilst they were in this deliberation to depart,
behold, a certain Thracian one of the Garrison Soldiers advised the Turks that
there were not above three hundred sound men remaining in the A Thracian
betrays the (...) of the Town.
whole Garrison, that (...) were now reduced to their ultimate Crisis; so that
if they appeared only before them, and would but terrify them with another
Assault the Town was their own, without the least doubt of Surrender. This
Advice retarded the hasty departure of the Camp; instead of which they again
mustered themselves before the Walls, and prepared to assault the Breach,
resolving to put all to a second extremity. The Christians within perceiving
the resolution of their Enemy, and being sensible how much they were infeebled
by the last Convulsion, and loss of blood, and as yet sore of their Wounds,
immediately spread a white Flag of Treaty, which was as readily accepted by the
Turks, and Varadin surrendered.
all Articles agreed on the 17th. of August, and on the 20th. the Garrison
marched freely out with Colors flying, and Drums beating, with liberty to go
wheresoever they pleased without hurt or injury; which Conditions were fully
and faithfully performed and maintained.

Varadin being thus yielded, afforded matter of discourse, of discontent, of
fear, and apprehensions at Vienna; some argued, That is was but common Vienna
troubled for the loss of Varadin.
and natural reason, when our Neighbors house is on fire to look to our own;
Others blamed the slow and phlegmatic proceedings of the German Ministers, who
in such urgent emergencies as these, could sit as unconcerned, as Spectators at
a Theater, who regard nothing, which way the prize is carried; And in short,
the whole Christian World stood Admirers of this sottishness, esteeming either
those Borderers astonished and struck into a stupid timidity, or moved by
principles of Policy, which none besides themselves either understood, or
penetrated. Only Count Nicholas Serini, a Prince who had a fair and Sovereign
Inheritance in those Parts, Commander of Croatia, and the Confines under his
Cesarean Majesty, a most mortal and inveterate Enemy of the Turks, could not
endure Count Serini designs against the Turks,
their insults, bravadoes and daily encroachments, but watching his occasion of
advantage, when Canisia was almost destroyed by a dreadful fire, and thereby
their Ammunion, and Provision for the most part consumed, he gathered what
Forces he could possible, and made use of the opportunity to lay Siege unto it,
not doubting but in that Conjuncture, and miserable Calamity of all things, to
promote the interest of his Master, and the common cause of Christendom; which
as soon as he had done, he wrote a Letter to the Emperor, acquainting him that
God had opened him a Gate and Path to his Interest, and to a just revenge of
the Ottoman perfidiousness; Who having violated their Faith, and the mutual
Peace in taking Varadin, would be justly and gloriously recompensed by the loss
of Canisia; which being now, as it were by miracle, put into his hands, it were
a neglect of the Divine Providence not to improve with advantage an opportunity
so cheerful and so promising: to which, besides other arguments, he added, That
if his Cesarean Majesty should not think fit to concur herein with assistance
of his Imperial States, yet at least he would be pleased not to interdict him
from the Glory of that design, in which he questioned not but to succeed, and
in a short time to render not only to his Majesty, but also to the whole
Christian World, proofs of his Valor, and a good account of his Enterprise.
Howsoever, the Emperor's Council seriously considering that Serini's State
could not be engaged with the Turk without involving his Interest; and that the
Princes of the Empire, though when assaulted, would willingly contribute their
Forces in the defensive part, yet would -- is forbidden by the Emperor.
be backward to be the Aggressors, and engage their States in an offensive and
provoking War, did therefore not only deny to second, or abett his designs with
military succors, but positively commanded him to retire, and desist from his
resolution against Canisia; with which Answer, the Zeal and Spirit of Serini
was so enflamed, that throwing in passion his Cemiter on the Ground, he raised
his wellformed Siege, and retired to his proper Residence at Chiacaturno.

The loss also of Varadin moved the Transilvanians to consult their safety in
this extremity of their Affairs, which now amidst these dangers and storms
which threatened them, appeared in a desperate and languishing The
Transilvanians consult their safety.
Condition, unless remedied by a desperate Cure, and the resolves of some wise
and valiant Counsel. Wherefore in the first place, they concluded to depose
Acatius Barclay, the Favorite of the Turks; and in his stead they constituted
John Chiminianus, or Kemenius, the late General of Ragotzki's Army. In the next
place, they made their Addresses and Applications to the Emperor for
assistance, supplicating, as Ragotzki, They beg assistance of the Emperor.
and those of Varadin had done before, the powerful protection, and sacred
Patronage of the Imperial Eagles, alleging those Arguments of common safety,
and mutual interest, which apparent reason suggested, and which were the
present Subject and Theme of all the Courts in Christendom. To this Demand the
Emperor assented, promising readily his assistance, but with Proviso, that for
his security, the Cities of Zechelhid, Chowar, Julia, and other places should
receive Garrisons of German Soldiers. The Transilvanians willingly accepted the
propositions, so that soon after those places were supplied with German
Garrisons. But as yet no effectual Forces came from the Emperor, nay rather the
German Councils seemed willing to persuade the Turks that there was no design,
but to maintain the ancient, friendly and amicable Correspondence; to which end
it is said confidently, that the Prince Gonzaga wrote to the Pasha of Buda,
That those Garrisons sent to possess certain places of Transylvania were only in
appearance, and not to Prince Gonzaga's Letter to the Pasha of Buda.
create Dissentions between the Austrian Court, and the Ottoman Prince; which
Letters Ali Pasha sent to the Transilvanians, with design, that discovering
unto them an evident reason to distrust the Emperor, they should wholly resign
themselves to the good will and disposition of the Port. But notwithstanding,
these verbal assurances prevailed not so much with the Turks on one side, as
the German Garrisons administered jealousy on the other; So that the Vizier
raged furiously against the Emperor, for encouraging Kemenius, who had
treacherously murdered his two innocent Brothers in his Rebellion against
Barclay, the only, true and lawful Possessour. Nor did the Turks only vent
their anger and disdain in words, but also by the sad and calamitous effects of
War; passing without farther parley into the Emperors Dominions in Hungary,
Count Serini builds a Fortress on the Turks Dominions.
where they put all to fire and sword. Count Serini perceiving evidently hereby
that the War was broken forth, and that it was not longer time to stand at a
gaze, and not make necessary Provisions for defense; about the beginning of
June, he laid the foundations of a Fortress on the Banks of the River Muer,
within the Dominions of the Turks, about a League distant from Canisia, and in
memory of his Family and Name, called it Serinsivar, a place convenient to
assault, and offend the Enemy, and to fix the Bulwark, or Redoubt of the
Province of Stiria, which work was laid with that secresy, and executed with
such expedition, that it was almost sinished before it was known, or notice
taken thereof by the Turks; but so soon as it was discovered, and the News
arrived at Constantinople, the old Vizier Kuperlee stormed with rage, and in
his height of passion, signed a Command for strangling the Pasha of Canisia,
for not timely preventing the Erection of that Fort in its beginning. In like
manner this work was an occasion of disgust at Vienna; for though the Turks
were the first who had broken the Peace, and given just cause to the Christians
to provide all cautions imaginable for their safety; Yet I know not why, nor
wherefore, there wanted not certain persons in the Court either emulous of
Serini's Glory, or zealous of the Emperors Interest, who interpreted the
activeness, and forward heat of this Count to be like fire to inflame the Fuel
of Controversy between the two Empires; yet certainly we cannot but
meritoriously The just commendation of Count Serini.
applaud the Heroic Spirit of this Prince, who was provident of his Countries
safety, watchful of the Enemies Motion, soon touched with the sense of the
Mohammedan infidelity, and in fine, a zealous Champion of the Christian Cause.
But now, with what Salve or Balsome soever the Italian, or Spanish Chirurgions
of Politic Government, imagined to obduct a callous over the smarts or wounds
of these differing States; the Breaches grew every day too wide to be drawn up,
or cemented by The (...) sends Forces to Transylvania.
artisicial compliances, or verbal lenitives; for now the succors promised by
the Emperor were arrived in Transylvania, under the Command of Count
Monteouculi, and joining with the Forces of Kemenius, formed such a numerous,
and well composed Army, as was judged not only sufsicient to contend for the
interest of the Christian Cause, but also for the entire decision of the Worlds
Dominion; So that both Generals with an unanimous consent, confident of
Victory, agreed, not to expect the approach of Ali Pasha, but boldly to meet
and provoke him to Battle.

Ali the Turkish General perceiving the strength and resolution of the
Christians, thought it prudence for a while to detract from Engagement, and
temper the usual mettle of the Ottoman fury with cooler Counsels of advantage,
which delays and opportunities of time would administer: for observing that the
Transilvanians were divided into Factions, he humoured the dissenting party, by
constituting Michael Apafi their Prince; The Turks Policy.
a person in the flower and strength of his Age, of great parts and abilities;
and one who violently affected the Principality, having but lately purchased
his freedom from slavery. In this manner Apasi passing from his Prison and
Chains, to the glory and trouble of a Throne; poor Transylvania remained
divided, and taking Arms against her self, went daily working and contriving
her own ruin. This has always been the Masterpiece of the Turkish Policy,
and this disunion amongst Christians has availed the Ottoman Interest more
than their Swords, and confirmed their obstinacy in Religion with a Miracle, as
if the division of Christian Princes (which in late Ages have frustrated the
holy designs against this common Enemy) had been an effect of their Prayers,
and a Concession of Divine Providence to their daily Petitions. So now the
Transilvanians being divided, great numbers of them revolted from Kemenius to
Apasi, which not only weakened, but discouraged the Christian Army Kemenius
routed.
with fear and confusion; amidst of which, Ali Pasha took his time to Assault
them, not far from Claudiopolis; and being assisted by the advantageous
conjuncture of the present opportunity, so wholly discomfited them, that he
killed and took 50000. persons, which was the Issue of the present union, and
the exclusion of Kemenius, who was now forced to abandon Transylvania, and seek
his refuge in Hungary.

Howsoever Kemenius could not here rest satisfied, but revolving in his mind
certain ways to recover his Principality, obtained from Montecuculi some German
Troops; with which, and with his own scattered Forces, which at length he had
collected into a Body; he resolved to try his Fortune once more with the Turks,
and joining Battle with them, not far from Presburg, he fought with a
resolution becoming the desperateness of his design; either that day to Die, or
to Triumph. The Fortune of that days conflict remained a long time doubtful; so
equal they seemed on both sides to be in their Courage, in their Force, and in
their Conduct, until at length the advantage of the Turks number prevailing,
Kemenius Kemenius a second time put to flight.
was forced to a disorderly retreat, and afterward to a confused flight; in
which, being by one of his own Soldiers knocked from his Horse, was trampled
under foot, and the greatest part of his people remained a Sacrifice to the
enraged Weapons of the Turks.

Apasi's party being greatly encouraged with this success, joining with a Body
of the Turks, laid Siege to Claudiopolis, the Court of the Transilvanian
Claudiopolis besieged.
Princes, now Garisoned by German Soldiers, and Governed by David Retani, a
right valiant and trusty Soldier, who omitting nothing which might conduce to
the defense and maintenance of the Town, either by his care or valor, made
many successful Sallies upon the Enemy, and tired and wearied them out in their
Siege; until at length General Schenidau then in Hungary, gathering what force
he could, which were not above 6000. Men, marched with all haste possible to
the relief of Claudiopolis; the report of whose approach arriving the Turkish
Camp before his person, or Army, and the common rumor and fear augmenting much
their number; the Turks were so terrifyed hereat, that in haste and disorder
they forsook their Siege after three Months continuance; leaving great
quantities of Victuals behind for want of Carriages, and Beasts of burden.
Schenidau having gained this success and honor with so much The Siege raised.
facility, he reinforced the Garrison, and returned with Triumph home; carrying
with him great Booties of Cattle and other spoils of the Enemy. The defense of
this place was accounted almost miraculous; for besides that the Fortifications
were after the ancient model, it was unprovided of Cannon and other warlike
Ammunition; and therefore we are not to pass by the Governor Retani without
due Commendations; whose valiant and generous spirit, with courage equal to his
diligence, knew how to fortify and to defend his Walls: For out of the Town
Bells he founded his Artillery; he daily wearied the Enemy with Sallies,
surprised one of their Batteries, which most annoyed the City; composed the
Mutinies of the Citizens within; and in short, against the opinion of all, he
defended and maintained it in the possession and right (...) the Emperor.

Claudiopolis being thus relieved, the Turks stomached inwardly the disgrace,
and yet thought it prudence for the present to dissemble; and therefore upon
some addresses made for Peace from Transylvania, and certain Propositions
tendered by the German Resident; the Vizier counterfeited his inclinations
thereunto so far, that he prohibited all farther Acts of Hostility upon the
Frontiers.

Notwithstanding which, the rumor at this time running, of a Combination of
all Christendom against the Turk, with Men or Money, forwarded by the
endeavors of the Pope, and the contrivances of Venice increased the former
jealousy, and caused the Skirmishes on the Frontiers to be more hot and
frequent: and the Vizier being froward and choleric, The Turks jealousy.
and by nature jealous; matters had immediately proceeded to an open rupture,
had not the German Resident, by his Moderation and Prudence, represented
affairs in the smoothest guise of Peace, and delayed the War rather than
composed it; so that this whole Summer was spent in disputes, messages, and
debates on both sides.

The Vizier designing this War in his Eye, and desirous to comply with the
vagrant humor of his Master, who was weary of his Seraglio at Constantinople,
resolved to transfer the Turkish Court to Adrianople, so that The Turkish Court
removes to Adrianople.
toward the end of June they entered their Tents without the City. But before
they could dispose their affairs for to depart, the Plague which is the
Epidemical Disease of this Country, and the common distemper of the Summer
Season began to break forth and diffuse it self through all parts of the City;
that in a short time the Keys of many Houses were brought to the Grand Signior
for want of Pretenders and Heirs surviving to possess them: in greater Houses
of Pasha's and others, where have been a hundred and fifty persons, scarce five
have remained alive for burial of the others; what the fury of that mortality
might be, was best conjectured A great Plague at Constantinople.
by the daily account was kept of the Corpse carried out of the City, by the
Gate only of Adrianople, which for some Weeks amounted (I speak moderately) to
twelve or thirteen hundred a Day; It being observed amongst the Turks, when
above a thousand in a Day are carried forth Dead by that Gate, that then
Prayers are to be made to Almighty God to withdraw that heavy judgment. At
which time the Greek and Armenian Patriarchs are likewise desired to offer up
their Devotions, and intercede with God for mitigation of the Pestilence; and
the same day in a Field called Okmaidan, do all assemble, though divided apart,
to pray against the common Calamity, it not seeming vain to them, that every
one should call upon his God. Nor did the Plague rage only in the City, but the
Ships and Turks Saykes were infected in parts remote on the Black Sea, and the
Propontis, so that above a hundred Sail were reported to be lodged at several
Ports for want of Seamen to navigate them home. The Camp also where the Grand
Signior, and Vizier remained, was not exempted from this common Contagion, for
the necessary intercourse between that and the City communicated the evil equal
unto both, strowing the ways with dead Bodies, in that manner as represented a
passage conducting to a Coemetery, or Charnel house, rather than to a Martial
Camp or Court of a Great Emperor. This mortality hastened the Grand Signior
with his Army and Attendances into a better Air, the Vizier was to follow a few
days after, but before his departure he settled and constituted his Son
Chimacam, or Governor of Constantinople. Things in this confusion and haste
not being well provided for, the Grand Signiors reception at Adrianople caused
him to prolong his Journey by taking a compass round by the Castles at the
mouth of the Hellespont, and from thence went to Dimotochum, where having
lingered out eight or ten days more, he made a solemn entrance into Adrianople,
which will for some years following be discoursed in this History as the Seat
of the Ottoman Empire.

It was now toward the Winter, when this Vizier Kuperlee, finding Kuperlee
sends for his Son.
himself mature with Age, and ready to fall like Autumn Fruit, sent for his Son
from Constantinople to bear a share with him in the Burden of the Empire. This
he did with the consent of the Grand Signior, for he alleged, that being now
feeble and decayed, he could not make his personal Addresses as formerly, nor
attend at the Court to render his Majesty an account of his Affairs; and
therefore had need of so trusty a Messenger as his Son, to carry his advices
and directions, and faithfully to communicate what he should encharge to his
Relation; all others being on some consideration or other suspected, and at
least Enemies to him, or to the Grand Signior. The Sultan accepting the
proposition and the Person, had often occasions of discourse and familiarity
with the Son, called Ahmet, who deported himself with that faith and prudence
in the management of all his Affairs, that the old Vizier had no great
difficulty to procure a Grant of succession for him in that Office: For though
there were many obstacles therein, as the abhorrency of the Turkish Policy from
all hereditary succession in places of trust; and the Youth of his Person not
exceeding 32 years of Age, and some emulous, powerful, and ancient Competitors,
who hated the Father; Yet the old Fox had so ingratiated himself with his
Master, for (to speak truly) he had been the only instrument that had preserved
him and his Empire Procures the Succession for his Son.
from falling into as many Divisions as there are Pashalicks, or Governments,
that the Grand Signior gave credit to him as to an infallible Oracle, assuring
him that before any other, who might either pretend merit, Age, or Precedence,
his Son should be preferred to the Succession. The old man acknowledged the
favor with all humility and thankfulness, declaring, that he had now served
his Majesty faithfully for the space of five years, a longer proportion than
commonly Viziers had managed that Office, in such tempestuous and distracted
times, who either for their own offenses, or want of Providence, or good
Conduct have made shipwreck of their own lives, and the Charge they piloted:
But he had lived in the worst of times, when the spirits of men with discontent
were enflamed round about him, and threatened the ruin of their Prince and
Empire; and yet had reduced things to composure, and to the obedience of the
Ottoman Yoke, that now he that was the Sultan might incline his head to rest
with security, and enjoy his pastimes and pleasures, without being interrupted
by those Conspiracies, which destroyed his Father, and endangered him in his
years of Infancy. And because the continuance of his Security and Glory
depended on the execution of certain Maxims, which he had framed to himself,
he was chalking out to his Son such undoubted Rules and Doctrines of
Government, as would certainly tend to the glory and prosperity of the Empire,
being abundantly satisfied that his Son was faithful, prudent, and active. But
three things he particularly recommended to his Majesty. 1. Never to give Ear
to the Counsels and Advices of Women. Rules given to the Grand Signior.
2. To amass what Treasure he could possible into his Coffers, though with
Oppression, and impoverishment of his people. 3. To be continually on
horseback, and keep his Armies in constant Action.


On the 19 th of October Kuperlee having ended his days, whose Disease Kuperlee
dies,
was Old Age, and a Gangrene in his Legs, his Son by Hattesheriff, or the Grand
Signior's Patent under his hand, taking the Seal was constituted Vizier in the
place of his Father, to the admiration and disappointment of the graver
Seniors, who were discontented, not only to perceive themselves neglected, but
that person also to supplant them, who was judged incapable of the office,
according to the Canon, and ancient Precedents of this Government.

The Body of Kuperlee was transported to Constantinople, where in his life time
he had erected a very stately and magnificent Structure, as his Monument over
the Grave, or Vault, where he designed to be interred. In his life time he had
filled it with Corn, which daily was distributed to the poor, and being emptied
after his death, received his Corpse, over which a small Mosch was endowed with
Oil for Lamps, and maintenance of certain Talismans and Softaes, to make
Prayers and Offerings for his Soul.

The Father being thus interred, Ahmet his Son began to contrive his own
establishment, and to settle his Greatness on the foundation of his Fathers
Rules of Policy, from whom not to degenerate in cruelty of Nature, or leave his
Legacies unpaid to those he had proscribed, he in Pasha of Magnatia cut off.
the first place sacrificed the Blood of the Pasha of Magnatia to his Fathers
Ghost, with some other petty attendances; so that the World perceived that they
had changed the Vizier, but not his tyranny, or at least the same spirit of the
Father seemed to be renewed, and transmitted again into the Person of the Son.
But more difficult it was to obtain the like success against Mortaza, the Pasha
of Babylon, and the Kayah-begh, or Lieutenant General of the Janisaries, who
were long before (as we have said) marked out for destruction by his Father.
For the first was the most powerful Pasha of all Asia, vigilant, and active,
and had done and merited great rewards from his Master, and particularly in
decoying, and cutting off the head of the Grand Rebel Asan Pasha, who dared the
Sultan at the Gates of his Seraglio; but understanding the ill will of the
house of Kuperlee against him, stood always on his Guard, lodging without the
Walls of the City, and under the protection of his Arms and Soldiers, who
were greatly affected to the generosity of his Person; so that, though many
attempts were made upon him, and that Officers, or Executioners came from the
Court, openly tendering from the Sultan the Present of a Sword, and Vest of
Sables, the usual Signals of the Ottoman Grace, but privately bringing a
Bowstring, or a Halter; yet they were all entertained at a distance, and
returned again with the same dissimulation they had used in their feigned
Addresses. In like manner the Kayah-begh, an ancient, prudent, and experienced
Commander, beloved by the Soldiery, and secured by the Privilege of his
Office, (for a Kayah-begh cannot be cut off during his Command, without
infringement of the honor and order of the Janisaries) preserved still his
Station, and Command in despite of the Viziers hate and endeavors. But what
could not be done by mere virtue of the Absolute Power, was effected under the
appearance of honor and favor of the Sultan, who by his Royal Commission,
having made him Pasha of Damascus, he was at the same instant deprived of his
Solomon Pasha in disgrace.
Military Power and Privilege, and lay now naked and exposed to the Arbitrary
Pleasure, and will of his Adversary. Nor could his prayers or tears incline the
Grand Signiors mind to reverse his Order, who, together with the Vizier, rather
enforced it with the specious pretext of Favor and Grace for his former
merits, and with commendation of his Abilities agreeable to the importance of
so considerable a Government increased the just suspicion of Solomon, (for so
the Kayah-begh was called) not being ignorant of the Turkish Proverb, A
Kayah-begh is like a Fish in the Water, which out of its Element immediately
dies. Howsoever, ut finis omnium cum dominante, grates agit, he acknowledges
the Tac. Lib. 14. Ann.
favor of his Master, and gave thanks for it, according to the Duty of a good
Subject, who ought to acquiesce in the sentence of his Prince, which, though
never so full of severity, ought to be believed, and called Clemency. The
Vizier now hasted Solomon Pasha to depart with all expedition, not allowing him
above four or five days time to make preparations for so long a Journey, which
otherwise he would have prolonged as one, like the rest of Mankind, desirous to
protract the thread of Life, imagining that in his journey, at some distance,
where his Death might be most obscure, and least noted, the Edict of the Grand
Signior might overtake him, and find a Grave for him in some solitary Desert,
or unfrequented Mountain. Wherefore he made one day an Address to the Vizier,
under pretense of taking his last furewel, and freely acquainted him with his
apprehension and his fears, desiring that he would deal as frankly with him, in
letting him know the utmost of his Fate, for that now he was in his hand, and
was so good a Proficient in the Mohammedan Religion, as to oppose nothing which
was his Destiny, or inconsistent with the Decree of the Sultan. The Vizier
reverencing the Years, and pitying the Condition of so worthy a Commander
abased solely by his Power, bid him be of good cheer, assuring him of his Life,
so long as he acted nothing contrary unto his, which he confirmed by Vows, and
all imaginable Protestations, encouraging him to proceed forward to his
Government with those cheerful Words, and Assurances, that Solomon Pasha taking
his farewell with more ease of mind, and confidence of Life, departed Adrianople
in three days after his delignment to the new Office: But not many days Journey
had he advanced into Asia, He is sent away.
before the G. Signiors and Viziers Commands over-took him, altering his design
for Damaseus, and instead thereof ordered him a Pilgrimage unto Mecha, and
exile into the remote and desert parts of Arabia, until he should be thought
worthy to be re-called by that power which banished him. In like manner some
few days after, the Mufti being on a Friday seated in his place, in the Mosch
of Sultan Selim (a very noble and famous Fabric) and attending there the G.
Signiors entrance, that he might begin his Prayers, was unexpectedly whispered
in the Ear, that he should retire and give place to another Mufti; which
immediately he obeyed, and in four hours departed Adrianople, being banished to
Gallipoli, for his Friendship (as was supposed) to Solomon Pasha, and for not
passing the Fetfa for his Death, according to the will and desire of the Grand
Signior.

During the Transaction of these affairs in diverse parts, the Wars against the
Venetians were carried on faintly; the Galleys had no other design, or
employment, than to transport recruits of Men, and Ammunition to Canea, that so
the Turks might rather keep the ground that they had gained in that Island,
than add thereunto by new Conquests, until such time, as that being freed from
other Wars, they might have leisure and opportunity to attend unto that alone.
Accordingly the Captain Pasha set forth at the usual Season from
Constantinople; and arrived at Scio with 23. Galleys, besides his own called
the Bastard-Gally, or Admiral; the advice of which, coming to the Captain
General of the Venetians, he hastened thither with all his Fleet to besiege him
in the Port: but this seeming after some days a tedious work, and what might
lose too much time; he resolved to depart from thence, and so leaving a
sufficient Guard before the Port, he set Sail with two Galleasses, thirteen
light Galleys, and seven Auxiliaries for the Coast of Rhodes; where his
Brigantines advised, that the remainder of the Turkish Fleet were Anchored, and
were taking aboard two thousand Soldiers for reinforcing Canea; but before the
Venetians could arrive, intelligence was given them by the way, that the Turks
were loosed from Rhodes, and were Anchored under the Island of Patmos,
wherefore altering their course, they steered for Nio, and there watering their
Vessels, sailed near to Nixia, where the Vanguard discovered five and thirty
Galleys of the Enemy, which had made prize of a Tartana laden with Provisions
designed for the Venetian Fleet, and having taken out her lading had set her on
fire. The Venetians having their Enemy in their Eye, gave them chase until the
Evening, when the Night coming on put an end to the pursuit: but keeping their
course toward Candia, they had sight again of them the next Morning, and
coming nearer, the Turkish Admiral put forth his Flag of Defiance, as if he
intended to come to a Battle; but the Wind blowing hard, and the Sea
increasing, both Fleets were separated until the Morning; when the Venetians
discovered certain of the Enemies Galleys to Leeward of Milo, where bearing
down before the Wind upon them, five of them ran ashore; one was sunk, and four
were taken by the Venetian and Maltese Galleys, three of which sighting with
great Courage and Valor, killed diverse brave Cavaliers of one and the other
Country. The men which ran the Galleys ashore at Milo, did it with design to
secure themselves in that small Fort which the Turks possessed in that Island;
but they were not able to withstand the valor of the Venetians, who having
first recovered the Cannon of the Galleys which were ran ashore, with their
rigging, and what else was useful, they set the Hulls on Fire; and immediately
entering the Port, the Captain General Landed two hundred select men, and
veterane Soldiers to besiege the Fortress, giving Orders to one Manolacchi
Macchiotti, who was well acquainted with the Turkish Language, to summon them
to a Treaty, the which they readily accepted, andwere received to quarter at
discretion of the General; the next Morning they were brought down to the
Seacoast to the number of about nine hundred, amongst which there was a
Janizar-Aga, a Bey of Rhodes, and three of Constantinople, besides Captains,
and other persons of condition and quality. These Prisoners being divided into
several Galleys and Ships, the Venetians departed, and cruising about the Coast
of Candia, to hinder the importation of all succors, they encountered with
Antonio Priuli, with a good Squadron of Vessels under his Command.

THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
The Second BOOK.
Anno Christi, 1662. Hegeira, 1073.
AT the beginning of this Year the People of Algier sent Messengers and
Presents to the G. Signiors Court, then at Adrianople, complaining against the
actions his Majesty's Fleet, under the Command of the Earl of Sandwich, had
done against their Town and Castles, pretending those Forts to be the G.
Signiors, and the Affront offered to him, as willing to interest him in their
Quarrels and Piracies. And that their Addresses might be more graciously
received, they brought with them certain Presents, which though in former times
were Yearly, were now only as their Affairs required, and on this occasion were
doubled: for besides their Presents to the Ministers and Officers of State;
they brought to the G. Signior a Ship made in Silver, beset with Emrods,
Rubies, and other Stones; fourteen young and hansome Boys, and a Neger Eunuch
for the Seraglio. But the Earl of Winchelsea, his Majesty's Ambassador there
Resident, being then at Court, had so well prepossessed the Vizier with the
ground and reasons for the War, that the complaints of Algier were judged in no
wise touching the Ottoman Interest, or the breach of their Peace, any
impeachment England and the Grand Signior. But their presumption to search
English Ships, and take out Strangers goods, was objected as an argument of
their disobedience and Rebellion, contrary to the G. Signiors Capitulations,
which also was aggravated by their ill Treatment of the G. Signiors Pasha, whom
they had beaten, imprisoned, and cast out of all power and authority; which
severe reprehensions so terrifyed and discouraged them, that they not only
desisted from their pretensions against the English, but began to fear, lest
the power and interest of the Ambassador at Court, should contrive some
mischief to their own persons.

Soon after this the Vizier esteeming it necessary toward his better
establishment to gratify the City of Constantinople, and the Grandees of the
The G. Signior persuaded to return to Constantinople.
Empire, by the G. Signiors return to his Imperial Seat, prevailed with him,
(as a matter wholly necessary) to adorn and comfort that place by his presence;
for now he began to declare a kind of abhorrency to it, in regard the memory of
those Rebellions which were nourished in that place, to the destruction of his
Father, and to the great hazard and narrow escape afterward of himself; had
taken that impression on his fancy, that the Chambers of the Seraglio appeared
melancholy and dismal, and the Walks of his Gardens solitary, and the noise of
the Rooks and Daws amongst his Trees, were like the croakings of Ravens or
unlucky Birds. Howsoever the Vizier had so far entered into his affection and
esteem, that his persuasions were stronger than his own absolute Dominion; and
prevailed so with him against the force of his own fancy, that about the
Equinoctial he began his Journey toward Constantinople, to the great joy and
satisfaction of his people: But by the way lingering out his time in Hunting and
other Pastimes of the Woods and Fields; it was the 30th of March before he made
his Entry, for never was Prince so great a Nimrod, so unwearied a Huntsman as
this; never was he at quiet, but continually in the Fields on Horseback, rising
sometimes at Midnight, to ride up the Mountains, that he might more early
discover the Sun in the Morning; by which extravagant course of life, he
wearied out his Court and Attendants, who began to believe the amorous humor
of his Father more supportable, than the wandering Vagaries, and restless spirit
of the Son. But The Grand Signiors extravagantHunting.
not only were his Huntings tedious to his Court, but troublesome and expensive
to the whole Country, which were all summoned in wheresoever he came, and
sometimes thirty or forty thousand men appointed to beat the Woods for three or
four days, carrying before them the compass of a whole days Journey about,
enclosing all the Game and wild Beasts within that Circuit, which on the day of
the Hunt, the G. Signior kills and destroys with Dogs, Guns, or any other way,
with abundance of noise and confusion: which pastime, though lawful in it self,
and commendable enough in so great a Prince, yet the frequent use of it, was a
burden and an oppression to his people, whilst in the Winter they passed many
cold Nights in the Woods, and being unused to that hardship, many of them paid
for their Emperors Pastime with their own lives.

The G. Signior being now at Constantinople, the Vizier judged not himself The
Vizier endeavors to establish himself.
so well fixed in his Government, but that through the malice of his powerful
Enemies, who were familiar to the G. Signiors Ear, he was in danger to be
shaken; the principal of which was the Kuzlir Aga, or Chief Eunuch of the Women
of the Seraglio, who by means of the Valede, (...) Queen Mother was
ill-affected to him, being both inclined to prefer some Favorites of their
own, for the diminution, and Eclipse of the Viziers Power, one whereof was the
Tefterdar Pasha, or Lord Treasurer, placed in Office against the Viziers
Approbation, which the Vizier understanding, made short Work with him,
depriving him of his Office, commanded him in a few hours to quit
Constantinople.

But the Queen Mother, and Kuzlir Aga resenting this Affront to their
Favorite, resolved to even scores in a piece of the like nature: Wherefore
they obtained for the Viziers Kahya, or Steward, the Pashalick of Darbiquier, a
rich and honorable Government, not for any disaffection or hatred they had
unto him, but only to deprive the Vizier of the Counsel and Assistance of so
knowing and faithful a Servant; for he was a Person, who by his own Estate, and
Friends had raised the house of Kuperlee, having in the time of his poverty and
meanness lent him that Sum of Money, which gave him the first Rise to his
Richesse and Authority; for recompense and interest of which, old Kuperlee made
him his Steward, and shared to him his honors and prosperity; in which
deporting himself toward all people with the same modesty, and evenness of
temper which he used in his former Condition, he procured no Enemies to his own
person, and such as hated the interest he served, only wished him disobliged
from it, so as to be able to dispense their malice on the Vizier, without
concerning him in his Masters ruin. This consideration moved the angry Lady,
and the envious Eunuch to vex their Adversary by the removal of his most
faithful Creature and Servant.

Mahomet Kahya now Pasha of Darbiquier, after a reasonable and convenient time
allowed him for his preparations, being very rich, set forward toward his
Government, with a very noble and numerous Retinue, having amongst the rest
five hundred persons young, well mounted, and well armed; which notwithstanding
were not so strong, but before they were advanced many days Journey into Asia,
were encountered A notable Robbery.
by a greater force of bold and desperate Robbers, who engaging with him killed
two hundred of his people on the place, rifled his Baggage, and constrained the
Pasha himself to fly to the next City. This strange and audacious Robbery
produced many Commands and Orders for seizure and suppression of Thieves in the
lesser Asia. And because the custom is, that something must be done in
compliance with the Imperial Commands, many poor innocent men were taken in the
Fields, and Mountains, and perhaps without any other Crime against them, than
that they were not masters of a thousand Aspers to bribethe Officers, were for
want thereof sent as Thieves to the Port, where without further conviction or
Trial they were executed.

The Vizier being thus weakened by the removal of his faithfullest friend, his
condition was given over as desperate by the generality of the World, and
several appearances of troubles arising from the Eastern and Western Parts,
gave occasion to the Queen Mother, and her Party, to disparage his Abilities in
the esteem of the Sultan: Wherefore they exhorted him to imitate the Example of
his Renowned Predecessors, who made use of their Viziers only to ease them from
the troublesome part of their Government, but did not entirely throw off the
knowledge and privity of the important Transactions and State Affairs in the
whole Empire. This Lesson awakened the Grand Signior a little, so that he
declined some days his sports abroad, and exercise on horseback, and instead
thereof passed much of his time in a Chiosk, or Garden-house on the Wall of the
Seraglio, just opposite to the Viziers Gate, where his chief business and
concernment was to observe such as went in, or came out; and when at any time
he espied those enter, remarkable for their Attendance, or difference of habit,
he would send to know of the Vizier, what occasion drew those people thither,
what their business was, and the like, by which he gave himself that
satisfaction as to believe that he had now found the true way of inspecting his
Affairs, and taking care of his Empire. The Vizier was not unsensible from
whence this humor of the Grand Signior The Queen Mothers enmity to the Vizier.
proceeded, nor ignorant what ill consequences such petty matters might
produce; wherefore he resolved, if possible, to reconcile the favor and good
will of the Valede, or Queen Mother, but all his Addresses (it seems) were
returned fruitless; so difficult was it to appease the malice of a feminine
Spirit; and this malice She so ill concealed, that it was often said by Turks
of Quality and Judgment, That the Great Viziers Mother, who entertained a
Familiarity with Spirits, as they believed, had by her Enchantments procured
the Office of Vizier for her Husband and Son successively, and prevailed still
to preserve her Son in the favor of his Master, yet could not by force of
Magic get power or dominion over the Valede; No Spells, it seems, had virtue
enough to qualify the spirit of that angry Juno. Some hereupon judged, that
the Vizier might have thoughts to make Resignation of his Office, and to
content himself with some Pashalick of a higher, and more eminent degree; but
apprehensions and jealousies of their dangers, and his own natural Ambition,
soon stitled those considerations, resolving to continue his Charge in
opposition to all the difficulties, and dangers he might encounter. And perhaps
he gave himself the same counsel which the Vitellian Soldiers did to their
General. Nihil atrocius eventurum, quam in quod Tacit. Lib. Hist. 3.
sponte ruant, moriendum vict is, moriendum deditis; id solum refer,
novissimum spiritum, per ludibrium and contumelias effundant, an per Virtutem.
Men who must die, whether they yield or are conquered by force, have the same
Fate; all the difference is, that the one dies with valor and reputation, the
other with reproach and cowardice. But to execute this stout counsel with
prudence and wisdom, he conceived it necessary, if possible, to reconcile the
sincere friendship of Samozade, the Reis Effendi, or Chief Secretary of State,
a person the best practiced of any, in the Affairs and Negotiations of the
Ottoman Empire, and one much in the esteem and favor of the Queen Mother, and
in order thereunto treats him with more familiarity and condescension than was
ordinary, or by many judged agreeable to the Greatness of a Grand Vizier; for
always when he came into his Presence, he arose up, calling him secretly
Father, Tutor, and Companion, in supporting the Burden of the weighty
Government, and such other Compellations, as the Grand Signior vouchsafed only
to the Vizier: for though this Reis Effendi was of the greatest abilities, and
this present Vizier the most youthful and unexperienced of Latter Times, yet it
may be accounted one special mark and token of his prudence, in knowing how to
elect so useful a friend, and of his policy in procuring his sincere
faithfulness toward him, and making him really his own. To which end he
conversed much with him, communicated all his thoughts, freely demanded his
advice, received his private entertainments, and in fine, was wanting in no
points of affable courtesy and compliance, whereby he might create him his
own, contenting for some time himself with the name of Vizier, though the other
as one, who best knew how to manage it, enjoyed the power.

The Chief Officers of the Seraglio, instigated by the Queen Mother That is, of
the Hizoda, or Royal Chamber
to diminish something the power of the Vizier, put often the Grand Signior in
mind, as a matter agreeable to his dignity, to have a regard to his Government,
which caused him more frequently than his humor served, to betake himself to
his Chiosk over against the Viziers Gate to make his usual observations; and
perceiving some Christians to enter the Court with red Calpacks, or Caps, and
yellow Shoes (prohibited to Christians by orders of inferior Magistrates but
never until now thought worthy the Imperial Observance) immediately called for
the Subashee or Constable of Constantinople, and from the Window commanded him
with great fury to enter the Viziers Court, and such Christians as he should
find there with yellow Shoes and red Caps he should first beat, and then send
uncovered, and barefooted home. The Subashee armed with a power in this matter
as high as the Viziers, entered his house without Complement or License, and
encountering first the Kapikahya's or Agents of Moldavia and Valachia
negotiating the Affairs of their Prince and Country, he rudely laid them down,
and without The Grand Signiors (...) prohibition of yellow shoes, and red
Calpacks to Christians.
respect to their Persons or Office, beat them on the seet, tore off their red
Stockins, and Caps, and sent them home with their heads and feet bare, derided
by the people, and lamenting the affliction of that Tyranny to which they were
subjected. This inhumane treatment of persons in a manner sacred, was seconded
by public Proclamations, strictly prohibiting all Christians from wearing red
Caps, yellow Shoes, scarlet Vests, and the like; and Janisaries from the use
of Hanjars or Daggers, and silk Turbants, upon pain of death: which Order was
so strictly enjoined, that the corners of every Street were furnished with
Officers to observe, and punish such who were found to offend. The Grand
Signior himself judged also the Execution of this order of that importance as
to deserve his own proper care and inspection, wherefore walking abroad, as his
manner was, in disguise, with his Executioner at hand, encountered in the
Streets an unfortunate Bridegroom, an Armenian, who that day, on privilege of
his Espousals, had adventured to dress himself with yellow leathern Socks:
nothing was, or could have time to be pleaded in his behalf, before the fatal
Blow was struck, which sent him to his Grave instead of his Nuptial Bed. This
fury continued some few days with much rigor, and strict observation, but
afterward growing cold again, all care was neglected, happening herein, as
commonly it does in all things, which have no other foundation than humor and
fancy.

But this inspection into petty matters did not so much disturb the thoughts of
the Vizier, as did the power and greatness of Mortaza the Pasha of Babylon, by
the Turks called Bagdat, a person of an undaunted Courage and great Conduct,
whom he had hitherto suffered to live, contrary to the true knowledge of his
interest, and the Rules his Father had left him: wherefore he resolved to renew
his design and attempts against his Life; one I remember was in December of the
past Year, when in our Journey to Adrianople, we met a Messenger on the way,
who amongst other Discourses informed us, that he was then going to Babylon for
confirmation of Mortaza, and as a testimony of the G. Signiors favor and good
will toward him, he carried him a Sword, and a Vest of Sables: we immediately,
and that truly guessed, for what Present the Sword was sent; for in some Months
after the Chaous-bashee, or chief of the Pursuivants, returned without delivery
of his Present. For the wise Mortaza The Vizier seeks to cut off Mortaza the
Pasha of Babylon.
was so justly jealous, that he would not so much as admit him to his presence,
but returned him again with his Sword and Sables, for those who were more easy
and credulous, and who believe to die by Command of the Sultan to be Martyrdom,
and the only Crown of all their merits and deserts: and knowing that he could
not long subsist in opposition to so great an Enemy; he contracted an Alliance,
by Marriage with a Daughter of one of the Gordean, or Curdean Princes, and in
Dowry, had one of the strongest Forts of those Mountains delivered into his
hands.

The Vizier finding himself thus foiled in his occult Artifices, began
publicly to profess his enmity; and therefore in the first place persuaded the
G. Signior, that the long continuance of Mortaza in that Government, beyond the
usual term, so opulent and powerful, and of a spirit so ambitious and
rebellious, could not but prove dangerous to himself, and in time give him
confidence of competition for the whole Empire: which hazard to prevent with
most prudence and advantage, (there being a present occasion of good Soldiers
for relief of Candia) Mortaza and his Accomplices could not be better bestowed
than upon that employment. The G. Signior readily consented to this Counsel,
being naturally very apprehensive of danger, and in his place constituted the
Aga, or General of the Janissaries, posting him away with all speed possible to
hisGovernment; who did not run so fast in his Journey, but that the advices of
the coming of a new Pasha, arrived timely the Ears of Mortaza, who judging it
an unequal match to contend with the whole Empire, gave way to his Successor,
but withal, kept himself so on his Guard, that his adversary could not reach
his Head, and send it as the first fruits and Tribute of his new Office. For
yielding up his Command as in an honorable manner of retreat, he gave out,
that with his Army (reported to consist of forty thousand men) he was on his
March to Candia, but soon after his design was discovered to be otherwise; for
believing his own Force unable to contend with his Masters, he retired with his
richess, and some of those most faithful to him unto his Fort on the Mountains,
and to the protection and Country of the King of the Curdi, whose Daughter he
had Married, and remained in expectation of time and opportunity, to take his
revenge on the Vizier, hoping that with time this storm would blow over, and
that the beams of his Princes favor would again shine upon him. These Curdi
are called by some Writers Cordiaei, from Curdi.
whence the Province had the name of Gordiene, bordering on Assyria, the
Kingdom once of Zabienus, who siding with Lucullus against Tigranes King of
Armenia, was by Tigranes murdered with his Wife and Children. These people
inhabit the Mountain Amanus, dividing Syria from Cilicia, which by reason of
the difficult access thereunto, was never yet subjected to the Ottoman Yoke;
they are said in former times to have worshipped a black Dog, and dare not
speak ill of the Devil, not for love, but fear. But some report that have
lately been amongst them, that they have left off that Hellish superstition,
and embrace a certain sort of Religion mixed with Christianity and Turcism; but
yet without Baptism or Circumcision. In brief, they are a bad sort of gross
people at the best, contenting themselves with little Religion, addicted to
blood and Robberies. These Curdi or Gordeenes, being a people retired, keep
within their Mountains, are shy in their Conversation and Discourse, and afford
us little subject, or opportunity of knowing with any satisfaction, their
Religion or Manners: but from such of our Countrymen, as have lately
entertained Society with them, we have this account. They are seated on those
Mountains as we have said before, which of old were called Cordiaei, or
Gordiai, beginning near Aleppo, but running out as far as Persta; they make
show of the Turkish Religion for fear, but have in reality another of their
own, which permits them to eat Swines flesh and drink Wine, as the Druses and
Kalbeenes; Bacon being esteemed by them a particular Cordial, or Restorative
for the sick. The chief Country and City of those near Aleppo is called Jeumee,
where they have a Convent of twelve Priests with a Superior over them, and
another of the like sort near Mosul, or Nineveth. The two Chiefs of these
Monasteries meet at fixed times to consult for the good of the Commonweal.
Their Devotions are private in a Cave; they tell us of but one Book, which
contains both their Law and their Rituals; being asked what they thought of our
Savior, they answered, he was their breath, and their Soul; at the name of
Mahomet they spit, and with Nicodemus his circumspection and assurance of
secrecy, they declared themselves and Christians the same, which they would
make appear so soon as they were delivered from their fear of bondage to the
Turk. They say that they worship God, and will not curse the Devil, to which no
force or power can compel them; partly, perhaps beeause they have heard of our
Saviors Precept, Bless, and Curse not, but rather, because they hold, that the
Devil and his Followers, shall one day be restored to their former seats of
blessedness and dignity. When their Priests are together, and Wine brought in
amongst them, the Superior makes a sign for silence, and afterward a short
Admonition, that Wine is the blood of God. I have heard that a Capuchin Friar
was once invited amongst them, with promise to give him a sight of their Book
of Rituals, and being come to Jeumee, was detained a Day or two in a Cave, on
pretense that the other Superior of Mosul was then amongst them, who being a
severe person, if he knew of his being there, would certainly put him to Death,
as one who came to alter their Religion; upon which suspicion the Capuchin
forgetting his Curiosity, fled for safety, with all speed possible. Their
Priests are said to be grave, wearing black throughout; their Garments plaited
or quilted; the Vestures of the Commonalty are agreeable to Mountaniers, whose
natures are rough and boisterous, addicted to blood and Robbery, the common
vice of those people. I have heard, that the Son of a Gourdeene Widow being
killed by some of that Country, she assembled her nearest Kindred, and required
them to bring her the Windpipe of the Murderer, which when they had done, she
together with her Friends, eat it in revenge. In fine, their Religion may have
some small Relics of Christianity, but mixed with the dregs of other
Religions. It Is possible they may be of the Manichee Race. Their opinion of the
Devils Restoration, was once held in part by Origin: that of Wine (that it is
the blood of God) was the Heathenish conceit of the Egyptian Priests. Their
whole Nation if well united may compose an Army of thirty or forty thousand men.

But to return to our purpose. The news of the flight of Mortaza to this
ignoble Prince troubled the G. Signior, who still retained some impressions of
kindness to his person, remembering his generosity, valor, and former deserts,
the memory of which was increased also by the Friends of Mortaza, who wanted
not in the Court to represent them with some compassion, arguing that his
flight was not of contumacy, or contempt to his Masters protection, but an
effect of natural preservation; which worked so far on the G. Signior, that he
immediately sent for the Vizier to enquire of him the state and condition of
Mortaza. The Vizier to defend himself, and make good what before he had
counseled his Master, aggravated his Adversaries crimes, and his disobedience
and flight to an inconsiderable King; with which, and some other light excuses
and persuasions, that the removal of such a person was agreeable to the present
state of affairs, and conducing to his own security, easily pacified the mind
and affections of the G. Signior; but no sooner was he returned to his House,
but advice was given him, that the Emaum of Mortaza, or his Priest or Chaplain
was then at Constantinople, whom the Vizier immediately sent for, and without
any Plea or Endictment, struck off his Head, and threw his Body into the Sea,
on pretense that he was sent thither, as a Spy for his Master, and to give
Intelligence, and a beginning to Rebellion: These were his colors and
allegations for his deserved Death; for Governors though never so wicked and
so absolute, and that have no need to render any other cause to the World of
their actions, than their own will, yet esteem it necessary to act under the
specious guise of justice, and in the good opinion of the multitude. The Aga of
Babylon encountered the same Fortune; for Mortaza giving place, he thought it
sit for himself to do the like; resolving for Constantinople, but being
intercepted in his Journey by the new Pasha, his Head was struck off, and his
Journey shortened.

But that which again renewed the trouble and fears of the Vizier, was a report
that the late Kahya-begh degraded at Adrianople, was secretly returned to the
City, and lived concealed, giving such Orders to the Janissaries as tended to
Mutiny and Insurrection, and that the pretenses and reports of his being gone
to Damascus, and thence in his holy Pilgrimage to Mecha, were but all false
stories to conceal his Residence at Constantinople. This set the Vizier all on
fire, and made him tremble with the thoughts of it; wherefore search was made
for him day and night, but not found; for in reality he was gone on his
designed Journey, only it was the misfortune of his Kahya, or Steward, as
before it was of Mortaza's Emaum, to fall into the Viziers hands, who being
beaten to confess where his Master was, died afterward of the blows.

But notwithstanding that Mortaza was fled, yet the Vizier laid not aside his
fears and thoughts concerning him, not knowing how soon he might be recalled
home, and seated in his place; of which various Examples are extant in Turkish
History; And therefore he sent orders to Mahomet Pasha, his late Kahya, now
Pasha of Darbiquier, as General (with the knowledge and consent of the Grand
Signior) and to the Pashaws of Aleppo, Erzirum and others near adjacent, to
prepare and assemble what Force was necessary to constrain the King of the
Curdi, to surrender Mortaza into their hands: But whilst these matters were in
agitation, some unexpected troubles in Georgia diverted their Arms, and held
them for some time in suspense, not knowing what the issue might be. The
Original and Ground thereof was this: After Sultan Solomon had taken Erzirum,
it was agreed in the Capitulations between the The Provinces of Georgia in
disturbance.
Turks and Persians, that of the seven Provinces of Georgia (anciently called
Iberia, but now as supposed to have received the Denomination from St. George,
the Cappadocian Martyr, there had in great esteem and reverence) three should
be tributaries to the Turk, and three to the Persian, all governed by
Achic-bash as head and supreme Prince, to whom the seventh should also be
subjected, without acknowledgment to either; In payment of which tribute, they
continued most willingly, lest for default thereof, the importation of Salt, of
which their Provinces afford none, should be hindered either from the Turkish,
or Persian Dominion. And now it happened that Achic-bash dying, his Wife
married again, who to gratify her new Lover, was contented to have the eyes of
her Son put out, who was the lawful Heir to the Government. This Fact was so
hainously received by the Princes of the three Provinces under the Persian,
that with common consent, they elected one to succeed Achic-bash, and extorted
the power out of the hands of the Amorous Traitor. The Princes of the three
Provinces under the Turk alarmed hereat, made insurrection, resolving rather
than any Foreigner, to set up one of the Kindred of Achic-bash, which the
Persian Provinces better understanding, approved likewise, and for
confirmation, and maintenance of their choice assembled an Army of threescore
thousand men. The Pashaws tending toward Curdi; were surprised in their March
with the news of these disturbances in Georgia, and not rightly apprehending
the causes of these sudden commotions, gave an arrest to the progress of their
Arms, inclining toward the Parts of Georgia, to be in a readiness to suppress
all designs against the Ottoman Dominions, so that the thoughts of War against
the Curdi was for some time laid aside. The news of these troubles did also
alarm the Port, with which also came a report, That six hundred Tents of the
Kuzilbashees (which are the best sort of Persian Horsemen) were pitched nigh
the Consines of the Grand Signiors Territories; so that Orders were dispatched
to the aforesaid Pashaws to watch the motion and issue of those Affairs, but
those storms blowing over by the establishment of Achic-bash, the Turkish
Forces proceeded on their first design against Mortaza, marching to the pass of
the Country of the Curdi, which is very steep, asperous and rough. The whole
Kingdom being, as it were, one Mountain of dangerous and difficult access, has
hitherto preserved the Inhabitants from the Ottoman Subjection. The entrance
thereunto being strong by Nature, is also fortified with several Castles, the
chief of which, possessed by Mortaza, is called Zizri, and the people
thereabouts Zezidi. The Turkish Army being arrived at this pass, Mahomet, the
Pasha of Darbiquier, appointed General, as we have said before, ordered five
hundred of his select men to enter within the pass, which the Curdi perceiving,
with little opposition, put to slight, being so commanded by the General; The
unadvised Curdi cagerly pursuing the enemy, left the pass naked, and
undefended, supposing their whole victory The Turks (...) against the (...).
and success to consist in the Rout of those few: whereupon the Turkish Army
wisely possessed the pass, and got between the Curdi, and their place of
Retreat, and laying the Siege to the Castle, required them either to surrender
themselves, or else Mortaza and his Accomplices into their hands.

The Curdi perceiving themselves thus hardly beset, and in a manner defrauded,
their Garrison which possessed the pass without the Confines, the enemey gotten
possession of the Gate which opened to their Country, their Castles besieged,
and in danger to be gained, and an inlet made to an Inundation by their
Enemies, caused them to request a three days truce for Consultation, which
being granted, they began to consider, whether it were better to hazard the
welfare of their Country in a dangerous War, of which the Turks having already
compassed the passage, had made half the Conquest; or to surrender up Mortaza
to his own King, one in whom they had no part, no interest, nor relation. The
latter counsel was most generally pleasing, wherefore they seized Mortaza,
promising at first to conduct him through the Mountains to the Persians, but
afterward being on horseback, and about a mile distant from the Camp, they
bound his hands behind him, and with his Steward, The Surrender of Mortaza in
the Turks hands, and his death.
the Master of his Horse, and a Page, delivered him into the hands of the
Turks, who immediately struck off their heads, and sent them to Constantinople,
where for three or four days they lay before the Door of the Divan, with
Inscriptions on them whose they were, and afterward were thrown into the Sea.
And thus ended this famous Mortaza, who had in like cases, by order of this
Viziers Father, been an active Executioner of other Pashaws, and now included
in the same Fate, by means of the Son, being proscribed (as we have said
before) by Testament, and the most likely of any Pasha in the Empire to stand
in Competition for the Office of Vizier.

The Vizier upon this success began to show a more cheerful Countenance than
formerly, suspecting less of danger upon removal of so suspicious an Enemy. And
truly it was now hard to say where in the whole Empire was a generous, bold, or
ambitious spirit remaining, who had Reputation and Authority enough to attempt
a priority, such havoc was made by this Viziers Father of all hopeful and
daring dispositions, and such an Addition made to the slaughter by this man in
present Office, that whether men's spirits were vanquished, and cowed with
former Examples, or that the Age really afforded not such Heroes, it is hard to
say: None now appearing other than obsequious to this Vizier, and to fear, and
court him.

The Vizier having thus successfully contrived his Establishment, and security
at home, had time to confirm it by his Wars abroad, well judging that Foreign
Wars allay Civil Dissentions, and the prosperity thereof does both produce
reputation and terror of his person amongst his Enemies, as well as reconcile
affections, and increase Authority amongst his Subjects at home. Wherefore he
mediated on a War against the Emperor, and was glad to embrace the occasion
from the late Disturbances made in Transylvania by Kemenius, as we have related
in the former Year. But yet like a crafty Politician, who looks one way, and
steers another, so the Vizier, that he might the better lull the Germans into a
sleep, and apprehensions of security, he dissembled his inclinations to Peace,
and to hearken to such propositions as were tendered him by the German
Resident, namely, that the Fort of Serini should be demolished being built
against the intention, and without the knowledge or consent of his Imperial
Master, that the Garrisons of (...), Coloswar, and other places should
beremoved, with other overtures, and the fairest propositions imaginable, which
might give the Turks satisfaction, and by some means or other reconcile the
differences, if possible. To which The resolution of War uncertain.
counsel the Emperor was the rather inclinable, in regard that a Treaty at
that time was on foot between the French King, and the Duke of Lordin for
Alsatia, and that the result might prove prejudicial to the Empire, should he
at the same time be engaged in a War against the Turk, whilst as dangerous a
friend as the other was an enemy, crept easily into a suspected Neighborhood.
But the other Christian Princes, especially Rome, and the Allies, engaged in
the Venetian Quarrel, perceiving the Emperor to detract from his resolutions
of War, upon this suspicion endeavored to clear him from all jealousy in
reference to the French designs, and for better evidence thereof, had their own
engagements seconded by protestations from that King, not only not to molest
the Empire during this War, but to afsord him considerableaid and assistance
both in Men, and Money. These Negotiations and incitements to a War, encouraged
the Emperor, and the German Princes in that manner, that whilst the Turks
expected the return of the Corrier from Vienna, as it were with an Olive Branch
of Peace, and Confirmation of all Articles, which before were esteemed to be
concluded, and agreed; the Scene was wholly changed, and the Letters contained
new demands and propositions, and in fine, made all doubtful and
unsatisfactory. The Turks penetrating rightly into this Affair, pressed hard to
have a speedy Peace, or War, wherefore the Reis Essendi, or Secretary of State,
did at a private Conference with the German Minister in the name of the Grand
Signior, and in few words declare, that three months were allotted to demolish
the Fort built by the Count Serini, and for coming of an extraordinary
Ambassador to consirm the Articles: Notwithstanding which, the G. Signior
unmindful of the time, and of the Conditions he had given, and prefixed for
peace, ordered the Vizier immediately to prepare for the War, declaring that he
would in Person accompany him in part of his March, and remove his Court to
Adrianople; For this being a Country Champion, and plain, full of Game of all
sorts, so drew the heart and delight of the Grand Signior, that his Seraglio at
Constantinople seemed as a Cage, or Prison in respect of those desired Plains
of Thrace: His Women were no pastime or recreation to him, in whose Apartments
he spent little time: For this excessive humor in Hunting made him daily to
press the Vizier to depart for Adrianople, not that he had so real a desire to
the War as he had to his Game; which gave occasion to that ordinary Saying
amongst the Turks, That the Grand Signior had left some Hares behind him at
Adrianople, and would return to seek them. At length the Vizier not longer able
to resist his importunity without his displeasure, summoned a Council of all
the Viziers of the Bench, where also the Janisar Aga was present, to consult
concerning the time of their departure, at which they unanimously concluded,
that for diverse reasons, it was most necessary to deferr this expedition until
the next Spring. First, Because that three months time were already given The
Reasons why the Turks deferred the War with the German.
to the Emperor for sending his Extraordinary Ambassador. Secondly, Because
in so short a time provisions could not be sent into those Parts for relief of
the Camp. Thirdly, Because the Soldiers which were abroad could not have
timely notice to repair to their Colors. Fourthly, Because many Soldiers had
begun to rebuild their houses destroyed by the late Fires, which by the Spring
they might see finished. And lastly, That the Summer being now almost spent,
was not so fit for action, as the Spring, which gives new life and blood to
men, as well as sap and moisture unto Vegetables. These reasons being
represented with all humility to the Crand Signior, he seemed to rest
satisfied, and his heat of visiting Adrianople for the present allayed. And in
the mean time, that the design against Germany might be the more covertly
carried, it was given out that the preparations were intended against the
Venetian Territories in Dalmatia, (viz.) Zara, Sebenico, and Cataro, and
Proclamation was made that all Soldiers should prepare themselves for the Wars
against the next Spring. In which Interim no accident intervening which might
bring matters to an accommodation and better understanding, the daily
Skirmishes on the Frontiers made the Controversy every day more difficult to
be reconciled, and the breach the wider. The Count Serini also proceeded in
sinishing the Fortification he had lately raised near Canisia; And the other
Commanders of the Cesarean Army seeing the great progress of the Turks in
Transylvania secured Claudiopolis, Somoswar, Sechilhid, Clewar, alias Coloswar,
and Betlem, with some other Towns and Fortresses. The The sad Condition of
Transylvania.
Turks on the other side, under the Command of Ali Pasha, penetrate into the
very Center of Transylvania, and conceiving a jealousy of War from the
passages before mentioned, lost no time to take their advantages, so that the
Pasha of Varadin not contenting himself with that Country, and limits formerly
prescribed for maintenance of his Fortress, adjoined to his Jurisdiction what
Villages and Towns he thought fit, whilst the poor Prince, Michael Apafi,
though made by the Turks, durst not lift a hand, or interpose the least
Obstacle, or Impediment to his quiet progress, or peaceable possession, which
so harrassed the people of the Country, and wrought that misery and destruction
therein, that the Prince, deprived of his power in Government, and disabled by
oppression to pay his Annual Tribute, had no hopes of redress, but from the
assistance of Divine Providence, governing the hearts of Christians and Turks
to compassionate the misery of his Country. Wherefore he craved the assistance
of the Emperor, and of the King of Poland, acquainting other Christian Princes
more remote of the sad estate of the Christian Cause; He sent also his
Ambassadors to the Port with most submissive Letters to the Vizier,
complaining against the Pasha of Varadin, and craving his Commands for
retirement of his Army, within their due and ancient bounds. Letters were also
directed to the Public Representatives of Christian Princes residing at
Constantinople, one of which was directed to the Earl of Winchelsea, his
Majesty's Ambassador, which being that which may conduce to the more full
understanding of the present deplorable Condition of Transylvania, I thought
fit to be here mentioned. Excellentissime Domine, and Amice observandlssime,
AFflictiones Regni Transilvaniae quibus per complures annos justo Dei The
Prince of Transilvania's Letter to His Majesty's Ambassador.
Judicio castigatur, toti Orbi Christiano manifestae sunt, nec possumus non
fateri, inter duos Potentissimos Monarchas adeo indies hoc Regnum coangustari,
ut nisi extraordinaria Dei clementia aliquod subsequatur levamen, vix, immo ne
vix quidem, din duraturum credamus. Sed ut adrem proximius collimemus.
Potentissimus Imperator per Legatos Regni, and nostros nunc reduces
Clementissimum suum patrocinium pollicetur, interim autem Passa Varadinensis
non contentus Villis ac Pagis ad dictam Arcem pertinentibus, usque ad
meditullium plane Transilvaniae, metu Mortis, integras ad deditionem cogit
Regiones, quae nunquam eidem Arci applicatae fuerant, nee possibile est
Principatum Transilvaniae iis ademptis, ulterius persistere, Tributumque annuum
persolvere posse. Qua de re tam Potentissimum Imperatorem quam Supremum
Vezirium denuo requirere cogimur, vestram quocirca Excellentissimam
Dominationem confidenter rogamus, eo quo convenientius putaverit modo continuo
nostro Oratori opitulari, eaque qua pollet Authoritate Causam promovere, ne
gravetur rem non saltem Transilvaniae, verum quoque Christianitati perutilem
factura, nosque ad vincula amicitiae arctissime devinctura, cui felicem vitam
precamur, and manemus indubitati.

Datum in Castris ad Pagum Koczard positis die 26 Septembris, An. Dom. 1662.
Excellentissimae Dominationis vestrae Amicus Benevolus, Michael Apafi.




In English thus. Most Excellent Lord, and most worthy Friend,
THE Miseries of Transylvania, with which for many years, by the just Judgment
of God, we have been afflicted, are manifest to all the Christian World; Nor
can we but confess, how between two most Potent Monarchs, our Principality is
so daily straightened, that unless through the extraordinary mercy of God, we
obtain some relief, we believe not our selves longer able to subsist. But to
come nearer to our business. The Most Potent Emperor, by his own Ambassadors,
and ours now lately returned, has promised us his most Gracious Protection;
yet notwithstanding, the Pasha of Varadin not content with the Towns and
Villages appropriated unto his Castle, has entered into the very middle of
Transylvania, and has compelled, for fear of death, those Provinces entirely
to yield themselves, which never before were belonging to his Fortresses, which
being taken away, it is impossible for the Principality of Transylvania longer
to subsist, and pay its annual Tribute; Wherefore we are constrained again to
beseech the most Potent Emperor, and the Supreme Vizier, as also we
confidently desire your Excellency, in that manner which your Excellency
judges most convenient, to be assistant to our Agent, and with your Authority
to countenance our Cause, in which your Excellency will not only perform a
matter beneficial to Transylvania, but to all Christendom, and oblige us for
ever with the Bonds of friendship; and praying for all happiness of Life and
Prosperity to your Excellency, we remain your undoubted Friend.

Given in our Camp at the Village Koczard the five and twentieth day of
September, 1662. Your Excellencies Loving Friend, Michael Apafi.




This Letter was received by his Majesty's Ambassador with that humanity as
was agreeable to his noble Nature, and with that sense of the Christian Cause
as became a religious Minister of the Faiths Defendor, and an Answer returned
thereunto full of affectionate Piety and Compassion. But it was feared that the
time was elapsed, and the Disease proceeded too far to admit a gentle Cure; For
it could not probably be expected, that the Vizier should, upon fair words, or
persuasions, or by the force of passionate and Rhetorical expressions, be
induced to let slip the fair opportunity of an entire and total subjection of
Transylvania. And the truth is, herein lay the ground of the great Quarrel
between these two Emperors; for ever since the Defeat of Chimianus (or as the
Transilvanians call him Kemenius) the Turk swallowing in his thoughts the
entire subjection of that Country, designed to reduce it to the Government of a
Pasha, rather than of a Christian Prince, though elected at the Ottoman Port;
and in order thereunto, advanced beyond the Limits of the ancient bounds, and
pitched his Camp in the very Bowels of the Country. These proceedings giving
matter of jealousy to all the Captains of the bordering Christians; the Count
Serini first hastened the finishing of his Fort, as much as was possible, and
next, according to his example, the Imperialists in all parts of the Borders
fortified their Towns and Castles, and reinforced their Garrisons; which was
answered by the Turks in the like preparations. And thus mutual fears and
jealousies effected that ill Correspondence, in which the State of Affairs then
remained.

And since Transylvania is the present Scene of Action, it will not be much
from our purpose to digress a little in declaring the state of that miserable
Principality, and by what ways and means the Turks increased their Tribute, and
encroached on their Liberties; the which Relation I received from one of the
Transilvanian Agents to this effect.

In the time of Sultan Solomon, Transylvania was governed by her own A History
of Transilvanian Misery.
Laws, and her natural Prince, paying then only thirty thousand Dollars of
yearly Tribute. After which Ali Pasha taking Varadin on the Frontiers, had some
part of the Country allotted him for maintenance of his Garrison, and at that
time solemnly swore, That beyond those Limits allotted to Varadin, the Turks
should not farther enter into Transylvania, but that Oath being little
regarded, they have since that time possessed themselves of six Provinces,
(viz.) Bichar, Doboka, Halnock, Colos, in which is Claudiopolis, and of the
best part of Zarand. Nor were the Turks satisfied herewith, but in the year
1658. the Vizier Kuperlee entered Transylvania, and by force of Arms took the
strong Town of Janova, and demanded the Surrender of Lugas and Karansebes into
his hands. Nor could the allegations of the Oath of Sultan Solomon, or of Ali
Pasha, or any other persuasions or submission induce him to moderate any part
of his severe demands, until first having miserably destroyed the whole
Country, and satiated himself with blood, he was contented, upon the sad and
humble supplication of the Ambassador from that Prince, to withdraw his Army
out of Transylvania, on condition, that fifty thousand Dollars of yearly
tribute should be added to the former thirty thousand, and that Lugas, and
Karansebes should be wholly abandoned by the native Inhabitants, and delivered
into possession of the Turk: And as a mark of his absolute Dominion over that
Country, he forced one Achacius Barcley, employed before as Ambassador to him,
to take on him the Government, threatening that if he accepted not of the
Charge, he would invest a Carter in the Principality: Notwithstanding all this
Treatment; and though the Transilvanians complied with all the propositions
offered them by the Turk, yet not long after the Tartar Han passed twice
through the Country, miserably harrassing, spoiling, and killing, or making
Captives all he met, whose departure also from this Country was purchased with
a considerable sum of money. And this was the state of the misery of
Transylvania, when the troubles raised by Ragotzki and Kemenius added to the
other discontents, and administered farther occasion to the ensuing War.

But whilst the thoughts of the Ottoman Court were intent on their preparations
for the next years War in Hungary, advice came that the Turkish Fleet,
consisting of seventeen ships, and thirty seven Saiques, lately departed from
Constantinople bound for Alexandria in Egypt, and The Alexandrian Fleet
encountered by the Venetians.
convoyed by six Galleys, which met them at Scio, very rich with money, and
other goods, (whose returns are yearly for the most part made in Sugar, Coffee,
Rice, and other Commodities) were encountered near Rhodes by the Venetian
Armata, and such ruin and prize made of them, that of the threescore Sail,
twenty eight Saiques, and four Ships were sunk and taken: ( viz.) eighteen
Saiques taken, and ten burnt, three Ships taken, and one burnt, and thereon two
hundred and seventy Slaves, amongst which there were of note, Arnout Asan Aga,
Eunuch of the Seraglio, Mahomet Aga, Bascut Agasey of Grand Cairo, and Emin
Reis, Captain of a Ship. When this news arrived I happened to be at the Viziers
Court, and perceived a strange disturbance and alteration in the faces of all
then present; but more particularly the Grand Signior seemed to be heated with
fury, and present resolution of revenge; so that he had almost forgotten his
designs against the Emperor, and quitting his pastime in Hunting, he began to
talk of transporting his Arms into Dalmatia, and thereupon sent Orders to one
Beco a Begh of the Morea to cause a survey of the Highways, Passages, and
Bridges toward Dalmatia, as if he had intended immediately to march, and
either to deferr his Hungarian War, or wage both at the same time. But his
graver, and more sober Council moderated his heat with reason, knowing that the
designs of Princes, though never so absolute, must be subject to times and
seasons, until their Powers can extend to Omnipotency, which never yet could
exceed the abilities of a mortal man, though some have affected Divine Honors,
and by Flatterers have been ranked after death in the number of the Gods. The
venetians lost seventy men only, or thereabouts, and amongst them Giaconto
Semitecolo, a noble Venetian, with other Braves and Soldiers of Fortune. The
Turks horribly touched with this loss and disgrace, especially the Grand
Signior, who had an interest in the Caravana, had a mind to vent some of their
fury on Signior Ballarino, the Venetian Minister to the Port, like those (as we
say) who cannot beat the Horse will beat the Saddle; so that they intended to
imprison him again in some dark Cell, or obscure retirement, of which, or of
some other rigor Signior Ballarino was so sensible, that he wrote this ensuing
Letter to the Senator Nicolo Contarini, which may serve to explain the anguith
and sorrowful apprehensions of his Soul.

IF my mind were capable of Comfort, I could not in the midst of so much
anguish entertain a more efficacious motive thereunto, than those obliging
expressions which your Excellency uses toward me, who like a Terrestrial
Deity is pleased to protect me. But alas, I am too much overwhelmed with grief
to discover any subject which may cause me to dry my tears. I find no shelter
against that storm which I foresaw. Nor is it sufficient for me to discover the
Tempest before it arrives: It is not sufficient in this darkness to lose my
sleep, disturb my quiet, tire my Body, debilitate my health by a stender Diet,
whilst tossed in the Bosom of an inexorable Element, I am denied the enjoyment
of a ray of Light. I hold the Helm of the Ship as direct as I can, but the
adverse waves of my Fortune drive me into the midst of those storms where I
apprehend the greatest dangers: I am here in the midst of a Sea, which is the
Nest of Extravagancies, the grand belief of unthought of Accidents, the
spacious Theater of Tragedies, a fierce Giant, a horrible Monster, who with
gentle Opiates endeavors to lull asleep, and lead those to destruction who
have too great a confidence in their own strength. I reproach my self for not
having been able to make it sufficiently understood, how one stroke of adverse
Fortune is capable to put all into danger, who are embarked in the same Vessel;
And as little able am I to inculcate into the minds of men, that whilst the
Waves of the vast Sea are smooth and calm, the nearer is the raging of the
Waters, and the fury of a Tempest. It was therefore necessary that there should
have been some more skilful Pilot than my self to conduct this Vessel. I was
long since acquainted with my imperfections, and therefore called aloud for the
assistance of an abler Pilot, to direct me in this tempestuous Region; but
since I was not heard, I gloried at least to be alone in this Gulf, that being
swallowed up by a final ruin, my Martyrdom may be a means to save the rest.
Rains and Lightnings do not affright me, but rather serve to quench that fire
of disdain which I conceive against my self, for not knowing how to perform
better, and serve to enlighten me daily to find out that Compass or Cart which
may direct me to a course or path of security. I fear Thunders and Tempests,
because the violence of one, and the hardness of the other is able to render a
cold sweat mixed with blood altogether unprofitable. This miserable School,
though of eleven years continuance, constrains me to study the disposition of
the Stars, the Signs in the Air, the ebbings and flowings of the waters,
concealed Rocks, the dangers of along Voyage, and the necessity of recovering a
Port. I have studied indeed, but I fear I have not well learned this profound
Discipline, for where there is the greatest urgency, there I have gathered the
least fruit; for since the aspect of the Spheres are become more inauspicious,
I am doubtful that I shall see the Ship beaten with swelling Surges, and being
full of Water, it will be so far from being eased by those opportune remedies
which I bring, that it will rather be increased by my tears. God grant by his
miraculous Providence, the Tranquillity which we desire, and which by humane
means will be difficult to obtain. I had not the understanding to take
Opportunity by the Foretop when She presented herself unto me with gentle and
benign appearance, showing me the means to save this floating Vessel, and spare
our insidious rewards. For this reason my dejected, but not conquered, mind
makes my very Bowels feel an unusual anguish of an over-troubled estate. May it
please the Divine pity, that these my affictions may prove the Offspring of my
own vileness, but not the means of my ruin. I trust therein, I confess, and
yet frail hope, amidst this Gulf of Sin, induces me to expect doubtful
successes; Yet certainly I will endeavor to avoid a shipwreck on those Rocks
of Despair:, And so imploring the Patronage of your Excellency here on Earth,
I confirm my self. From Pera of Constantinople the 19 of December, 1662.

This Letter seems to be wrote in the style of a despairing person, yet if it
be well considered, the meaning is no other than what the Issue of Affairs some
years afterward did evidence; and his intentions were no other than to
describe the ill nature of the Turkish Ministers, and their obstinacy of
continuing a War, until they had wearied out the Venetians into an humor of
surrendering the whole Island of Candia unto them. I had the honor to be well
acquainted with the Person of Signior Ballarino, and I always esteemed him in
his external Behavior accomplished with the excesses of Italian Civility; he
was endued with great fluency of Language, both in Discourse and Writing; he
was jealous, acute, and wary; and in short, was a proper Minister for that
Republic, well practiced and versed in the manner of Treaty with the Turkish
Court. He at first was sent from Venice to Constantinople in quality of
Secretary to the Excellentissimo Capello, Procurator of St. Mark, a Person
eminent for his Office, and the several great employments which he had
exercised in that State; he was sincere, and of a generous Soul, his comely
looks, and grave habit spoke him to be a Gentleman and a Senator. In short, he
was so well esteemed of at Venice, that he was thought worthy to be employed in
this Embassy to the Grand Signior, which is commonly granted to persons after
they have run through all services of the Commonwealth, as a Consummation of
their Honors and Richesse. This Gentleman then had the misfortune to be
invested in this honor in the worst of Times, when the War was broke forth,
and being thereby exposed to their cruelty, he was put into Prison, where
passing for some time a Life of sorrow and sadness, he fell into a melancholy,
which represented all things to him in the blackest manner; so that, I know not
why, his fancy suggested to him, that he was not only miserable in his
Imprisonment and Restraint amongst the Turks, but that he was fallen also into
disgrace, and displeasure of his Prince at home. I will not say that Signior
Ballarino did nourish the operation of this black humor in him; but I have
heard that he did not administer that comfort to him, as might serve to dispel
the thickness of that Vapor which obscured the generous temper of his Soul. In
short, he gave such way to this melancholy, that he laid violent hands upon
himself; (as we have said before) but afterward by the Care of his Friends and
Servants, being cured of his wounds, he lived some years after, by his sorrows,
and repentance for it, to give satisfaction to God and the World. Howsoever,
the Senate being informed thereof, and judging this Act to be the effect of a
violent Frenzy, appointed Ballarino to take on himself the entire management
of Affairs, reserving only the Title and Honor to Signior Capello. Ballarino
now managing all Affairs, Capello looked on himself as neglected and laid
aside, howsoever comported his condition with submission and gentleness, never
openly resenting the Honors of Ballarino, or to see him preferred before
himself; Howsoever, secretly nourishing an inward discontent, his robustious
Nature, upwards of eighty years of Age, was forced to give way to its final
dissolution; and falling sick he sent to the Earl of Winchelsea, then
Ambassador for his Majesty at Constantinople, to acquaint him of his
Distemper, desiring him to send me, who was then his Secretary, unto him. At
these Summons I was easily persuaded to go, having always had his Person in
great Reverence; and being come to his Bedside, he raised himself upon his
Pillows, and embracing me in his Arms, I fancied my self to receive the
Benediction of one of the Ancient Patriarchs. He began with a weak voice to say
to me, Sir, I am near my end, expecting every minute to render up my last
Breath, and therefore as a dying man, I desire of your Master, the Ambassador,
that so soon as I am dead, he would be pleased to deliver this poor Carcass of
mine from under the Covering of this accursed Roof. For Answer whereunto I did
not stand to expostulate the reasons with him, well knowing the cause of his
discontent; but that I would communicate his desires to my Lord Ambassador,
and speedily return with my Answer to him. Accordingly I departed from him, and
quickly brought from my Lord a promise to endeavor hisutmost to comply with
his request; at which he seemed to be much satisfied, and commanded his
Servants then present, especially one called Sig. Tomaso Gobbato, his great
Confident, to be Witnesses thereof. The next day he expired his last Breath,
and the day following his Body being embalmed, his Bowels were buried, and the
Funeral Rites performed with such order and decency as was seemly in a Country
where he lived rather like a Prisoner than an Ambassador. All things being
thus prepared, the Earl of Winchelsea, according to the Will of the Deceased,
sent for his Body, already embalmed, which was immediately without opposition
or scruple sent to his house; where it remained for some months, in expectation
of a conveyance for Venice. At length a Dutch ship, being bound from
Constantinople thither, it was designed that the Body should be thereon
embarked; but I know not for what reason, the Customer refused to suffer it to
pass; though it may well and rationally be conjectured, That Ballarino, who was
sensibly touched to have the care of the Body of his Master, his Countryman,
and Colleague taken from him, did with Presents prevail with the Customer to
put difficulties in the way, which he supposed might vex those who were thought
worthy of this employment. This opposition being made, and not to be overcome
without much money, it was contrived that the ship departing should attend the
Corpse at Tenedos, which was without the Command of the Castles; and the Body
being divided from the Legs, was packed up in a Butt of Cavear, and so sent
down by a Boat with License of the Customer, as a parcel of Goods and
Merchandice; and so safely arriving aboard, the Corpse were separated from their
adjuncts; and being laid decently in a Costin, covered with a Pall of Black
Velvet, with Scutcheons, and other ornaments appertaining to the Funerals of
such great Personages; it arrived safely at Venice, where it was interred with
the usual Ceremonics, in the Tomb of the Ancestors of that Ancient Family.

But the heads and thoughts of these Governors were not so employed in their
preparations of War, but that the Vizier could lend an Ear to the suggestions
of some malicious Pharisees, who, under pretense of Religion, informed him,
That the Christian Churches, burnt down in Constantinople and Galata by those
dreadful Fires in the year 1660, were again re-edified against his Command, and
the Law of the Turks, which allows the reparation of Churches, and continuance
of such which were found standing when Mahometanism was introduced; but not to
erect new, or rebuild what are either by time, fire, or other accidents fallen
to ruin. And being farther informed, that though those Churches were restored
under the notion of Dwellings, or Warehouses, yet secretly served for
Celebration of Divine Service, and thereby his Deerees and The Vizier destroys
the Christian Churches rebuilt after the Fire.
Edicts were frustrated and disappointed: Wherefore, furiously transported with
a Mohammedan Zeal, commanded immediately that the Authors of those Buildings
should be imprisoned, the Churches themselves levelled to the Foundation, and
the ground whereon they stood consiscated to the Grand Signior. This action,
though naturally agreeable to the disposition of the Vizier, who was a perfect
Turk, zealous in execution of all points of the Mohammedan Law, being educated
after the severest sort of Professors, and one of those whom they called
Softaes; yet he was chiefly prompted unto this, and to a greater abhorrency of
Christianity, by one Vanni Esfendi, a Shegh, or Preacher, one who was as
inveterate The Zeal of a Turkish Preacher.
and malicious to the Christian Religion, as any Enthusiast or Fanatic is to
the Rites of our Church and Religion. And thus we may see how troublesome
Hypocrisy and Puritanism are in all places where they gain a Superiority; For
this Preacher not contented only to ruin the Christian Churches, but persuaded
the Vizier that the terrible Fires in Constantinople and Galata in the year
1660, and the last years unparalleled Pestilence, and the inconsiderable
advance of the Turks on the Christians for some years, were so many parts of
Divine Judgments thrown on the Mussulmen, or Believers, in vengeance of their
too much License given to the Christian Religion, permitting Wine to be sold
within the Walls of Constantinople, which polluted the Imperial City, and
ensnared the faithful by temptation to what was unlawful: Wherefore a Command
was issued, That no Wine should be henceforth sold within the Walls of the
City. And it was farther intended that Greeks and Armenians, and all other
Christians, who had Dwellings or Possessions within the Walls of the City,
should within forty days sell those habitations, and depart; which otherwise
should be confiscated to the Grand Signior; but God who supports the Faithful
in Trials of Persecution, moderated this Decree, and reserved still his Church
in the midst of Insidels; not suffering this City to lose the Name nor Religion
of that Holy Emperor, who both erected, and christened it; as also to preserve
most of the Churches, which though again uncovered, yet were redcemed for money
from the possession of the Turks. Nor was the Mohammedan Zeal satisfied in
Demolishment of the Churches themselves, unless it vented part of its fury
against the poor Workmen, which for their hire and days Wages erected them;
such as Greek Laborers, Masons, and Carpenters, who were all beaten and
imprisoned. But it happening at that time that the Queen Mother building a
sumptuous Mosch, and having occasion of many Laborers and Artists to forward
so vast a Work, sent to the Maimarbashee (who is the Master workman, or Cape,
over all such who are employed in Building) to supply such a number of
Carpenters, Masons, and others, as were convenient to carry on that Fabric
with expedition; who readily replied, That he would provide all that was
possible, but could not promise a sufficient number, unless those Greeks were
set at liberty, who were imprisoned by the Grand Vizier for building the
Christian Churches; which answer being reported again to the Queen Mother, she
interceeded with the Vizier in their behalf, who being glad of any occasion to
gratify so great a Lady, immediately released them, without any fine or
reward, which he designed to obtain for their liberty. Howsoever the Vizier not
well brooking such an indignity (as he supposed) put upon him by so mean a
Slave, as the Maimarbashee, dealt with some of the imprisoned Laborers to
accuse him, as the Author and Licenser of building the Christian Churches. The
Greeks easily enough persuaded to please so great a Personage, accused him
accordingly, whose Evidence, though not passable against a Turk by the
Mohammedan Law, yet served the Viziers revenge for the present, who immediately
commanded his head to be struck off, and his Estate confiscated; which was The
Viziers revenge on the Cape of the Builders.
reported to consist of two thousand purses of money, every purse importing five
hundred Dollars, then found actually in his house, which, if true, is a strange
Wealth for so ordinary a person. But by this, and by many other instances, we
may perceive that there is no people in the World more covetous, and desirous
to amass Wealth than the Turks, nor none more uncertain to enjoy it.

About this time the French Merchants in the Levant, having advised his most
Christian Majesty that the Turks were sensible that the affront to the person
of Monsteur la Hay, his Ambassador, was contrary to the Law of Nations, and
such an injury as could not but provoke the Choler of so puissant a Prince to a
just revenge; and knowing that his Majesty being powerful at Sea, was able to
extend his Arms to the utmost Confines of his Empire, whilst the interposition
of other Countries limited the Turks March by Land, and their ignorance and
inability in marine Affairs rendered them incapable to arrive those Banks of
France, which the Sea washes: These Considerations the French Merchants having
persuaded the King to be the thoughts of the Grand Signior, and that he desired
the continuance of the Peace and Traffic with France, and as an evidence of
his remorse and displeasure for the injury to Monsieur la Hay, the Father, his
Majesty was contented in satisfaction thereof to redress this injurious
transgression of the Law of Nations, by some extraordinary marks of favor and
honor to the Person of Monsieur la Hay the Son; that so exceeding the usual
method and rule of Ceremony toward this Ambassador at his arrival, the World
might be convinced of the real affection, and hearty desire the Grand Signior
had to renew his Peace, and preserve his Commerce with France. This is supposed
to be what the Merchants of Marseille and Lions governed by the Interest of
their Trade, suggested to their King to induce him to send an Ambassador to
Constantinople; For at this time Monsieur Roboli, a Merchant, remained only
Messengers from France to introduce a new Ambassador.
as Consul or Agent for the Affairs of Commerce. Things thus represented at the
French Court, the King dispatched away two Gentlemen to Constantinople with
Letters to the Grand Signior and Vizier, and one to the Sieur Roboli, the
Agent, declaring that if the Turk would make amends for the last Affront done
to the Ambassador, by some signal notes of Honor in the abused Person of
Monsieur la Hay, the Son, he would then condescend to confirm the Ancient
League and Amity. The Letters translated out of the French Tongue, were as
follows. To Our Dear, and Well Beloved le Sieur Roboli, Agent for Our Affairs
at Constantinople. By the King.
Dear, and Well Beloved,
THE Inclination We have to continue that Amity with the Emperor of the Turks,
which has remained so long between Us, and Our Empires, and maintain the
ancient Alliances, has caused Us to write to Him, and his Great Vizier, to
know the Entertainment and Reception that they will give to the Sieur de la
Hay, the Son, in satisfaction of the violence exercised before on his own
Person, and the Person of the Sieur de la Hay, the Father, our Ambassador,
against the Law of Nations. We write to You this Letter, to give you Order to
conduct and present before the Vizier, the Secretaries du Pressoir, and
Fontain, which We have sent to carry him our Dispatches, and return with the
Answers, which you shall solicit without loss of time, the which you shall
bring your self, in case they be not agreeable to that resolution we have taken
not to receive any satisfaction, but in the Person of the said Sieur de la
Hay, the Son, which is due to Us, for that Insolency and Affront which has
been done them. Willing also notwithstanding, that before you depart, you
assemble the French Merchants in Constantinople together, that they may choose
amongst themselves one for their Chief; but if the Answers be such as We have
cause to expect, We approve that you remain in the Station where you are, in
Quality of Our Agent, until the Arrival of the said Monsieur de la Hay, and
that you send them by the said Secretaries du Pressoir, and Fontain, of which
you shall not fail, for so is Our Pleasure.

Given at Paris the twentieth of January, 1662. Signed, LOUIS. De Lomenie.


The King of France his Letter to the Great Vizier.
To the Most Illustrious and Magnificent Lord, the Chief Vizier of the Sublime
Port of the Grand Signior. Most Illustrious and Magnificent Lord,
ALthough the Indignity offered to the Person of the Sieur de la Hay Venteley,
Our Ambassador, and to his Son, which We have designed to the same Charge,
have touched Us as far as becomes a victorious Prince, who holds the first rank
over Christian Kings, and who has under his Power one of the most warlike
Nations of the World; Notwithstanding after being informed, that the disgrace
which the said Gentlemen have incurred has proceeded rather from malice, and
the ill Offices of some Persons, who have endeavored to disturb, by this ill
Treatment of them, the good Correspondence which has been between Us, than
from any design on the Grand Signiors Part to offend Us; and that on the
contrary, there continues in His will an intention to maintain the Ancient
Friendship which remains between our Estates and People after so many Ages. We
being not desirous to estrange Our selves, shall send an Ambassador in
ordinary to his High Port, and having cast our Eyes upon the said Sieur de la
Hay, the Son, We are much inclined to dispatch him for this employment; but as
We desire to be assured of the good reception that shall be made him, We give
You advice of Our intentions by this Letter; that according to the desire You
have testified of the continuance of Our friendship, and Our Ancient Alliances
with His Highness, shall pray God to have You, Most Illustrious and Magnificent
Lord, in His holy and worthy protection.

Written at Paris the twelfth day of January, 1662. LOUIS. De Lomenie.


The King of France his Letter to the Grand Signior.
To the most High, most Excellent, most Puissant, most Magnanimous, and
Invincible Prince, the Great Emperor of the Mussulmans, Sultan Mahomet, in
whom all Honor and Virtue abound. Our most dear and perfect Friend.
MOST High, most Excellent, most Puissant, most Magnanimous, and Invincible
Prince, the Grand Signior, Emperor of the Mussulmans, Sultan Mahomet, in whom
all Honor and Virtue abound. Our most dear and perfect Friend. May God
increase Your Greatness and Majesty with a happy end. We have not known how to
impute the ill usage, which has been offered to the Person of the Sieur de la
Hay, our Ambassador, and to his Son, designed by Us to the same employment,
to any causes and motions in Your Highness, but rather to the Instigation of
some People, which would trouble that good Correspondence, which has been so
long established between Us, and our Empires. And as we have cause to believe
that Your Highness desires much to continue this friendship and good
understanding, upon what has been wrote Us on Your Part; and to concur with
You herein, we desire much likewise to continue to maintain an Ambassador at
Your High Port, in place of the said Sieur de la Hay. And since We have none
of Our People that is more intelligent than the Sieur de la Hay, the Son, in
what concerns the Affairs and Functions of this Embassy; We have elected him
for this employment, to which We shall willingly dispatch him, if We may be
assured of the good usage and kind reception which shall be given him. This is
that which We expect from Your Highness, reserving a more particular
information to be sent by the Sieur de la Hay, the Son, of the good
Correspondence which We desire always to have and maintain with You. And
hereupon We pray God, That You may be most High, etc. as above, in his Holy and
Worthy Protection.

Written at Paris the twelfth day of January, 1662. Your true and perfect
Friend, LOVIS. De Lomenie.


The Viziers Answer to the foregoing Letters.
To the most Glorious amongst the Sublime Christian Princes, chosen amongst the
Great and Sublime of the Religion of the Messiah, Mediator of the Affairs of
all the Nazarene Nation, Lord of Majesty and Reputation, Master of Greatness
and Power, Louis Emperor of France, the end of whose days be happy. The
Salutations which respect Friendship, and are desired from Love and Affection,
being premised. Your Majesty shall know that the Letter which was sent to Your
Friend, by the Honorable du Pressoir and Fountain has been delivered me by
the Sieur Roboli, Agent and Attorney of the Embassy, at the High and Imperial
Port; the Contents whereof We have apprehended to be as Your Majesty gives to
understand, touching the entire Amity and good (...). Certainly Your Majesty
knows, that the Augmentation, and daily Increase of that Amity, proceeds from
the protection and honorable Observance of Conditions and Capitulations
between both Parties. By the Grace of the most High God, the Sublime and
Imperial Port of the most Happy, most Puissant, most Valourous, most
Magnificent, and most Strong Emperor, Support of the Mussulmans, My Lord,
whose Arms God prosper with double Force, is always open for our Friends, and
others without any Obstacle, as all the World knows, and particularly for Your
Majesty, Who is our Friend, and has been long in Amity with the most Serene
Ottoman Family, whom God establish until the day of the Balance. It being a
most certain Truth that there has happened neither on one side or other any
Action contrary to the promised Faith.

And now, since Your Majesty desires for a new Ornament of the Ancient and Good
Correspondence, and to the end that the Agreement and Conditions thereof be
honored as they ought, that the considerable Person amongst the Nobles of the
Court of Your Majesty, the Sieur Denis de la Hay, Son of the late Ambassador,
a Subject of Reputation, Your Gentleman of Credit, whose Days may they conclude
in happiness, be sent to reside at this Happy and Imperial Port, for Your
Majesty, according to the ancient custom; To the end that the Intention of Your
Majesty may be performed, We have exposed it at the High Throne of the thrice
Happy, most Mysterious, and most Great Emperor, My Lord, Who with an Imperial
regard of courteous Demonstration, has accepted the said Demand with
willingness, and therefore in signification of his Pleasure, We write You this
Our present and friendly Letter; and if it please God, according to the ancient
Custom, when the said Ambassador shall arrive at this High Port with the
Letters of Friendship from Your Majesty, he shall be honored on the Imperial
part, and entertained according to the ordinary custom, the Imperial
Capitulations shall be renewed, the Ornament of Affection on one side and the
other shall be confirmed; and for an essicacious Consirmation of a good Peace
between both Entperours, an Imperial Letter shall be sent to Your Majesty,
whose health be happy and prosperous.

From the Imperial City of Constantinople. The Poor Ahmet Pasha. The Vizier
styles himself The Poor in respect to the Greatness of his Master.





In Answer to the Kings Letter the Grand Signior made no reply, but only by his
Vizier, by reason that in all the Ancient Turkish Registers and Archives, there
was no example found, that the Grand Signior ever wrote to any King, who had
not an Ambassador actually resident at his Port. But this Negotiation about a
French Ambassador took not effect, until some time after, in which other
Letters and Messages intervened, as will appear by the following Sequel of this
History.

It was now toward the beginning of Winter, when the Season of the Year
compelled the Turkish Fleet of Galleys to return according to custom, to the
Port of Constantinople. The whole Summer before, they The returns of the
Turkish Armata to winter at Constantinople.
had for the most part passed in some Harbor or Creek amongst the Greek
Islands, having afforded nothing of Convoy or succor toward the safe Conduct
of the Fleet of Grand Cairo, but suffered them to fall into the hands of the
Enemy, as before mentioned, and indeed for several years the Marine Affairs of
the Turks have always gone decaying in Fame and Force; and the preparations of
the Armata every Spring, have been of Form and Course, rather than with hopes
of success correspondent to the expense. In their return home, near
Constantinople they encountered a sierce storm, so that three Galleys were cast
away at Ponte Piccolo, (by the Turks called Cuchuccheckmage, about four Leagues
distant from Constantinople.) Howsoever the Weather clearing, the remainder of
the Fleet got into Port, entering with joy, with vollies of great and small
Shot, with Streamers flying, Pipes sounding, and all other sorts of their
Country Music, bringing with great Ostentation a small Flyboat, which had been
a Ligornese Man of War, taken by them as she was cruising singly in the Arches
of Pelago; which was brought in with so much Ceremony used in toaing her into
Port, decking her with Streamers and Pendants, with such signs of Victory and
Triumph, as if they had led Captive the whole Venetian Armata. But I must not
omit the relation of what befell one of the Beghs Galleys, designed, with the
rest, The Slaves make an Inforrection in one of the Beghs Galleys.
to rendezvous at Constantinople, whilst she loitered amongst small Isles in
the Gulf of Nicomedia. It was a Gally, the Commander of which had newly
received as the Portion of his Wife, being a Young man lately married, who
entertained great thoughts of raising his Fortunes by the spoils and prize he
was to make. At these Isles several of the Officers, and The Soldiers at Sea
called by that name.
Levents went on shore; where whilst they entertained themselves with Wine and
merriment; the Slaves made an insurrection in the Gally, seized the Captain,
cut off his Head, and threw his Body into the Sea; and so becoming Masters of
the Vessel, weighed Anchor, and set sail. Those on the shore admiring at the
unexpected departure of the Gally, accompanied her with their eyes and wonder
as far as they could perceive her in sight, but observing her to steer a
different course from the Port, to which they were designed, suspected much of
the truth of what had succeeded; wherefore taking their Boat immediately, they
hastened to Constantinople to give advice of what had passed, that (if possible)
Orders might timely arrive the Castles on the Hellespont, which might obstruct
their farther passage. But alas! the poor Slaves were so dismayed with their
own action, and so transported with a slavish fear and apprehension of what
might succeed should their escape not be effected; that they knew not what
course to steer: all things seemed to contradict their liberty, the Wind proved
contrary, their Spirits dejected their understandings void of counsel and
contrivance; so that wandering three or four days in the Propontis, at last ran
their Gally ashore on the Asian side, near Palormo; from whence they were
brought back to Constantinople, and there, by sentence of the Captain Pasha,
fourteen of them had their Legs and Arms broken, and so suffered to dye in that
torture, and afterward their Bodies were thrown into the Sea, to the terror
of all other Slaves, who prefer a miserable Life at the Oar, before the
torments of some hours in dying.

Though the Turks have their Affairs but ill managed at Sea, and their success
accordingly fortunate; yet their preparations for Land services are more
expedite, and executed with that secrecy and speed, that oftentimes Armies are
brought into the Field, before it is so much as rumoured by common mouths that
any designs are in agitation: For though it was now Winter, yet the design
against Germany went forward, Forces were daily sent to the Frontiers, Cannon,
and Ammunition for War, transported by way of the Black Sea, and the Danube.
Orders issued The Preparations for the German War.
out to the Princes of Moldavia, and Valachia to repair their Wharfs and Keys
along the River, for the more convenient landing of Men and Ammunition, and to
rebuild their Bridges for the more commodious passage of the Tartars; That
Horses should be provided against the next Spring, for drawing all Carriages of
Ammunition, and Provisions; their Magazines stored with quantities of Bread,
and Rice, their Fields well stocked with Sheep, and other Cattle, and that no
necessaries be wanting which concern the victualling, or sustenance of a Camp.
The Tartars were appointed to have in a readiness a hundred thousand Horsemen,
to make Incursions on the Frontiers; Likewise the Pashaws of Darbiquier,
Aleppo, Caramania, and Anatolia received their orders; and seven and twenty
Letters, accompanied with as many Vests, after the Turkish manner, were sent to
as many Pashaws of the Empire, to dispose the strength of their Countries in a
Warlike posture, so as to march when the Grand Signiors Commands should require
them to attend his designs: And that the occasion of the War might appear the
more justifiable, it was resolved, That no Acts of Hostility, or other Breaches
of Peace should be pretended, than the Fort built by the Count Serini, being a
matter really against the Articles of the last Peace; the Demolishment whereof,
the Ottoman Force intended to make the principal end of their first Enterprise,
in which if they encountered any opposition from the Emperor, the Cause of their
War would be then the more plausible; for as yet the Emperor had not fully
declared his approbation of that Work, raised by Serini, as agreeable to his
Assent, or Pleasure. On the other side with no less caution and labor did the
Christians endeavor to secure their Frontiers, by raising their Militia, and
reinforcing their Garrisons, and especially to perfect the new Fort near
Canista, which, as it was thought so considerable, as to countervail the
inconveniences and miseries of a War, so the Turk thought it neither
honorable, nor secure, until he had seen it razed, and levelled with the
ground.

All things thus growing black and stormy round about, that nothing An Accident
disposing the Christian Affairs to a peace with the Turk.
seemed less probable, and it may be said, less possible, than an accommotion;
Behold, on a sudden, an Accident fell out at Rome, from whence this War with
the Turks received its life and heat, which becalmed much of the fury and storm
on the Christian Consines, and inclined matters in Germany toward propositions
of Peace, fearing that Italy, who had begotten this War, was not able (as
things stood) to contribute toward its maintenance and support. The occasion
was this. It happened that in the streets of Rome the French Ambassadors Coach
was assaulted by the Corsi Natives of the Ifle of Corsica, which are of the
Popes Guard, the Page killed at the Boot of the Coach, and the Ambassadors
Lady wounded; whether this barbarous act was designed against the Person of the
Ambassador by any Persons of Eminency, or malice of the People, is little to
the purpose I have now in hand; only the King took this Affront so heinously,
that for the present no acknowledgments or satisfaction the Pope could make,
could allay his just resentment, or any thing be imagined possible to expiate
this indignity, besides a War. The News of this Division between the Son, and
the spiritual Father, filled all the Ministers of Constantinople with much Joy,
and with subject of Laughter, and expectation of the Event, judging now that
their daily Prayers for the Discord of the Christian Princes amongst
themselves, were heard and granted, since they had so far availed, as to
disunite the very Economy of Christendom. And now they imagined that this
difference would have a forcible influence on their Affairs in Hungary, and
either incline the Emperor speedily to a Peace, or otherwise to undertake a
War on disadvantageous terms. Things had an issue accordingly, for in a few
Weeks after, advice came by Post from Ali Pasha, then at Tentiswar, that his
Salam-Chaous, called Chusaein, who had long since been sent to Vienna, with
more distinct Demands of what the Turks proposed, and being supposed, through
his long stay, to be detained a Prisoner, was again returned, and with him had
brought the Baron of Goez, as Internuncio, The Baron of Gowtz sent to Ali Pasha.
sent to Ali Pasha, to receive a more particular Information of the Turks
propositions, for that the Emperor pretended, he was not as yet thoroughly
satisfied therein. And thus matters, beyond all expectation, began to incline
to an agreement, in regard that Rome being now in danger herself, not by the
Turks, but by the Christians, held herself incapable to administer that Fuel to
the Fire of War which She had promised; so that the League treated there
beginning to fail, the Emperor grew faint, and the Princes cold, in their
Preparations, wishing some Course could be effected, which might bring matters
to an accommodation. Such were the Discourses and imaginations of the Turks; In
which condition we leave the state of Affairs until the beginning of the next
year; and in the mean time it may not be from our purpose, nor tedious to the
Reader, to record what befell this year most remarkable to the English Nation,
and their Trade in Turkey, which also may be beneficial, by instruction of past
examples, to such who shall for the future be concerned in the Traffic and
business of the Levant.

What Remarkable Accidents befell the ENGLISH NATION, and their Trade this Year
in TURKEY.
THE Messengers from Algier, as before related, having promised better
Obedience for the future to the Commands of the Grand Signior, obtained a new
Pasha for their City, and Country thereunto belonging; who before his
departure, was enjoined by the Grand Signior to dispose Affairs with the Earl
of Winchelsea, his Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople, as might
demonstrate his dispositions toward a Peace, and his desire that the Algerines
should do the like, and accept of that Clause in the Articles, prohibiting the
search of English Ships, either for their own or Strangers Goods. The place
appointed for the meeting between the Ambassador and the Pasha, was a certain
Chiosk, or Garden house, belonging to an Eunuch, the Aga of a Seraglio at Pera;
where both parties being met, the Pasha declared that the Grand Signiors
desires were, That a Peace should be concluded on the Ancient Capitulations,
and that by him these Orders were to be carried unto Algier, from whence he was
advised, that the Algerines were ready to accept those Articles, if one of his
Majesty's Ships singly appeared about the Treaty; so that, the World might not
esteem their condescension to proceed from Force and Compulsion. Hereof Advices
being sent into England, a Peace ensued in some Months after, but what faith
these Insidels kept will be related in the Sequel of this Story; the memory of
which is engraven with the Point of a Diamond, and the Losses which ensued
thereupon to the Exchange at London, deserve a particular Treatise, which in
the mean time many Families retain in a sad remembrance.

In May Advice was brought to the Lord Ambassador, how that the Anne, a
Frigate of his Majesty's Royal Navy, commanded by Captain Jonas Poole, which
had convoyed the general Ships to Smyrna, in her passage homewards stopped at
the Morca, and came to an Anchor near a place in that Country, called the Black
Mountain, commodious to Wood and Waterin; to which end were landed threescore
men, armed with Swords and Firelocks; these made havoc of the Woods on all
sides, loading their Boats away as fast as they could, and not only so, but set
great Trees on Fire, which in that dry Season of the Year dispersed it self far
and wide; which being seen at a distance in the Night, alarmed the people of
the Country, so that the Begh, or Governor came down with some Force to
discover the matter, supposing that some Malteses, or Venetians might be
landed. At the approach of this Body of Turks, our Men quitted the Woods, and
shifted away as fast as they could to their Boats, of which thirty eight
escaped, the rest falling short were intercepted by the Turks, and eleven of
them were killed, and eleven taken Captives; and of the Turks, two Aga's, and
two or three others had the fortune to fall by some Musket Shot from our men,
whilst in this confusion, they endeavored to defend themselves. On the news
hereof, our Lord Ambassador represented the whole matter to the Vizier
declaring, That it was lawful according to our Capitulations to take
refreshments, and supply our wants in any part of the Grand Signiors Dominions;
and that therefore he demanded Justice on the Begh of the Morea, and
restitution of the Captives. But the Vizier understanding that some Turks were
killed in the skirmish, lent not so ready an ear to these Complaints;
howsoever, to be acquitted of the Ambassadors solicitations, referred the
business to the Examination and Justice of the Captain Pasha: but it falling
out that at that time the Consul and Merchants at Smyrna had an unhappy
difference with the Captain Pasha, (which shall in the next place be related)
was the Cause that all Applications to his Favor and Justice were suspended,
and a slow progress made toward obtaining the liberty of those poor
unfortunate men. Howsoever, some months after it happened that the Begh of the
Morea being removed from that Government, and coming to Constantinople with his
whole Estate, brought with him the eleven Englishmen, which he had taken, and
offered them to sale unto the Ambassador, who considering that they were
Englishmen, and such as had been enslaved in actual service of their King, he
esteemed himself obliged both in Charity and Honor to redeem them. But the
Case appeared too foul to demand their Liberty by strength of the
Capitulations; for besides that, the cutting Wood in places inhabited without
permission, is a Robbery and a Crime in its self, not to be maintained by the
Law of Nations, the killing of a principal Aga, and wounding others, might
sufficiently warrant the Turks, without any Breach of Peace, to detain these
men as lawful Captives: Wherefore the Lord Ambassador deeming it unseemly,
that those who had served in his Majestics Navy should be condemned to the
Turkish Galleys, disbursed fourteen hundred Lion Dollars, which was demanded
for them, which was afterward repaid him by his Majesty; and having clothed,
and provided them with necessaries for their Voyage, conveyed them with the
first occasions into England.

The difference between the English Nation, and the Captain Pasha which impeded
the Liberty, for some time, of these Captives, had its Original at Smyrna,
where some English Merchants making Collation one Evening in a Garden, were
assaulted and beaten by certain drunken Soldiers belonging to the Sea.
Levents, belonging to a Gally then in Port, in whose Company was a Portuguez
Slave. The News hereof flying to the Frank Street put all the Neighborhood
into an uproar, so that diverse people with such weapons as TheGarden Avania.
came next to hand, in a sury went in pursuit of the Levents, and unhappily
meeting one, drew him into the English Consuls house, where they treated him
with such blows as abated much of the heat and fumes of his Wine; during which
disturbance and confusion, the Portuguez slave found an opportunity to make his
escape. The Consul knowing it some advantage in Turkey to complain first, sent
to the Kadi, giving him to understand the ill usage of four of his Merchants
(whose names he gave in writing) by the unruly Levents, whilst they innocently,
and without injury to any, divertised themselves in a Garden; to which, for the
present, little more was given in answer, than that on a farther examination of
the business, the Consul should receive Justice. In the mean time the Turk, who
had been beaten in the Consuls house, resolved not to leave the Gate till he
had received satisfaction for his blows; and the others that were his Comrades
demanded their Slave from the English, which was lost, by whose means and
assistance (as they pretend) he had made his Escape. The matter came now to
high Demands on both sides, which the Kadi, either not being desirous, or not
of sufficient Authority to compound, the Gally departed without any agreement,
and the complaint was carried by the Turks to the Captain Pasha, who then being
with his Fleet at Mytilene, with little other thoughts or business, was glad of
this occasion to get money, and therefore suddenly returned the Gally again,
with Orders to bring before him the four Merchants, whose names he
particularized, to make answer to their accusation of having beaten his
Levents, and contrived the escape of the slave. The Consul and Merchants being
affrighted by this Message, and Command of so great a Personage, endeavored
with money to accommodate the business, by force of which it was at length
taken up, costing in all the sum of Dollars two thousand seven hundred, or
thereabouts. The which passage may serve for an example to such as live in
Turkey, that all troubles of this nature are best compounded for at first; for
at the beginning nothing more was demanded than the price of the Slave, and of
the broken pate of the Levent: but being suffered to come under the Cognizance
of powerful and covetous Tyrants; as there is no fathoming their unsatiable
desires, so there is no prospect into what inconvenient dangers such Affairs
will involve, and entangle themselves.

As Turkey has been seldom or never without having false money current, so
the best sort of Silver has been so clipped by the Jews, Armenians, Merchants,
and others; that the Dollar was brought at Constantinople to six Drams, and at
Smyrna to seven, which made great confusion in the Trade of these Countries.
Wherefore the Vizier as he had already given proof and testimony to the World
of his strict observance, and adherence to the Mohammedan Law, so he was
desirous to appear highly careful and sensible of the Public Interest: And
therefore as the most necessary work, he began with the Dollars of six Drams,
proclaiming The Viziers Edict against Dollars of six Drams.
that they should no longer pass in payments, and that those in whose hands
they were found, delivering them into the Mint should receive a 8 o in return
of every such Dollar, by which means the Mint would advance a. 4 on every
Dollar, esteeming every dram worth 14 Aspers, and that for the present no
Dollar being current under seven Drams, it might afterward bebrought to Lions,
and Dollars of nine Drams; which regulation, though at first grievous to some
particular persons, would afterward redound to the common advantage and
benefit of Trade. To forward which Design the Grand Signior, and Queen Mother
sent all their Dollars of six Drams to be new coined into Aspers at the Mint,
so likewise did the Vizier, intending to be very strict in prohibition of that
money. But a while after it happened that the Treasurer of the Viziers Steward
having occasion to pay moneys, either for his own or his Masters account,
forced some Bags of six Drams on those to whom payment was to be made; the
Receivers denied to accept them, but he being a powerful man, and very urgent,
forced the money upon them, with which laden, as they had received them, they
went directly to the Vizier, acquainting him that they were desirous to obey
his Commands, as to the six Dram Dollars, but his Stewards Treasurer had forced
on them that sort of money, which if it was his pleasure that they should still
pass, they were contented to receive, if not, they desired him to give Command
for their payment in other money. The Vizier being highly enraged, that the
first Violation of his Commands should begin in his own Family, immediately
ordered, without farther proof or process, that the Offenders Head should be
struck off, and his body thrown into the Sea; which Sentence was executed in
the same hour for example and terror of others, and to expiate the crime, and
take away the scandal from the fountain of Justice, whose streams can never be
esteemed to run clear when the source is corrupted. In like manner the Overseer
of the Mint was strangled, and Emir Pasha, formerly Pasha of Grand Cairo, was
banished to the Isle of Lomnos, for making the Coin of Aspers 5. per cent.
worse than their true value.

The Merchants at Aleppo, being far from the Court, are more subject to
troublesome Avanias than others, who are nearer to the head or fountain, from
whence Justice should proceed, as may appear by many examples, Merchants of
Aleppo.
and particularly by an accident which fell out there this year. For it
happened, that a Janisary which served the English Nation, riding abroad with
some of the Merchants, for want of heed, or the unruliness of his Horse,
chanced to hurt a Youth playing in the streets. Whereupon the Merchants, and
the Janisary, not to suffer this business to come within the knowledge of the
Cities Officers, immediately for some money quieted the complaints, and stopped
the farther demands of the father; and to make the business more secure, caused
the father to make Hoget before the Kadi, that he was well satisfied, and
remained without farther pretense, either on the Merchant, or the Janisary, for
the hurt which his child had received. But the Pasha, who had for a long time
attentively watched an opportunity to extort money from the English, was
resolved not to let pass this fair occasion; and therefore sent to demand from
the Consul those Merchants, which he called Accessories to this mischief, and
the Assassinates of a Mussulman. The Consul appearing in person before the
Pasha, denied to deliver up the Merchants being guiltless of any crime 5 and
that for hurt to the child, the father had received full satisfaction from the
Janisary, and given a discharge before the Kadi. Howsoever this reason would
not pacify the Pasha, who could acknowledge no other argument available than a
sum of money; and therefore in prosecution of his design produced ten false
Witnesses, that the child was dead of its hurt, and that English men had done
the mischief. The Consul had now no other answer than a flat denial; for the
Pasha had forced by threats the Hoget from the Janisary, and persisting with
constancy in defense of his Merchants, the Pasha confined him for an hours time
in a Chamber of his House, and beat, and imprisoned his Druggerman. The Consul
afterward returned home; and perceiving a difference between the Pasha and the
Mufti, purchased the favor of the Mufti on his side, and procured from him an
Hoget of the several proceedings in this business, which was dispatched away
with all expedition to Constantinople, that a redress of this injury might be
obtained from the Superior Power. Whilst the Lord Ambassador in due manner
resented this breach of Capitulations, and prepared to make his complaints to
the Vizier, it happened that certain Christians of Aleppo, from whom the Pasha
had forced 18000 Dollars by unjust extortion, were then at Court soliciting
the restoration of their right. The Ambassador judging this a convenient and
opportune preparation to prepossess the mind of the Vizier with a true
apprehension of the injustice of this Pasha, encouraged and pricked forward
these abused and oppressed Christians in their complaints; and the next day
presented his Memorial to the Vizier, containing all the particulars of the
late passages at Aleppo: which with the other Crimes alleged the Day before,
so moved the mind of the Vizier, that he promised the Ambassador to send a
Kapugibashee of the Grand Signior to enquire into the Truth of these
Allegations; and that he might be satisfied of his real intentions to do him
justice, he advised him to send a Messenger in company with this Officer, who
might witness the reality of his proceedings. The Kapugibashee being in this
manner dispatched, and arriving at Aleppo, made the Pasha refund the money he
had unjustly taken from the poor oppressed Christians of that Country; in which
good action my Lord Ambassador had been an useful instrument, having
encouraged the Agents of those Christians at Constantinople, counseled them
what Course to take, and introduced them by his Chief Interpreter to the
Presence of the Vizier, for which he received the thanks of the Greek and
Armenian Patriarchs, who gratefully acknowledged to the English Consul at
Aleppo, how much they were engaged to the charity and favor of the English
Ambassador: But whilst all men's eyes were in expectation what farther
proceedings were designed against the Pasha in favor of the English, the
Officer denied to have received any instructions therein, and so returned to
Constantinople without taking notice of the English Concernment. The
Ambassador judging himself herein slighted, sent to the Viziers Kahya to know
the mystery of this neglect; for the Vizier and himself having pawned his word,
and promises to do him justice, against the Pasha of Aleppo, it seemed strange
that his assurances should vanish into nothing; and that he so meanly esteemed
his Quality and Office, as to disparage it with so much disrepute and contempt
as must necessarily befall him, should this Pasha escape without (...)
punishment; For then the World might with reason believe his Applications of no
prevalency, and his Merchants fear the insufficiency of his protection. To
which the Kahya answered, That it was true, that the Kapugibashee was not
instructed in the Concernments of the English, in regard a more solemn and
eminent piece of Justice was designed for the Ambassador, than any that could
be performed by the Kapugibashee, and that in twenty or thirty days at farthest
the Pasha should be deprived of his Office. The next day following the Kahya
advised that the Hattesheriff, or Imperial Command for deposing of the Pasha,
was signed, and that old Mahomet Pasha of Darbiquier was constituted in his
place; which News was highly pleasing to the Lord Ambassador, in regard he had
been an ancient Friend to the English, under whom he presaged to our Nation at
Aleppo all security and contentment. By which Story it is observable, That
though the Supreme Reflections on the Premises.
Officers amongst the Turks are willing to satisfy Christian Ambassadors
resident with them, in the Care they have of their Welfare, and maintenance of
their Capitulations; yet are not desirous to publish to their own people the
punishment of their Grand Officers, at the instigation or for the concernment
of a Christian: And that though the Turks are apprehended amongst us for a
people of great Morality, and singleness in their Dealings; yet it is
observable in this, as well as in other their actions, that they have double
tongues and faces, and know how to act with as fine a Thread, and plausible
pretenses as are accustomary in the most politic and refined Courts of Italy.

Anno Christi 1663. Hegeira 1074.
THE Baron of Goez, which at the end of the last year arrived at Buda with
several overtures of peace, had so far proceeded in his Treaty with Ali Pasha
of Buda, that all Articles seemed almost concluded, and scarce any difficulty
to remain, unless the Surrender of Zekelhyd on the Confines of Hungary; which
also was afterward accommodated by Agreement, That the City should be resigned
into the hands of the Prince of Transylvania, as the most equal Condition
between the Emperor and the Turk. So that, matters thus seeming to be
composed, all people talked of Peace with Germany, and that the force and
miseries of Wars were to be turned upon Dalmatia: And though the Turks had no
design less in their thoughts than this, or any intentions toward a Peace, as
will be proved by the Sequel; howsoever, the German Ministers, as men credulous
of what they desire, gave the Peace for certainly concluded, in which conceit
the Turks so humoured and indulged their fancy, that they persuaded Prince
Portia, the Chief Minister of State to the Emperor, in that manner of the
reality of their intentions; that he neglected the necessary provisions and
preparations of War. And though he was often advised by the Resident at the
Ottoman Port, that all these Demonstrations of Peace were only Artifices of the
Turk, to delude the Emperors Council; yet so tenacious was he of this opinion,
that The Turks with words deceive the German Ministers.
though it be but common reason, and the vulgar rule of Policy for a Prince to
arm, and suspect his Neighbor, who puts himself into a warlike posture; yet
this Great Personage, though in other things profoundly wise, and circumspect,
was so deluded, that he replied to the Residents Advices to this effect, That
it was the Office of a prudent and experienced Minister to discover with
diligence the resolution of the Cabinet Councils of Princes, and not to give
ear or credit to what is the common voice or vogue of the Vulgar.

The Spring drawing near, the Vizier prepared all things for action, nominating
and appointing such, who in his absence were to supply the Offices of State:
Ishmael Pasha, then Pasha of Buda, was designed for Chimacam, or Governor of
Constantinople, and Mustapha Pasha, Captain Pasha, Brother in Law to the Great
Vizier by marriage of his Sister (and now the present Vizier) was made Chimacam
at Adrianople, near the Person of the Grand Signior. All other preparations for
War went forwards, thirty pieces of Cannon from Scutari, and fifty from the
Seraglio, most of a vast bigness and weight, which had served in the taking of
Babylon, with great store of Ammunition and Provisions of War, were transported
up the Danube to Belgrade, and the Princes of Moldavia, and Valachia, had now
Commands sent them to quicken their diligence in making their preparations of
War, and in providing Sheep, Beef, Rice, and all sorts of Victuals for supply
of the Camp; and General Proclamation was made in all places, That all
Soldiers, who received one Asper of pay from the Grand Signior, were to
prepare themselves for the War.

About the middle of February the Horse Tail was set forth at the Viziers Gate;
(which is the usual signal of the Camps motion within the space of a month) so
that none may excuse himself from the War for want of due and timely
intimation. And though the time for departure nearly approached, yet the Grand
Signior was so impatient, that he would scarce expect until the Equinoctial,
which was the Term formerly appointed and published for this expedition;
resolving sometimes to proceed The Grand Signior impatient to leave
Constantinople.
before, and leave the Vizier to follow him, letting fall words often, That
such as loved and honored him would keep him company. But this hasty
resolution, and eager desire of his Journey the Vizier, Mufti, and others of
his Counselors did moderate, persuading him to a little longer patience: to
which, though with some difficulty, he assented; yet he could not forbear from
his horses back, and constant exercises abroad, nor could he be induced to take
one nights repose longer in his great Seraglio at Constantinople, but lodged at
Daout Pasha, a small Palace about four miles distant from Constantinople. Which
extravagant manner of living most people attributed to his wandering humor, and
delights in hunting, riding, and such like exercises, having his sole pleasure
in the Woods and Fields: But others, who judged with better foundation, did
conceive, That the Grand Signiors choice of other places of Residence rather
than his Imperial Seraglio, proceeded not so much from his own unsettled humor,
and course of living, as from an apprehension of some Designs, and mutinous
Treasons of the Janisaries against him: for to speak the truth, since the death
of Kuperlee, the Militia began again to be corrupted; and if we may believe the
opinion of the most principal Turks, the Vizier undertook this War to employ
the busy spirits of the Soldiery, which began to grow resty and insolent
through idleness, and by that means secure his own life, and establish his
Condition and Fortune.

The Equinoctial being come, the Grand Signior would not have one days longer
patience; for though the Season was wet and rainy, yet the Tents were pitched;
and though the Wind was so violent and forcible as overturned almost the whole
Camp, yet no difficulties and inconveniences of Weather could give one hour of
intermission to the Sultans desires: Wherefore on the 9th of this Month the
Grand Signior departed Much.
from Constantinople, attended with his Court, his principal Officers of State,
and with what part of his Army was then in a readiness to march. The
magnificence of the show they made, was according to the usual solemnity, yet
worthy the sight of a Stranger, and perhaps not incurious to the Reader in its
Relation.

First, marched with a singular Gravity, the several and distinct Orders The
Cavalcade which the Gr. Signior made when he departed from Constantinople.
of Civil and Military Officers in their proper Habits and Caparisons, the
Santones in their wild dress followed by the Emirs, or such as are of the
Kindred of their false Prophet; The Great Vizier, and Mufti rode in rank
together, the Vizier on the left hand, the most honorable place amongst the
Soldiery, being the side to which the Sword is girt, as the right is of
greatest esteem amongst such as are of the Law, being that hand which guides
the Pen: The Trappings of the Viziers Horse were plated with Gold, and before
him were carried three horse-tails, called in Turkish ( Tugh,) and behind him
came about three hundred and fifty Pages, all Young men well mounted, and armed
with Jacks and Coats of Male: Next followed the Minions of the Court, or
Seraglio, ( viz.) the Paicks with Caps of beaten Gold, and embroidered Coats,
the Solacks with Feathers, armed with Bows and Arrows; these two last are of
the highest degree of Lacqueys, which more nearly attend the Person of the
Grand Signior; These were followed by nine led Horses of the Grand Siginor,
richly adorned with precious Stones, and Bucklers all covered with Jewels of an
unknown value. Immediately before the Person of the Grand Siginor was led a
Camel carrying the Alcoran in a Chest covered with cloth of gold: The Grand
Siginor himself was clothed in a Vest of cloth of gold lined with a Sable
incomparably black, held up from the sides of his Horse by four Pages; his
Person was followed with great numbers of Eunuchs, and Pages with long red Caps
wrought with gold about the head, carrying Lances and Mails, with two locks,
one on each side of their head, which are worn by such only as are of the Royal
Chamber: after these crowded great numbers of Servants, with the chief Comp. of
Spahees, commanded by the Selict ar Aga, in number about 1800. And in this
manner and order they marched to their Tents.

The Tents were raised on a small Hill, as may be judged about four miles
distant from Constantinople, and about two thousand in number ranged at that
time without order, only the Grand Siginor's seemed to be in the midst, and to
overtop all the rest, well worthy observation, costing (as was reported) one
hundred and eighty thousand Dollars, The richness of Turkish Tents.
richly embroidered in the inside with gold, and supported by Pillars plated
with gold. Within the In Turkish Perdeh.
Walls of this Tent (as I may so call them) were all sorts of Offices belonging
to the Seraglio, all Retirements and Apartments for the Pages, Chioskes or
Summer-houses for pleasure; and though I could not get admittance to view the
innermost Rooms and Chambers, yet by the outward and more common places of
resort, I could make a guess at the richess and greatness of the rest, being
sumptuous beyond comparison of any in use amongst the Christian Princes. On the
right hand hereof was pitched the Grand Viziers Tent, exceedingly rich and
lofty; and had I not seen that of the Sultans before it, I should have judged
it the best that my eyes had seen. The ostentation and magnificence of this
Empire being evidenced in nothing more than in the richess of their Pavilions,
sumptuous beyond the fixed Palaces of Princes, erected with Marble and Mortar.

On the 16. of this month the Aga of the Janisaries first raised his The Turks
begin their March.
Tents, and began his march, the next day followed the Grand Siginor, Vizier,
and other Officers, and Spahees. At which time all Asta was full of Soldiers
flocking from all parts of the East, as from Aleppo, Damascus, Arabia, Erzirum,
and Babylon: so that for a long time Boats and Barks were continually employed
to ferry the Soldiery from Scutari into Europe: and the Highways, Villages,
and all parts of the Road toward Adrianople were filled with Soldiers, as if
all Asta had issued out to devour and inhabit the German Possessions. And for
greater expedition in the March of the Army, Proclamation was made of a general
Rendezvous at Sophia at the The Turks Feast.
Biram, then within three weeks time, where they designed to soil their Horse,
and refresh themselves before they fell in carnest to their business. But
before the Grand Vizier departed from Adrianople to prosecute a War in Hungary
against the Emperor, he called Siginor Ballarino to his presence, as if he
would treat with him of matters tending to an adjustment with Venice; when at
the same timo he had 20000 men in a readiness at Scutari to march into
Dalmatia, and to join with other Forces in Bosna and Croatia; but this
dissimulation and appearance of Treaty served only to discover on what Terms a
Peace might be obtained, in case Affairs in Hungary should be so pressing as to
require an application solely of Arms to that Country.

Not only had Signor Ballarino Affairs of public trouble, but likewise
something touched him of private concernment in his own Family; where the
Turks, I know not upon what information coming to search, found in his house
two figures, one of a man, and the other of a woman made of linen cloth,
stuffed with Wool and Cotton; the which were interpreted by the Turks to be
Images of Sorcery and Enchantment; one representing the Grand Siginor, and the
other his Mother, were designed in a secret manner, by thrusting Needles and
Pins into those parts, where the heart and liver is, to cause those whom they
represent to dye with macerations and consumptions, according to the
Enchantment of Medea. In jecur urget acus. And this suspicion was augmented by
the reports of the neighborhood, who hearing the Priest often recite his
Litany, and sing Evening-song, avouched that they constantly overheard the
Charms muttered in such forms as are used by Magicians and Sorcerers: wherefore
designing to take the Priest, who was the Father Provincial of St. Francis, and
punish him for his Witchcraft, the good man fairly fled, and kept himself out
of harms way, until Signior Ballarino could quiet the minds of the Turks by
some Art, which he more forcibly practiced upon them by a stronger charm of
money and Presents than that which was the subject of their complaint.

In the mean time all scars and dangers of Candia vanished, because the Turks
bent their Forces and chief of their strength against their Encmies at Land: to
provide against which, the Senate of Venice sent into Dalmatia the, Baron Spaar
for General, with many other Officers under him, namely the Marquess Maculani,
Count Ettore Albano, Carlo Martinengo, and Roverelli, Count of Caudes, the
Cavalier Grimaldi, Echenfelt, and others. Into Friuli, Francisco Morosini was
dispatched in quality of Proveditor General with supreme Power and Authority,
and in this manner all matters were as well provided and secured by Land, as
they were by Sea.

The Biram chanced to happen out this year toward the end of April, by which
time the Vizier, and most of his Army, assembled according to Proclamation at
Sophia; where having continued some time, and consulted well in what manner to
put their designs in execution, they proceeded in their March toward Buda, and
the Confines of Hungary; but in the way the Vizier was encountered by a
Messenger from the Emperor, offering all reasonable Propositions of Peace, if
possibly a stop might be given to the farther progress of that vast and
formidable Army. All matters were proposed which probably might give
satisfaction; the Fort of Count Serini (the grand eyesore of the Turks) was
proffered to be demolished, with other Conditions which before the March of the
Army were never proposed or demanded. But the Vizier gave little ear to these
fair Overtures, but proceeded forwards in his Demands, as he did in his March:
requiring now, not the demolishment of the Fort, but the surrender of it
entirely with all the Strength, Artillery, and Ammunition into the hands of the
Grand Signior. Had this condition been granted, it is probable the desires and
pretensions of the Turks would not have stopped here, but have risen, as the
spirits of their Enemies had condescended, and exceeded all the hopes and
advantage which they imagined probable and feasible to be obtained by the War.
Wherefore this Message proving fruitless, the Bringer of it was permitted
license to return into Germany: But the Resident was refused dismission, being
detained in the Turkish Camp, as an Instrument to mediate a Peace, when both
sides should grow weary of the War.

About this time the Tartars were greatly infested by the Cosacks, who were
then very formidable and strong, approaching near the City of Osac, the Key and
chief Fortress of Tartary, under the Command of a The Cosacks insest the
Tartars.
Fisherman of the Boristhenes, who having had great successes, and collected a
considerable sum of money, became a dangerous Enemy: By Sea also they commanded
absolutely, roving uncontrouled, having a Fleet of Saykes and Galleys near an
hundred and fifty Sail, against whom the Tartar Han or King of Tartary craved
of the Grand Signior forty sail of Galleys that year to oppose them. But this
Force of the Cosacks was soon abated; for it pleased God, that passing out of
the Palus Moeotis through the narrow passage of Colchos into the Black Sea, the
best part of this Fleet suffered shipwreck; with which they were so dismayed,
that the twelve sail of Galleys (which was the whole Force the Turks could
spare this year for that Sea) gave a check to the remainder, and forced them
again to the Banks of the Boristhenes. The rest of the Turkish Fleet,
consisting, together with the Beys Galleys, in all but of thirty Sail, departed
from Constantinople, with design rather to make some appearance of a Fleet, and
noise amongst their own people, and collect the Contributions of the Isles in
the Archipelago, than out of hopes of effecting any thing against the
Venetians, and so it succeeded; for this Fleet remained the whole Summer at
Mytilene, not daring to appear abroad for fear of the Enemy.

Though the Tartars were so hardly beset by the Cosacks, yet their danger at
home was not a sufficient excuse to disingage them from their assistance in
the. War of Hungary. For the Vizier marching toward the Frontiers, sent one
Messenger after the other to hasten the Tartar Han with all speed possible to
the Wars. But the Tartars seeming not so willing, or so ready as the Turks
expected, more positive commands, and severe threats, were dispatched than
before, that laying aside all excuses or delays, they should with all the Force
of their Country attend in this present War against the Emperor, or otherwise
the Tartar Han The Tartar unwilling to go to the War.
was to be deprived of his Government, and his Son constituted in his place.
These severe menaces reduced the Tartar to great straits; fearful he was to
displease the Sultan, not knowing what ill consequences might proceed from
thence; but more apprehensive he was of the approaches of the Cosacks, and of
the displeasure of his own People, who were resolved to see this fire of War
extinguished in their own homes, before they would attend the designs, or
satisfy the lusts of a stranger Prince. In this Dilemma the Tartar Han finding
himself, made use of fair words and promises, engaging his word, That after the
harvest was past, no obstacle should prevent his compliance with the Sultans
expectations; for at present it was impossible, in regard that should their
people at this season be diverted srom gathering the harvest, the Corn and
Fruit would remain on the ground, and so occasion a Famine, and destruction of
their Country. And herein the Tartar had some reason; for these people go not
to the Wars, as other Nations, who leave a sufficient number behind to
cultivate their Country, and perform all other Offices and Employments in a
Commonwealth: but these making their chief livelihood The course of lis:
amongst the Tartars.
and subsistence on the prey and robberies they make on their Neighbors; as
many as resolve to eat Bread and live, who are men not old or impotent, able to
bear Arms, betake themselves to their Horse and Bow, so that when their Army is
abroad, their Towns and Villages are only inhabited, and defended by their
Women. But the Turk whose desires are never satisfied with reasons, or
withstood by words, or with any thing besides the execution of his Commands,
dispatched another Message more They are threatened again.
full of threats and resolution than formerly, carried by the Embrahor, or
Master of the G. Signiors Horse, menacing nothing but Fire, and Sword, and
Destruction, to the Han and his Country, if he longer delayed to perform his
Duty. But by this time the Harvest being almost gathered, and their fears
against the Cossacks partly extinguished, the Tartar promised with all
expedition an Army of seventy thousand men, under the Conduct of the Prince his
eldest Son, who whilst they were putting themselves in order, and assembling
for the War; reports were murmured, as They send an Army into (...)
if the Turks were in a Treaty of Peace with the Emperor, and matters in a
fair likelihood of composure: At this news the common Soldiers amongst the
Tartars were not a little startled, fearing that they who are free Booters, and
have no other pay than their purchase, should by such a Treaty be forced to
return empty, and therefore before they would proceed, sent to advise the
Sultan of these their fears; supplicating him, that if he should think fit to
conclude a Peace, and so oblige them to return into their own Country, that he
would not take it amiss, if upon their march home, they should make themselves
good upon his Subjects of Moldavia, and Valachia, whose persons and Estates
they resolved to carry with them, as a just prey and recompense for their loss
of time and labor. The Sultan who sets a small value on the Lives and Estates
of his Christian Subjects, judged this Proposition but reasonable, so long as
upon these terms he might obtain the benesit of the Tartars assistance, who are
the best Horse to forage, destroy, and make desolate a Country.

The Story of Asan Aga the Mosayp or Favorite, and other instances of the
uncertainty of the Turkish Richesse, and Glory.
TH E Great Vizier being by this time arrived on the Frontiers with a very
considerable Army; the G. Signior at Adrianople continued his usual pleasures
in Hunting, Riding, throwing of the Gerit or Dart, and in other pastimes and
sports of this nature; at which time casting his Eyes upon one Asan Aga, a
sprightly youth of his Seraglio, a Polonian by Nation, to be more forward and
active than any of his Court, took an affection to him, so sudden and violent,
as might be judged neither well founded, nor long durable; for the Grand
Signior having heard, that; there were examples amongst the Emperors his
Predecessors, not only in the absence, but in the presence also of the Vizier,
of maintaining and constituting a Favorite, in Turkish called Mosayp, did own
publicly the Election of this person for his Friend and Companion; so that
this Minion was on a sudden so highly ingratiated in the favor of his Prince,
that he always rode equal with him; Clothed as rich, and mounted as well, as
the Sultan himself, as if he had been his Coadjutor, or Companion in the
Empire. The Queen Mother, the Kuzlir Aga, and other rich Eunuchs of the
Seraglio, the Chimacams of Adrianople, and Constantinople with all the Great
Officers and principal Ministers, were commanded to make Presents of Money,
Jewels, and other Sacrisices, to this rising Sun; whom now every one so courted
and adored, that he became the only talk and admiration of the whole Town; no
other discourse there was, but of Asan Chelabei, Asan the fine accomplished
Gentleman, Asan the only Creature of Fortune, and Idol of the whole World. This
high and sudden promotion of this Youth, greatly displeased the Queen Mother,
and Kuzlir Aga, who had Creatures of their own to prefer, and by their means
became the Envy and Emulation of the whole Court, so that there wanted not such
who posted the news to the Vizier, as him, on whom the growing greatness of
Asan might have the most dangerous reflection: but the Vizier duly considering,
that the deep impressions this Youth had made in the affections of his Master,
were not to be removed by plain dealing, but by some more occult Artifice and
dissimulation, took occasion to write to the G. Signior, in favor of Asan Aga,
extolling the prudence of his choice of so complete and hopesul a Youth for his
Favorite, but that it was pity, so pregnant parts as those with which Asan was
endued, sit to promote his Masters Service and Interest, should be Encloistred,
and Buried, in the softness and delights of his Seraglio; and therefore his
Counsel was, to have him preferred to some government, and degree of a Pasha,
to which, his Abilities and Education, in the Nursery and Discipline of the
Court, had abundantly accomplished him. Pessimum genus inimicorum, laudantes.
Nor were the Queen Mother, (...).
and Kuzlir Aga, all this time wanting in their contrivance to undermine him,
but not with a design spun with so fine a thread, professing themselves openly
his Adversaries: for which Courtly Policy, the Vizier only received a check,
and some few verbal reproofs, for intermedling with what so nearly concerned
his Masters Fancy and Affection: But the Kuzlir Aga, was by one word from Asan
(whom he had discovered to be his The Kuzlir Aga (...) to Cairo.
Enemy) deprived of his Office, and had therewith lost his Life, had not the
Queen Mother powerfully interceded for him, and gained an exchange of his
punishment from death to banishment in Grand Cairo in Egypt. The Baltagibashee
also (who is the Captain of that part of the Grand Signiors Guard, who carry
hatchets, and are employed in cutting (...) the Baltagibashee.
Wood for the use of the Seraglio) being discovered to be a Confederate in the
same Plot against the Favorite, was condemned to the same punishment, and
immediately both of them dispeeded away to the place, where they were to spend
the remainder of their days. Grand cairo has always been the place of
Banishment for unfortunate Courtiers, or rather of such who have with much
greatness, plenty, and contentment sometimes enjoyed the Fruit of their great
Richesse, gained in the sunshine and summer of their Princes Favor. To this
City also was this Kuzlir Aga exiled, who in the enjoyment of his Office for
several years, had amassed a most vast Wealth, incredible to be spoken, and
much to be wondered, that a Negro, whose hue and person is contemptible amongst
all, whom God has created of a Color different from those who partake more of
Light, and are of nearer similitude with the Sun, and Nature of an Angel, one
whose Original was a Slave, and his price never above a hundred Pieces of
Eight, should be loaded with such Goods of Fortune, and enriched with the
Treasury of a Prince: His Retinue consisted of about 900 Horse, (besides
Camels, and Mules for his Baggage) amongst which a hundred were led Horses,
worth seven or eight hundred Dollars a Horse, and that he might still seem to
live by his Princes Bounty, a thousand Aspers a day was to be his constant pay,
to be issued out of the G. Signiors Revenue in Egypt; by which we may in part
calculate the greatness of this Empire, when so vast Richesse is accounted but
a reasonable proportion for so vile and mean a Slave: Howsoever the G. Signiors
Treasury suffers little hereby, for this wealth and pomp is but lent him to
keep, and look on; he is incapable to make a Testament, or constitute an Heir;
the G. Signior himself succeeding to all the Estate he has given him, and the
improvement of it. This Negro being proceeded as far as to Constantinople, had
his Companion the Baltagibashee, recalled from him with design to be put to
Death, but afterward by mediation of some powerful Friends, who took advantage
of the gentle and benign humor of the Sultan, his pardon was obtained, and he
preferred to a small Government of a Pasha.
Pashalick in the lesser Asta. Howsoever the Eunuch proceeded in his Journey to
Grand cairo, where being arrived, after three Days, was by the Imperial Command
stripped of all his wealth and greatness, which amounted unto two Millions of
Dollars, to be restored again to their sirst Master, who uses to lend his
Slaves such gaieties and Ornaments, only to afford the World occasion to see
and admire the vastness of his Wealth, and contemplate the vanity and
unconstancy of Richesse and Worldly glory. This poor Negro thus divested of
all, returned to his primary condition of a Slave, in which he was born, and
for many years had lived, and was now banished, forsaken, and disconsolate in
the upper Egypt; whither going scarce with sussicient to preserve him from
Famine and Beggary, the Beyes of Egypt, out of compassion, bestowed on him an
Alms of twelve Purses, being eight thousand four hundred Dollars, according to
the Account of cairo, now the only. support and sustenance of his Life.

This Victory gained over these great Personages, and foyl given to the Queen
Mother herself, was not carried by this young Favorite with that prudent
equality of mind as was decent; but being puffed up with pride and glory,
adventured to a judgment and censure of the deepest matters of State, which
touched not a little the jealousy and scorn of the Great Vizier, who therefore
wrote to all those grave Sages, to whose Counsel he conceived the Sultan gave
any car or credit; representing with extraordinary passion and fervency the
dangers he apprehended might befall his Master, and his Empire, whilst both were
subject to the unexperienced Counsels of Asan, a Youth both in years and
knowledge. That it was much to the disparagement of the Supreme Office of
Vizier, whilst he was with thousands of Turks on the Frontiers contending for
the Glory and Enlargement of the Ottoman Dominions, subjected to millions of
dangers and labors; to be supplanted by a Boy, sit only for an attendant in
his Masters Chambers; and to have the privacy of the Emperors State Counsels
and policy rilled by a Youth, whose years had not sitted him for the knowledge
and continence of an ordinary Secret. These reasonable Complaints of the
Vizier's were by some of his wise Friends, whose Age and Gravity had produced
something of Reverence toward their Persons, not without hazard and fear
communicated unto the Sultan, the violence of whose Love being with time
moderated and abated, he began to consider the reasonableness of this
Discourse, and so on a sudden, to the great admiration of all, cast off his
Favorite, creating him a Kapugibashee, or chief Porter, with a hundred and
sifty Aspers a day Sallary.

The Ruin of Samozade, the Reis Effendi, or Chief Secretary of State to the
Great Vizier.
AND since we have related a Story which partly represents the unconstancy and
tyranny of the Turkish Greatness, it may yet please the Reader, should we add
another, though a little out of its due order, not less remarkable, and worthy
of Record than the former.

When Newhausel was besieged, called by the Turks and Hungarians Oymar, and
diverse attempts made on it in vain; Samozade the Reis Effendi, with less
caution and wisdom than he did usually practice in other matters, wrote a
Letter to the Chief Eunuch of the Women, then in the Seraglio at Adrianople, to
this effect. That if the Grand Signior desired to have that Fortress taken that
was then besieged, he should choose a more able Captain for his Army than the
present Vizier, a person who had only been educated in a Tekeh, or College,
and studied in the speculations of Law, and not in the Oda's of the Janisaries,
or Customs and Exercises of the Camp: and therefore if his Majesty thought fit
to choose another General, he could not cast his eyes on any more able and
deserving than Ibrahim Pasha his Son in Law, a Person qualified for the Office
of Vizier, being skilful in all points both of War and Peace. This Eunuch being
the person that had succeeded to the former lately exiled, having received this
Letter, immediately without farther Art or Prologue, read it to the Grand
Signior, at which though at first he was startled, yet not as yet weary of the
Vizier, but still conserving a kindness and esteem for him, took the Letter
from the Eunuch, and sent it to the Vizier, permitting him to inflict what
punishment he judged most agreeable to his own preservation and vindication of
his honor. The Vizier having received this Letter, seemed not in the least to
be surprised with the perfidiousness of Samozade, but in a cool temper
recollecting all the Applications and Addresses (which we have mentioned
before) at his first entrance into this Supreme Office, and judging from
thence, that he was not a person capable of friendship, or a steadiness to his
Interest, sent for him, and for Ibrahim Pasha his Son in Law to his presence,
and first having upbraided his Treachery, and want of Integrity, in return to
all the Caresses and Endeavors he had used to win his Faith, caused both their
heads to be struck off by the Executioner.

This Samozade was one of the most wise and best practiced Secretaries of State
that ever served the Ottoman Empire, and one whom our English much lamented,
being perfectly acquainted with the particulars of our Capitulations, and
Constitution of our Trade; and had not his extraordinary Covetousness blemished
his other moral Virtues, he might have been esteemed a man rare, and a Minister
not unworthy the greatest Monarch of the World. The Richesse he had collected
during the time of his State Negotiations were incredible and immense, for he
spared and lost no opportunity of gains, which rendered him the more liable and
obnoxious to the stroke of Justice. His Goods were now seized on for service of
the Sultan, his Master, as justly confiscated for Treason, his Estate was found
to amount unto three millions of Pieces of Eight in ready money; He had sixteen
hundred Camels, four hundred Mules, six hundred Horses of the best sort,
besides ordinary Horses of service proportionable to those of value. In his
Chests and Stores were found four thousand Girdles, or Sashes of the best sort
of Silver, never worn; seven and twenty pounds weight of Pearl, three hundred
Daggers (or Turkish Hanjars) most set with Diamonds and Rubies, besides ninety
Sable Vests, each whereof might be valued at a thousand Dollars; His Swords and
rich Furniture were without number, or account, with a Cart Load of the best
and finest China; over and above all this remained to his Son a Revenue of
about ten pounds Sterling a day, who being condemned to the torture to confess
the hidden Riches of his Father, at his first examination discovered one
hundred and twenty five thousand Zaichins of Venetian Gold.

Of an Avania brought upon the Dutch Nation.
BEfore we proceed on with the Relation of the War in Hungary, where we for a
time shall leave the Great Vizier, it will not be from our purpose to digress a
little in recounting certain intermediate Accidents, which had reference to our
own and the Dutch Nations Interest at the Ottoman Court. And first I shall
begin with the Dutch, to whom a considerable trouble and misfortune befell, by
means of a ship of theirs called the Emperor Octaviano, which designing to
lade Turks Goods at Alexandria for Constantinople, had her License and
Dispatches obtained by means of the Holland Resident, the Sieur Warnero. This
ship being accordingly laden at Alexandria, whereon also the Grand Signior
himself had thirty thousand Dollars Interest, and being ready to depart, was
near the Port surprised by the Venetian, and Maltese Corsairs, and so taken.
This News was posted over land from Grand Cairo, and the Cargo sent of the
Goods, importing fourscore and four thousand Dollars, which in the Month of
June arrived at Constantinople. The persons interested in this loss being many,
in the nature of a Tumult applied themselves to the Grand Signior, and demanded
sentence against the Dutch Resident for reparation, alleging that he had
recommended the ship, and Commander, who had combined with the Corsairs to
surprise him, and that the Resident had engaged for the faithfulness of the
Captain, who had betrayed their Goods, not endeavoring to defend himself so
much as by the shot of one Musket. The Grand Signior being likewise concerned
herein himself, was easily persuaded to grant his Order and Sentence, That the
loss of all should concern the Dutch Resident, and his Nation, requiring the
Chimacam of Constantinople to summon the Resident, and intimate his pleasure
therein, exacting a time limited for the payment. The Resident being called to
several Audiences thereupon, denied to have had any hand in the employment of
this ship on this Voyage, and that their Capitulations, to which the Grand
Signior had sworn, acquitted him from being responsible for the misdemeanors
of any of his Nation, for whose fidelity and good behavior he had never
personally engaged, and thereupon positively refused to make himself liable for
payment of this money, to which he was neither obliged by the Law of Nations,
nor his own private Act. Notwithstanding which, the Turks sentenced the
Resident to be liable to make satisfaction; in regard that when the ship was
first freighted, he appeared before the Chimacam at Constantinople, and being
asked whether the Commander of this Ship was an honest man, and one who might
be entrusted with such a concernment of the Turks; his Answer was, That he
believed he might, and that he was always esteemed faithful and honest to his
Trust: which in the Turkish Law amounting to as much as if he had said, he
would become his security, the Grand Signior consirmed the former sentence
against the Resident, and with haste and sury dispatched a Kapugibashee to
bring his person to Adrianople; where being arrived, and continuing as yet
constant to his first Answer, was committed to custody of the Chaousbashee, or
Chief of the Pursuivants, where they gave him time until after the Feast of the
little Biram, to consult his own good and security of his Nation within the
Turkish Dominions. The Feast was no sooner ended, but the Grand Signior sent
immediately to know his ultimate resolution, declaring, That if he continued
still obstinate against his Power, he had commanded that he should be committed
to that Dungeon which had some few years before been the Lodging of other
Christian Ministers. The Resident terrified at the thoughts of such an
Imprisonment, declined from his former constancy, engaging to pay the money in
an hundred and five days time, for no longer would be granted; so violent and
unreasonable the Turks were in their demands against the Law of Nations, the
particular Capitulations, and the common reason and justice of the World. This
money was for the most part taken up by the Dutch Nation in Turkey at Interest,
and afterward the debt extinguished by money lent them by the States, for
payment of which a particular Imposition was granted on all Goods brought from
Turkey, until the debt to them was cleared with an Interest of one per cent.
for the year. By which it may be observed, how little are esteemed the persons
of Christian Representatives in the Turkish Court; who having proved with what
tameness some Princes have taken the affronts offered to the person of their
Ambassador in former times, and now observing with what patience the States of
Holland have sustained the like insolence and injury in their Resident, they
may possibly profess their Function sacred, but yet in matters of their own
interest will never be induced to vouchsafe them that respect or just treatment
which is due to them.

In what state the Affairs of England, in reference to the Turkish Court, stood
about this time with Algier, and other Parts of Barbary.
IN the preceding year we declared how a Peace was concluded between England
and Algier: for better confirmation whereof, and security of our Merchants
Estates in the Levant, upon occasion of a future breach, it was judged
necessary by His Majesty's Council, That the respective Articles last made and
concluded with Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli should be distinctly described and
ratified by the Grand Signior, with this Clause at the conclusion of each, viz.
That in case the foregoing Articles were not kept by these his Subjects
respectively, but should contrary to the meaning thereof through Piracy be
broken, that then it should be lawful for the King of England to chastise those
people by his own Arms and Force, without impeachment or breach of that good
Peace and Amity which intervenes between His Majesty of Great Britain and the
Ottoman Emperor: And this was supposed might always be a Plea in defense of
the English Nation in Turkey, when at any time His Majesty provoked by the
injuries of those faithless and piratical Nations, should take due revenge upon
them, not only on the Seas, but also on the Land, subverting those very Cities
and Fortresses, which are the Nests of Piracies, and the common chastisement
and Gaols of Christendom. When these Articles came to the hands of His
Majesty's Ambassador the Earl of Winchelsea, with Orders to have them ratified
and subscribed in the manner foregoing, the Turkish Court was then at
Adrianople, to which place on this occasion the Lord Ambassador made a journey
from his usual Residence at Constantinople; and having acquainted the Chimacam
with the whole matter, and the Propositions rightly apprehended by him, they
were offered, and the next day communicated in behalf of the Ambassador to the
Grand Signior, who readily promised compliance with His Majesty's desires,
ordering the Articles, and conclusion of them, to be engrossed and prepared for
the Imperial assent. Howsoever some considerable time ran on before they were
delivered out, in regard that being matters of State relating to War and Peace,
they could not be fully granted without privity and knowledge of the Grand
Vizier, who was the supreme Counselor, and therefore we were forced to attend
thirty five days before an Express could go and return from the Frontiers with
the Answer expected, which was as easily granted by the Vizier, as before it
was entertained by the Grand Signior. On August 5. the Confirmation of the
several aforesaid Articles were consigned unto my self in presence of our Lord
Ambassador by the hands of the Chimacam, being my self designed in person to
deliver them; for which service a Frigate of His Majesty's Navy attended at
Smyrna: so that very evening I departed, and arrived at Smyrna the 15th of
August.

In my Journey from Adrianople to Smyrna, omitting the Geography of the
Countries, and the pleasant view I had from the top of a Mountain between
Malagra and Gallipoli, from whence I could survey all the Hellespont, and at
the same time take a prospect of the Propontick and Ionian Seas, I shall only
relate two passages which befell me in this Journey, not: unpleasant to be
remembered.

The first was at a small Village called Ishecle, at the foot of the Mountain
Ida, not far from the Ancient Troy, now named by the Turks Kauzdog, which
signifies the Mountain of Geese; the people that inhabit here are of a rude
disposition, great Thieves, and of a wild and savage nature; at my entry
thereupon I was advised by those that were with me, that it was necessary to
take Mules to carry my Baggage through the Mountains, and to press the people
to convoy me to the next Government by virtue of a Command the Grand Signior
had granted me for the security of my Travels; so that arriving at this place
by break of day, I went directly with all my Attendance, being about eighteen
or nineteen Horse to the Kadi's House, where knocking hard at the door, a
Servant looked out at the window, and spying so great a company, wholly
affrighted, ran to his Master, and awakening him with such dreadful news, he
had scarce any soul or life remaining to render an answer; for he was one of
those, who three times a day was used to take his Dose of Opium, which gave him
a strange kind of intoxication or drunkenness; during the operation of which,
men have their spirits violently moved and agitated, that afterward it leaves
them so wearied and languid, that in the morning when they first awake, they
remain like dead stocks, their members are benumbed, and can scarce turn from
one side to the other. In this condition the News of new Guests surprised this
Kadi, when wholly feeble he called to his servant to reach him his Box of
Opium, of which when he had taken his usual proportion, and that it began to
work, his life returned again to him, and he began immediately to recover, so
that he had courage to open his Gates and receive us in: when he had read the
Command, and found no hurt in it, the man was transported with joy and Opium,
and was so kind, cheerful, and of a good humor, that I could not but admire at
the change; he told me, that he lived in a barbarous Country, and was forced to
use that for divertisement, and as a remedy of his melancholy hours. I easily
perceived the effect it had upon him, for he seemed to me like a Bedlam; in
which humor he called all his Neighbors about him, and after a wise
consultation, they provided me with two Mules, and five men on foot with rusty
Muskets without powder or shot to guide and guard me through the Mountains. I
had not traveled two miles before all my guard was stolen aside, and taking
advantage of the Woods and Mountains were fled from me, so that I found my self
with no other than my own people, in an unbeaten path, and a way unfrequented;
the man excepted who drove the Mules, who for sake of his Beasts was obliged to
a farther attendance. We traveled in this manner through the Mountains about
four hours, when near a Village called Suratnee, we met one of the Principal
men on Horseback, carrying a flead Mutton behind him, which upon examination
we discovered to be carried for a Bribe to the Kadi of Isheclee, that so he
would be his Friend, and favor him in his Cause: And farther upon inquiry
finding, that our entertainment was likely to be mean at Suratnee, we forced
the Gentleman to return with us, and to sell us his Mutton at the market-price,
and so for that time we disappointed our Kadi of his Fee or reward: and being
upon the rise of a Hill descending to Suratnee, so that the people could see us
at a distance, they like true Sons of Kauz-dog forsook their habitations, and
fled, which we perceiving posted after them, and catched two of their men, whom
we brought under Shart, (or the Country-mans Oath, which they account very
sacred, and will by no means break) to be true and faithful to us, to serve,
and not leave us for so long time as we should remain in their Village; and
accordingly these men were not only serviceable, but diligent: so soon as they
discovered me to be one who would pay justly for what I took, and was not a
Turkish Aga, or Servant of Great men who harass the people, and take their
service and meat on account of free Quarter, the whole Village returned again
from their places of Refuge amidst the Woods, so that I neither wanted
provisions nor attendance.

Another passage happened unto me of better civility and entertainment in the
Plains of Pergamus, where not many miles from that ancient City, I arrived
about six a clock in the evening at certain Tents or Cots of Shepherds, being
only Hurdles covered with Hair-cloth, lined within with a sort of loose Felt, a
sufficient defense against the Sun and rain; the Turks call these people
Euruchs, and are Shepherds, who with their wives, children, and cattle live and
inhabit, where they most delight, or like the Shepherds of ancient days, remove
their dwellings to those places where they find most plenty of water and
pasture. Amongst these Cots so soon as I alighted from my Horse, I was received
and saluted by the Aga or Chief with great humanity and kindness; for so soon
as he understood who I was, and that I was employed in public Affairs, he
presently placed me under some neighboring Trees, and called for Carpets and
Cushions to sit on, which were more fine and rich than agreed with the outward
appearance of men wholly unaccustomed to a City-life. After some discourse had
with me, which I remember to have been very courteous and inquisitive of my
condition and business, he provided Provender for our Horses, and in a short
time ordered Bread and Eggs to be brought for to stay my stomach, supposing
that hard Travels had sharpened my appetite. About an hour after that, he
invited all my company, and then we fed very plentifully of several dishes
which the good Houswives had dressed within the Precincts of their poor Tents:
whilst the Shepherds had in the field killed a fat Kid, and were then roasting
it whole at the fuel of a tree which they had felled; this Roast-meat they cut
into quarters, and with Bread and Salt put it into a Linen-cloth, delivering it
to one of my Servants for our Breakfast the next morning. Having thus well
refreshed my self with the charity of these good Shepherds, I arose with the
Moon about eleven a clock at night; but before my departure, I demanded what I
had to pay: to which the generous Shepherd replied, That my acceptance was a
sufficient payment, for that all men were obliged to be civil and hospitable to
men who traveled the World like me for public service; and withal desired me
to speak well, wheresoever I came, of such poor men who led their lives in the
sields, who were instructed in these Principles, viz. to hurt none, and to be
humane and helpful to all mankind.

In a few days after my Arrival at Smyrna, I embarked on the Bonaventure Frigate
commanded by Capt. Berkeley, afterward Sir William Berkeley, and shaping our
course first for Tripoli in Barbary, we came to Anchor Tripoli.
before the Town the 29th: and immediately going ashore, we were conducted to
the Presence of the Pasha of that Country, whom I acquainted with the occasion
of this Address, delivering into his hands two Copics of the late Treaty of
Peace, one confirmed by the Hand and Seal of His Majesty our Gracious
Sovereign, and the other of the Sultan; both which he received with singular
respect and reverence, promising to maintain the Peace sacred and inviolable;
and so being dismissed fairly from him, we speedily repaired on board, and
setting sail again that night with a prosperous gale, we anchored in the Bay of
Tunis on the second Tunis.
of September: and the next day being landed, we in the first place madc our
Addresses to the Dey, who bears the Office of Prince or Governor in Chief,
though in the Arabian Language the word signifies as much as Uncle, to whom I
tendered the Confirmations of Peace in the same form and manner as before at
Tripoli: the Dey received them with respect and honor, promising to continue
the Peace; that part which was from our King he received himself; but that
which was from the Grand Signior he advised me to deliver to the Pasha; for
coming from his Master, it might more nearly concern him than any other: the
Pasha having seen and read the Hattesheriff, returned it again to the Dey to be
placed amongst the Records and Registers of the Divan, and so making a Visit to
all the great men in power, giving them notice of our business, that so none
might take exceptions, or judge themselves neglected for want of Addresses; we
the same Night departed from Tunis, and proceeded forward in our Voyage to
Algier. But before we arrive there, I have time to acquaint the Reader of the
pestilential Fever which then affected our whole Ship. When we departed from
Smyrna, we had fourteen sick of the Autumnal Distemper, but before ten Days, we
had ninety five out of a hundred and sixty men, which lay sick on their Beds
and Hamocks; and we feared so general a weakness, that we should not have had
strength sufficient to have Sailed our Ship; for I think there was scarce any
amongst us in perfect health. But God showed his strength in our weakness, so
that in ten Days, having buried nine of our men, he was pleased with the change
of our Climate, to renew our health, and in Answer to our Prayers, as it were
by a Miracle, to restore us to all the Health, and Strength, and Comfort, that
we could desire.

At Algier that Den of Thieves, and Harbor of Faithless Men, and all Impiety,
we arrived the 10th of September, where immediately with assistance of the
Consul, we designed to tender the Confirmations of the Peace unto the Divan;
then the supreme and absolute power. But whilst we imagined the Peace firm, and
improbable, that those Articles which were concluded and agreed but the last
Year, should so easily and soon be forgotten; we found the Scene of affairs
greatly altered, and sears of an unexpected rupture; for the Ships of Algier
roving in the Seas, had lately sent in nine small English Vessels without a
Pass from the Duke of York, for want of which, they pretended by a new
Agreement they ought to be prize; of which, six by means of the Consul being
released, three only remained under detention at our Arrival; when immediately
we applied our selves to Shaban Aga, a Spanish Renegado, then Cape or Chief of
their confused Divan; to him we first disclosed the import of our Message, and
showed the Confirmations of our Peace subscribed by the King of England, and
the G. Signior. After he had read them, a Divan was called, and the
Confirmations openly published; at which time, it was assented, and agreed,
that the Articles ought to be maintained, and the Peace continued: but to have
this established by sirm Authority, it was farther referred to the Great Divan,
which is a grand Assembly of the People, who usually meet together every
Saturday of the Week. In the mean time, having had an acquaintance formerly
with the Pasha of this place, sent hither by the G. Signior, we were desirous
to make him a Visit, the better to discover in what nature they honor and own
the Ottoman Port: but before we could be admitted to his presence, we were
obliged to demand License of the Divan, which they granted with some
unwillingness, and with the caution of two or three Witnesses of our Discourse.
We were scarce welcomed into the room, and the usual salutations passed, before
we were interrupted by the Officers, and not suffered to proceed; so little
esteem they made of the Pasha, to whom notwithstanding they allowed twelve
thousand Dollars a Year for his maintenance, so as to carry the fair and
specious outside at the Ottoman Court, of receiving a Pasha from thence; but
were so far from permitting him to intermeddle in the Government, that they
confined him like a Prisoner, not suffering him to stir abroad without
permission and consent of the Divan, and that very seldom, though he often
pleaded, his health was much empaired by his restraint, and craved enlargement,
rather for necessity than his pleasure.

The Day of the great Divans Assembly being come, the Confirmations of the
Peace were again read, and well approved, and so laid up in the Repository of
their Writings; and promise made us for releasement of our Ships. But let us
now observe the levity and unsteadiness of this popular Government; for being
the Day following appointed to receive our dispatches, and discharge of the
three Ships; there arose unexpectedly The unconstancy of the popular Government
at Algier,
at the Divan, certain scruples and jealousies amongst them, which immediately
quashed all our Negotiations, and instead of confirming the Peace, produced a
War. For the Divan being met, they were afraid to release the Ships, lest the
Soldiers who had sent them in, being then abroad, should call them to question
for it at their return; and not to release them, might be an occasion of a War;
which not succeeding according to their desire, the causers thereof might be
called into question, and punished for it; of which still remained the fresh
memory of late Examples. In this Dilemma of their affairs, they resolved to
make the Act herein, to be of general and public assent; and to that end they
Assembled a Grand Divan, calling the Captains of Ships and Galleys, then in
Port, unto their Council; who without hesitation, or questioning other matters,
declared, that the three English Ships were lawful prize; and that it was no
longer requisite to maintain the second Article of freeing Strangers goods on
English Vessels; it neither being the design nor interest of Algier, to benesit
all Christendom by their Peace with England: this Sentence was followed by the
whole rabble of the Divan, with cry and noise; to which, the wiser sort,
notwithstanding our Plea, and reasons to the contrary, which lasted for full
two hours, were forced to condescend, and concur in the same vote. Howsoever by
importunity, and something of the force of reason, which in the most blind and
obscure minds of men, has something of forcible violence; we obtained the
release of the three Ships, upon discharge of the strangers goods, and payment
of their Freight. But the second Article of Peace, forbidding the search of
English Ships, for Strangers Estates or their Persons, was declared null, and
no longer to be maintained; nor the Peace likewise, unless his Majesty would
accept it upon that condition, to which end, they wrote this following Letter.

The Letter of the Government of Algier to his Majesty.
GReat and Christian Prince, King of England. After Health and Peace, etc.
Since we have made Peace with You unto this day there have no injuries nor
damages been offered by Us. Your Ships that have been as Prizes, for Your sake
we have let free, not offering them the least injury, nor diminishing any thing
from them in the least, until such time as Your Consul gave Us Counter-passes;
that what Ships were found with them, to be let free, and those that are
without them to be brought in: And we have found diverse without them, which for
Friendship sake which is between Us, We have let go free. Now from henceforth,
if that we find any of our Enemies goods or men in Your Ships, we shall take
the goods and men, paying the freight to their Port. And we shall desire you,
as soon as you shall receive this our Letter, that you will send your answer
hereunto, for we shall think it long until we receive it from you; and for the
future, what Ships shall be brought in without a Passport, we shall take them,
and detain them here, until such time as we have an answer from You; which pray
send without delay. The end of the Month Sefar, 1074, which was then in the
Month of September, 1663.


In this manner a second War broke forth in the space of two Years, by which a
person may judge of the inconstancy and unsteady humor of this People; who but
three days before, gave us all the evidence of fair correspondence and
Friendship; and it is probable, that when they entered the Divan, they came not
with resolutions or thoughts of War; however accidents and occasional
Discourses each with other, following the cry and humor of some rude Savage
person, which leads the rest, carried all things with violence toward a
breach: So that by what preceded, and from these following reasons, it may be
concluded impossible to maintain a sirm and lasting Peace with this People.

First, Because these people are composed of the worst sort or scum of the
Turks, and worst of Christians, which are Renegadoes, who have renounced God
and their Country, and a Generation of people who have no Religion, nor Honor;
Peace cannot be longer expected or maintained, than fear or interest enjoins
them to compliance.

Secondly, The Government of Algier being popular, and in the hands of a vile
Commonalty, who are ignorant persons, guided by no Rules, or Principles;
unsteady in all their Councils, not resolving or consulting any thing before
they enter the Divan, do commonly follow that resolution, which they perceive
to be carried on with the greatest noise; and therefore are a people not
capable of Peace or Friendship.

Thirdly, This irrational Commonalty is overawed by a heady Soldiery, who are
only then affrighted into a Peace, whilst a stronger force compells them into
good manners. But when that power and punishment is withdrawn, they again
harden their hearts like Pharaoh, and then when the temptation of rich Merchant
men presents it self, their natural inclination to Piracy returns, and their
Covetousness again prevails, and then they curse the Peace, and the makers of
it, and without remorse break their Articles, and their Faith, having neither
honor, nor Conscience to restrain them. Wherefore unless the Heads of the
chief Causers of the War be given in satisfaction, or money paid for the
expense, and Hostages given for security of it, it can never be expected that a
lasting Peace should be maintained with this people; the proof of which, has
been made appear by the sequel of affairs, and by those Wars which have ensued
since this time. And now let us return to the Wars in Hungary, and become
Spectators of those Transactions, which were then the general concernment of
the Eastern and Western World.

The Proceedings of the War in Hungary.
WE left the Grand Vizier on his March toward the parts of Hungary, with an
Army, as computed, to consist of eighty thousand fighting men, and of about
seventy thousand designed for Pioniers, and other necessary services of the
Army. In this march the Vizier out of The Vizier desires a Treaty to amuse the
Christians.
design to slacken the Warlike Preparations of the Christians, and to discover
the inclinations of the Emperor to Peace, desired a Treaty, that if possible,
matters might be reduced to terms of accommodation. The Resident of Germany,
was then in the Army, but he, not being empowered singly for any such Treaty,
the Baron of Goez, then with Ali Pasha at Temeswar was sent for, and being
arrived, were both called into the Viziers Tent at Belgrade, to whom it was
proposed, That in Case the Emperor desired a Peace, he should resign into the
hands and possession of the Sultan Zekelhyd, Zatmar, Clausenburg alias
Colosvar, with the late built Fort of Count Serini, without which, no Sacrifice
could appease the anger, and give a stop to the progress of the Ottoman Arms.
Whilst these Propositions by Post were dispatched to Vienna, the Vizier
proceeded in his Journey to Strigonium, now called Gran, to which place, after
sixteen Days time, the Messenger returned with an answer from the Emperor,
which showed an inclination toward an acceptance of Peace on the terms
proposed, but with instructions to his Ministers to moderate by their discreet
mannagement (what was possible) the rigor of the demands. For by reason of the
disaffection of the Hungarians, whom the Emperor had lately disgusted by
demolishing several of their Churches, and discountenancing the Protestant
Religion which they professed; and by reason of the phlegm of the Princes of
Germany, whom different interests made slow and unactive in their preparations
against the common Enemy; the Emperor was wholly unprovided to oppose the
violence of this overflowing Torrent, and became an unequal match for the
Ottoman Force. The Turks perceiving that the Germans began to condescend, and
yield to any conditions, which might purchase their quiet, started a farther
demand of fifty thousand Florins of Yearly Tribute, and This Tribute was paid
by the Emperor to Sultan Solomon.
two Millions of Crowns for expense of the War, to be paid by the Emperor to
the Sultan. These proud and unexpected Proposals startled not a little the
Baron of Goez, who readily made answer, that he clearly perceived now, that
there were no intentions to a Peace, since the Vizier was pleased to make the
matter so difficult and impossible, for that it were as easy to bring Heaven
and Earth to meet, as his Master to meet the G. Signior in the Concession of
this particular. These extravagant demands awakened the Imperial Court, who now
observing the Turks without their Vizard, to march hastily to surprise them,
vigorously roused themselves to make that convenient provision and defense by
War, which the straitness of time permitted them: so that in the first place
they Assembled a Diet at Ratisbonne, where it was resolved to raise four
Armies; the first for the Guard and defense of Moravia and Silesia, under the
Command of Count Susa, a Native of Rochel. The second under the Command of
Count Raimond Montecuculi, for safety of Rab, Newhausel, and Komora, and the
Frontiers of Hungary. The third under Command of Count Nicholas Serini for
defense of Croatia. The fourth composed solely of Hungarians, commanded by the
Palatine of that Country, which they reported to consist of thirty thousand
fighting men. Fifthly, It was ordered that all Garrisons should be well provided
of Victuals and Ammunition; and that the Inhabitants of Vienna should take into
every house a provision for a years maintenance, and such as were not able at
their own Cost, were to abandon their Dwellings. And in the mean time the
Villages round about were demolished, to the great amazement and confusion of
the people.

The Turks now bearing in their thoughts nothing but War, began to design and
chalk out the best order and method for its prosecution. The principal places
then in eye of the Vizier, were Raab, and Komorra, Fortresses of considerable
strength, maintained and defended by Soldiers of known prowess and conduct,
and provided equally with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, agreeable to
such considerable Bulwarks and Walls, not only of the German Empire, but (I may
say) of all Christendom. Raab, called by the Italians Javarin, and by the Turks
Raab.
Yanick, is situated in a plain, level, and Champion Country; the Town it self
very regular and compact, the Fortifications most exact according to the new
model, and much improved in its strength since the recovery of it from the
hands of the Turk, by whom it was once taken, in the year 1594. it has its
name from the River Rab, on which it is seated just on the meeting of the
Danube. Komorra is a stronger Fortress, erected in an Island of the River
Danube, called after the same name, which has Komorra.
often been attempted by the Turks, but with ill success; at both which places
I have personally been, and viewed them with much delight. Wherefore the Vizier
considering the strength and difficulty of these places, resolved to take due
and mature consideration before he engaged himself in any enterprise, and to
that end assembled together in Consultation with him the most ancient and grave
men, that were Natives of the Country; some of these being such who had lived
in Rab, been Slaves there, and had well marked and observed the strength of
that Fortress The Turks deliberate of the Method to be used in the war.
both as to Nature and Art, assured the Vizier, That the Work was immense,
difficult, and dangerous, and not to be accomplished in the space of one
Summer; and that the Winters in that Country were very cold and rigid, and ill
agreeing with the temperament of the Asiatick Soldiery. The Vizier, though he
farther considered that his Soldiers were as yet young and unexperienced, and
that a foyl encountered at the first Enterprise, might be a discouragement from
following the continued Tract and Course of this War, which must be sustained
with labor and patience, and that to withdraw his Forces in the Winter would
be a dishonor to the Ottoman Arms, a blemish in the beginning to his own
Reputation, and an encouragement of the Enemy: Howsoever, having a violent
Ambition and Desire to become Master of Rab, he could not rest satisfied in
this Counsel before he had consulted with Ali Pasha, and other Pashaws of the
Frontier Countries, who duly considering the matter as it stood, concurred in
the same judgment that was formerly made of the difficulty of this design; and
herein they were the more strongly confirmed, by the report of certain
Hungarians, whom some parties of Horse, under the Command of Ali Pasha, roving
and sallying out near the Walls of Rab, had surprised and taken, who being
brought bound before the Vizier, related, That the Town was well provided with
all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, and the Garrison reinforced by Count
Montecuculi with supply of four thousand men, and in this manner reported the
Work as difficult as the Turks of the Country had formerly signified. This
relation confirmed by so many hands, diverted the Vizier from this Design; for
before that time imagining it a place which might easily be subdued, he
proposed to himself, without any interruption, a clear and undisturbed March to
the Gates of Vienna, which he swallowing also in his thoughts, hoped by his own
success to repair the shame of Solyman's flight from the Walls of that City,
and besides the Glory of forcing the Emperor from his Imperial Seat, he should
atone for the sin of the Ottoman Cowardice, and be the first who undertook to
mend the actions, and outvie the prowess of the most magnificent, and most
successful of their Sultans. But the Ambition of this grand design giving way
to necessity, and to those other impediments which obstructed it, after due and
mature Consultation, Newhausel, called by the Newhausel.
Hungarians Oywar, was sixed upon as the place to be first attempted, and held
up to the eye of the Soldiery, as the reward and prize of their valor and
hazard. Wherefore Boats were provided, and Planks, and Timbers for a Bridge to
pass the Danube, which the Turks in a few days, according to their usual
expeditions, had raised; so that the Army both Horse and Foot began to
transport themselves as fast as was possible to the other side, but the
multitudes crowded over in that disorder and have, that three or four thousand
men had scarce passed the River before the Bridge was so broken and shattered,
that some time was necessarily required to repair it, before the rest of the
Army durst adventure to follow their Companions. The Approach of the Turkish
Army alarmed all that side of Hungary, but especially the Inhabitants of
Newhausel; who observing the Turks to bend their Course that way, plainly
foresaw the Storm of War to be breaking on them: the News also of the fall of
the Bridge, and thereby the Separation of about four thousand Turks from the
Body of the Army, was brought in by the Country people, who forsaking their
Villages fled for succor to the stronger Fortress of Newhausel. Hereupon
Forcatz, the Governor of Newhausel, a valiant Forcatz the Governor of
Newhausel, ill advises a Sally.
and experienced Soldier, though esteemed by the Turks unfortunate, taking
this Alarm, judged that this occasion of cutting off that part of the Turkish
Army which had past the River, was in no wise to be omitted, and therefore
assembled a Council of War, which consisted of all the principal Officers and
Commanders of the Garrison; (amongst which was Colonel Volter, that commanded
the four thousand men, lately sent to reinforce the Town) he declared that his
opinion was, Immediately to make a Sally on that part of the Turkish Army,
which had already passed the River, before the Bridge was repaired for
Transportation of the others; which endeavors, by Gods Assistance, succeeding
well, might not only discourage the Enemy, but be a means to divert them from
their present design upon their City. This Advice, though he pressed with heat
of Argument, and violence of Speech, yet could it not prevail with the rest of
the Council, which seemed wholly averse thereunto, especially Volter who
declared, That his Commission was not to fight in the Field, but to conserve
himself within the Walls, for maintenance of his Garrison: Some days passed in
this Dispute, whilst Forcatz growing more eager and hot on this design, used
opprobrious Terms, and expressions of infamy toward the other Officers,
accusing all such of Cowardice and Treason, who refused to concur with him in
this Enterprise and advantage on the Enemy, which Heaven seemed to reach out to
them for their Deliverance, if their wisdom and courage afforded them only
will and grace to lay hold on the opportunity. These sharp words and resolution
of the Governor provoked the minds of the Officers to a condescension, and
thereupon about eight thousand men of Choice, and approved Soldiers, well
armed with stout hearts, and hard Iron; not suffering themselves to be
upbraided with such reproach, in the silence of the Night, under the Conduct of
Forcatz, (their own Commander Volter remaining in the Town) took their way
toward the Turkish Camp, and being armed with Firelocks, marched with all
privacy, without lighted Matches, or sound of Drum or Trumpet. But whilst the
foregoing Dispute lasted, the Turks had transported the gross of their Army
over the River, and then lay on her Banks, resting securely under their
Pavillions. The Christians approaching near the Turkish Camp, Forcatz surprises
the Turkish Camp.
with the first twilight, and dawning of the Morning, (perceiving the Enemy
unprovided, but not discovering their Force) dealt at first onset, their shot
most plentifully amongst them, and proceeding amidst the thickest, cutting,
shooting, killing, and making havoc of all before them. The amazed Turks
having many of their Companions brought to their last sleep, before themselves
were thoroughly awake, and some flying before they discovered the reason or the
danger, an Alarm was given by the confused murmur of Allah, Allah, and that the
Christians were upon them, reached the farthest Quarters of the Turkish Army,
which immediately put themselves into Battalia, and order of fighting, whilst
this handful of Germans proceeded forwards, dealing their blows amongst their
Enemies, cutting the Cords of the Tents, and destroying all before them. But by
this time the Turks having put themselves into a posture of Defense, the Horse
and Foot came marching in a Body, extending their Wings in the form of a half
Moon, so as to enclose this small number, and on all sides to assail them. The
Germans seeing this formidable sight approach, and no safety in flight,
encouraged each other The Germans are routed, and fly.
to sell their Lives at as dear a rate as they could; all hopes of escape
seeming desperate, they fought with that courage and obstinacy as amazed the
Turks, and yielded not until their Spirits fainted with labor, and their
Swords were blunted by the Bodies of their Enemies. The Count Forcatz hardly
escaped, but by the help of his Horse, with some few others, fled to Newhausel,
which unwillingly received him, wishing that the rashness of his Counsels had
only proved his own destruction, and not involved so many brave and innocent
Soldiers, who were only unfortunate for being overpowered by his command and
persuasions: The rest overwhelmed with multitudes yielded; for though they
behaved themselves beyond the power and courage of men, yet the numbers of the
Enemy prevailed at length over these Christian Champions, whose Gallantry was
more eminent and conspicuous in being subdued, than the Glory of their Enemies
in the Victory. In this Skirmish few escaped, amongst which four hundred
Gentlemen were slain, and about eighteen hundred Prisoners reported to be
taken, a bad Omen at the beginning of this War. This Rout being given, the
Turks triumphed in Blood, The Vizier deals not like a Soldier with his
Prisoners of War.
and success, and returned with their Captives, and Trophies back to
Strigonium, where the Vizier mounting a Throne of State and Majesty, treated
these valiant Soldiers, not like men of War, or Captives taken in open Field,
but as a Judge condemned them to dye by the hand of the Hangman or
Executioner, passing a formal Sentence of Death upon them, as if they had been
Thieves or Assasinates arrested by the hand of Justice. The Sentence being
passed, and the Turkish Army drawn up, these valiant Christians were ranked in
order and sile to dye, who had so lately with Swords in their hands, ranged
themselves in Battle against their Enemy; and so soon as the Executioners fell
to their work, and the horrid Massacre was begun, the Guns were fired, and the
whole Camp resounded with barbarous Music and shouts. In the mean while the
most superstitious amongst them triumphed, that God was now destroying the
Infidels, manifesting the truth of their Prophet, and doing his own work; not
unlike the assertions and doctrines of those Pretenders to Religion, who have
always hallowed and excused their cruelties with the Name of God, and
sanctified the blood they have shed by making their Enemies Amalekites, and by
pretense of false Lights and Prophecies countenanced their most impious
Sacrilege in Gods Churches, and Invasions of their Neighbors Rights. The
merciless Executioners had proceeded to bereave of life about thirteen or
fourteen hundred persons, the Vizier standing a Spectator with zeal to his Sect
and Prophet, until the Turkish Soldiery who inhabit the Borders, glutted with
so much cruelty toward their Neighbors began to murmur, and at length to
speak aloud, That to destroy Captives in cold blood was an action against the
Law of Arms, and might be revenged by their Enemies with like examples of
cruelty, since none there present, being all Soldiers, were secure from the
misfortunes and mutabilities of War. The Vizier over-hearing these whispers of
the Soldiery, gave a stop to the cruelty of the Executioners, and sent such as
survived to different Prisons in Buda, Adrianople, and Constantinople. I have
seen not far from Strigonium the heads of these Wretches thus miserably
butchered, thrown up into a heap, the beards and hair of those that lay
undermost still growing; the earth which sucked in their blood, became thence
stenched up and barren, and the white bones and carcasses of their bodies lay
dispersed and scattered in a large field; so that I could not but call to mind
the massacred Legions under the Conduct of Quintilius Varus in Germany; and
those albentia ossa, and the barbarous Altars flowing with the Roman blood; and
I could as passionately fancy to have seen the angry Germans return to appease
the Ghosts of their Countrymen with decent Burial, as I was sensible of
Germanicus his zeal, when he adventured to contaminate his Augurs Office by his
too forward Humanity and Religion toward his Country and Parentage. But this
cruelty of the Vizier was recompensed by Count Serini not long after, who
having had some success against Arnaut Basha and his Army of whom he had slain
six hundred men, and such as he took alive, in cold blood he dismembered and
tortured, and having of some cut off their hands, and plucked out their eyes,
sent them to report the reason of this inhumane and merciless usage to the
Vizier.

In the mean time Forcatz advised General (...) the Governor of Rab of this
defeat, and how the flower and strength of his Garrison was destroyed; and that
if he were not immediately supplied, he should be forced to abandon his Fort,
and leave all to the fury and mercy of the Enemy. Hereupon a thousand Germans
were sent for succor with The Turks approach to (...).
all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions requisite; but the Turks after their
Triumph before Strigonium, returned and marched on so fast toward Newhausel,
having passed the Danube, that certainly they had intercepted this Recruit, had
not Forcatz amused their minds, and for a while stopped their hasty approach,
by advancing a white Flag to the top of the Walls, as if he had had a design of
Treaty and Surrender of the Town upon Conditions: so that here the Turkish Army
made a halt, and for three or four hours time remained with expectation when
Conditions for the Surrender should come; every one wondering to see the Flag
of Truce erected, and so much silence in the Fort, and yet no appearance of a
Message. In this interval and breathing of time, the Succor safely arriving
within the Town, the white Flag was changed to colors of defiance, to the
great astonishment and anger of the Turks: Whereupon the Vizier drawing
somewhat nearer, began to entrench and begirt the Town on the 4th of August,
which was defended by three principal Officers, viz. Count Adam Forcatz, the
Marquess Pio an Italian, and one Lucatelli an old and experienced Soldier. But
the Vizier, before he would offer any violence to the Town, thought sit to
summon them in this style: That through the Grace of God and the Miracles of
our Prophet, who is a Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is Happiness The
Turks Summons.
and Glory, I that am the first of the Council, and General of the most Mighty
Emperor of the Turks, that is the King of all Kings of the Earth, To you Adam
Forcatz that are the Chief among all the Nobility of Hungary, do make known,
That through the Command of my most Gracious Lord, the most terrible, the most
puissant, and most mysterious Emperor, I am come with his Forces before
Newhausel to reduce it to his Obedience. Wherefore if you shall deliver up the
place to Us, you shall have liberty to march out with what belongs unto you
from the highest to the lowest, and he that would rather stay shall keep his
Goods and Estate: but if you will not yield, we will take it by force, and
every man of you, from the highest to the lowest, shall be put to the sword. If
the Hungarians did but know the good intentions of the mighty Emperor, they
and their children would bless God for him. Peace be to the obedient. The
Christians not submitting to these Summons, the Turks continued to make their
nearer approaches, and being now at a convenient distance, raised two great
Batteries, on which they mounted a hundred Pieces of Cannon, and from thence
made such constant shot as shaked the Churches, and almost levelled the most
lofty Buildings with their foundations. The 14th of August was designed for a
general storm, so that before break of day Faggots and Rubbish were brought to
fill the Ditches, and sealing Ladders to ascend the Walls; but though the The
Turks storm the Town.
Ottoman Forces were puissant, and their Assault they made fierce and brisk,
yet they were received with that gallantry by the Defendants, that the Trenches
early in the morning were filled with the carcasses of the dead, and at last
the Turks forced to give over the Assault, with the loss of great numbers of
their men.

The Siege still continuing, and the Turks angry, and inflamed with the
disgrace of their late foil, endeavored to redeem their Honor by their
Attempts, filling up the Ditches with Rubbish, serving themselves therein of
the Christian Captives lately taken: The Defendants on the other side, by the
dictates of Nature and Reason, were directed to maintain their houses, wives,
and children from the rapine and violence of an unjust Enemy; so that both
Parties moving from different Principles, used all the Art and Valor possible
for destruction each of other: the noise of Cannon from the Forts raised by the
Turks, resounded continually in the Air, and from the Town the shot were often
so fortunately placed, that daily, besides great numbers of ordinary Soldiers,
many Persons of Note and Quality amongst the Turks were slain.

But the Turks having before this Town a greater number of Soldiers than
either could come to sight, or what was thought necessary to subdue it, the
Vizier selected from his Army a very considerable Force to enter and spoil
Moravia and Austria; of these were 600 Tartars joined The Turks enter Moravia
and Austria.
to a strong Force of Turks, who by the guidance of the Natives passing the
River Waegh, spoiled and destroyed all the Country round about, carrying men,
women, and children into slavery, leaving what was not conveniently portable,
in ashes. But in passing the River, they incountred a considerable Body of
Germans, both Horse and Foot, and being opposed by them, were at first forced
to retreat again over the River with the loss of about eight hundred
Janisaries; but the next day renewing the Fight with better courage and
success, passed the River in despite of the Imperialists, whom they pursued
almost as far as Presburg. These Turks were seconded by a greater Body of
Tartars, every one after the manner of his Country, leading one or two spare
Horses, made Inroads within five miles of Vienna, destroying and laying in
ashes all places before them; things there resembling Doomsday consumed with
fire, and not so much almost left as marks or appearance of habitation.

These Troubles and Confusions in Hungary were the talk and amazement The
confusion of the German Councils.
of all Christendom, and indeed little more they were than talk; for the
Christian Princes farther distant, as less concerned stood at a gaze, expecting
the issue of that Treaty which was between the King of France, and the Pope;
and the Princes of Germany (whatsover was resolved at the Diet) like men
surprised knew not what Succors to afford: some thought it now time to treat
with the Emperor, and recover the Rights and Privileges they thought their
due, and to condescend to no Terms of confederate assistance against the common
Enemy, unless with advantageous considerations to their State; and all in
general acted with that negligence and coldness, as if only the State of
Austria, and not the common Cause of Germany had been concerned. The Election
of a General for the Imperial Army admitting long debate, was another
retardment to the Preparations for the War; the Duke of Brandenburg was
nominated, and solicited to accept the supreme Command; but the Title of being
General of the Empire, or the Imperial Army, was a dispute undeterminable, and
a difficulty not to be overcome: and though the Enemy had passed their
Frontiers, and triumphed in their Possessions, and threatened the subversion of
all Christendom, yet Jealousies, Niceties, and acry Formalities took up all the
time; so that at length their Councils had no other result than an increase of
Animosities and Difficulties amongst themselves. The Emperor also The Emperer
removes to Lintz.
terrified with the Siege of Newhausel, and the near Incursions of the Turks,
abandoned his City of Vienna, carrying with him the Records and greatest of his
Richess to Lintz, to the greater apprehension, discouragement, and fear of the
whole Country in general, and was an act which might have produced very fatal
effects, had not the Winter approached, and the progress of the Insidels been
interrupted by the Valor, Vigilance, good Fortune, and Conduct of Count
Serini, who in requital of those Incursions the Turks made into the Christian
Territories, entered the Turkith Borders near Komorra, and there with Fire and
Sword destroyed all before him, defeated a Party of about three thousand
Janisaries, taking from them a good Booty of Money and Provisions designed for
Relief of the Leagure before Newhausel.

During these varieties of success the Turks still continued the Siege, and
having now made a breach, and almost filled the graft with rubbish, Faggots and
other implements, attempted a second storm on the 28th and 29th of August, but
were repulsed with an extraordinary loss, by the courageous Gallantry of the
Defendants: on the 9th of September was given another more furious Assault,
every Pasha leading his men The Turks make another assault on the Town.
in the Front, so that the Action this day was so violently and courageously
performed, that the Turkish Ensign was advanced to the top of the Rampire of
the Fort Frederick, where both sides coming to handy blows, the dispute
continued a long time; but the courage of the Defendants at length prevailing,
the Turks were driven headlong from the Walls, and their Colors wrested from
them with the loss of about five thousand men, and four hundred Christians.
Though the Turks were much abated in their courage by this days work, yet the
Vizier obstinately continued the Siege, preparing speedily for another storm,
in which he hoped to force the Christians to a Surrender. In the mean time, to
facilitate the design of the Turks, on the 15th of September the chief Magazine
of Powder (none knows how) took fire, and blew into the air, by which blow
fifty Soldiers and several Officers were slain; but the worst was, that the
besieged were deprived of all their Powder, unless what remained in private
houses, which so dismayed the Inhabitants, that immediately with one voice they
demanded a Parley: the women also began a confused tumult, crying out for a
Surrender, in which they were so impetuous and violent, that they threw stones
from their windows on the Soldiers. Amidst of this confusion the Turks
disposing their Companies to make another storm, the Officers resolved upon a
Treaty, which concluded with these following Conditions.

First, That the Commanders and Garrison should march out on the Newhausel
yielded.
17th of September with Bag and Baggage, and have safe conduct as far as
Komorra: and that for a convenience of the sick and wounded, the Vizier should
be obliged to provide four hundred Carts and more, if there should be occasion.

Secondly, That as such as desire to abandon their dwellings, may have liberty
to depart, so such as desire to abide may continue their habitations: and that
the Religious and Ecclesiastical persons may perform their Functions as in
former times.

Thirdly, That upon the Surrender of the principal Works, no Turk shall enter
within the Town, until all such as intend to depart have quitted their stations.

Fourthly, That for performance of Articles, two Aga's should be given for
Hostages; and that until the foregoing Articles were fully accomplished, all
acts of Hostility should cease.

Fifthly, That the Garrison might not be necessitated to march through the
Turkish Camp, the Turks themselves were obliged to make them a new Bridge, or
repair the old to pass the Niter.

These Articles, though punctually observed by the Turks, yet the Tartars, who
are of a faithless and barbarous nature, upon certain pretenses assaulted the
Garrison, as they marched out, and had doubtless moved the rest of the Camp
Rabble to imitate their example; had not many of the Pashaws at the Head of
their Troops, killed the most forward in this Rebellious attempt, whose
perfidious insolence and riot could not yet have been restrained, had not the
Garrison quickened their pace, more like a flight than an orderly March. But the
Vizier on the contrary, distributed money to the Garrison, and especially to
the Hungarians, with design (as is supposed) to allure and attract their minds
to a belief of the gentleness of the Turkish Yoke; as if he compassionated the
miseries of that Country, which was the Stage whereon the Tragedies of so many
miseries and slaughters were acted. This Siege continued about the space of 43.
Days; of the Garrison marched out 3500. sound men, and about 500. wounded;
those Inhabitants who would remain, had protection and liberty. The Army which
besieged the Town consisted of 50000. men. In the Town were found 60. pieces of
Brass Cannon, but most broken and unserviceable, with little Ammunition, but
with great provision of Hungarian Wines. The loss the Turks might receive, is
computed to have been of about 15000. men, amongst which was slain, the
Spaheelar Agasee, or General of the Horse, Beco Pasha, Beglerbeg of Romalia,
Vsasf, Pasha of Anatolia, and Ibrahim Pasha of Seydi, with sixteen Captains
belonging to Buda, and nine to Constantinople.

The loss of Newhausell affected the Austrian Court with so drendful
apprehensions of the Ottoman Fortune and Fury, that they hastened the finishing
of the Works, and Fortifications of Vienna; cutting down all the Woods and
Boseage thereabouts, which might benefit or thelter the Enemy; and so great an
impression did the fear of the Turks prevalency and power work on the minds of
the Germans, that they not only Fortified the Frontiers, but secured the
innermost parts of Austria, which extend along the River, as far as within
three Miles of Lintz.

But above all, Possonium which was upon the Frontiers, though not Possonium
garrisoned.
an open Town, yet of no strength or resistance, was not neglected, but
reinforced with a considerable Garrison, and the Works restored and repaired,
with as many additional Fortisications as time would admit. But the Inhabitants
had lost so much of their Spirit and Courage, by the melancholy relation of the
fate of Newhausel, and the apprehension of the dreadful advance of the whole
Turkish Force; that their constancy to the Emperor began to waver, and to
entertain some thoughts of submitting to the mercy and clemency of the Turks,
who had newly declared, that such as voluntarily submitted to the Ottoman
Obedience, should for three years be exempted from all Tribute or Taxes. This
consideration adjoined to fear, so prevailed on those of Possonium, that they
shut the Gates against the Garrison which was sent to recruit and defend them;
some publicly declaring the extremity of their affairs had no other safety
than in a surrender of themselves to the mercy and protection of the Vizier.
Howsoever the Count Strozzi, with his Italian Artifices, so wheedled the Count
Strozzi.
grosser humor of the Hungarians, that they were persuaded to admit him and
his Regiment within the Town, where he disposed all things with that Conduct,
and built those Forts, and in a short time so apparently rendered the Town
tenable, that the Inhabitants taking Courage, resolved to defend themselves, in
obedience to their Prince, to the ultimate point of Estates and Lives. In the
mean time the Turks made themselves Leventz taken by the Turks.
Masters of Leventz, a Town though tenable, and not contemptible for its
strength, yet was by the peoples fears, and allurements of the Viziers promises
and fair Propositions, committed to the mercy of the Turks, and swore in Fealty
to them the 23d day of September.

By this time the news of the taking of Newhausell, was arrived at the
Festivals for Victory amongst the Turks.
Ottoman Court, where it was entertained with so much joy, that a Dunelma, or
Festival, was appointed for the space of seven days through the whole Empire;
which according to the fashion of the Turks, is Celebrated by adorning the
Gates, and outward Walls of their Houses, so soon as it begins to be dark, with
great store of Lamps and Candles, during which time the Nights are spent with
Music and Bankets, as the Days are with Visits and Presents, and Corban,
(which is an Alms which rich men make in flesh to the poor sort, and is given
either at the little Biram, which is called the Feast of Corban, or upon some
public Thanksgiving, which is performed in this manner.) He that makes the
Corban, first lays The manner of Corban.
his hand upon the head of the Sheep, or Lamb, makes a short Prayer, and then
in the name of God cuts the throat, the Butcher afterward fleying off the
skin, the Corbanist divides the flesh into small pieces, to as many poor as
slock to receive it. In the heat of these Revels, and Bankets, every one spoke
high in praise of their fortunate Arms, and Congratulated each with other, the
prosperous beginnings of this War, promising to themselves the following year,
rather a time of Peregrination or Travel through the pleasant Countries and
Cities of the Christians, than blood and sweat in obtaining the possession of
their Enemies. Nor were such imaginations vain, or absurd for the Commonalty to
entertain; in regard it was evident to the World, in what manner the Ottoman
Arms roved through Hungary uncontrouled, without an appearance of any
considerable Force to give them the least stop or interruption; so that under
the very Walls of Rab and Presburg, and on the Banks of the Danube near
Komorra, Incursions and depredations were made, and great numbers of people of
both Sexes, and of all Ages, were carried into slavery, the Country all round
laid wast, the Corn and Hay burnt; with all other miserable effects and
Concomitants of War.

In this manner all places seemed to fall down and yield at the very rumor of
the Turks approach; for not only Leventz surrendered it self, but likewise
Nitra, though over-topped by a strong and an impregnable Castle, was by the
Cowardice of the Commander betrayed at the first Summons of the Turks; for
which action, the Captain afterward, by express Command of the Emperor
suffered Death.

After all these successes, though no opposition appeared in the Field, to
obstruct the luxuriant and wanton march of the victorious Squadrons of the
Ottoman Army; and not only Hungary, but Austria, and the lower Germany was
Alarmed and terrified with the rumor of the Turkish numbers; and though the
Vizier (as it is said) began this War with the ambitious thoughts of possessing
Vienna it self, and out-vying the Acts of Solomon the Magnificent: Yet it
seemed strange, that being come thus far, and almost in prospect of his hopes,
that he should give a check to his Fortunes, and not advance toward Vienna; to
which now the passage seemed wide and open; but it was almost a miracle, that
he should not make a Visit to Possonium, before which, had he only displaid his
dreadful Arms, it had surrendered at his first Summons and Appearance. Instead
The Vizier assaults Schinta, but beaten off.
whereof he attempted Schinta, the Magazine of the Emperors Arms and
Artillery, but found not the same easy entrance as he did with the Governor of
Nitra, but instead thereof, being stoutly repulsed after several assaults,
concluded the enterprise too difficult, and requiring more time and blood than
could be countervailed by the acquisition of that place. Wherefore raising his
Camp, he employed a considerable party to take Novigrade, a Castle situated on
a high Rock, encompassed Novigrade taken by the Turks.
with a Ditch of thirty four Foot deep, Garrisoned with 600. Soldiers, and
provided sufficiently with Victuals and Ammunition; howsoever by ill fortune
and worse Conduct, this place also was resigned into the hands of the Turks.

By this time the Winter approaching, and the season of the Year beginning The
Vizier retreats to his Winter Quarters.
to be unfit for action, the Great Vizier retreated as far as Belgrade, to take
up his Winter Quarters with the gross of his Army. Where remaining with full
satisfaction and glory, contemplating the successes of the past Year, and
promising to himself greater renown, and exaltation of his mighty acts, for
that ensuing; he so contemned the Force of his Enemies, that he Licensed great
numbers of the Asian Spahces, who came as far as from Babylon and Grand Cairo,
to return home to their own possessions. Howsoever to vex the Christians with
continual Alarms, the Vizier ordered a flying Body of Turks and Tartars, to the
number of 30000. under the Command of Pasha of (...).
Chengiogli, to pass into Stiria and Croatia, the Country of Count Serini, and
there to burn, lay waste, and depopulate all before them. Count Serini was now
newly returned from Hungary, and supposing the Season for action sinished, had
lodged the greatest part of his Forces within their Winter Quarters, and
securely laid himself to repose; when an Alarm came of the approach of thirty
thousand Horse; the Count rowsing his great Spirit from its case, collected as
many of his people into a Body, as the shortness of time would permit, which
were not above 480. men; and with these he betook himself to the (...) Muer, to
give a stop (if possible) to the passage of the Enemy, placing Sentinels in all
places where the River was fordable. On the 17th of November the Christians
espied the Turks Encamped on the other side, and at the same time discovered
2000. of them to have passed the River; on which, Serini immediately made that
furious Assault, assisted Count Sirini overthrows a party of Turks and Tartars.
with the Courage of Captain Chirfaleas (a person who had often times given
glorious proofs of his valor against the Turks) that he soon put them to open
flight, and they seeking to pass the River, and missing the place where the
River was fordable, threw themselves headlong into the Water, where the most
part of those perished who escaped the Sword. The Turks on the other side were
so amazed at this stupendous Valor of Serini, that their Courages failing
them, they desisted from their farther attempt upon Croatia, so that this poor
Country seemed as it were for the present, to be reprieved by Miracle from a
total destruction.

THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
The Third BOOK.
Anno 1664. Hegeira 1075.

THE Month of January was now well entered with its rigid Frosts, when Apasi
Prince of Transylvania, beholding his Soldiers in their Winter Quarters, and
all things quiet and still about him, judged it seasonable for his
establishment to discover himself with some luster to the World, seated in the
usual Throne of the Transilvanian Princes; which sight appeared souniversally
grateful to the people, that they began to be enamoured of their Prince, and to
applaud his Person, his Prowess and Virtues, and to cast an ill and envious Eye
on those Cities, which were Garrisoned with German Soldiers. About which time
the Fortress of Zechelhyd revolted from Zechelhyd revolts to Apasi.
Obedience of the Emperor unto Apasi the Prince: for the Soldiery of that
Garrison having long Arrears of pay due to them, made a Mutiny, and expelled
their Colonel Dempenbal from his Office, and pillaged his House, placing the
Quartermaster of Strozzis Regiment in his stead. The news of this Sedition
flew quickly to Vienna, from whence immediately a Messenger was dispatched with
an Act of Pardon, from the Emperor, upon submission, and proffers of full
satisfaction of all Arrears; Apasi, who taking hold of this opportunity, sent
every Soldier ten Dollars with a Suit of Clothes, promising larger and more
constant pay than they received from the Emperor, with which the Garrison
being satisfied, surrendered up their City on the 20th of January. But whilst
other Armies remained in their Quarters, and other Commanders gave themselves
up to ease, and drowned themselves in Wine and Bankets; and whilst Jealousies,
Envics, and Ceremonies, disturbed and confused the resolves of Diets and
private Councils; The generous and vigilant Serini, having received advices
from Adrianople, that the Turks design in the next Campagna, was to convert the
whole heat and fury of the War upon Croatia, and through that Country to open a
passage unto Friuli; his active Spirit conceived that heat and flame, that the
Winters cold could not chill his hot and eager desires from entering into the
open Field, and commencing some attempt and enterprise on his Enemy. Wherefore
on the 16th of January he began his march from Serinswar, with an Army of about
25000. men; And in the first place, marching along the Banks of the Dravus,
showed himself before Berzenche; which upon conditions of marching away with
Arms, Bag, and Baggage, was surrendered to him. Bakockza was likewise yielded,
and a Palancha on the River quitted upon report of the Counts approach, leaving
behind them eight brass Guns in the Fort. From hence he marched toward Esseck,
otherwise called Oseck, which is the only pass from the upper to the lower
Hungary, having a Bridge of Wood over a Moor or Fen, about six or seven miles
in length, which once I remember, with my Horse, I was an hour and three
quarters in passing (as I observed by my Watch), and reported to have been six
years in building. This Bridge Serini resolved to burn, which cost the Turks
300000. Dollars, Oseck.
and six Years time to build, imagining that to rebuild it again, was a work of
that time, as could not be repaired in one Summer, and that by this means the
Turks would be disappointed of all action the following Year, and the Empire
have time to breath, and assemble the utmost of The Bridge burned.
their strength and force together: wherefore taking opportunity of the hard
Winter, when the Marsh was frozen, and a strong wind to carry the flame; he
sent before him 2000. Dragoons, and 3000. Croats, which encountering 6000. Turks
at the foot of the Bridge, set for guard of that place, were so ill treated by
them, that they had been wholly cut off, had not a considerable Force of Horse
and Dragoons, come in to their assistance, by whose resolution they not only
routed the Turk, but took the Palancha, which was the defense of the Bridge,
and having gained it in hot blood, put all to Fire and Sword; after which, Fire
being set to the Bridge in diverse places, in a short time it was consumed and
remained in ashes. The news of this exploit was received at Vienna with great
Joy; believing that for the following Year, they had disappointed the Turks of
a passage, but by the sequel it will appear, how much they erred in the account
made of the diligence of the Turks, who in forty days repaired that which they
esteemed a work of some Years; and as I observed, it was all built of new
Timber, and on another foundation different from the old. From this place
Serini marched to Quinque Ecclesiae, or Five Quinque Ecclesiae taken by Serini.
Kirk, at whose near approach, the Turks set out a white Flag on one of the
Towers, signifying a desire of Parley, as if they had had intentions to
surrender on Terms and Articles of Agreement; the Christians with this
confidence marched near the Walls, where the Turks espying their advantage on
their Enemies now under command of their Guns fired upon them, and did severe
execution, killing amongst others several principal Officers, of which were
General Hammerling and Count Harberstein; which perfidious action so
transported Serini, that he resolved on a furious assault, and performed it
with that gallantry, that on the 5th of February he took the Town by storm and
force of Arms, and in recompense of their treacherous Stratagem, put all the
Inhabitants to the sword, and gave up the Town to the Pillage and Plunder of
the Soldiery, and afterward setting it on fire, rendered it the most horrid
spectacle of fire and sword that had as yet been seen or known in this present
War.

These successes of Serini gained him the reputation of a valiant and fortunate
Prince, and his liberal hand in frankly bestowing the Booty and Pillages
amongst the Soldiery, invited great numbers to follow his Banner. His active
Spirit and Vigilance gained him likewise a reputation amongst the Turks, that
their principal fear and dread was of Serin-Ogli, as of a watchful and politic
Enemy; for in every place he made great havoc and spoil, being reported to
have laden two thousand five hundred Carts with Slaves, Goods, and Ammunition,
and to carry with him an hundred fifty five Pieces of Cannon taken out of small
Forts and Palancha's, and to have laid waste all the Country between the Dravns
and the Danube. In these Incursions, and victorious and dreadful travels
through the Enemies Country, the valiant Serini at length arrived at Sigeth, a
Fortress consisting of a new and old Town Sigeth besieged.
conjoined by a Bridge which crosses a famous Marsh or Fen, ennobled by the
Attempt made thereon by Solomon the Magnificent in the year 1565. with an Army
of six hundred thousand men; in defense of which Nicholas Serini, the great
Grandfather of the present Count, immortalized his Fame and Memory with the
loss of his life, and renowned the place it self by his Feats of Arms. At this
place Serini was resolved to revenge the blood of his Ancestors, and sacrisice
great numbers to the Ghost of his Grandfather; to which end he sent the Count
Olack before him with part of his Army, to summon the Enemy, and prepare the
way to his own more effectual force; Olack had ordered all things accordingly,
when Serini full of Glory and Spoils arrived him in his Leagure, and joining
together appointed the day for a general storm; but whilst these things were
meditating, and that Sigeth was reduced almost to the last extremity, advice
came of the near approach of a Body of twelve thousand Turks and Tartars; to
encounter which The Siege raised.
the Attempt was accounted difficult, considering the loss and diminution of
the Christian Forces, which by continual actions, and the bitter suffering of
the Winter season, were reduced to a number inferior to that of their Enemies,
and wanting all sorts of Provision and Ammunition, it was resolved, as most
expedient, to raise the Siege, which was the next day performed, and the
Soldiery taken into Garrisons to repose and recruit themselves. But whilst by
the active and zealous Spirit of this great Champion most matters proceeded
successfully on the side of Croatia, the Christian Affairs on the other side,
by the negligence of some Ministers, ran into evident ruin and disorder. For
Claudiopolis which Claudiopolis yields it self to Apasi.
not many years past had defended it self so valiantly against the Turks under
the Command of the Governor Retani, did now, wanting pay, (the sinew and life
of the Soldiery) follow the late example of Zechelhyd, and surrendered it self
into the hands of Apafi; and though the complaints and murmurings of the
Soldiers gave a sufficient time of warning to make due Provisions against a
misfortune so imminent and plainly appearing, yet the want of expedition at
Vienna, and the unprofitable application only of empty words and air to feed
the penury and satisfy the appetite of starving men, was a remedy so little
available, that the Garrison submitted to Apafi, and yielded to Conditions
whereby they might eat and live: the story of which place, compared with that
of Zechelhyd, was so shameful and pungent to men capable of any impressions of
honor or duty, that at length it awakened the Germans, and admonished them to
provide better for Zacmar and Tockay, and other Frontier Garrisons, lest they
also should incur the like Fate and misfortune with the two former.

By this time the Actions of Serini were rumoured in the Grand Signiors
Seraglio, and the report of them became common in the mouths of the Vulgar;
wherefore full of anger and disdain, the Sultan wrote severely to his Vizier,
reproving him of negligence for suffering Serini so freely to range his
Countries without control, to the great dishonor of his Empire, and damage of
his People: whereupon the Vizier not as yet having received his Recruits, nor
prepared so early for the March of the gross of his Army, dispatched
notwithstanding a considerable Force to precede him, with Orders either by
stealth to surprise Serinswar, or else to lay siege unto it. This Army marching
by the way of Bosna, the News thereof was brought to Count Peter Serini,
appointed Count Peter Serini defeats the Turks in the Streights of Morlac.
by his Brother to stand Sentinel on the Guard of his Country, whilst he in
Person was busied in Hungary, who immediately thereupon with what force he
could collect, ambushed himself at the narrow Pass of a Mountain called the
Morlac, where he had not long attended before the Turks without order or care
entered with their whole Body; but being on a sudden surprised by the Count,
were wholly defeated, leaving two thousand dead on the place, with many
Prisoners.

The month of March being now well entered, the Frosts began to thaw, and the
Air become more mild and moderate, when Count Nicholas Serini entertained
thoughts of laying siege to Canisia: But to lay the foundation of this design
with the better judgment, it was thought first necessary to view the state and
situation of the place; wherefore the Count in person accompanied with about
fourteen Officers, went one day The danger of Serini.
to take a survey thereof; but he was not so private in his design, but that it
was known to the Turks, who secretly laid five hundred men in wait to take him,
and upon the near approach of Serini, started from their holes with shouts and
out-crys; but the Count was so well mounted on his Croatian Courser, that he
out-ran them all, and got refuge in the Thickets of a neighboring Wood, where
three hundred of his own Horse alarmed at a distance by the Echo's of the cry,
came in to his succor, and making head against the Turks, routed and defeated
them, killing and taking many Prisoners; amongst the slain was found one armed
cap-a-pe, with a silk twist or cord of diverse colors about his waste, who was,
as reported by the Captives, to have been one who resolved to have taken
Serini, and with that cord to have brought him bound to the feet of the Vizier.
Serini having thus escaped, resolved to revenge himself of the affront, and
therefore made most dreadful spoils, and confusion in all places round Kanisia,
so that the people flying thither for Sanctuary, were refused entertainment by
the Pasha, who at that time laboring with scarcity, and expecting a siege, had
no need of unnecessary guests.

Serini having now fully resolved to lay siege to Kanisia, thought fit first to
signify the design to his Imperial Majesty, for which purpose he dispatched
away the Engineer General with Letters to the Council of War of the Lower
Hungary, containing a perfect relation of the success and progress of his Arms
in that Winter, and how he had laid waste and desolate all that circumference
of Land which lies between the River Dravus and Serinswar, by which means
Kanisia was already strained Serini makes known to the Emperor his design
against Kanisia.
with famine, and that now was the only season to recover that Fortress, if the
design were put into immediate execution, before the Turks arose from their
Winter Quarters, or had time to afford a powerful Relief. The resolution of
Serini was so well pleasing to the Council, that by the same Messenger they
signified their approbation thereof to the Emperor then at the Diet at
Ratisbone, humbly desiring, that this design might proceed, which would
undoubtedly take effect, if the Count were provided only with thirteen thousand
Foot and seven thousand Horse; but then the Siege was to be laid before the
beginning of April, lest the early motion of the Turkish Camp should blast and
defeat the too late beginning of this action. The particular Journal of
Serini's success was not less pleasing to his Caesarean Majesty, than his
present Heroical resolution against Kanisia, who thereupon gave Orders to the
General Council to supply him with all Provisions, Ammunition, and Men, which
were requisite for this Siege, and was graciously pleased himself to express in
a Letter to the Count the sense he had of his Merits and Valor, which he
applauded and extolled in the words following.

POstquam mihi Architectus Militaris de Vassemboij eximios Vestros progressus
famosique Pontis Essolciensts exustionem, and coetera a Vobis edita Virtutis
Militaris singularia specimina longa seric exposuisset, supervenerunt Vestroe
de 19. Februarii, and omnia breviori, quam tantorum gestorum magnitudo capit,
enarratione confirmantes. Posuit fortunatus iste progressus labescenti rei
Hungarioe sirmum adminiculum, erexit consternatos meorum sidelium animos, and
suturorum foelicium successuum non exiguum jecit fundamentum. Proinde hoec
Vestra egregia facta non minus mihi grata and accepta accidunt, quam in Nominis
Vestri perennitatem, and augendam apud Posteros memoriam redundant. Spero
omnino per Divinam assistentiam, virtutemque, and experientiam Vestram ejusmodi
ultiores foelices successus, atque hostilium armorum debellationem.

According to this Order of the Emperor, the resolution of the Council of War
was established on the 10th of March, and Serini published, That on the 8th of
April he would begin the Siege; but in regard the Kanisia besieged.
Germans in Stiria, and the Forces of the Rhyne by reason of the absence of
their General, the Count Olack, could not be so soon ready, the time of the
siege was deferred until the 30th of April, on which, or the first of May, the
Town was formally beleagured, not so much with hopes of success, as with design
to maintain the reputation of the Imperial Arms, and to divert the gross of the
Enemies force from the more easy and delightful Plains of Hungary, or the
plenteous Confines of Vienna, to a Country less happy or fruitful, encompassed
with Fens and Marshes, poisoned with bad Airs and Vapors, and made more
miserable already by the Desolations of War. But let us leave Serini at his
Siege before Kanisia, and travel a while with our thoughts to the Diet at
Ratisbone, and understand what is there forming and designing toward
Preservation of The Diet at Ratisbone.
the Commonweal of the Empire. The taking of Nemhausel, and the Progress of the
Ottoman Arms, had awakened the German Princes with that sense of the common
danger, that a Diet was assembled at Ratisbone to consult of the most effectual
means that might give a stop to the uncontrouled incursions of the Turk. And
not to trouble the Reader with the names of all those Princes and Ambassadors
which there appeared, it will be sufficient to signify, That besides his
Cesarean Majesty, there were present, as his Plenipotentiaries, the Elector of
Mentz, and Archbishop of Saltzburgh: And though many Princes showed themselves
with Glory and Splendor; yet none appeared with that Pomp and Magnificence as
the Elector of Bavaria, who for number of Coaches, richness of his Liveries,
and complete Government of his Retinue, was so neat and polite, that he seemed
not only to exceed every Court in particular, but in Elegance and Magnificence
to equalize them all together. Upon Debate of matters in reference to this War,
the Count of Olach was unanimously chosen General for the Confederates of the
Rhyme; but the more hot Disputes between the Protestants and Papists about
Election of other Generals kept matters in longer suspense, yet at length the
Marquess of Baden was chosen Marshal General in behalf of the League, the
Marquess of Durlach, and the Bishop of Munster his Councillors, and Directors
of the War, and Count Francis Fucher, General of the Ordnance. But in the
Levies of their Forces The strength of the Christian Army.
they concurred more freely and willingly; for besides the Imperial Forces,
which consisted of 41600 Foot, and 13900 Horse, the Allies and Confederates
furnished 13850 Foot, and 3350 Horse; the Auxiliaries of the Empire made up a
Body of 16991 Foot, and 4037 Horse, besides the Forces of Saxony, and
Brandenburgh, and the Succors of France, so that, by Gods Providence, the
Christian Army was this year esteemed equal, if not more numerous than the
multitudes of their Enemies.

The next matter under consideration was the nomination of Ministers Italy.
to be sent abroad to implore assistance from Christian Princes more remote;
the Count Piccolomini was to negotiate in the Courts of Italy, but having taken
a Distemper in his Journies, died after a short Sickness at Milan.

Also the Count Colalto, sent to his Majesty of Great Britain, died in England,
his Journey before he arrived at London; notwithstanding which the generous
piety of his Majesty was not wanting with a liberal hand to contribute toward
the promotion of the Christian Interest.

From Poland nothing more could be obtained than Terms of Courtesy, Poland,
and Demonstrations of Good Will and Desires, for that their Forces being
employed against the Moscovite to recover the lost Countries of Lituania, could
not possibly attend the Service and Command of his Imperial Majesty, though
they could not but at the same time reflect on their premures and necessities
with shame and confusion, which disabled them from answering with like returns,
the grateful memory they still retained of the assistance against Sweden.

To his Most Christian Majesty Count Strozzi was employed, before whose Arrival
at Paris the common report and vogue was, That that King resolved to contribute
an effectual assistance to the Christian France.
Cause in that present Conjuncture; which pious disposition Strozzi so happily
improved, that he obtained from his Majesty a Grant and promise of four
thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, raised and paid at his own charge, to
be united with the Troops of the Rhinish League: And farther his Majesty was so
gracious herein, that he published a Declaration, That what person soever would
serve the Emperor against the Turk, his resolution and action therein should
be accepted by him, in the same manner, as if the service were immediately
tendered to himself. Upon which many persons of Quality resolved upon this
expedition, amongst which was the Duke of Buglion, the Marquis de Villeroy, the
Abbot of Richelieu, and many other Heroes, and Persons of Bravery, who ventured
their Lives with no other consideration than that of honor and Religion. But
before I pass from this Embassy, give me leave to report a Complement which
Count Strozzi passed upon this King, which some say did savor a little too
much of flattery and affectation. The matter was this: Count Strozzi Count
Strozzi's Speech to the French King.
being admitted to hiis Audience, so soon as he entered into the Chamber, I
know not whether it was feigned or real, he seemed to be struck with such an
amazement and fear, that for a while he was not able to pronounce a word
articulate or intelligible; but at length recollecting himself, he began with a
trembling voice to excuse this hesitation of his Speech, having his Senses
dissipated, and his Eyes dazzled with the Rays and Splendor of so much Majesty;
and with that, as in a rapture or ecstasie, broke out into an admiration of the
French Monarchy, the report of whose Greatness and Glory, though arrived to the
utmost Confines of the Universe, came yet far short of that real Majesty which
he saw and admired, whose dreadful and mysterious Throne was sufficient to
revive the dead Ashes of the Sabean Queen to prostrate herself before this new
Solomon, much excelling the wisdom, the richess, the virtue, and happiness of
the former. And thence descending with the like sagacious obsequiousness, to
confute the malicious Reports of malignant tongues, who, envious of the harmony
of Christian Spirits, represented his Majesty as ill-affected to the Austrian
Family, whereas to the contrary, he could testify to have found that excess of
Affection, and admirable disposition in his Majesty toward the Emperor his
Ally, as rendered his Embassy abundantly happy and successful, which, joined to
the Zeal his Majesty had toward the Christian Cause, was like Friendship
united to Charity, and Moral Virtues made perfect by spiritual Qualifications.
In fine, he compared his Christian Majesty to that Glorious Sun, which
communicating his light to the Christian World, affords the most benign
influence to the Catholic Climate; with much better reason therefore ought
Germany to participate so great a Circle of those Rays, as may serve wholly to
obscure and darken the dim and barbarous Light of the Ottoman Moon. In sum,
Strozzi knew so well how to manage his Discourse, and play the Orator, that he
obtained considerable assistances, and returned to his Master the Emperor with
full Demonstrations of all obliging Terms, and courteous Treatments. And having
thus understood what preparations are making in Christendom, let us pass over
into the Turks Quarters, and see what is in the mean time transacting in those
Dominions.

At this time the rumor of a Rebellion and Mutiny amongst the Rebellion of the
Beghs in Egypt.
Great Beghs at Grand Cairo in Egypt afforded matter for trouble and
consultation at the Ottoman Court; for that those Beghs who have great
possessions and power in that Country, made seizure of Ibrahim Pasha, and
imprisoned him, being about the expiration of his three years commonly allotted
to that Government; and therefore near upon departure. The demands they had
upon him was for no less than three thousand purses of money, which, according
to the Cairo Account, are reckoned seven hundred and fifty Dollars a purse, and
pretended to be taken from them against Law and Justice; and that without
restitution thereof they resolved not to restore him his liberty. This
insolence against so eminent a Pasha, qualified with such absolute power in his
Government, and one related to the Grand Signior by marriage of his Sister,
compared with the late neglects and disobedience of that people, who for some
years had failed in the full payment of their Tribute, were interpreted as
evident Symptoms of disaffection, and malignancy, which that people entertained
against the Ottoman Subjection. Wherefore the Sultan immediately dispatched
away the Master of his Horse to Cairo, with full power to appease this
Rebellion, and with Lenitives to moderate the fury of the people, who seemed to
be too licentious and unbridled to be governed by a Musselim, or Deputy:
Wherefore the Selictar Aga was elected Pasha, and to depart with all
expedition. In the mean time this Messenger, to make greater haste, took post
through Asia with thirty in his Company, and in a short time arrived at Grand
Cairo, where, with fair terms, and restitution of some money from the Pasha,
all matters were reduced to an amicable composure, only the punishment of the
Chief Mutiniers, with a fair Countenance, deferred for a season, was afterward
according to the Turkish fashion, when time and opportunity presented,
remunerated to those factious Spirits with a severe Interest, and satisfaction
to Justice.

Not long after Ibrahim Pasha having obtained his liberty, returned from his
Government of Cairo to Constantinople, where refreshing himself some time with
the embraces of his young Sultana, an Imperial Command for immediate payment of
four hundred Purses of money to Ibrahim Pasha (...),
the Grand Signiors Treasury, disturbed his delightful quiet. The Pasha made a
present payment of one half, but desired time for the remainder, either for
want of that instant supply, or else on hopes of ease of his Fine. But the
Sultan, who is impatient of any delay in his Slaves, which savours of obstinacy
or disobedience, though never so reasonable, dispatched another Command
enjoining present compliance, and as a penalty for the late neglect, raised the
Demand from four hundred to six hundred Purses, which if not as readily paid
as required, the Kimacham of Constantinople was empowered to commit him
Prisoner, within the four Gates of the Seraglio, the fatal Prison, from whence
few find other Release than by Death. The Pasha not being able to comply, and
imprisoned.
was there restrained of his Liberty; and yet had the good fortune in a few
days to obtain his freedom, by the endeavors (as some suppose) of the Great
Vizier, who having by this Act weakened his Power and Treasure, did afterward
as an instrument of his Deliverance, conserve his Life, and obtain for him the
Government of Darbiquier, where being remote and obscure at so far a distance,
could never be capable to shadow, or by his great popularity and affable
comportment endanger the present happy state of the Viziers Office.

Matters growing now toward action, by return of the Spring, the Grand
Signior, to encourage his Vizier in a continuance of his duty, sent him a Horse
and a Sword as a testimony of his favor and good esteem of his person: and
Orders were issued out through all the Empire for public Prayers to be made
some days before the Vizier began his March toward the Enemy. This appointment
of public Devotions occasioned matter of argument and dispute between the
Mufti and a Shegh or Preacher, one that was always near the Grand Signiors
Person, and therefore on confidence of his familiar accesses to the Presence of
the Sultan, and on presumption of his Sanctity and Privilege of his Office,
took liberty to oppose and contradict the Oracle of the Ottoman Law. The
Problem A Dispute between the Mufti and a Shegh.
in question was, Whether Prayers appointed for success of the Ottoman Arms,
according to the Law of their Prophet, were to be made privately, and in every
Mosch or Oratory apart, or in a general Assembly of the whole City. The Mufti
maintained the last Position, citing in favor of his opinion the testimony of
diverse Arabic Doctors, and the customs of the present and past times. The
Shegh on the contrary was for Devotions to be performed in every Mosch,
declaring, That the Assembly of all the people of a City into one body did
nothing avail or enforce the power of Prayer; for they being true Believers
were all illuminated, and had no need of helps to make their Prayers more
fervent or more acceptable. The argument was hot on both sides: and though the
Mufti had got another Shegh on his part, who might pretend to as much of
illumination as the other, and joined to the Mufti's opinion, who is the Mouth
and undoubted Interpreter of the Law, might seem able not only to resolve the
knottiest difficulties, but to impose an assent on them with greater authority;
yet the Shegh having the Grand Signior on his side, presently got most of
reason, and forced the Mufti to recant his former opinion as erroneous, and to
banish the other Shegh his Companion, pretending that he was now convinced, and
had sooner discovered the truth, had not the Impostor, the false Preacher
deceived him by his feigned illuminations. This Victory gained the Shegh much
applause and esteem with the Grand Signior, so that he vented what Doctrine he
pleased, and all he said was taken for Divine Rules and Precepts. He was born
about Van on the Confines of Persia, so that he is called Vanni Efendi, and is
of the Armenian Race: he preached every Friday at Adrianople in one Mosch or
other, where the Grand Signior was for the most part present; and though the
greatest part of his Sermons were stuffed up with praises of the Mohammedan
Religion, and invectives against Christians, sentencing all polluted and
profane who associate with them, and exclaiming against the abomination of
Wine; yet it is confidently reported, that he is no strict Observer of the Law
he professes, the which his Disciples and Familiars are ready to excuse in him,
saying, That it may be lawful for him to dispense with such matters, in regard
his Illuminations and high Prerogatives of Sanctity have infranchised him from
observance of the meaner and less substantial points of their Law.

The Turks who are as much given to Predictions and Interpretations Predictions
amongst the Turks.
of old Prophecies, as ever the Egyptians were, busied themselves this year
more than ever, to know the Event of this War. Some who had studied ancient
Arabic Predictions, had extracted certain Astrological Figures, and from
thence framed strange fancies, according to the humor or melancholy of the
Astrologer; one whereof coming to the Grand Signiors ear, mentioning diverse
things obscurely, and in general of the great effusion of blood, but that at
last the advantage and Victory should remain to the Turk, and that the Grand
Signior himself should shortly make a Journey; the Grand Signior troubled
hereat, as much as ever Pharaoh was about the Interpretation of his Dream, sent
for one of the Chief Justices of the Law called the Kadilescher, and with him
conferred concerning this Prediction: all things pleased him well, but only the
latter part of making a Journey. Whither that Journey should be, he could not
imagine; his Arms were so prosperous in Hungary, that he conceived the Vizier
had no need of his presence either to animate or recruit his Army: and to any
other part, he knew not what could move him from his delightful and beloved
City of Adrianople. The Kadilescher supposing that he might put that
Interpretation thereon which might not be ungrateful, replied, Perhaps, O
Emperor, he may mean that you shall again return to your sublime and happy
Port of Constantinople. The Grand Signior suddenly touched herewith burst into
choler: The Grand Signiors aversion to Constantinople.
How, said he, to Constantinople! what joy, what comfort can I have there? Has
not that place been fatal to my Father? What benefit had my Uncle from thence?
or any of my Race? Have not all my Princes Ancestors been subject to a thousand
Mutinies and Rebellions in that place? I shall sooner than return thither set
fire to it with my own hands, and rejoice to see that City with my Seraglio
brought to ashes. And that we may farther discover the strange aversion the
Sultan had to Constantinople, and his resolution to change the Seat of his
Empire, it is observable, that he built a small Seraglio not far from
Adrianople, A small Seraglio by that name near Constantinople.
in imitation of that near Constantinople called Odout Pasha, the place to
which he most frequently resorted after that City fell under his dislike and
hatred. The Village where his Palace was built was called Chiomlichoi, or the
Village of Pots, where earthen vessels were made: but the Grand Signior changed
the name, and called it Odout Pasha; with which name before the people were
well acquainted, and that it was accustomed to their mouths, two poor silly
Countrymen mistaking, and calling it simply by the former name, were
apprehended by some of the Bostangees; and brought before the Grand Signior as
contemners of the Imperial Command, and by his immediate Sentence were put to
death.

About the end of May the Grand Signior had a Son born to him of A Son born to
the Grand Signior.
one of his Women, for joy of which seven days of Dunalma, or rejoicing were
appointed through all the Ottoman Dominions: but especially at Adrianople the
Solemnity was greatest, all sorts of Artisans endeavoring to outvy each other
in their shows and pastimes to entertain the City. At the Gate of the Seraglio
was erected a magnificent Pavilion for the Grand Signior, before whom were
shown rare artificial Fireworks invented by the most ingenious Masters thereof
amongst the Jews: one of which firing a Rocket, which not ascending with usual
strength, unhappily fell on the Vest of the Grand Signiors Favorite, standing
at the door of the Tent: at which the Young man being surprised, sent to find
out him who fired it, which happening to be a poor Jew, was condemned
immediately by the Grand Signiors sentence to receive eighty blows on the soals
of his feet: but as report went, this young Favorite not appeased with this
slender punishment, obtained the Sultans command to put him to death.

But to return to the Turkish Camp. The Vizier was astonished to understand
that Kanista was besieged, and wondered much at the rashness of Serini, in
attempting a work so difficult without probability of success; howsoever being
advised, that the Garrison was ill provided of Victuals and Ammunition, he gave
order for its supply. In order to The Siege of Kanisia.
which eighty Carts laden with Provisions convoyed by a considerable number of
Turks, were conducted by way of Sigeth; but being interrupted in their passage
by Serini's Soldiers, were routed, put to slight, and their Provisions taken.
In the mean time the Besieged made many vigorous Sallies, and some not without
loss to the Christians, and to defend themselves the better uncovered the tops
of their houses, and made their Lodgings under ground, secure from Grenades,
or shot of the Enemies Batteries. On the other side the Ammunition and
Artillery from the Emperor came not so timely as was expected; nor were the
Bomboes and Grenades so artificially made, but that many of them spent
themselves in vain: the Succors likewise of men fell very short of the numbers
promised, and Soldiery being drawn from their Winterquarters before the colds
were past, or the pasture grown, began to murmur; but nothing discontented them
so much as want of Pay, the just complaint of Soldiers, which discouraged them
more than the difficulty of their adventure: against all which Serini provided
as much as he was able out of his own Purse, continuing the Siege more out of
reputation than probable hopes of success; for his Army was at least diminished
two thousand in its number, of which four hundred Hungars, and two hundred
Germans were lost in the first Assaults made upon the Suburbs, and the rest
perished by sickness, and the vigorous and frequent Sallics of the Enemy.
Howsoever Serini seemed not to doubt of the success, if he could but be for
some time secured from the advance of the Vizier, who now began to draw his
gross and numerous Army out of their Winter Quarters into the open field; and
therefore with the other Officers before Kanista signified their advice to the
Emperor and General Council of War, That it was necessary that the Imperial
Army should be as early in the field as the Ottoman; and for the more
methodical government of Affairs, that the Army should be divided into three
Bodies, one to recruit the Forces before the Town, a second to march to Osek,
and hinder the Enemies passage over the Dravns, and a third to take the field,
and apply assistance where it was judged most useful. This counsel being well
accepted by the Emperor, Orders were immediately issued forth to General
Montecuculi to begin his March, with design to obstruct the Turks passage over
the Dravns; for that the success against Kanista was of that high importance,
as might justly require the employment of all the Christian Forces in its
concernment. Wherefore one Post was dispatched after the other to Montecucli to
solicit his speedy March, and to give a stop to the Viziers progress. But he
answered, That he attended General Sporch, whom he every day expected to join
with him; but this Answer proving by the effect to be nothing more than a
present excuse, gave occasion of sulpicion, and produced that discontent in the
minds of the most zealous, as spread a rumor through all Germany much to the
disreputation of (...). Time thus being protracted, and no Forces appearing to
recruit the Leagure, at length advice came to the Generals, when they were just
going to dinner, that the Vizier with a most numerous Army was within Fifteen
English miles,
three Leagues of the Town. For the Bridge of Osek was against the common
opinion again rebuilt, planked, and completed, with new Timbers in the space
of forty days; many hands making light work; which when first founded, was the
work of six years: which Expendition was the more remarkable, in regard that
this Bridge was not formed out of the ruins of the old, nor founded on the
same ground, but new framed out of the Woods with as much comeliness and order
as besits a Bridge of that nature and length, passing over a wild Marsh or Fen.
The news of the Viziers so near approach was strange to Serini, who by the
calculation made of his March, did not yet expect him for several days; but the
Vizier apprehending the straitness in which Kanista might be, leaving the gross
of his Army, made more expedite Journies with a Body of twenty thousand Horse,
which not being unknown to Serini, his daring spirit was once resolved to give
him Battle, in which opinion was also Count Strozzi; but Olach dissenting, and
refusing to engage his Forces, the Siege was The Siege of Kanista raised.
raised, and all the Forces with good order retreated to Serinswar, where they
arrived the day following, leaving to the Enemy a great quantity of Powder,
Match, Shovels, twenty Carts of Meal, and two Iron Guns broken.

No Pilgrim ever followed his way with more devotion to the sacred Shrine, than
the Vizier was willingly led in pursuit of his Enemy to the The Turks pursue
the Christian Attny.
Walls of Serinswar, being the place to which his intentions inclined, as the
beginning and consummation of the War. Over against this envied Fort there is a
little Hill strong by Nature, incompasled with a narrow Ditch, yet not so
narrow, as that a Horse can leap over it, nor yet so shallow as to be forded.
This Hill Serini proposed to the rest of his Colleagues or Coadjutors, viz.
Olach and Spaar, as a place commodious to incamp their Army, because lying open
to the River, could easily be relieved, and would serve as a Redoubt or
Out-work to the Fort, in which upon all extremities they might find Sanctuary
and refuge: But the apprehension of the Viziers Numbers, and his near approach
had made that impression of fear in their minds, that no safety seemed to
remain, unless they could see the River Mura between them and their Enemy. Nor
was Serini more successful in his persuasions to assault the Enemy, whilst they
were wearied with their March, and busied in extending their Tents, the other
Generals being of opinion, that it was too great a hazard for them alone to
venture their Forces in so unequal a Combat, but they ought rather to expect
Montecuculi, by the addition of whose Forces the lot of War would be less
hazardous, if not wholly certain. In this manner great Enterprises have been
disappointed, which have wanted only resolution to make them successful,
Fortune being commonly favorable, if not a servant, to bold and daring
Spirits; the disunion also of Generals has been the overthrow of the wisest
Counsels, and Wars have been observed nover to have thrived where the Heads of
Armies have been of dissenting humors of different interests.

This timidity on the Christian part raised in that manner the spirits of the
Turks, that without stop or opposition passing the River Muer, they arrived at
Serinswar, where they immediately fell to their Mattock and The Turks entrench
before (...).
Spade, breaking ground for their Trenches, which by continued labor they so
diligently attended, that in seventeen days they arrived at the very ditch of
the Fort: only whilst the Turks were transporting their Numbers over the River,
the generous spirit of Strozzi not enduring to see their passage so easy and
open, valiantly opposed himself and his small Force against the greater power
of the Enemy, and so resolutely performed the Action, that he killed five
hundred upon the place, till at length being unfortunately shot by a
Musket-bullet in the forehead, Count Strozzi slain.
he gloriously, together with one Chisfareas, a renowned Croatian Captain,
ended his days in defense of his Country and the Christian Cause.

In this interim General Montecuculi arrived with his Army, and was received by
Count Serini with all evidences and demonstrations of respect and hearty
welcome, and between both passed an appearance at least of friendly
correspondence. But as to the present Engagement, Montecuculi was of opinion,
That the opportunity was over-slipt, which should at first have been performed,
rather by way of surprise than open Battle, Serini's Reasons to fight with the
Turks.
before the Ottoman Army had arrived to its full numbers, consisting now of an
hundred thousand fighting men. To which reasons Serini replied, That the
Christian Cause, and the States and Confines of the Empire were not to be
maintained by men that carry their thumbs at their girdles, or by Armies made
resty with ease, and wanton with luxury. That those Armies were raised not to
consume and exhaust the Revenues of their Princes, and Exchequers of their
States, without making satisfactory amends by a valiant defense of that
Interest which they owned. That the Enemy had not been before that time
attempted, was no fault or neglect of his, who under the very Walls of Kanisia
resolved to give them Battle; but that the other Generals supposed it more
prudence and caution to protract the Engagement till his Arrival, who being now
happily conjoyed with them, nothing ought to deter them from a glorious Attempt
on the Turks, who not consisting of above thirty thousand men, ill disciplined,
and worse armed, were not able to withstand the prowess of their Veterane Army,
which far exceeded them in number, discipline, and courage. These or such like
expressions Serini used; and to prove what he averred, he dispatched a
confident Person of his own, who spoke naturally the Turkish Language, with a
Letter to the German Resident, then entertained under custody in the Turkish
Camp, to know of him the true (...) and number of the Turks, which Messenger
soon after returned with this short account.

Nisi me mortuum velis, amplius non rescribas, hic vix sunt triginta millia,
The German Residents Letter to Count Serini.
nec illa satis electa, quid vos a pugna deterret? Tormenta Arcis nimis in
altum exploduntur. Which in English is thus. Unless you desire my death, write
not back to me again, here are scarce thirty thousand men, and those ill
provided, what then should deter you from an Engagement? The Cannon in the
Castle are too high mounted, or shoot over. Serini gave this Letter to
Montecuculi, who replied, That so soon as General Montecuculi contrary to the
opinion of Serini declines the Battle with the Turks.
Sporch came up with his Forces, he would immediately draw up the Army into
Battalia; Sporch being arrived, he then resolved to expect Marquess Baden, and
so deferred the Battle from time to time, until the Turks advantaging
themselves by these delays, had worked themselves under ground to the very
Walls of the Castle. At length Montecuculi entering into Serini's Fort (it is
not known upon what reasons of jealousy, or discontent) cleared Serini's
Forces of the Garrison, and dispossessed the Governor, which when Sirini
perceived, full of anger and displeasure, he quitted the Camp, and retired
himself to his Residence at Chiacaturno, with intent to make his just Appeal
and Complaint to the Emperors (...) retires from the Wars.
Court.

The Turks availing themselves of these delays and discontents, proceeded
forward in their work, so that having Mined to the very Walls, on the 9th of
June, they blew up one of the Half Moons, at which the Defendants were so
terrifyed, that with amazement they left open one of their Sally Ports, at
which the Turks entering, put the whole Garrison into disorder, consisting of
1900. fighting men; so that now no safety remaining but in flight, they forsook
their Fort, and crouding over the Bridge in confused heaps, broke it down with
the over-pressure of its burden; by fall of which, many perished in the Waters,
and about 350 which remained, (...) taken.
were cut off by the Sword; This was the fate of Serini's Fort, built with Art,
and lost by Cowardice and ill Conduct, which the Year before, only with 20.
Germans, and 150. Hungarians, withstood a most impetuous and fierce storm of
the Enemy, but now was less tenable than a Palancha, though Garrisoned with
1900. men, of whom in this last assault one alone had Courage to fire his
Musket, but none adventured to draw a Sword: unless certain Volunteers, and
French Officers, whose Courage only renowned their own Deaths, and served to
upbraid the Cowardice of their Companions. In the Fort were only found five
small Field Pieces, one whole Cannon, a great Mortar piece, and two small ones
belonging to Count Serini; there were also one Mortar piece, and two small
Field pieces, like to those of Serini, belonging to the Emperor; the other
Guns of weight or value, were carried out of the Fort, as being judged not long
tenable, and decreed to be abandoned to the Enemy. Serinswar being thus taken
was immediately demolished by the Vizier, and razed to the ground; either
because he would seem to maintain his word, or Vow he had made, or because he
would not multiply Garrisons, when the present occasions required rather the
active Force of a moving Army.

But before we proceed farther, it seems pertinent to our purpose, to
Reflections on the disgrace of Serini.
declare the reasons and grounds of the preceding neglects and discountenance
passed upon Serini by the Grandees of the Imperial Army, which not being
vindicated by the Emperor, seem to have been cast upon him by his express
Order, or at least to have been willing for some private respects, to have the
person of Serini abased, and his actions obscured. It is therefore to be noted
(what before has been said) That the first pretense the Turks made for this
War, was this Fort of Serinswar, raised against the Capitulations and Articles
of the last Peace; for which, though the violence against Varadin may be
pleaded as equal, if not exceeding the present breach, to which this was only
subsequent, and seemed to be but a just recompense or effect thereof; yet
because it was that stone of scandal and offense, which drew after it that
deadly War, in which the Emperor unwillingly engaged against the Ottoman
Power, and caused him freely to intimate unto Serini, his desire rather to see
that Fort demolished, than the Peace interrupted; to which Serini yielding no
Ear, drew upon himself the deserved displeasure of his most gracious Prince,
who permitted the act of his obstinacy and disobedience, to become a just snare
to his own folly. But perhaps, that displeasure which was Justice in the
Emperor, might be Envy, and emulation in his Ministers who beholding with
jealous Eyes his actions and succesies the Winter before, which enraged his
Enemies, and exalted his name to that glory in all the Courts of Christian
Princes, that the Pope honored him with Medals of Gold; the King of Spain,
with the Order of the Golden Fleece; the French King as a demonstration of his
esteem, with a Token of ten thousand Crowns; and Cardinal Francis Barberini,
with a Pension of eight hundred Crowns a Month; and all other European Princes,
at least made the most part applications to him by Congratulatory Letters,
admiring his Virtues, and applauding his Successes; permitting their Gazets and
Diurnals, Weekly to divulge and publish his praises. From whence may rationally
be collected, the true occasion of that Envy, which by cold assistances, and
slow succors, obstructed as well the taking of Kanisia, as the valiant defense
of Serinswar, which was decryed, not only as a Fort erected without due and
mature consideration, but without art, or regular proportions, which might
render it tenable; accusing at the same time as well the rashness and temerity
of Serim's Counsels, as his want of judgment and experience in Military Affairs.

But to leave now the sad subject of the Christian misfortunes, occasioned by
their own quarrels and dissentious, which the Grand Enemy of Gods Church always
endeavored to sow for advancement of his own Kingdom: Let us cast our Eyes on
the other parts of unhappy Hungary. The Siege of Kanisia being raised, and
Serinswar taken, and demolished, success had swelled, and puffed up the minds
of the Turks to a height that nothing seemed difficult or impossible to their
desires. On the other side, controversies and delays gave that advantage to the
Enemy, that nothing could be expected, but losses, slaughter, and in the end, a
total ruin. But God who pitied the miseries of poor Christendom, cast his
Eyes of mercy on the Frontiers of the upper Hungary, granting some more happy
successes to the Christian Arms, conducted by the Valor and Fortune of Count
Soise, a French Gentleman, who having the Command of an Army distinct from that
of Montecuculi, began his first attempt and enterprise upon Nitra, where
several persons of Quality, and Officers of the Turkish Army, were assembled to
consider of the affairs of War. Soise having taken his convenient measures, and
made his due (...) taken by (...) the (...)
approaches, began to batter the Walls, a great part of which in a short time
he shook so shroadly, that he opened a very wide breach, and continually plying
Grenades into the Town, so assrighted the Besieged, that immediately they
offered a Parley, which Soise accepted, (and the rather, upon advice, that
Varadin, Solnoc, Temiswar, and the places adjacent, were collecting Forces to
raise the Siege, and relieve the Town) entered into Treaty, and concluding upon
Conditions, the Town Surrendered, and the Turks marched out with their Colors
folded, and Muskets under their Arms, leading their Horses, had Convoy as far
as Chomar.

Soise having obtained this success, entered into Consultation about recovery
of Newhausel, but having not Forces judged sufficient to attempt the difficulty
of that place, he turned his endeavors and designs upon Lewa, or Leventz; but
in the way thither, he was casually engaged with a Body of fourteen thousand
Turks and Tartars, who were marching to the relief of Nitra, and fell in
unawares upon his Rereguard: whereupon The Turks assault Soisi.
Soise commanded the Regiments of his Major General Guarnieri, and of the
Colonels Caprara, and Zeitsch, and the Horse and Dragoons of Brandenburg, then
marching in the Van to face about, and Charge the Enemy, which they performed
with that Courage, and Vigor, that they routed and pursued them as far as the
River Giava. At which place Soise Encamped with his Army, and in an
advantageous situation made a line of Circumvallation about his Camp,
strengthening it with some pieces of Cannon. The Turks having recovered a
convenient Retreat upon the River, remained opposite to the Christians, and
having there reinforced themselves with additional Recruits, returned again to
give them Battle, and in three places with extremity of fury and despair,
assaulted the Christian Camp: Fortune for a long time remained doubtful on both
sides, till at length the admirable resolution of the Christians overcame,
leaving a thousand Turks extended on the place; many were drowned and the rest
fled; leaving a rich Booty for reward to the Conquerours.

The Christians in this manner being successful, resolved not to check the
current of their Fortune, but without delay proceeded to Lewa, Lewa taken.
which having been for some time battered with great Guns, surrendered it self
to the mercy of the Conqueror; in which was found, a considerable quantity of
Meal, and twenty great pieces of Artillery.

In the mean time, the difference between the King of France and the Pope (on
occasion of the insult offered at Rome by the Corst, to the Ambassadors House
and Person) being this Year composed; those Forces of the French being in all
about 3000. Horse, sent first into Italy to avenge this affront, under the
Command of the Count Coligni, were ordered to pass into Hungary, by way of
Venice, to the assistance of the Emperor; to which, several Gentlemen,
Volunteers of the same Nation, joining themselves, formed a Body of 4000. Horse
well appointed, valiant and desirous of action. The Pope also, whose words
expressed and breathed out nothing but holy zeal against the common Enemy,
promised a supply of 10000. Foot, and 3000. Horse, which were to pass by way of
Trieste into Croatia, according to the promise and assurance of the Nuntio at
Vienna: for acknowledgment of which religious and considerable succor, Count
Leslie was dispatched from the Imperial Court, in a private Character, to pass
those Offices of grateful acceptance, as were due to so high a merit and sense
of the Christian Cause. But scarce was Leslie arrived at Venice, before he
understood (to his great admiration) that the holy Army was by Order of the
Pope disbanded, for The Pope recals his Forces from assistance of the Emperor.
which no other cause was assigned, than only, that at Rome it was seriously
debated, and in the end, it was concluded, that the expense was too great to be
charged on the Ecclesiastical State; and that the Soldiery also were
themselves unwilling to be so far separated from their own Country; all which
at Vienna were understood to be frivolous pretenses, and the causes thereof
attributed to the sinister Offices of a person ill affected to the Emperors
Interest, by which the Pope and Don Mario his General, falling from their
resolutions and promises, Count Leslie was revoked from his employment, and the
Imperial Interest, and hopes disappointed of so considerable a succor.

Howsoever, that the Pastoral care might not seem to be altogether dormant and
careless of the Universal Flock, the Pope having disbanded The Pope supplies
the Emperor with money, but not with men.
his Army, could not do less than to supply the defect thereof with money; for
raising of which, he charged the Ecclesiastical State through all Italy (the
Dominions of Venice only excepted, whose Wars already with the Turks exempted
them from farther Taxes) with an imposition of 6. per Cent. of their yearly
Revenue, under the notion of Tenths, or Tiths, which in all amounted to the sum
of 700 thousand Dollars, which by Bills of Exchange, was remitted by way of
Venice to the Imperial Court. In the mean time, the French Troops were arrived
in Hungary, under the Command of the Count Coligni, which joining themselves
with the General Montecuculi, followed the motion of the Viziers Army. The
Turks designed to pass the Danube, for recovery of Lewa or Leventz, and in
their way to destroy and lay desolate the Country of Count Badian, and in
virtue and strength of that and former successes, to pass forward to the
subjection of Possonium and Vienna. But God who disposes the affairs of this
World, and gives laws and bounds to the licentiousness and unlimited Pride and
Avarice of Mankind, took off the Wheels of the Turkish Chariots, and caused
them to move slowly and warily, having an Eye always backwards to the Forces of
Montecuculi, who attended them along the Banks of the River Muer, or Mura.

But whilst these two great Armies marched in view of each other, the Walachian
and Moldavian Forces joining with a considerable number of Turks and Tartars,
under the Command of Chusacin Pasha, resolved to assault, and again to recover
Leventz, which though scarce settled, being so lately taken by the Christians,
yet valiantly repulsed two fierce assaults of the Enemy, with that Courage, and
Bravery, that 2000. were slain under the very Walls. By which time, it being
the (...) of July, Count Count Soise marches to raise the Siege of Leventz.
Soise passed the Nitra with his Horse and Foot, and thence hastening his march
with all expedition, he first Encamped at the foot of a Hill called St Benet,
from whence he discovered the Enemies Body from the top of a Mountain, and
thence approaching nearer, threw up some Earth and Works by the Banks of the
River Grava; the next day having found a fordable place of the Water, Soise in
less than two hours passed the gross of his Army; which the Enemy observing,
left their Siege, abandoned their Trenches, and displaid their Army in open
Field, which consisting of 25 or 30 thousand fighting men, appeared much more
numerous than the Christians. For to these Forces, under the Conduct of Husacin
Pasha of Buda, were joined the Pasha of Anatolia, and Cidizade, the Pasha of
Temeswar, four Boluchees of Spahees, and a good Force of Tartars, together with
the Militia of Moldavia, and Valachia, under their respective The Turks before
Lewa.
Princes, which composed an Army, as was computed, of above 25000. men. Upon
approach of Husaein Pasha, the Christians gave way, and retreated, intending to
receive their Enemy in a larger Field, and afford an occasion to them of
greater confidence in execution of the design they came to act. The Turks
supposing the Christians to be fled for fear, with more boldness marched
forward. And believing this retreat to proceed rather of fear than policy,
continued to contemn the pusillanimity of the Christians, and lest it should
argue too much regard and esteem of their Force, vouchsafed not to send Scouts
abroad, either to view their Camp, or to prevent surprisal: but some of their
Officers wisely considering, that a Soldier ought never to despise his Enemy,
they were persuaded to send a considerable Body of Horse, to view and discover
the Enemies Force, who in the way, meeting with a party of the Christians,
after a small Skirmish put them to flight, and taking some Prisoners, brought
them before the General; the Prisoners upon Examination confessed, that Count
Susa was fully resolved the next Morning to give them Battle, and declared the
number and courage of his Army to be such, as altered the opinion Husaein had
conceived of the Cowardice and weakness of the Christians power; so that that
whole night the Turks past with watchsul and vigilant Guards; their Arms ready,
and their whole Camp in a posture of desence.

The next Morning being the 9th of July, the day breaking discovered The
Christian Army put themselves into Battalia.
the Christian Army at so near a distance, as that their several motions might
be discerned; and putting themselves in Array for the Battle, made two Wings of
Horse; each Wing consisting of 3000. Horse, the most Armed Cap-a-pe, and well
provided; the Foot marched in the Body of the Army, well appointed and sitted
with all sorts of Ammunition and Arms, and so raised with cheerful Courages, as
rendered them in appearance to the Turks, a Warlike and formidable Army. The
Turks likewise drew themselves into Battalia, defirous to try the fortune of
the day; the right Wing was Commanded by the Prince of Valachia, and the left
by the Prince of Moldavia. The Body of the Army was composed of Turks and
Tartars, almost all Horse, except 2 or 3000 Janissaries, sent as an Auxiliary
Force from Newhaufel, and Strigonium. These two Armies thus rauged in a posture
of defiance, stood in view each of other, until Husaein Commanded his men to
pass the Marsh or Fen, which was between them and the Christians: but several
would have persuaded him the contrary, lest the success of the day not proving
to expectation, the Marsh should be a disadvantage to their flight, and an
occasion of greater slaughter in the pursuit: to which Husaein Courageously
answered, That men who would Conquer were to look forward, and not behind them;
those that would save their lives by slight, were fit to perish in it; and that
for his part, he was resolved to cut off all hopes of safety from his Army, but
what consisted in their Swords, and Victory over their Enemies. The Turks
having thus passed the Marsh, made a halt and faced the Christians until Noon;
who moved not a foot from their ground, that so they might obtain the advantage
of the Sun; which in the Morning being in their Faces, would upon declining be
an offense unto the Turks. In the mean time, no question but both Generals made
their Orations to their Soldiers, encouraging them to fight in defense of
their Faith and Religion, of their Countries Glory and Safety; suggested with
those Arguments and Rhetoric, as was agreeable to the principles and condition
of both parties; and which we may well suppose according to the License of
Historians, to have been in these words, or to this essect.

The Speech of Count Susa to his Army.
WHen I see, and consider besore us (Fellow Soldiers) those Enemies who are
the object of our fury and rage, I conceive words more necessary to moderate
the heat of your anger, so as to sight with diseretion, rather than to raise
your Spirits to that height of Warlike Courage, in which consists the sasety
and glory of this days Fortune. For these are they, who lately in cool blood
against the Laws of Arms and Nations, unhumanly butchered our Countrymen and
Kindred, and made no difference between Captives of War, and Malesactors, but
like Thieves, and Murderers, sentenced brave men to death, who had no other
crime, than that they unhappily fought in defense of their Country. These are
they, who in the very times of peace, consume your Borders, and rob your
Markets; and whose Capitulations of Peace, make yet all acts of hostility
lawful: These are the grand Enemies and despisers of the Cross of Christ;
against whom whosoever dies, is both a Conqueror and a Martyr. This Army
before your Eyes, consists in part of Moldavian, and Valachian Christians,
forced to this War by compulsion, not of choice; the rest are either Turks
educated in the sostness of Asia, or Tartars who never made advantage by
Battle, but by flight; these are they with whom you have this day to contend
before the Walls of Lewa, where many of your Wives, and Children, and Friends,
are immured, and are Spectators of your Virtue and Courage: Let us therefore
valiantly address our selves to this Battle, on the success of which the
fortune of Hungary and Germany depends.

The Speech of Husaein Pasha to his Soldiers.
WHilst our General the Grand Vizier is so successful in his Arms abroad,
having subdued the strong Fortresses of Oywar and Serinswar, and struck a
terror and amazement to all the Enemies of our formidable Emperor; let not us
be unactive, or want our share in the renown and fame of triumph and Victory. I
shall not need to put you in mind of the glorious exploits of your Ancestors,
whose Valor and Virtue, which formed this vast Empire round about us, you
ought now to imitate, and give the World new prooss, how emulous you are to
exceed the Courage and bravery of former times. The other divisions of the
Ottoman Power have contended hitherto with their Enemies on unequal terms, and
droven them forth from their shelters of Trenches and Bulwarks; but here you
have an open Field to fight, nothing between you and the naked Breasts of your
Enemies; we stand in equal numbers and terms with them; nothing can win the day
but only Valor, and nothing lose it but mere Cowardice. These are the
shattered Companies we have expelled last Year from Oywar, and the Companions
of those, whose Bodies and Heads we have heaped before Strigonium: should we
submit to be subdued by these, whom our Osmanlees have so often Conquered; we
should not only stain our selves with the highest infamy and shame, but give a
turn to the Universal Fortune of the Ottoman Arms.

By this time it was Noon, and the Sun turning it self from the Christian to
the Turkish Army, a Warning piece was fired from the Christian Camp, at which
sign their whole Army began to advance, and with chearfullness to approach the
Turks, who stood ready to receive them. At the Husaein Pasha routed und tied.
first onset the Christians poured a plentiful Volly of shot on the Turks and
Tartars, which composed the main body; at which immediately they put themselves
to flight, leaving the two Wings to an unequal Battle, who resisted not long
before they followed the example of their Companions, leaving their Baggage and
Cannon, with the honor of the day, unto the Christians; who in the pursuit
slew the Turks without compassion or resistance; filling the Fields with dead
Bodies, and the Rivers with blood, until Night which is the shelter of the
distressed, gave a stop to their farther slaughter: such as escaped betook
themselves to Resuge denied them at Strigonium.
Strigonium, where they were refused either passage over the Water or
Provisions, or any other refuge or entertainment after their wearisome flight;
for Strigonium it self was judged now in danger, and the next attempt after the
foregoing Victory, and therefore there was no reason or policy to unfurnish
themselves of necessary provisions to supply or relieve a discouraged and cowed
Army. Whereupon the Moldavians, and Valachians, sinding themselves half
famished, forced their Princes to return home, being glad of the occasion to
acquit themselves of the Turkish The Moldavians and Valachians return home.
Wars, in which they were used more like Slaves than Soldiers. The Princes
though sensible of the danger this unlicensed departure, and desertion of the
Wars might bring upon their persons, were yet necessitated to yield to the
violence and mutiny of their Soldiery: in their march homewards they
encountered no difficulties or opposition, unless at the Tibiseus, where a small
number of Turks would have denied them passage, but were soon dispersed by the
Sword of the resolved Soldiery, who having conducted their Princes to their
usual Courts, made an end betimes of this Years Campagna. Husaein Pasha in the
mean time, being denied entrance at Strigonium, fled to Newhausel, where his
presence was most acceptable for reinforcement of (...) Garrison, which now was
in some danger of being recovered by the Christians. Of the Turks were killed
in this Fight 6000, of the Christians 150; none of Quality, excepting one
Kovari, a worthy and stout Hungarian Captain; 4000 Carts were taken, laden with
all sorts of Provision and Ammunition for War; about 100 Colors, and a great
number of Tents, and Arms of all sorts; twelve pieces of Cannon, about 1000
Horse; and 140 Camels, straying in the Fields, without care of Keepers, or
Riders, with great: Droves of Cattle of all sorts, and other good booty and
spoil, which remained as a reward to the Conqueror. The number of Prisoners
was not great, by reason that the Soldiery, in heat of the pursuit, and in
revenge of the Turks Cruelty toward the Garrison of Komar the less, whom
lately in a barbarous Cruelty they had put to the Sword, were wholly inclined
to slaughter and destruction, only about 700 Moldavians, and Valachians, were
spared until they came in sight of Strigonium, where they erected several
Gibbets, and hanged them thereupon, with their Muskets about their Necks,
requiting (as they supposed) part of the Viziers Cruelty, and executing part of
Gods Justice upon those who profess the name of Christ, and yet sight under the
Banner of Mahomet.

Soise animated with the foregoing success, designed to attempt Barcan Soise
assaults Barcan.
a Palancha opposite on the other side of the Danube to Strigonium, and to that
end embarked ten thousand five hundred of his men on four Galleys, and forty
Galliots, carrying the Teutonick Colors, in regard that that religious Order
had amply contributed toward the building of those Vessels, when they were on
the Stocks in the Arsenal of Vienna. The Soldiers were so fleshed with the
former Victory, that nothing seemed difficult or hazardous; so that Count
Marset, without Orders of the General, rashly in a Bravado fell in upon the
Town, without any advantage of earth, or other shelter, but with open Breasts
exposed himself and Soldiers to all dangers; but the attempt being too
difficult, he was, in fine, shot through both the Cheeks, and forced to retire
with loss and disreputation: This attempt was seconded by the Duke of Holsatia,
and his Insantry, who bringing some small pieces of Cannon to the very
Palizadoes, began to batter the houses, during which about a hundred and sisty
Janisaries made a vigorous Sally, but were repulsed with a sufficient loss, so
that the Christians making good their ground, brought up and planted four
Cannons, and two Mortar Pieces, and siring at the same time some Grenades, so
plied their work, that the Inhabitants looking on their condition as desperate,
gave fire themselves to their Wooden Buildings, passed the Bridge, and
recovered Strigonium. The Town thus abandoned, the Christians had no difficulty
to get possession, but entering quietly in, seized what was remaining of value,
and adding to the flames, by other fires, in a few hours reduced all to Ashes;
Farcan burnt.
which being done, Soise marched back to Komorra, to refresh his men, and take
Counsel what ought to be the next design and enterprise to be taken in hand.
And here for a while was a pause, or full point of the actions of Soise, who
not wanting Adversaries in the Imperial Court, emulous of his happiness and
fortune, instilled such suspicions and scruples into the mind of the Emperor
and Council, as caused Soise to give up his Commission, that he might seek a
life private, and free from the evil tongues of the envious, until afterward
his Virtues dispersing those malignant Clouds, he was restored to the good
opinion of his Cesarean Majesty, and honored with the Charge and Command of
the strong Fortress of Komorra, where I my self had once the honor to make him
a Visit, and was courteously received by him. This ill success of the Pasha of
Buda arrived the Viziers ears, whilst he was attempting to pass the River Rab,
in which were many difficulties, in regard the Banks were defended by the
Christian Palanchas, which in every adventure cut off considerable numbers of
men. At which loss of men, and time, and the ill success near Lewa, the Vizier
being greatly moved, made another attempt on the 27th of July; advancing with
the Gross of his Army as far as Kemend, where the River runs narrow and
shallow, but by the valor of the Hungarians, Germans, and French conducted by
General Montecuculi, an Italian born, were repulsed with some Slaughter.

On the first of August, the Turks made another considerable attempt, The Turks
with part of their Army pass the Rab.
having planted Guns on the Banks of the River, which shot into the Christian
Camp, and passed over in one place six thousand Janisaries and Albanians, and
near a Village called Chiesfalo, where the water was narrow and shallow, very
considerable numbers of Horse crowded over. At which formidable sight, the
Christians collecting their Forces together, retreated to a more spacious
place, where might be open Field sufficient for both Armies to draw up and join
Battle. About half the Army having now passed the Water, the other part, in
which was the Vizier, remained still on the other side, intending the next
Morning to follow and advance to the Body, which was gone before; but it
happened, by Gods Providence, that that very Night there The Rab swells with
immoderate Rains.
fell such a Deluge of Rain, as immediately made the River to swell above its
Banks, and become altogether unpassable without a Bridge or Floats; so that the
Turkish Army being now divided by the Waters, were incapable of yielding any
sudden assistance each to the other. Howsoever, the Vizier judging that that
Part of his Army which had already passed, was an equal Match for the
Christians, entertained not the least diffidence of good success, at least
supposed they might be able to decline a Battle, until by abatement of the
waters (which could not be long at that Season of the Year) he were enabled to
pass, and join his main Body with them; and therefore full of hope and
confidence, having at first discomfited the forlorn hope of the Christians,
which consisted of a thousand men, dispatched immediately Messengers to
acquaint the Grand Signior of his success and passage, which News he knew would
be the more grateful, because the Grand Signior by daily Letters and Commands
urged him to proceed in his March, and not to suffer the impediment of a narrow
Ditch to be an interruption to the whole Ottoman Force, which in former times
was not restrained by the depth or breadth of the Ocean. The Grand Signior
having received this Intelligence, as if the entire Victory and Triumph over
the World consisted in the passage over the Rab, was transported with such an
extraordinary joy and assurance of Victory, that to anticipate the good News a
solemn Festival was ordained for the space of seven days, and seven nights,
called by the Turks Dunalma; in which time the whole nights were made light
with Lamps and Candles, and made cheerful with great The Turks vain joy.
Guns, Vollies of Muskets, Sound of Drums and Trumpets, revellings and what
other Solemnities might (...) joy and triumph. But scarce three Nights of this
vain Dream had passed, before the Grand Signior awakened by intelligence,
contrary to his assured expectation, of the Defeat and Destruction of a
considerable Part of the Viziers Army, shamefully commanded the Lights to be
extinguished, and the remaining four Nights designed for Joy, to be converted
to Melancholy and Darkness: And though the rashness and vain fancy of the
Governors was the sole cause of this precipitate mirth, yet as great men love
always to charge their errors and follies on the shoulders of others, so the
Sultan accused the Chimacham, through false Information, to have been the
Author of this shameful Decree; and in that fury, calling the Executioner, had
certainly taken off his head, had not his young Minion, Signifies the Son of a
Kul, or Slave.
or Favorite, now called Kul Ogli (promoted to the Preferment of Asan, before
mentioned) with much earnestness and Prayers interceded for his Life.

And indeed this Joy and Triumph was so much more ridiculous and shameful, by
how much more fatal and destructive was the ensuing Event. For the Turks being
now got over the River, had not, at first, time enough given them to cast up
Earth, but were forced by the Christians to an Engagement; For the Christian
Army was drawn into Battalia to receive them. The right Wing consisted of the
Austrian Forces, commanded by Montecuculi himself; The Left was formed of the
Confederates of the Rhine, commanded by Count Olac, to which was adjoined forty
Troops of the French Cavalry, conducted by Monsieur Coligni, and the main Body
was commanded by the Marshal General Marquis Bada, which composed a very
formidable Body, and assailed the Turks with extraordinary Valor; the Fight
was very furious, and began about nine a Clock in the morning on the third of
August, and continued till four in the Afternoon with variable fortune; during
which time the Waters being abated, the Spahees passed over in several places,
and charged the left Wing of the Christians, and in other places they made
attempts, only to divert the Army, whilst the Janisaries threw up Earth to
secure a passage for the rest; which when the Christians espied they at first
resolved to sound a Retreat, but afterward, perceiving that the Trench was but
newly begun, Montecuculi drawing up the Body of the Army into a half Moon,
attacked the Janisaries on all sides with that fury, ordering the Bodies of
Horse to contend with the Spahees; that the Turks now faintly fighting began to
give ground to their Enemies, at which instant turn of Fortune, an outcry was
heard, That Serini on the other side had set on the Viziers Camp; which so
animated the Christians, and terrified the Turks, that the latter began to give
back, and put themselves to shameful flight, leaving dead upon the Place eight
thousand of their Companions, and the Glory of the Day to the Christians. The
Turks, who always fly disorderly, not knowing the The defeat given the Turkish
Army by the (...) Rab.
Art of a handsome Retreat, crowded in Heaps to pass the River, the Horse
trampling over the Foot, and the Foot throwing themselves headlong into the
Water, without consideration of the depth, or choice of Places fordable; those
sinking catching hold on others who could swim, sunk down, and perished
together; others were carried away by the rapidness of the Stream, and both Men
and Horse were carried down the River, and swallowed up in deeper Places: the
Water was died with Blood, and the whole face of the River was covered with
Men, Horse, Garments, all swimming promiscuously together; no difference was
here between the Valiant and the Cowardly, the Foolish and the Wise, Counsel
and Chance, all being involved in the same violence of Calamity, non vox Tae.
lib. 1.
and mutui hortatus juvabant adversante unda, nihil strenuus ab ignavo, sapiens
a prudenti, constlia a casu differ, cuncta pari violentia involvebantur; so
that the Waters devoured a far greater number than the Sword, whilst the Vizier
standing on the other side ofthe River, was able to afford no kind of help or
relief, but as one void of Counsel and Reason, knew not how nor where to apply
a remedy. This defeat though in Christendom not greatly boasted, by reason that
the destruction of the Turks, which was most considerable by the Water, was
partly concealed to them, yet the Turks acknowledge that Ruin and Slaughter to
have been of a far greater number than what the Christian Diaries relate,
confessing that since the time that the Ottoman Empire arrived to this
greatness, no Stories make mention of any Slaughter or Disgrace it has
suffered to be equal unto the calamity and dishonor of this. On the Turks side
were slain that day, Ishmael the late Pasha of Buda, and Kimacham of
Constantinople, by a shot from the Enemy passing the Water; the Spaheelar
Agasee, or General of the Spahees; the Janisar Aga, the younger Son of the
Tartar Han, and several other Pashaws; Alibegh, General of Bosna, thirty
Capugibashees, five and thirty Pages The slain on the Turks side.
of the Vizier's and three hundred of his Guard, five thousand Janisaries,
three thousand Spahees, fifteen hundred Bosnacks, eight hundred Albanians, six
hundred Croats and Hungarians of the Turks Subjects, two hundred and fifty
Valachians and Moldavians, six hundred Tartars, of Anatolia fifteen hundred,
and about four thousand other Asiaticks, from the farthest parts of the Turks
Dominions, Eastward; so that in all we may account seventen thousand slain on
the Turks side; besides which were taken sixteen pieces of Cannon, a hundred
and twenty six Colors, with the Standard of the Viziers Guard, five thousand
Cemiters, most of which were embossed with Silver, and some beset with Jewels,
with many Horses, of which six were sent as a Present to the Vizier. Of the
Christians were slain near three thousand Men; those of note were, The Count
Nassau, Count Charles of Bracondors, Captain of the Guards to Count
Montecuculi, Count Fuchier General of the Artillery of the Empire, Colonel
Pleiter, with his Lieutenant Colonel and Sergeant Major, and with many other
Gentlemen of the French Nation, who deserve forever to be chronicled for their
Virtue and Valor. For herein the French Nation ought not to lose their just
praise, having made proofs of their Valor, as well in this, as in other
Battles, it being reported, That Monsieur Coligni their General, killed thirty
Turks with his own hand.

The News of this Victory being posted to Vienna, it is wonderful to consider
with what Applauses, with what Honors, with what Encomiums the Fame of
Montecuculi was celebrated; for besides the Triumphs, with (...), sounding of
Bells, Banquets, and other demonstrations of solemn Joy; the Glory of
Montecuculi was the Theme of every Ballad sung in the corners of streets; which
Honors of the Commonalty were seconded by greater and more substantial of the
Imperial Court, who conferred upon him the Title of Lieutenant General of the
whole Army, a Dignity so eminent, as is inferior to none, except the Emperor,
in order of the Militia; and was not without some scruple granted to the
Archduke Leopold by his Brother Ferdinand the Third; and withheld from
Piccolomint Duke of Amalsi, until he had highly merited it, and made his way to
it through bloody fields, where Providence first crowned him with Laurels of
Success and Victory.

And here is just occasion for us to doubt, why Montecuculi should be thus
admired and loaded with Honors, whilst the services of Serini and Soise were
so far from being taken notice of, that they seemed to effect the disgrace and
ruin of these Worthies, rather than to produce the favor of their Prince, and
the applause of their Country, the natural Rewards of Valor and Virtue. And
indeed I cannot but confess, I my self have wondered, when in the Court of
Vienna I have heard the Actions and Zeal of Serini so slightly spoken of or
contemned, when a Stranger took the liberty but to descant on his actions, and
to vent any thing which but savoured of his commendations. The reason of which
I adventure to assign unto two causes. The first is, that Antipathy or natural
Reasons why the Services of Montecuculi were accepted better than those of
Serini.
aversion the Germans have to the Hungarians and Croatians, these endeavoring
to maintain the Privileges of a People, who have a free liberty of the
Election of their Prince; whilst the others desirous to take occasion to weaken
and impoverish them, would necessitate them to yield their Kingdom to the
Emperor by an hereditary Right. The second is, the fury of Serini and Soise,
whose zeal without consideration of irritating the Turk, or fear of moving the
passion of the Lion beyond the terms of an easy pacification, transported them
to commit all damage and ruin, which are the just concomitants of War; which
rage seemed over-violent to the Court at Vienna, and not to suit with the
present Policy of the War, which was designed to be carried on rather in a
defensive than in an offensive posture; imagining perhaps, that the good nature
of the Turk might be complemented into Peace, and that gentleness and
generosity might have the same effect upon them, as it had upon Saul, when
David had his life at his mercy, and yet spared him: according to which
counsels of the Court, Montecuculi squaring every particular of his motions,
and thereunto adding success, mounted on the wings of Fame, and had his Glory
celebrated without diminutions; but the hot and zealous temper of Serini, which
Souldier-like understood nothing but downright blows, knew not how to use that
moderation and caution, which the Imperial Court judged an ingredient so
requisite to the prudent management of the present War, that he was esteemed
incapable of command, who had not discretion enough to practice it: and this
was the true reason that Serini was discountenanced, and that his Command was
taken from him, and that his Appeal to the Court was without redress: howsoever
in regard that the Fame he had won carried him high in the esteem of all
Christendom, he was entertained with hopes and fair promises; and even after
the very Battle of Rab, nothing was more commonly discoursed than the giving
Nicholas Serini a command independent of any other General: but in the end it
proved nothing but vain Proposals to humor the fancy of Serini himself, (...)
to satisfy the World, which admired, a person so qualified and deserving as
he, should be made a subject of so much disgrace and neglect.

With this News the Turks remained greatly ashamed and dejected, having but two
days before demonstrated excesses of joy, congratulated the happy News one to
the other, and after their manner sent Presents abroad, derided the Christians
upon the News, exprobriated them with a thousand injuries, and applauded their
own Virtue, Valor, and the righteousness of their Cause and Religion: but on a
sudden Intelligence coming contrary to their expectations, such a dampness fell
upon their spirits, that for some days there was a deep silence of all News at
Constantinople; they that the day before sought for Christians to communicate
to them the Miracles of their Victory, now avoided their Company, ashamed of
their too forward joy, and the liberty they had taken to contemn and deride the
low condition of the Christian Camp. And now the ill News not being able longer
to be concealed, Prayers and Humiliation were appointed publicly to be made at
all the great Moschs of Constantinople and Adrianople, where all Emaums with
their young Scholars were commanded to resort, and sing certain Prayers
appointed for such occasions.

The minds of the Soldiery after this defeat were very much discomposed,
Sedition in the Turkish Camp.
tending more to sedition than obedience. Every one took license to speak
loudly and openly his opinion, that the War was commenced upon unjust and
unlawful grounds. That the total Eclipse of the Moon which portends always
misfortunes to the Turks, should have caused more caution in the Commanders in
engaging the Armies this year, until the malignancy of that Influence had been
over-passed. All generally accused the first Vizier as the Author and ill
Manager of the War, Iniquissima Tae. in Vita Agricol. e.
bellorum conditio est, prospera omnes sibi vendicant, adversa uni imputantur,
and calling to mind the solemn Oath with which Sultan Solomon confirmed his
Capitulations with the Emperor, particularly vowing never to pass the Rab, or
place where the Turks received their defeat, without a solid and reasonable
ground of War, concluded that this Invasion was a violation of the Vow, and an
injury to the sacred Memory of that fortunate Sultan, and therefore that all
Enterprises and Attempts of this War would be fatal and destructive to the
Mussulmen or Believers, and the end dishonorable to the Empire.

This opinion was rooted with much superstition and strength of fancy in the
minds of the Vulgar: and the rumorsin the Camp that the Vizier upon a false
Alarm of the approach of the Enemy toward his Quarters, had commanded the Army
to retreat, administered fury and courage to the Christians, and fear and
amazement to his own; from which error and timidity was occasioned that
slaughter which ensued; on which discourses and reports dangerous discontents
daily increasing in the hearts of the soldiery, it is thought, they would have
vented their passion, and revenge on their General, had he not at a public
Assembly of all the Heads and Commanders of the Army cleared himself freely, by
charging the miscarriage of all upon the Grand Signior, having acted nothing
but with Authority of the Imperial Command, promising with as much speed as
honor and safety would permit, by agreement and composition of Peace to bring
the War to a conclusion. And this contrivance and art was that (as is supposed)
which for the present secured his life; for the Soldiery were greatly
terrified and possessed with a dread of the Christians, and amazement upon
every Alarm. For the old and experienced Commanders and Veterane Soldiers were
either destroyed by the secret Proscriptions of the Vizier Kuperlee, or slain
in the Engagements of this Year, and the Asian Spahees and other Soldiers
having wives and children, and possessions to look after, were grown poor, and
desired nothing more than in peace and quietness to return to their homes: so
that nothing could come more grateful to this Camp, no largesses or donatives
could pacify the minds of the Soldiery more than the promises and
expectations of a Peace.

The Sultan during these disturbances and misfortunes was preparing The Grand
Signiors hunting at Yamboli.
for a hunting Journey to an obscure Village called Yamboli, about three or
four days travel from Adrianople, designing to drive all those vast Woods along
the Black Sea for Game, where he had a small ruinous Seraglio. The
Queen Mother, the Chimacam, with all the Court, were to accompany him. The
Equipage and Pomp he went in persuaded many, that the design of that Journey
was grounded on other causes of Policy, than what were generally penetrated:
some conceived, that the Vizier contrived his Journey thither, to divert him
from opportunities of receiving Intelligence from Spahees, and others of the
true state of the Camp, and management of Affairs: others judged it might be to
avoid in that obscure place the mutinous seditions of the Soldiery. On what
consideration soever it might be, the Grand Signior having spent some time
abroad, returned again to Adrianople with all his Retinue, without doing any
thing more important than killing great numbers of wild Beasts, and ennobling
those Wildernesses and Woods about Yamboli with the same of his renowned
Hunting. Keblelee Pasha being slain (as we have said) before Scrinswar, who was
Husband to the Viziers Sister, the Vizier bestowed the Widow on Husaein Pasha
of Silistria. And much about the same time the Grand Signior considering that
his own Sister, by the death of her old Husband Ishmael Pasha, slain in the
last Battle, led a single life, conferred her in Marriage upon the old Mahomet
Pasha, whom before we have related to have been Kahya to the Vizier, late Pasha
of Darbiquier, and now of Aleppo, who as an Honor charged with a weight of
troubles and other inconveniences, seemed thankfully to receive her; and though
he was a man of ninety years of age, and had long since forgot the solaces of
the bridal Bed, yet according to the custom of Marriage with a Sultana, he was
engaged to divorce his former Wife, with whom he had past the summer and winter
of his age, and as a constant Husband, was still uxorious in his love. So that
in the midst of Wars, where some found Graves, others found Marriage-beds, and
reason of State found a Vacation to conjoyn Mars and Venus without interruption
of ruder Enterprises.

The Great Vizier after his defeat marched to Stultweissenburg or Alba Regalis,
to recruit and refresh his Army, and expect the Recruit of the Pasha of Aleppo,
who was said to bring with him about eight thousand Soldiers.

From Stultweissenburg the Turks, with the gross of their Army, returned to
Strigonium, and here the Vizier not unmindsul of the shameful flight, and
rebellious return of the Princes of Moldavia and Valachia to Vizier sends for
the Princes of Moldavia and Valachia.
their own Countries without his order or permission, sent one Messenger after
the other in great haste and fury after the Turkish manner, to recall those
Princes to the War, and that laying aside all excuses whatsoever, they should
immediately, with what Forces they could collect, repair again to the Camp. The
Princes weary of the War, and fearful of the Viziers evil intentions to take
away their lives, endeavored to excuse The Princes of Moldavia and Valachia
recalled to the Wars.
their flight, alleging, that their People would not obey, or follow them to
the Wars in any considerable numbers, and that now it being the end of the
Summer, new Levies would be of great expense, and of little benesit, and
disenable them from paying their yearly Tribute; of which (notwithstanding
their consumption of Treasure in the last Expedition) they were like to find no
ease or relaxation, though a burden too great for their harassed and
impoverished Country to support. But these excuses were no arguments to
resolved Turks, so that Commands came doubled and trebled one after the other
full of threats and menaces, to march forward with what Forces they could
collect, the Messengers assuring them, That there was no design prepared
against them by the Vizier, but what was friendly and of good intention. At
length the Princes not able to remain longer without a censure of Rebellion to
the Port, with heavy hearts and light purses set forwards with about fifteen
hundred men apiece, sending before such sums of Money and Presents, as they
hoped might mollify and prepare their access to the Vizier, whilst they
themselves marched slowly, to afford longer time to the operation of this
Physic. The Prince of Valachia had entrusted about forty thousand Zaichins to
an Officer of his called his Vestiario or Master of his Wardrobe, whom he had
sent before him, therewith to make his access easy and safe to the Vizier: of
whose faith that he might assure himself the better, he made him swear before
the Holy Altar, and take the Communion thereupon, that he would be faithful and
active in this Negotiation. The Vestiario thus departing, added to his
religious Fides Graeca, or the honesty of a Greek.
Vows, common promises and protestations; but no sooner was he a few miles
distant from his Master, before he tired in his Vows, and altered his road from
the Vizier to the way leading to Constantinople, declaring as he went, That his
Prince was become Rebel, and was fled, and that he, not to be Partner in his
perfidiousness, was hasting to Constantinople, there to give evidence of his
faith and submission to the Turks. This unexpected news coming to the Prince,
caused him to despair of all security and reconciliation with the Vizier, and
force him by flight to make good the words of his treacherous Servant; so that
taking with him his Wife and remainder of his Wealth, passed through
Transylvania with much difficulty, and at length arrived within the Emperors
Territories, resolving to exchange an inconstant and dangerous Principality for
a more secure and private course of life. But this impious Greek did not rest
quiet with his ill acquired Estate without receiving disturbance from the
Boiars or Nobles of the Country; and Stridia Bei the new-made Prince, justly
accusing him for having robbed the Public Treasury, extorted from him the sum
of 150000 Dollars toward his Investment in the Principality, and ease of the
Country, which was now wracked for payment of old debts, and the growing
charges of the new Prince. And thus much of the Princes of Moldavia and
Valachia.

At Strigonium great were the Consultations, what course was to be taken: The
Christians were now Masters of the Field, and the Turks discouraged, and now
the Summer was so far spent, that it was too late to think of recovering their
reputation that year with the hazard of a Battle. So that at length it was
resolved to unite the shattered Forces of Chusaein Pasha, lately defeated by
Count Susa, to the Army of the Vizier, and attend to secure Oywar or Newhausel
with Provisions, Ammunition, and Reinforcement of that Garrison, whereby this
War might conclude with some Trophies of advance, and enlargement of the
Ottoman Borders, which in all their Wars is the design and Maxim of the Turks.
So that marching thither, they gathered and collected all the Provisions
possible, and having supplied the Garrison, they returned again to Strigonium
with all expedition, retaining still impressions of terror from the late ill
success. And that they might march with less impediment, they sent their
Artillery and heavy Baggage down the Daenube: such was the fear of the Turkish
Army at present, that it is supposed, had the Christians eagerly pursued their
Victory, they had not only defeated the whole Turkish Force with little
opposition, but also without any impediment marched to the very Walls of Buda.

But what infatuation soever blinded the Christian Counsels, little or no
advantage was taken, as if the design of the Emperor had only been to repel
the Enemy from his Borders, or that he feared to irritate the Turks with a too
inveterate and pertinacious prosecution of his Victories. Instead of which the
Vizier making some Overtures of Peace, and evidencing the reality of his
intentions by his Presents of a Vest of Sables, and a Horse richly furnished,
with which he flattered and caressed the German Resident, the Articles were
accepted and embraced at Vienna with much greediness, and the Peace almost
wholly concluded and clapped up in a moment, to the astonishment of the whole
World. But as The reasons which inclined both Parties to Peace.
matters of this nature cannot succeed without just and due considerations, so
on both sides certain causes concurred which inclined and disposed things to an
accommodation. For on the Turks part there wanted not such in the Ottoman
Court, who emulous of the Grand Viziers fortune and charge, endeavored to
remove him from the favor of his Prince, by accusing him in many particulars
of negligence, and imprudence in the conduct of his Affairs. To answer which,
his return with the Olive Branch of Peace in his mouth, and yet the Laurels of
Conquest on his head, having added so considerable a Fortress as Newhausel to
the Dominions of the Empire, and demolishment of Serinswar, the Original cause
of the War, were a sufficient conviction of the evil accusations of his
Adversaries, and an argument irresistible, when enforced by the Authority of
his own Presence. On the Emperors side, the demand of the City of Erfurt by
the Elector of Mentz situated on his Consines, at a time of so much exigency as
this, and seconded by hopes of assistance from France, and the Hans Towns on
the Rhyne, whereby it was probable great turbulences might result, inclined the
Emperor with much reason to Proposals of Peace; Instructions for which being
conveyed to the Resident then in the Turkish Camp from the Caesarean Court,
after a short Treaty the Articles were agreed and concluded, as follows.

First, That Transylvania remain with its ancient Limits and Privileges under
the Command of Prince Michael Apasi.

Secondly, That the Emperor of Germany have liberty to fortify both Gutta and
Nitra.

Thirdly, That the Turks shall not alter or innovate any thing on the Confines
of Hungary, or any other part bordering on the Emperor.

Fourthly, That Apasi pay six hundred thousand Dollars to the Ottoman Port for
expenses of the War.

Fifthly, That all Acts of Hostility between the Emperor, and the Grand
Signior, and their Subjects for ever cease.

Sixthly, That the two Provinces of Zatmar and Zaboli, granted to Ragotzki by
his Imperial Majesty during life, return again to the Emperor, to which
neither the Prince of Transylvania, much less the Ottoman Port, shall ever
pretend.

Seventhly, That the strong Castle of Zechelhyd, which revolted from the
Emperor, be demolished, in regard neither Party will relinquish his Right
thereunto.

Eighthly, That Varadin and Newhausel remain to the Turk, having conquered them
by force of their own Arms.

Ninthly, That for confirmation of this Peace, Ambassadors be interchangeably
sent with Presents of equal value.

On these Terms (of which none seems disadvantageous to the Christian Interest,
unless the fourth Article, the dishonor of which seems to be covered with the
name of Apafi, though the score was paid by the Emperor) the Peace was
established, and the Vizier, as a beginning thereof, gave liberty to many
Christian Captives, some whereof were of Quality, and Proclamation was made
through all the Confines for a Cessation of Arms. Howsoever, some petty
matters remained undecided, which were deferred until the Arrival of an
extraordinary Ambassador, who was to exchange with the Turks another
Ambassador in the Month of May following; and in the mean time suspension of
Arms, and all other Hostilities was confirmed. At which News all sorts of
People amongst the Turks were greatly rejoiced, and the Publication thereof the
more welcome, by how much the more unexpected. Whereby we may observe the
alteration of that ancient Martial disposition, which was natural to this
Empire, which whilst it was exercised in War, grew hardy, active and inured to
warlike exercise, but now through Idleness and want of War (except the
Venetian, which affords the Soldiery no considerable employment) their minds
became resty, wearied with one year and a halfs labor, and dejected with the
unprosperous success of one Summer.

But what Considerations soever the Emperor might have to conclude this Peace,
the Hungarians were highly dissatisfied with it, because The Hungarians oppose
the Peace.
it was founded on their proper loss; and that Newhausel was given for a price
of the common quiet, which none but themselves paid, and yet all Germany
enjoyed the benefit. That that Town was an appendage to the Kingdom of Hungary,
and to which the Emperor having only the claim (as they pretended) of an
Elective Prince, could not dismember any part without consent of the States
thereof; and this position they maintained with that heat and fury, that they
declared themselves disobliged from observation of the Articles, resolving to
vindicate their own right in despite of all opposition whatsoever; and that
since the Emperor had undertaken their Protection he was bound to assert their
freedom, and defend their Cities, even with the expense of his own Treasury,
and at the hazard of his own hereditary Possessions. But to these exorbitant
Demands the Emperors Council replied with these following reasons and
moderation; That they themselves were the first Beginners and Promoters of this
War; That His Majesty at their instance and request condescended to protect
them as Subjects, not only with draining of his own Exchequer, and blood of his
Patrimonial Dominions, but with the charge of hired and mercenary Strangers. In
the mean time what assistance had the Hungarians brought to this War or to
their own defense? What Contributions did they ever make? What Forces did they
ever unite in the Field by a general assent of their whole Kingdom?
Notwithstanding his Majesty was ready to continue the War, could they
themselves propose either a safe way for the maintenance of it, or that the
present Conjuncture did not offer honorable Conditions of a happy Composure?
Moreover, The Emperors Reasons for a Peace.
That the King of Spain, his Uncle, and Father in Law, being aged and decrepit,
leaving no other Heir than an insirm and sickly Child, to support the charge
and weight of all his Kingdoms, it was requisite that at such a time as this,
he should be free from all encumbrances, either to assist the Infant in
Administration of the Government, or to assert his own Rights (if so it should
please God) in the Succession. And that now, since a Treaty was on foot for
Election of a Successor to the Kingdom of Poland, it was necessary for His
Imperial Majesty to bear his part in that Transaction; but above all, it was
considerable, That the common Enemy being rich and powerful, God had seemed to
put his Victory into their hands to no other end than to improve it unto a
Peace, which being at this time neglected, the best that could ensue would be
the miseries of War, which turning on the inconstant Wheel of Fortune with
variety of successes, is always attended with Slaughter, Captivity, Fire,
Sword, and a thousand other Calamities. These, and such like reasons, moderated
and mollified the exasperate spirits of the Hungarians, so that they seemed to
acquiesee and be satisfied, and making a Virtue of Necessity, had patience
where there was no other remedy.

The sudden News of this unexpected peace did in like manner affect the French
King, and the States of the Empire, judging it unreasonable for them to be
interested in the War, and yet unconcerned in the Conclusion of the Peace.
Howsoever, things being well represented, and as well received and understood;
his Most Christian Majesty accepted of the Reasons as just and satisfactory. In
the mean time the French had a The French Army march homeward.
free liberty to make choice of their Winter Quarters, which they fixed upon in
Bohemia, but their King being unwilling to burden the Country with his
Soldiers for a longer time than they were serviceable to them, he ordered them
to march, and quarter in Alsatia; but before their departure the Emperor
honored Monsieur de Coligni with his Picture incircled with Diamonds, and the
other Officers with Gold Chains and Medals; ordering the Troops not to march
above ten miles a day, and every third to be a day of repose, and to be
entertained all the way at free Quarter, so as to return into France jocund and
healthy, as they departed thence. But before they would bid adieu to those
Countries, the General and Officers paid their Visit to Count Nicholas Serini,
presenting him with a Horse, Furniture, and Pistols, as a small Tribute to that
Great Captain, whose Fame was celebrated through the whole world, ingenuously
confessing, That the rumor of his name struck more amazement and terror in
the Enemy, than the Armies that actually faced them, and was more instrumental
in obtaining the Victory on the Banks of Rab, than their weapons or courage
which fought against them. But not long after this worthy Hero Serini hunting
one day separated from the rest of his Attendants in the Thickets of a Wood,
behold, on a sudden was surprised by the rushing forth of a wild Boar, which
raging, and made furious by some Wounds he had received, first struck him in
the Knee, with which falling to the ground, the fierce Beast not giving him
leisure to recover himself, ganched him again in the head with his broad Tusk,
which proved so mortal, that in a short time he expired in the Arms of one of
his Pages. This Serini's Death.
was the end of this valiant Captain, who unconquered in many and redoubled
Conflicts of his Enemies, was made the prey of an ignoble Beast. Such are the
secret and occult Providence of Heaven, which men interpret or reflect on as
they are governed by prejudice or interest. And so did the Turks attribute the
Fall of this their Grand Adversary to the righteousness of their Religion, and
justness of their Cause; as if he had been a person unworthy to dye by the hand
of a man, was condemned to be executed by that Beast, which is most abominated
and detested by the Turkish Rites. He was a Person as mortal an Enemy to the
Turks, as ever Hannibal was to the Romans; in Dangers most courageous, The
Character of Serini.
in War valiant, and patient of labor, in Peace courteous, and moderate in his
Pleasures; his Diet was natural, rather than artificial; in Bankets, or
Drinking Meetings, after the fashion of that Country, was sparing in Wine, and
rather abstemious than intemperate; Music and Dances were the Entertainment of
the softer and effeminate Part of his Court, rather than his own Pastimes,
whose Recreations were chiefly in the Woods, and in fuch Huntings as had
something in them of similitude with Martial Exercises; his Judgment was
profound and deep, and yet his familiar Discourse facetious; his Conversation
obliging, his humor affable, and yet severe and majestic; he spoke much, and
yet well, his disposition was liberal and generous, especially to his
Soldiers, whom he never restrained or defrauded of their Booty and Prey, but
contented every one with a just and exact Division. In short, he was one of
those zealous Champions of the Christian Cause, who in the Chronicles of past
Ages ought to be placed and numbered amongst the worthiest Heroes.

The Winter now approaching, and a conclusion in all appearance made of the
War, the Vizier returned to Belgrade, designing to remain there until the
German Ambassador had entered the Turkish Borders, and in the mean time sent
for his Mother thither, pretending that in an uncertain and changeable estate
the Maternal Blessing is of highest Consolation, The Vizier sends for his
Mother to Belgrade.
it being esteemed pious amongst the Turks for a man to die at the Feet of his
Mother. This Mother of his was esteemed a cunning or wise Woman, by whose
Charms and Incantations his Father, and he were supposed long to have conserved
the Office of Vizier; and as my own Ears can witness the common Soldiers
Discourse, That his Mothers Art consisted much in Philtrums and Charms,
reconciling affection and friendship, and had a power over the Grand Signiors
Inclinations and Understanding, rendering all things and actions the Vizier had
performed in this War full of merit and admiration. This I say was the
Discourse of some common Soldiers.

In the month of December, that Blazing-star which appeared formidable to most
parts of the known World, was also seen within the Turkish Empire, not without
a general terror of all, as prognosticating disasters The Blazing-star.
of Sword, Pestilence, and Famine; and set the Turkish Astrologers at work to
find out the mystery it portended: from whose Art most commonly was divined the
death of some great Person in the Empire, which some would have to be the Grand
Signior, others the Vizier, others both, as they desired alteration and change
of Government.

The Grand Signior continued all this time at Adrianople taken up with The
Sultans hatred to Constantinople increases.
an extraordinary delight and pleasure in his Court there, with which his
aversion to Constantinople so much increased, that he could not endure so much
as the name of the place: and if accidentally in his Hunting (as is reported)
he chanced to fall into the road which led thither, and remembering himself
thereof, would immediately turn thence, as one that corrects himself of some
desperate error, or avoids a path which tends to an evitable destruction. The
Kadelescher and the other grave Judges of the Law observing this unreasonable
hatred of their Prince to his Imperial Seat, considered how prejudicial it was
to him and his People to have a City of that renown, antiquity, and
commodiousness of living despised and abandoned: and that perhaps the Soldiery
now upon their March from the War, might be impatient of returning home, as all
the Dependents on the Divan, and Personages of great Quality, desired to enjoy
their Habitations and Gardens at Constantinople; from which discontent on all
sides it was concluded, That there might result dangerous Seditions and
Mutinies, and therefore resolved (and as some say also at the instigation of
the Vizier) to prostrate themselves before the Grand Signior, and tender him
their opinions and sense in that particular, which they accordingly performing
and assigning the Kadelescher, or the Chief Justice with all humility to be
their Mouth in this Petition, their counsel was received with that indignation,
that they were chased from the Grand Signiors presence with fury and high
displeasure, and the Kadelescher at that moment deprived of his Office.

To these other extravagances the Grand Signior would have added another of a
higher nature and cruelty, by causelessly putting to death The Sultan seeks to
destroy his Brother.
his Brother Solomon, whom all the time of his Reign, together with another
Brother, he had kept Prisoner in the Seraglio: for now having a Son of his own,
he conceived it more secure to remove all competition that might be for the
Government, according to the example and custom of the Ottoman Princes; but
suffering some remorse of conscience in the thoughts of imbruing his hands in
the blood of his guiltless Brother, conceived it more justifiable to perform
the Fact by process of Law, and to that end sent to the Mufti for his Fetfa or
Sentence, viz. That in such a case, where there is a sufficient provision for
continuance of the true Lineage of the Ottoman Family, whether it may be lawful,
according to their Law and ancient Presidents, to take off some as superfluous
Suckers, that draw not only nourishment from the root, but endanger also the
life of the Tree. But the Mufti was not so cruel or unjust as to pass this
sentence, but rather supplicated the Grand Signior to defer this resolution;
for having but one Son, and that a Child, which was subject to the common
chances of mortality, the Ottoman Family was not so sufficiently provided of
Heirs, that he could pass his sentence for taking away one who was so necessary
a reserve and member of it; with which reply the Grand Signior suffered himself
to be overcome, having some touches of

But returning now to the Great Vizier, we find him in his Winter Quarters at
Belgrade, where having taken an affection to the elder Son of the Tartar Chan,
or else having conceived some hatred or displeasure against the Father, frankly
proffered to depose the Father, and confer the Government The Vizier offers to
depose the Tartar Chan.
upon him who was the Son. But it seems this young Tartar, though barbarous,
had yet so much of filial obedience and reverence instamped on him by Nature,
that he modestly refused the proffer, and immediately dispatched a Messenger
with secret Advices to his Father. The Tartar Chan received this Intelligence
with great indignation, and purposing to play that game in reality with the
Vizier, which he had passed on him only by way of overture, wrote a Letter to
the Pasha of Buda, a man of great abilities and courage, advertising him, that
hearing a true and worthy character of his prowess and wisdom, he could not but
desire to be his friend; and that he might make demonstrations of his being
such, he prossered all the interest he had at the Ottoman Court to promote him
to the supreme Office of first Vizier. What Fate soever accompanied this
matter, either from the Confidents of the Tartars, or of the Pasha, the
substance of the Message came to the knowledge of the Vizier, who obtaining a
private Commission immediately from the Grand Signior therein, sent for the
Pasha, and without farther process, or evidence of proof, or accusation struck
off his Head.

Anno Christi 1665. Hegeira 1076.
THE Peace thus happily concluded with Germany, was a subject of singular
contentment to the people, and not less readily embraced by the Grandees, who
hastened so much the consummation thereof, that in the beginning of January one
Mahomet Beigh, of the Order of the Mutafaracaes The Turkish Ambassador departs.
(who are those that attend the Services of the Divan, and are of a degree
somewhat above the Chaouses) a man of considerable richess, was designed
Ambassador for Vienna, and qualified with the Title of the Pasha of Romelia.
In the month following being February, this Ambassador having received his
Presents and Instructions departed, with Orders to remain on the Frontiers,
until the Emperors Ambassador met him at the place of Exchange, where
according to custom at the same time that one enters into the Dominions of the
Emperor, the other passes into those of the Grand Signior. The Presents that
one Emperor sends to the other are according to the ancient Canon, and are to
be of equal value, and are commonly estimated to be an hundred thousand
Dollars. Those sent by the Grand Signior to the Emperor were 3 Horses with
their Furniture adorned with precious Stones. 12 Other led Horses of great
price. A Royal Tent with all the Apartments, valued at eighty thousand Dollars.
A Royal Feather set with Jewels. Ambergreese of a considerable value.
Bezoar-stones. 20 Cods of Musk. 70 Coftans or Vests of three sorts. 6 Persian
Carpets. 40 Very fine Turbants, with other Persian Commodities of diverse sorts
of Linen.


The Spring being now well forward the time of action, and the Summer at hand,
the Turks remained with great expectation of the German Ambassador; and with
greater impatience, in regard that their Ambassador had for some time continued
upon the Frontiers. It was now May, and yet no news from Germany; so that many
began to doubt the reality of the Peace, others reflected on the dishonor of
the Grand Signior, in having his Ambassador so long on the Frontiers, as if
the Peace had been precarious and desired by the Turks: some considered the
present ill consequences, in case the War should break out again; for the
license was given to the greatest part of the Army to return home, and all such
as came as far as from Babylon, Damascus, and Egypt to the Frontiers in Hungary
were departed; and to recall these again, and other Zaims and Timariots Rumors
of the People on occasion of stay of the German Ambassador.
from remote parts, required a considerable time, of which their distress would
not admit, should the Christians prove deceitful in their Treaty. Besides
which, reports were spread abroad, that the French had intercepted the
Ambassador in his passage about Komorra, and had given an interruption to the
Peace. Others reported, that the Ambassador was dead in his Journey, and that
the Hungarians were again in Arms, as wholly dissatisfied with the Peace. These
rumors flying about, all people blamed the facility of the Great Vizier in
being too credulous, and confident of the faith and morality of the Christians;
and the Enemies of the Vizier more boldly adventured to accuse his ill
management of Affairs, which did not a little tickle the ambition of Mustapha
Pasha, then Captain Pasha, and Chimacam of Adrianople, supposing that all the
disgraces and ill successes of the Vizier prepared a way for his ascent unto
that Office. And to become more popular, being a man naturally of an affable
and plausible carriage, insinuated himself into the favor and good opinion of
the Great men and principal Favorites of the Seraglio, over-acting his part in
some measure by condescensions unbeseeming the degree and dignity Mustapha
(...) affectation and popularity.
of a Chimacam, being observed one day to kiss the Vest of the Kuzlir-Aga, too
apparent a piece of adulation and meanness in so great a Subject, who in those
parts represents the person of his Master. These passages were not altogether
unknown to the Vizier; and though at a distance he could not perfectly view,
and discover particularly the comportment of this Chimacam, yet being by
conversation well acquainted with his subtle disposition, guessed at his
thoughts and the rest of his actions, and to deal with him in the same terms,
wrote a Letter to the Grand Signior, bewailing the ill success of the War
against Venice, and the ill estate and condition of the Fleet, to repair which,
and to give courage to their men, and restore the Discipline in marine Affairs,
the presence of the Captain-Pasha was necessary in the Fleet, who had now for
two years enjoyed the benesit and the title without personal attendance on that
important Charge. The Grand Signior having received' this Letter, concurred in
the same opinion with his Vizier, and gave Orders to the Chimacam to prepare
himself to serve that Summer at Sea; for that now it was necessary he should be
in person there, and less requisite his presence in the City, where his Office
would speedily be made void by return of the Vizier. The Chimacam immediately
in obedience to his great Masters command, put himself in a posture for his
Voyage, and in the first place sent away his Women to Constantinople, and
appointed the Fleet not to depart until his faither order: yet in the mean time
so secretly and underhand made use of the friendship of the Court-Favourites,
representing as from themselves, how useful the service and attendance of the
Chimacam was as yet in the City, by reason that the delays of the German
Ambassador made the Viziers return uncertain, and that this Office would ill
be supplied by any other, they obtained license for his continuance in Office,
and disappointed the intentions and designs of the Vizier.

About the end of May, after long expectation arrived the German Ambassador at
Buda, to the great joy of the Turkifh Camp. I then was there my self, and
observed the general satisfaction at this news: so that now the Ambassador
being entered the Frontiers, and his arrival secured, on the 29th of May the
Vizier began his March from Belgrade with the whole Army, and I kept company
with them for thirteen days. On the last of June the Vizier arrived within six
hours Journey of Adrianople, intending in two or three days to prepare for his
solemn Entrance. But it is reported, That the Viziers Mother had by her Art so
affected the heart of the Grand Signior toward her Son, that he could not
longer want his presence, and therefore in the way dispatched frequent Messages
to him to hasten him as fast as his convenience would permit. And better to
assure him of his grace and favor, sent his young Favorite, a handsome Youth
of about twenty years of age, to meet him with a Present of five Horses richly
adorned and furnished, and to feast him plentifully on the way: and being come
within a few hours Journey, the Grand Signior could not contain his desire of
seeing him, until the day of his Entry; but ordered him immediately to come to
him, being impatient of a private Conference. The Vizier accordingly obeying,
and being come to the Royal Presence, the Grand Signior kissed him on the
shoulder, and honored him with a It is in the fashion of a Mace, which the
Turks wear at their Saddles.
Topoose of gold studded with precious Stones, with a Sword, a Dagger, and a
Horse richly furnished, with which Regal Munificence he returned triumphing to
his Tents, being now fully assured of the real grace and constant favor of his
Master. The second of July the Vizier made his Entrance with solemn Pomp and
Glory through part of the City, passing again into the field to remain under
Tents with the whole Camp, being so ordered by the Grand Signior, in regard the
City was neither capable to contain so great a number without dispossessing the
greatest part of the Inhabitants of their Houses; nor in this hot season of the
year was it so wholesome and cool as the open air of the Country. Besides
matters would be in a far greater readiness for a departure toward
Constantinople, to which place the Vizier had persuaded the Grand Signior to
make a Visit after Audience given to the German Ambassador, whom the people
now expected with wonderful impatience.

Not many days after arrived Count Lesly the Ambassador Extraordinary from his
Caesarian Majesty to the Grand Signior, who made a solemn Entrance into the
City, passing first through the Turkish Camp, where the Grand Signior remained,
and thence to the House furnished and appointed for him at the expense of the
Sultan. The Cavalcade was The German Ambassadors Entrance.
as follows: In the Front of all were the ten Chaouses which had attended the
Ambassador through the whole Journey, these were followed by an hundred fifty
five other Chaouses with Muzevege, with some Captains over the Janisaries. The
Ambassador had of his own Retinue about a hundred and fifty Persons on
horseback, well mountted, and clothed after the Hungarian fashion; his proper
Guard consisted of four and twenty Persons armed with Partisans; before him
went his Trumpets, and Kettle Drums, but not sounding, with two Banners of
Spread Eagles flying, one of them richly embroidered, carried by a Count of the
Empire. The Ambassador himself was clothed with a Cloth of Silver Vest, lined
with Sables, on his Cap he wore a Feather after the Turkish fashion, adorned
with Jewels, which they call ( Sargouch) and is only used by the Grand Signior,
and his principal Vizier; before him went eight led Horses richly furnished;
immediately after him followed the Pages and Servants of the Spaheelar Agasee,
and of the Aga which conducted him from the Frontiers. Next came his Litter
covered with Violet colored Velvet and carried by Mules; then his three
Coaches with six Horses a piece, one of which being richly gilded, and made
cheerful with Glass Windows after the new mode, the Grand Signior became much
pleased with it, and at his request it was presented to him; after these
followed four or five other Coaches of four Horses, in which were Churchmen and
unfirm persons; and last of all came the German Wagons, and other Carts with
those of the Country with Baggage.

This Ambassador was not long arrived before he was admitted to Audience given
to the German Ambassador.
Audience with the Prime Vizier, who bestowed on him a Vest of Sables, with a
Horse and Furniture of considerable value, and a hundred of his Retinue were
vested with Coftans, which amongst the Turks are testimonies of favor and
acceptance. About four days after the Ambassador had Audience with the Grand
Signior himself, at which were only forty Coftans given out, which coming from
so Grand a Personage, were in value multiplied much above the number given by
the Vizier.

The Presents brought by the Ambassador were as follows: A Looking Glass of
about a Man's height, in a silver Frame, standing on a pedestal of Silver,
turning round on every side. 2 Great Basins of Silver, supported with three
Pillars at three Corners, a Man's Body and a half high, adorned with several
Figures; at one Pillar was fastened a gilded Basin, over which was a Fountain
Cock for (...) Water to run through. 2 Great gilded Basins full of holes at the
Bottom to make a Passage for the water. 12 Silver Candlesticks, every one about
two Else high. 6 Silver Flower-Pots. 12 Gilded Ewers for sweet Waters. 12
Silver Dishes with Covers made after the form of Turkish Turbants, all gilded
within side. 12 Gilded Dishes for Confects, set upon Pedestals of Silver. 1
Round Table of Silver upon a Pedestal of about half an Ell, after the manner of
the Turkish Tables, with many Devices. 4 Guns with Silver Stocks, and one
Cutlash of Silver. 2 Great Writing Desks of Jaspar-Stone with Prospectives
within. 2 Other of Ebony Wood, and Tortoise shell, in-laid with Gold and
Silver. 1 Great Ice Vessel, and one great Drinking Pot of Silver. 4 Pieces of
Spanish Tapestry wrought with Silver. 14 Clocks with Turkish and Christian
Figures. A Grota with a Clock in it, and a Case of Virginals which sound with
the motion of Water that runs through it. A Cupboard an Ell high adorned with
Bosses of Silver, in which was a Salt-Box, Candlesticks, and other
appurtenances thereunto. A large Chest with Figures of Silver gilded. A high
Writing Desk of Silver gilded with many Boxes and Drawers, which for the Art
and Invention is not to be described.
Presents to the Valede or Queen Mother.
An embroidered Cushinet to sow upon, in which was a Looking Glass, and a
Virginal sounding of it self. A large Looking Glass in a Silver Frame. 2 Silver
Candlesticks of an Ell and half high. A Basket of Silver rarely worked and
engraven. 4 Great Cups.
To the Great Vizier.
12 Silver Platters with Covers. 2 Silver Candlesticks of an Ell high. 12
Silver Plates handsomely worked for Confects. 1 Basket of Silver engraven. 14
Very large Silver Cups.
For other Ministers to be bestowed as occasion was.
32 Clocks of several sorts, some with Turkish, and others with Christian
Figures. 21 Watches gilded. 7 Gilded Basins and Ewers.


The Weight of the Silver all together amounted unto three thousand five
hundred pound weight. These were the Particulars of the Presents sent from the
Emperor to the Grand Signior, from whom he received the like value by the
Ottoman Ambassador. And though this Relation may seem impertinent to the
Weight of History, yet in regard on such minute things many times greater
matters depend, and thereby the curiosity of the Reader satisfied, I thought it
not from our purpose to insert a List thereof.

This year gave the first Beginning to trade between the Ottoman Dominions, and
that of Genoua. For in Company of the German Ambassador, in condition of a
private person, came the Marquess Durazzo a Nobleman of Genoua with Letters
from that Republic to the Grand The Genoese make Peace with the Turk.
Signior, and Great Vizier, importing their desire of friendship and commerce
with the Ottoman Port. This design of opening a door to a new Trade was
commenced and carried on wholly by the contrivance and power of the Family of
the Durazzo's, falsely founded on the course allay of money, then current in
the Turkish Territories, which proved not long durable, as will appear by the
Sequel. This Marquess being arrived at Constantinople, declared his Message,
which if favorably accepted, an Ambassador or Resident with Merchants should
be sent to hold a Trade in the Turkish Dominions. In answer whereunto the
Vizier replied according to the usual complement, That the Arms of the Port are
always open to those who desire to entertain a friendship and correspondence
with it. But because in former days Ambassadors from Spain and Genoua having
like promises of admission, were notwithstanding, through the union of the
English, and French and Venetians, obstructed in their passage, and forced to
return home, though one of them as far as Scio in his way, and the other as
Ragusa; therefore this Marquess in remembrance hereof pressed the Vizier
farther in his promise, desiring him to give him the assurance, that what
opposition might be made to the contrary by other Ministers, he would yet keep
firm to that word he had given to his Republic: the Vizier constantly promised
that he would; and if any other Ambassadors were not pleased with the
friendship and Treaty of that day, they might seek their remedy as they
pleased, and if they pleased might have liberty to depart. The Marquess being
satisfied with this assurance, took Letters to his Republic in assurance
thereof, and Articles were given, and Privileges The Genoese received.
for Trade signed according to the Tenor of other Capitulations: and being
herewith dispatched, he returned home by Land, and the next year appeared again
himself in the Person of Ambassador Extraordinary to the Ottoman Court; where
after high and considerable Presents and great Expenses made, chiefly supported
by the House of Durazzo, a Resident was seated at Constantinople, and a Consul
at Smyrna, where we will leave them for a while, and some years after (God
willing) take an account of the profit and loss this progging Nation had made
by this Embassy and Trade. But before we leave this point, it will be worth our
noting, how hainously the French Ambassador Monsieur La Hay took this
entertainment of the Genoese, in regard he was so concerned against his
admission, that he declared to the chief Ministers of State, how he had
received Orders to oppose the entrance of the Genoese Nation as highly
prejudicial and obstructive to their Trade; and in fine, to acquaint the Grand
Signior, that in case he resolved to entertain them, his Master would withdraw
his Ambassador and Nation, and therefore they ought to consider, whether a new
Friend and an inconsiderable Republic ought to be preferred before the known
and approved acquaintance of the powerful Empire of France. But whatsoever the
French Ministers were able to act to the contrary, the Genoeses kept their
stations, in which they were the better secured by those frequent occasions of
disgust his most Christian Majesty in defense of the Christian Cause, had given
to these Enemies of the Christian Faith.

The Great Vizier and the German Ambassador being now both at the Ottoman
Port, the Wars were concluded, and every one began to dispose his affairs to a
quiet and a reposed life. But this Empire being still by Gods Providence in a
condition of growth and augmentation, could not remain long in Peace, nor long
in health without exercise and The Turks resolve to prosecute the War in Candia.
action. Wherefore no sooner was Germany at ease, than the Vizier began to move
the prosecution of the War in Candia, desiring to obtain the glory of
subjecting totally that Island, which for the space of twenty five years had
been the principal subject of the Ottoman design and exercise, and acquire to
himself the Fame in History of being Conqueror of Candia, and Concluder of the
Venetian War. Wherefore the Vizier with several other principal Persons,
assembled in a Garden near the City of Adrianople, sent for the Signior
Ballarino Representative for the Republic of Venice; where being come, at the
first word demanded of him the Surrender of the whole Island of Candia. To
which he modestly replied, That so great a gift was not in his power to give,
and that his office was only to be assistant to that happy hour, wherein all
matters might concur toward Peace, and that his Mediation might contribute
toward a conclusion of this long and tedious War. In the mean time he should
acquaint his Prince with the demand the Vizier was pleased to make. To which
the Turks added menaces, with high and insolent words, designing to bend their
whole force and power against Candia, the effect of which will hereafter be a
material subject of our History. And thus much, to my best remembrance, I
received from the mouth of that Venetian Minister.

In the mean time the Grand Signior, though he continued his Sports and
Hunting, without regard to the violent heats of the Summer, yet he began to
entertain something more of warm affection toward his Women, and to be
reconciled to that Sex, in contemplation of his little Son, who beginning now
to play and prattle, afforded him matter of entertainment in the Apartments of
his Women; so that he affectionately doting on his Queen, gave order for
increase of her Revenue and Attendance, The Grand Signior passionately loves
his Queen.
and appointed the best Artisans of Adrianople to make her a Crown studded with
very precious Stones to adorn her Head, of which he was so impatient, that he
ordered the Goldsmiths to work in the Seraglio, permitting them scarce time to
eat or sleep until it was finished. In recompense of which affection of her
Sultan, this Lady so corresponded, that she appeared passionately in love,
practicing certain pretty tricks of swooning and of an uneasy condition in his
absence, which so endeared him in all respects to her, that it was said the
Sultan kept himself constant to this Queen only, and contrary to the custom of
other Emperors, and permission of the Turkish Laws, made use of the multitude
of his other Women only for Slaves, or Attendants to the greater state and
adoration of his beloved Queen.

And now the Grand Signior, at the persuasion of the Vizier and others of his
Council, resolving to winter at Constantinople, certain Women of the lower rank
were dispatched before, as forerunners of the removal of the Court: and being
in the Seraglio at large without observance and awe of their usual Spies, two
of the boldest Wenches finding a Cradle, wherein the Royal Infants were usually
laid, adventured to pick out the best Jewels, of which some were very good
Stones, and afterward laid it up again in a private place, where it was not
easily found. Not many days after the Queen Mother wanting the Cradle of so
much value and antiquity, where many of the young Sultans had lain, sent to the
Seraglio at Constantinople to fetch it thence. But it not being found,
inquisition was made into all secret corners, the Wardrobes were searched, but
nothing appeared, to the great fear of those to whose care it was committed,
one accusing the other to acquit himself. In fine, the matter was so traced,
that some whispers there were concerning those in whose hands the Cradle not
long before was seen to remain. The Women having guilty consciences were amazed
in being so closely followed, and fearing the matter should be perfectly
discovered, entered into consultation what course they should take to save their
lives and their honor. In fine, they both concluded, that in such an extremity
desperate remedies ought to be used, than which none was better than to set
fire to the Seraglio, by which means, either the thing sought for would be
esteemed for burnt and consumed by the fire, or in so great a loss it might be
hoped that The Seraglio at Constantinople set on fire,
matters of smaller moment would not be remembered. Wherefore the bold Wenches
without other consideration gave fire with their candle to the roof of Cedar,
of which wood most of the Women's rooms in the Seraglio are made, which in a
moment made such a flame, as with the help of a little wind, was carried
through all the quarters of the Women's Apartments, and thence took its way to
the Divan Chamber, and other considerable parts of the Court, where many
Records and Registers of Law were consumed to ashes, together with one of the
lesser Treasuries, where much richess, which endured not the test of fire,
perished: and the whole Seraglio had run an evident hazard, had not the
Bostangees and other Servants of the Court ventured far into the flames, in
which many of them miserably perished. The fire being quenched, and the Women
afterward (I know not how) detected to have been the Authors thereof, were
sent to Adrianople, and being there accused, were strangled by the immediate
order of the Grand Signior.

But the destruction of that considerable part of the Seraglio was no
impediment to the Grand Signiors return to Constantinople, being rebuilt with
that speed and industry, equal or excelling the magnificence of the former,
that the day prefixed for the Journey thither was not prolonged by reason
thereof. Howsoever the Grand Signiors aversion to the place made the wheels of
his Chariots move slow, and the quickness of his Attendants grew slack and
cold, observing so much displeasure in their Emperor to the place designed. For
though he was pressed by the Vizier to begin his Journey, and could not
handsomely refuse to comply with the time appointed; yet to defer this
resolution as long as was possible, he contrived a long way of Meander toward
Constantinople, forming his Journey in Company with the Great Vizier by way of
the Dardanelli upon the Hellespont, on pretense of viewing the Fortifications
of the new Forts raised at the entrance of that Straight, and sending some
Provisions from thence for Relief of Candia; wherefore the Captain-Pasha was
commanded to Sea with three Galleys, and at Gallipoli to attend the Grand
Signiors arrival, being to transport him thence to the Castles, and back again.
And the design being now resolved, and hot to prosecute the War in Candia; for
transporting thither a numerous Army, it was concluded, That the Captain-Pasha
should propose to the English Ambassador the Grand Signiors desire of fifteen
Sail of Ships, with consent of our King, for this service, the Turks paying
what reasonable Rates should be demanded. But the Earl of Winchelsea then Lord
Ambassador, modestly replied, That though His Majesty of England did always
entertain a good affection and a zealous disposition toward the Affairs of the
Grand Signior; yet at present the War with Holland, and ill understanding with
France, made his occasions for his own Shipping more urgent than usual, and the
time most unseasonable to press his Majesty in this particular: by which reply
and several other excuses of the Ambassador, the Captain-Pasha perceiving an
aversness to the Proposition, and that Christians unwillingly arm Turks against
the Cross, gave an account of this discourse to the Grand Signior and Vizier,
who immediately gave order for the building of sixty Galleys against the next
Spring, which with what they had before would make up above an hundred Sail.
The Rendezvous of this Fleet, together with Saykes and other Turkish Vessels,
from thence to transport the Vizier and his Army for Candia, was appointed to
be made at Malvoisia; of the success of The Turks prepare for a War on Candia.
which we shall have occasion (God willing) to discourse in the following Year,
which gave a beginning (as we may say) to the total loss of that Country and to
that famous Siege, which in History will bear the Fame of one of the most
memorable in the World. And as a preparation thereunto, and as a supply of the
present urgent necessities, three Ships, viz. one English, another French, and
a third Dutch were laden with Corn, and thirty Sail of Beys Galleys, with all
sorts of Arms and Ammunition, with a Recruit of a thousand Janisaries, were
dispeeded from Constantinople for Reinforcement and Succor of that Island.

And now at length the Grand Signior after his long circuit arrived at
Constantinople, where he made his solemn Entry the third of October, but not
with that Joy and Pomp, which usually attended other Sultans in their return
from the Wars and labors to their Imperial City; but all things seemed like
the Sultans humor sullen and displeased; for he seldom The Grand Signior
arrives at Constantinople.
lodged in his Seraglio, or slept there, but at a small Palace called
Damt-Pasha, where he for the most part made his abode; only sometimes in the
day he passed a few hours at his Seraglio, but rested not there in the night:
the reasons hereof some attributed to the remembrance of those dangers and
troubles which he had seen in that Court, and which made so deep an impression
on his fancy, that he could never enter within those Gates without some sense
of terror for the late disorders.

The German War being thus concluded, the Sultan returned to Constantinople,
and Affairs disposing themselves to spend their fury against Candia, all things
growing black and tempestuous toward that Coast, the Venetians prudently
provided to oppose the storm. And as an able Marquess Villa received into
service of the Venetians.
General, and wise and experienced Captains are the supports of an Army; and
that the success of War depends much on Martial Discipline, and on the
vigilance and wisdom of the Commanders, the Senate gave order to their
Ambassador at Turen called Catarin Belegno, to offer unto Marquess Ghiron
Francesco Villa, a Native of that Country, the honorable charge of General of
the Foot with a stipend of 12000 Crowns of yearly Pay; the said Marquess
obliging himself to bring with him four Captains, and two Lieutenant-Generals,
for entertainment of whom the Republic allowed five thousand Ducats, besides
seventy Ducats a month pay to an Engineer. To this Marquess Villa a power was
given to command in chief over all, without subjection to any other than to the
Captain General, and to the Proveditor-General in Dalmatia, when he waged War
in that Province: and in short, his actions were not to be questioned or
examined by any other than the Senate it self, to whom he was immediately
subjected, and a Gally was to be allotted purposely to transport him and his
Family to Candia. Upon these conditions agreed at Turen, Marquess Villa took
his Journey to Venice about the beginning of April, being accompanied with his
Kinsman Francesco Villa, his Nephew Benedetto Count of Lagnasco, Count Lodovico
Saluzzo, and Count Bernardino Barretta, which four served in quality of
Captains, together with Gio. Francesco Pusserla and Alessandro Negri, who were
Lieutenant-Generals, and Gio. Girolamo Quadruplano Engineer. With these
Companions and several other Volunteers Gentlemen of Quality, the Marquess
Villa was received with much honor by the Nobility and People of Venice; and
being introduced into the College, with a singular grace and fluency of
Language he began to speak in this manner.

IF thanks, most Serene Prince, and most Excellent Sirs, ought to be equivalent
The Speech of Marquis Villa to the Senate.
to the benefits we receive, I must of necessily (not to appear ungrateful)
refuse those favors, which this most Serene Republic is pleased to confer
upon me; or resolve to appear ungrateful, because I am unable to make a
compensation. But I satisfy my self in this, That as the mind which receives
favors, and returns thanks is the same; so that mind which makes
acknowledgments with a due sense of them, does in some measure equal the
benefit, though it prove defective in expressions to declare it. I do theresore
confess and acknowledge, that the Election you have been pleased to make of me
amongst so many conspicuous Persons, unto a Charge graced by most renowned
Predecessors, and in it self most honorable, is a most singular favor, and
an effect of your immense Bounty to me; which though it be limited with some
subordination, yet it may serve for the ultimate Goal to a glorious Course of
Military labors. I must also farther acknowledge, That as it is the property
of this most Serene Republic to receive momentary Services, and to render them
eternal by Records in History; so they have been pleased to adjoyn unto my mean
deserts a remembrance of the humble devotion which my Ancestors professed
toward them: I mean Alfonso Villa my great Grandfather, who in that most
glorious Fleet at Lepanto, whose Sails were the wings of Victory, evidenced his
Christian zeal against that People, which issuing from the bowels of
Sea Monsters, continue to vent their ancient rage against your most Serene
Highness. Nor with less promptness of mind, had my Grandfather Francesco Villa
and my Father Guido Villa consecrated their Powers to your Command; but that
the unparalled Equity of this most Serene Republic gave permission, that one
of them should take the charge of General of the Artillery of the Holy Church
under the Pope his Supreme Lord, preferring a natural duty before a voluntary
service; and that the other being entertained in service of the most Invincible
Charles Emanuel in Piedmont, you were pleased to judge, That the service done
to a Prince your Confederate, and Son of this Republic, was a service and duty
rendered to your selves: so that this Election made of me by this most Serene
Republic, and approved by the singulur goodness of that Charles Emanuel, who
now reigns, evidences the Destiny of my Family, and obliges me to satisfy that
hereditary debt by performances, which my Ancestors entertained only in their
wishes. Hence it is, that to this my Election some celestial influence has
concurred, by which I am clearly assured, that your more than humane power is
desirous to imitate the Divine, which oftentimes makes use of weak means to
operate miraculous effects, that to you only the success may be acknowledged,
and to you only the thanks be returned: that if the Providence of your
Serenity, and of this most Serene Republic will be pleased, (as I am assured
you will) to imitate the Divine Providence, which cooperates with means, the
number and quality of your Troops and plenty of your Provisions, which are the
nerves of War, are those means which correspond with the ends you design: and
therefore I dare presage, that I shall not only see the threatening horns of the
changeable Ottoman Planet precipitated into the Sea by the Venetian horn of
strength, but those glorious Conquests renewed, which rendered your Name more
bright and resplendent than the Sun it self in his Oriental parts. With these
auspicious Presages, I feel already in my breast an impatient heat to sacrifiee
my life in so worthy a cause, fancying that I serve the Universe, whilst I am
engaged in the service of the greatest of Republics, which communicates
delicious Fruit to all People, gathered from those triumphant Palms, which were
planted and watered with her own sweat and labors; and resembles her own
generous Lion, which continually stands on the Guard in opposition to the
common Enemy, that all other people may rest quiet, and repose secure. And thus
much, Most Serene Prince, and Most Excellent Sirs, shall suffice to have been
spoken by a Soldier, not acquainted with Eloquence, to whom courage is more
requisite than words, and to fight well with the hand, is more laudable than to
utter florid Speeches with the tongue.

According to the preceding counsel and desire of Marquis Villa, the Senate
sent by diverse Convoys great plenty of Provision and Ammunition to Candia, and
fitted their Fleet with all things necessary; and strengthened their Forts both
with Horse and Foot drawn out of their Garrisons on the Terra Firma, being
assisted with men and money from other Princes and States. The Pope gave them
liberty to levy four thousand men out of his Countries, the Emperor also
furnished them with a considerable Force, to which were made Additions from
other Parts of Germany.

In this manner the prudent Care of the Venetians provided for their own
safety: But at Constantinople things were more quiet, for it being Winter, the
Turks made Entertainments for the German Ambassador, who was first feasted by
the Chimacam, and twice afterward, with much Magnificence, by the Great Vizier
at his own Garden, seated on the Bosphorus, all difficulties being before
overcome, and agreed, unless the deliverance of the poor Captives from the
Prison and the Oar, who continued in the torment of expectation between hope
and fear, either of liberty or perpetual slavery. Which Treaty though it
properly belonged to the Vizier, to whom the absolute power is derived, yet in
formality it was reserved for matter of the last Audience with the Grand
Signior, who being desirous to attend his Hunting and Pastime abroad, was in
pain, until he had complied with his Office toward this Ambassador, whose
departure though not some time after designed, yet being often called upon, to
receive his Dispatch from the Grand Signior, was admitted on the 31th of
October to his Audience with the same formality and feasting as is common to
all other Ambassadors in the Divan, or place of Judicature, and received three
and forty Costans bestowed on himself and his retinue, and thence being
conducted to the Chamber of Audience, with some of the principal Noblemen of
his Company, they presented themselves on their Knees, with their Faces on the
Ground, according to the Custom of the Eastern Courts; with which occasion the
Here Reningen, who had for sixteen or seventeen The German Ambassadour's last
Audience with the Grand Signior.
years been Resident for the Emperor, a person grown infirm with Age and the
Gout, and his Knees not so active and pliable as the younger sort, coming also
to take his turn in this prostrate manner of Worship, was so rudely handled by
the Kapugibashees, who assisted on each Arm at the Ceremony, that he not being
able to bow his head to easily as others, was thrust down by them with so
little consideration or respect, that his Brows and Forehead were broken on the
Flour; which mischance so disordered him, as put him besides that Speech which
he had premeditated in Turkish to address to the Grand Signior; and though he
curbed what was possible his passion, whilst he remained in the Royal Presence,
yet in vain afterward he vented his Choler with words against those unmannerly
Officers without other remedy or satisfaction. The Demands of the Ambassador
were in writing read before the Grand Signior, according to the custom of the
Court, and principally concerned the freedom of the Slaves, some of which were
then in the Galleys, and Banniard, and others of the most principal in the
seven Towers. Other Demands there were in relation to the State of
Transylvania, that for the future it might be free from Incursions, in which
particular the Turks had already violated the Peace; and that a more orderly
Government of Affairs might be observed on the Frontiers, than usually had
passed, as agreed by the last Capitulations. To which the Grand Signior gave no
Answer, referring all to the Vizier, only told the Ambassador in short, That
he should counsel his Master to beware of invading the Ottoman Dominions, or
acting any thing in prejudice of the Peace.

The Articles of Peace made between the two Emperors were for the most part a
confirmation of the ancient Agreement, only it was provided as a new Addition,
That the Armies should depart from the Confines of Transylvania. Secondly, That
the Castles and Forts garrisoned with German Soldiers in that Country should
be resigned into the hands of the Prince. And Thirdly, There were other
particulars added in reference to Newhausel, and the Countries adjacent lately
conquered, and the Limits of both Emperors, as before declared.

But whilst these things were in agitation, and Ambassadors interchangeably at
either Court, the Turks of Varadin and Janoua made frequent incursions into
Transylvania, destroying the Villages, and carrying, away great numbers of
Captives; and so lately, as about the beginning of August last, those of
Varadin conveyed themselves privately under the Castle Cseh, and robbed the
Horses belonging to that Garrison, killed some, and carried others into
slavery; at which time also two thousand Turks besieged the Castle Valko, which
they took, and razed to the ground; which Complaints of their Countries
Aggrievances the Transilvanians intimated to the German ambassador, as matters
already acted contrary to the late Articles of Peace, requesting farther to
interpose for a moderation and abatement of their Tribute, which Kuperlee had,
contrary to Oath and reason, unjustly augmented. But the Ambassador seemed so
coldly to interpose in this behalf, as taught the Turks to deny his Requests,
acquiescing with this Answer, That it was no breach of Peace the to make
incursions on the Frontiers, as also without Cannon to rob, and spoil, and
skirmish, not exceeding five thousand men in number. For it appeared that the
Ambassador The Reasons why the German Ambassador interposed notin behalf of
Transylvania.
was most desirous to secure the main points of the Peace, which concerned most
the Interest of the Empire, and not hazard it for such like Concernments of
Transylvania; for though it seemed strange to the World to see a Peace hastily
clapped up with disadvantageous Terms on the Emperors side, whilst he was
victorious and fortunate in several Enterprises; yet they that penetrated
farther into the State and Condition of the Empire report, That there was a
necessity of making a moderate use of these successes by a fair accommodation,
rather than to tempt Providence by a too eager and continued prosecution of the
war. For it was observed that the Designs of making the Duke of Anguien, Son to
the Prince of Conde, King of Poland proceeded forward; and that there was a
Combination of a dangerous League amongst the Princes of the Rhine. The
Divisions between the Germans and the Hungarians increased; the latter of which
are known to be an obstinate sort of People. The Army also of the French was
feared in the Bowels of the Empire, under the Command of Monsieur la
Feuvillade, who under pretense of applying themselves to the assistance of
Christendom, were suspected to come with intentions to advance the interest of
their King, and force the next Diet to elect him King of the Romans; in order
whereunto, and in consideration of farther assistance, they demanded several
Towns in Hungary to be delivered into their hands, and made extravagant
Propositions for Winter Quarters; all which considered, made the German
Ambassador more tender how he entered into Disputes with the Turk, which might
prejudice the essential points of the Peace, or occasion a new War more
destructive to Germany through the dangers before intimated, than by the Arms
and Hostility of the common Enemy. These Considerations made the Ambassador
less zealous in the matter of Transylvania, and in all others which were not
really conducing to his Masters immediate service; so that having no other
difficulty remaining, than the liberty of the Captives, on the day of his last
Audience The German Ambassadour's Audience with the Vizier.
with the Vizier, being the 8th of November, he urged with more earnestness
their Release, which was in part granted; those of the Galleys were delivered
from their Chains and Oars; but such as were of greater Quality in the seven
Towers were detained, until the Emperor had on his part released the Turks of
Quality in like manner; and though it was agreed in the Article, That Captives
should on both sides be released, yet the Vizier interpreted it to be in
respect to Number and Quality, of which I remember to have heard often
Complaints, and especially of those poor Gentlemen, then under Irons and
restraint, who though afterward received their freedom, yet for the present
endured more torment in their minds, than if they had never been put in
expectation to enjoy their hopes. At the end of the Audience the Ambassador
proposed something in behalf of the Religious of Jerusalem, That certain places
of Devotion might be restored them, which were injuriously taken from them by
the Greeks; and also that License might be granted for re-Edification of some
Churches, and Monasteries destroyed in Galata by the late Fire: To the first of
which the Vizier answered, That the Franks with the Greeks of Jerusalem should
have a fair and equal Trial at Law about the possession of those places in
difference, and Justice and Right should be done unto the injured; but the
latter Proposition he positively denied, for being a matter contrary to their
Law and Religion, was not dispensable by his Power, nor ought he to expect a
Complement from him, or Gratuity of that nature, which was inconsistent with
the honor and conscience of the Donor; but that in any thing else he was ready
to yield to his Desires, whereby he might understand the value he put upon his
Person, using this Expression, That he was more satisfied that the Emperor had
designed so illustrious and worthy a person to this Embassy, than if he had
sent him a hundred thousand Dollars more of Present, and at the Conclusion of
the Audience, vested both the Ambassador and Resident with Sables, which ended
with all imaginable satisfaction, and mutual contentment.

On the 21th of the month of November arrived at Constantinople Monsieur De
Ventelay, Ambassador from the French King to the Grand Signior, who was Son to
the Sieur De la Hay, the former Ambassador, a An Ambassador arrives srom
France.
person much talked of before he arrived, a generous and an accomplished
Gentleman, and one well practiced in the Affairs of that Country. To understand
which story the better we must look back to the former Year, at the beginning
of which during the German War, and that the Vizier remained in his
Winter Quarters at Belgrade, a Corrier with Letters from his most Christian
Majesty to the First Vizier arrived, who concealed not the occasion of his
coming, nor the contents of his Letters with that secrecy, but that those who
were employed in the Translation of the Papers into Turkish, made it publicly
known to be no other than a recital of the many provocations his most Christian
Majesty had received from the Pirates of Barbary, containing a List of the
Ships, Men, and Goods they had from time to time seized and made Prize: in
vindication of which indignities to his Honor, and in protection of his
People, he could not do less than make a War upon those Pirates (for as yet the
advice was not come, that the French had deserted Gigeri) in which for the
foregoing reasons the Grand Signior ought not to judge himself concerned. And
for the Succor given the Emperor, it was not afforded as King of France, but
as one of the Princes of the Empire, in which capacity, by virtue of his
Tenure, he was obliged to contribute such Forces on the like emergencies and
distresses of the Empire. And if the foregoing reasons were available with the
Sultan to induce him (as in reason he ought) to believe he continued in perfect
friendship with him, without breach of Articles, he was then ready to send his
Ambassador to reside at the Port, provided it might be Monsieur De Ventelay,
Son to Monsieur De la Hay late Ambassador there, who was the person that had
some time since received indignities from the Vizier Kuperlee, that so his
Majesty might receive satisfaction, by having the very person of Monsieur De
Ventelay honored by extraordinary demonstrations of respect, in reparation of
the former affronts. This Messenger having translated his Papers, obtained
license to ride Post to the Vizier, and in the frosts and extremities of the
weather in Jannary set forward on his Journey; but in his passage through
Adrianople, visiting the Chimacam, and desiring his license in like manner to
ride Post to the Vizier on public affairs, received such a lesson of scorn and
disdain, vented with the extremity of choler against the French Nation in
public Divan, with terms undecent to be repeated: and that in farther
resentment, if he were First Vizier, he would refuse to accept any friendship
or alliance with them; but since he was inferior to the Great Vizier, he would
dispeed him to the Camp, and grant him a Command for his Post. But it seems
this Corrier being arrived at Belgrade, was received with better terms, and
more courtesy by the Vizier, who had learned by experience of the late
Christian Wars, and proof of the Valor of the French Nation, that the
Propositions of that King were not lightly to be contemned. And therefore
consented that Monsieur De Ventelay might freely come (using their common
expression) that the Arms of the Port are always open to receive the addresses
of Friends, Allies, and Confederates. With this Message and Letters the Corrier
was dispatched by way of Ragusi with safe conduct, and what else was requisite
for his securer passage. No doubt but his most Christian Majesty was the more
urgent, that the person of Monsieur De Ventelay (who was the subject on whom
formerly the Turks had exercised such injurious violence) should be accepted
for Ambassador, and resolved, Reflections of the Turks on the Embassy of
Monsieur De Ventelay.
unless they received him, he would send no other, that so his Honor which
suffered before in this person, might be repaired again by the respect and
reverence they were to show to him as Ambassador; as if in repentance of their
former unkindness, they should now strive to make amends by extraordinary
demonstrations of honor to this Representative. For it was judged in France,
and there concluded, That there was no other means to repair the Kings Honor,
than by the Embassy of Monsieur De Ventelay; to which that a greater reputation
might be added, he was transported in one of the Kings Ships called the Caesar,
accompanied with a Fire-ship, and a small Patach for a Victualler, and for his
better Equipage was attended by four or five Marquesses and Persons of Quality.
Being arrived at the farther part of the City called the Seven Towers, the
Ships came to an Anchor, from whence the Ambassador sent to advise the Vizier
of his arrival, desiring as one mark of the extraordinary honor promised him,
that a return might be made to the Salute of his Ship from the Seraglio, by the
Cannon which lay under the Wall, a Ceremony before never demanded, or practiced
with respect to any Christian or Turkish Vessel; and that his landing might be
honored with a more than usual reception by the attendance of Officers, or at
least equalled to the Formalities of the late English Ambassador. But the
Vizier it seems judged, that the reception of the English, strained on a
particular occasion, was not to be brought into example, and that a Salute from
the Seraglio was so besides the ordinary custom, that he esteemed the demand to
be extravagant, and that such a President would be dishonorable to his Master.
And therefore resolving not to exceed the particulars of former customs,
offered at his landing to have him accompanied to his House with ten Chaouses;
only the Ambassador not accepting hereof, in a discontented manner entered with
his Ship the day following, and giving the usual Salutes to the Seraglio,
landed at Topenau, a place near to his own Dwelling, from whence with no other
attendance than his own Company, privately walked up, and with no farther
ceremony took possession of the place of Residence of former Ambassadors from
France.

Notwithstanding this slight treatment, the Ambassador was not so much
mortified, but he conceived hopes, that the Turks would at length in
contemplation of his Masters greatness, gratify him with some signal
demonstrations of extraordinary honor, by concessions of unusual Privileges,
and greater facility in his Negotiations: and therefore was induced, though as
yet he had not had a personal Audience of the Vizier, to desire a revocation of
the agreement made with the Genoese, (the Marquess Durazzo, of whom we have
spoken before, being just upon his departure) protesting against it with all
earnestness, as a matter so prejudicial to the French Traffic and Commerce in
those Dominions, that if admission were given to the Genoese, they must expect
to lose friendship and commerce with France. But notwithstanding this heat and
other protestations against it, the Vizier who inherited his Fathers spirit,
little regarded the discontent of the French, but calmly answered, That the
Grand Signior was Master of himself and Country, and might make Peace or War at
his own pleasure without license or permission of the French King; and that
such as were envious, or discontented at the Peace, had free liberty to depart,
and take their remedy as they esteemed most beneficial.

In this manner matters passed between the time of this Ambassadors A strange
accident befallen the French Captain of the Man of War.
Arrival and his Audience. In which interim the curiosity of Monsieur Abermont,
Captain of the French Man of War, had like to have proved fatal to him; for
whilst he viewed from the Gallery of his Ship the pleasant situation of the
Seraglio, and the Prospect of the Bosphorus, behold at a distance appeared
certain Galleys gently gliding down the stream, dressed up with Flags and
Streamers, which all Ships and Saykes saluted with their Guns as they passed.
This Captain being informed that the Grand Signior was there in person, and
returned from his Hunting, which he had made in certain Woods not far from the
City, saluted him also as he passed with twenty five Guns; but being not able
to discover his person, presently fitted his Boat and followed him, hoping to
receive that satisfaction at his landing; for conceiving, that access to the
Ottoman and Eastern Princes is as facile and grateful, as it is to those of
Christendom, with all confidence endeavored to accost the Person of the Grand
Signior as near as was possible. The Grand Signior turning his eyes, and seeing
a man habited (as he conceived) in a barbarous and extravagant dress,
apprehended the Majesty of his Person violated by so near and bold an approach
of the curious Stranger; and thereupon, without farther inquiry, being moved
with scorn and indignation, called for the Executioner, who is ever ready at
his hand. But some persons then present, especially the Bostangibashee, being
of more moderation, beseeched the Grand Signior to have a little patience, and
to inquire of the Ghaur or Infidel (as they called him) the cause of this his
boldness: with which the Grand Signior suppressing a little his passion, and
having patience until one was sent to expostulate with the Captain, who all
this while, though he perceived some disturbance, was yet ignorant that the
matter so dangerously concerned himself; and not being able to understand the
Messenger, nor to be understood by him, rendered the business more confused, and
less understood: which the Messenger observing, and knowing the danger of this
worthy and innocent Gentleman, being perhaps of a compassionate nature and
prudent, framed this excuse to the Grand Signior, That he did not well
understand the Infidels language, but what he conjectured was, That he being
Captain of that Vessel, which had newly saluted his Majesty as he passed with
twenty five Guns, was now come in confidence of his Royal bounty and clemency
to receive a Coftan, as a sign of his Majesty's favor, and reward of his own
respect. The Grand Signior having by this time his choler somewhat abated, was
better pacified with these gentle words; the Bostangibashee also interceding at
the same time in his behalf, that he was a stranger, and ignorant of the
customs of their Court, and that if he deserved punishment, he might be
remitted to the examination of the Vizier, who might chastise him, as he found
it reasonable. The Grand Signior contented herewith, the rude Bostangees seized
the Captain and hurried him to the Vizier, who all this time was ignorant of
his error or his danger, more than that he perceived by the accent of their
words, and by their gestures, that something was amiss, and debated in
reference unto him. The Drugger-men, or Interpreters of the French Nation being
sent for, and the Vizier and the Captain both understanding the matter, the
crime appeared only to be an absurdity committed through ignorance: yet to
please the Grand Signior, and to make an appearance, as if something were done
in chastisement of this bold curiosity, the Vizier ordered, that the Captain
should be conducted by two Chaouses to the Ambassador, there to be put in
Chains and in Prison, until satisfaction was made for his fault. The Captain
being thus brought before the Ambassador, this honest Gentleman was punished
in the same manner as we do those in Christendom, who crowd to see their Prince.

The Ambassador had his first Audience with the Vizier on the 7th of December,
which being insignificant to any other business more than to the delivery of
his Masters Letter, and other matters of Form and Ceremony, we shall need to
insist the less upon it.

His second Audience before that of the Grand Signior, was in the beginning The
French Ambassadors second Audience.
of January, at which time the Ambassador began to declare what he had in
Commission from his King, which principally related toward a satisfaction for
those affronts formerly offered him in the person of his Father, and himself
inculcating into the Vizier a true apprehension of the greatness of his Master,
his Force by Land, his powerful Fleet which should that following year be set
forth in the Mediterranean Seas, with other arguments which might challenge due
respect and honor to so great a Prince. These Proposals and Discourses, though
the Vizier seemed not to entertain with that benign and flexible ear as was
expected or thought satisfactory, and thereupon several disgusts did afterward
succeed; howsoever in the end all matters cleared up again, and his Excellency
was permitted to return to his own House with all imaginable satisfaction, as
he was pleased to intimate to the Ambassador for his Majesty of Great Britain.
Soon after followed his Audience with the Grand Signior according to the usual
Ceremonies; so that all things run smoothly with the French for several years
after. And here by the way it is observable, That an English Ambassador once
arguing hotly with the Vizier on some points of the Capitulations, in which
judging himself wronged, threw the Capitulations to the Vizier, telling him,
that he might keep the Writing and Paper, since he resolved not to obey the
Letter. The Vizier hereupon calmly took the Capitulations, and laid them behind
his Cushion, which the Ambassador in a more considerate temper could not again
recover under an expense of fifteen hundred Pieces of Eight.

During the time of these Negotiations the Grand Signior wholly employed his
time and thoughts in Hunting, ranging all the Woods for several days journies
round Constantinople, in which Exercise twenty or thirty thousand men were
employed, collected from the Cities and Villages round about, all which were
paid at the public expense and charge of Housekeepers both Turks and
Christians, which in one hunt might The Grand Signiors Huntings.
amount to thirty or forty thousand Dollars. With this burden the people being
often oppressed, and many perishing in the Woods with cold and hunger, began to
murmur at the excess of Tyranny, cursing their Princes madness and folly,
maintained with the life and ruin of his Subjects. But not withstanding all
these whispered curses and secret menaces the Grand Signior followed his
delights with such frequency, and with that heat and eagerness, that the people
perceiving no end of their misery, began to speak loudly and plainly, and by
some principal Persons gave the Vizier to understand, That the people would not
longer endure the extravagant Vagaries of their Prince at so dear a rate, of
which he that was his chief Counselor ought to inform and advise him. The
Vizier, who was before sensible of the excess of his Masters humor in this
particular, and that immoderation, even in lawful and innocent exercises, may
become a Vice, and when acted with oppression of the Subject as dangerous as
other terms which sound more of Tyranny and Violence, resolved with courage and
humility to represent to his Master the danger of such expensive Huntings,
especially when over frequent; and therefore assured those who made their
Complaints, That for the future all matters should be redressed, and the Grand
Signior should not be so prodigal in his Huntings on the Purse of his Subjects.
And so sensible was the Vizier of the disorders which might arise from hence,
if some remedy were not speedily applied, that he immediately departed
Constantinople to find out the Grand Signior, who was lodged in some retired
cool place, environed with Woods and Mountains; leaving Solomon Pasha for
Chimacam, or Deputy, in his place, in whose former Government many terrible
Fires had happened in Constantinople.

About this time Advice came to Constantinople of certain Addresses the The
Nogay Tartar desires Lands of the Grand Signior.
Nogay Tartar had made to the Pasha of Silistria to obtain a Country to live in
between the Rivers of Boristhenes and the Danube; for that their own Country
being full, they were forced to abandon and empty it of forty or fifty thousand
Families, who lived in Wagons, and had about a hundred thousand head of
Cattle, all which with their substance, they proffered for Subjects to the
Grand Signior, if he pleased to afford them protection, and Land for Pasture
and habitation. The Pasha approving hereof, gave them assurance of security
under the shadow of his Masters favors, sending information thereof to the
Port, who willingly embraced these new-come Guests, and entered into
consultation what Country and Limits should be assigned them. In the mean time
the Krim Tartar jealous of this people, and not knowing what inconvenience such
Neighborhood might produce, fell upon them, and cut off a great number of
them, forcing the rest to return into their own Country, which though ill taken
at first by the Turks, was yet afterward excused by the Tartar, and dissembled
by the Port.

Though all things appeared quiet at Constantinople after the Peace concluded
with the Emperor, and that the German Ambassador was returned back to his
Master; yet the Turks prosecuted their Designs against Venice, and made great
preparations in the Provinces of Albania, Bossena, and Licca, which confine on
the Venetian Territories; and though in reality those Forces were not intended
against those parts, but in order to a more warm prosecution of the War in
Candia, whither the Vizier intended to transport himself in Person; yet the
Venetian State not fully penetrating the Design, took the Alarm chiefly in
Dalmatia, and reinforced their Garrisons of Cataro and other Fortresses. And
that matters there might be well provided, and all things acted with due
circumspection; Marquis Villa was ordered to visit those Garrisons in his
Marquess Villa surveys the Forts in Dalmatia.
Voyage to Candia; so that departing from Venice attended with two Galleys, he
arrived in a few days at Zara, and thence proceeding to Spalato, where the
Proveditor General, Catarin Cornaro, made at that time his residence; they both
joined together to survey the most important places of that Province. They
began with the City of Spalato, which Spalato.
rather seems a place intended by Nature for a Palace of delights, than a
Garrison of Arms; being the Seat which Dioclesian (who was born at Salona, six
miles distant from thence) chose for his Garden of retirement, after he had
renounced the Empire, and is now turned into a ruder shape of War, since the
Invasion of the Turk made it necessary to be fortified for security of itself,
and the parts circumjacent. Spalato is now very strong, being secured by diverse
Redoubts; the chief of which is situated on a little rising, called Grippe,
distant about a Musket Shot from the Town, is strengthened with four Royal
Bastions, and with good Artillery; there is also a new Line of Fortisication
drawn round the Town, which renders it the strongest, and most considerable of
all Dalmatia: But to make this place the more impregnable, these Generals laid
the foundation for another Bulwark; and as an evidence of their Union, they
cast a medal with a stamp on one side of Cornaro, and on the other of Marquis
Villa, and so rendering thanks to God, the Service ended with firing all the
Guns of the Town.

Afterward both the Generals embarking, passed that Night to Curzola, Curzola.
anciently called Corcina Negra, which is one of the greatest and best of the
Isles of this Gulf; Thence passing by Ragust, where the Deputies of that
Government, in recognition of that Soveraingty which the Venetians have over
the Adriatic Seas, presented the usual refreshments to the General of the
Province; and in a particular manner treated Marquis Villa with a Present in
name of their Republic. That Night they Cataro and Perasto.
arrived at the Entrance of the Channel of Cataro, and taking Perasto in their
way (which is a strong Fortification about six miles distant from Cataro) they
were received there with firing all the Guns of the Town, which were doubly
multiplied by an Echo returned from the sound of the neighboring Mountains.
Thence they proceeded to visit Budua, a place well fortified, as also Fort St
George in the Island Liesina, which is the usual Rendezvous of Brigantines, and
armed Barques; at length they went to Almissa, where they made a general Muster
of all the Forces of the Province; in all which places having viewed and
amended the defects in Fortification, and given order for supplying them with
Ammunition and Provisions necessary; they returned back to see the famous
Fortress of Clissa, the situation of which seems to have been Clissa.
planted when Nature desired to sport, and be wanton; for it issues, as it
were, out of the Bosom of two Mountains, which are at an equal distance from
the Town, and then drawing themselves at each end into the fashion of a Bow,
seem to form a triumphal Arch. The passage through these Mountains is so narrow
and crooked, that it appears like a Labyrinth; and being supplied with plenty
of Fountains and Cisterns both within and without the Fortress, the Suburbs
demolished, and no encumbrances to cloy and weaken its strength, is certainly
more obliged to Nature for its defense than to Art. From hence they proceeded
to view Sebenico, which is another strong Fortress, situated on a rising Hill,
and Sibenico.
overviews a spacious Port, the entrance to which is secured by the Fort St
Nicholas; and the City it self, besides its own Walls, is guarded by a
Citadel, and by the new works of St John, situated on two Hills; From hence
the Generals returning to Zara, the Capital City of the Province, which being
encompassed by the Sea, and annexed to the Land only by a Bridge, which is also
defended by a Fort, is rendered the strongest and most impregnable of all the
Fortresses. And here having made a general Muster of all the Forces, and
visited the Country of Novigrade, and Possidaria the habitations of the Morlach
Militia, the Marquis returned again to Venice, being called thither by the
Senate; for the Year being now well spent, and the Winter approaching too near
to admit of any considerable action; the time grew seasonable for counsels in
which manner the Affairs of Wars might best and most advantageously be directed
for the succeeding Year. Yet in regard Advices were come from Candia, That the
Turks were much afflicted with the Pestilence, and scarcity of all Provisions;
it was judged requisite to prosecute the War the more eagerly against them,
before the Great Vizier arrived there with such an Army as commonly attends his
Person; it being advised from Count Leslie, the Emperors Ambassador at
Constantinople, that the whole force of the Ottoman Arms was to refund it self
speedily on that Island. This Intelligence hastened the departure of Marquis
Villa from Venice, with such Force as was then in a readiness, being directed
with necessary Instructions of what he ought to act in Candia. In his Voyage
thither he touched at Corsu, Cesalonia, and Zant, and afterward happily
arrived on the 6th of December at the Isle of Paros or Parest in the
Archipelago, where he met with the Captain General, and other Chief Commanders
of the Fleet, together with Vuertmiller the Lieutenant General of the Ordnance;
and here the Marquess reforming several Companies, which were much diminished
in their numbers, a general Muster was made of all the Forces, which being
ranged in form of Battle, they were accounted to amount unto eighteen hundred
Horse, and eight thousand two hundred ninety five Foot. This Army had some want
of Fire-Armes, and other Necessaries, of which the Senate being advised, they
promised to supply all by a Convoy, then preparing; and congratulating in their
Letters to Marquis Villa the good News of his happy Arrival at Paros, raised
and prompted him to Achievements worthy his Courage and Grandeur; for being a
Person now elevated on the Bulwarks of Candia, he seemed to stand on that
Theater, where he had all Europe for his Spectators.

The Troubles which the English Trade found this Year in Turkey.
THE Current of our Negotiations ran smoothly this Year without any
considerable interruption in all parts of Turkey, unless at Aleppo, where the
Emin, or Customer, according to his usual practice, began a new pretense, not
only against former Presidents, but also against the very Letter of
Capitulations, demanding 2 per Cent. Custom at Scanderone, and 3 at Aleppo; a
matter against which our Articles of Peace and Commerce have made many and
sundry Provisions; Notwithstanding the Customer (like others of his
Predecessors, who have ever at Aleppo made Disputes about their Customs,
without being restrained by the most strict Imperial Commands, and plainest
Decisions of the Law) resolved to make good his pretense by a sequestration on
the whole Cargo of two general Ships, then under his Custody in the
Custom-house. The Consul hereupon had recourse to the Justice of the Kadi, and
there produced the Capitulations, the Hattesheriff, or Royal Signature, under
the hand of Sultan Ibrahim, wherein the particulars of Custom were regulated, a
Command from the present Vizier, and his Father, and other Commands from
Adrianople and Constantinople, all of the same tenor. The Emin on the other
side, had no other Argument than his Baratz or Patent from the Tefterdar or
Lord Treasurer, which was so prevalent, and of that force with the Kadi, joined
with the fear and favor he bore toward the Emin; that it was judged by him to
stand in balance with all the other Imperial Signatures; and therefore left
the business (which was as much as the Customer desired) undecided, making a
Declaration, that the reasons on both sides were so forcible, and the arguments
so equal, that he concluded it more proper, that a matter of so great
importance should be reserved for the determination of more powerful and
eminent Officers. The matter standing thus doubtfully, the Emin conceiving it
too great a pawn to detain so great a quantity of Cloth for a difference only
in the Custom, delivered to every man his consignation, reserving only fifty
Bales to make himself good on the judgment and commands he expected shortly in
his favor. The difference being now referred up to the Court, the Lord
Ambassador received the just complaints of the Consul and Merchants; for
redress of which abuses, his Excellency dispatched my self, then his Secretary
and Druggerman, to the Vizier at Belgrade, attending the advice of the German
Ambassadors entrance into the Frontiers. The Vizier having heard the
difference, was ready to have passed sentence in our favor, had not the
Tefterdar the only Advocate for the Customer, from whom the Original of our
Evils was derived, put an unhappy obstacle in the course of our Negotiations,
pretending that therewerd ancient Tefters or accounts amongst his Books, which
mentioned two and a half per Cent. at Scanderone, and three at Aleppo; and
though it was urged to the contrary, that we never had to do with the Registers
of the Treasurers, nor had managed any Apalto, or Farm of the Grand Signior;
but our Capitulations are our Law and Rule, and our Commands Registered in the
Reis Efendi's, or Secretaries Office, than which we never had, nor could ever
acknowledge any other Canon: yet the Vizier over ruled our reasons, and we were
forced to submit, until the Tefterdar took his leisure to examine and consult
his Books.

The Vizier and his Army being then upon their return, we found no opportunity
to renew our solicitations, until we came to Nissa, where the Army had two
days of repose, and there again as in other places before, we urged the
Tefterdar so importunately, that at length we compelled him to acknowledge to
the Vizier, that our affairs were not registered in his Office. So that now we
took liberty to declare our reasons to the Vizier; which we drew from our
Capitulations, the ancient Hattesheriff of Aleppo, the Vizier and his Fathers
own Commands, and Copies of others of the like tenor, not omitting other
Arguments and Evidences, which rendered the business not a little clear and
apparent to the capacity of the Vizier: who thereupon reprehended the
Tefterdar, for seeking by his Command to introduce an innovation contrary to
our Capitulations, and promised us Commands in our favor; but we replied, that
we had already Commands, and the Grand Signiors own Royal Signature on our
side, and that our Ambassador had not sent us so many days Journey to seek
another, which perhaps would as ill be observed as the former; But it was the
punishment of the Customer which the Ambassador expected, who against so many
clear evidences, durst proceed to the violation of them all. Many other words
were added pertinent and forcible to the present purpose. To which the Vizier
answered, that he was now upon his Journey, where business of this nature was
ill dispatched. And therefore ordered us to proceed to Adrianople, where he
should have more leisure to consider what was sit to be done in order to
justice and satisfaction of the Ambassador. Hereupon I left the Army, wherein
I was much incommoded, and proceeded with all haste to Adrianople, where the
Great Vizier in some days after me arrived, and there we renewed our wonted
endeavors, and solicitations, that we might come to an end of this business,
and that justice might be done us: But the Vizier willing to gratify the
Tefterdar, was not forward to pass his Sentence, but put us again off to
Constantinople, where the Books should be perused, that were laid up amongst
the Registers of the Divan: For that this matter was a concernment of the G.
Signiors, in determination of which, he ought to be tender and considerate.
That for sending for Ibrahim Aga, the Customer (which was one of the principal
of our demands) to answer for the injuries he had done our Nation, he was
already ordered to appear at Court, where he should be ready to stand to
judgment for what the Ambassador should object against him: and this had been
the answer which was contrived to be given to the Ambassador himself, in case
he had (as once he designed) appeared at Adrianople in person on this occasion.

The Vizier arriving at Constantinople some few Months after; The Lord
Ambassador obtained Audience of him on the 15th of October, pressing still for
justice against the Customer of Aleppo: but nothing thereof could be procured,
besides a Command for restitution of the fifty Bales of Cloth, detained in the
hands of the Emin, upon the pretense before related, and that the payment of
Customs should be regulated after the rate of three per Cent. according to the
ancient usance. For putting this Command in execution, an Aga was ordered to be
dispatched, for whose service herein the Vizier allotted a thousand Dollars
should be paid him, which though an extravagant reward, yet to put an honor
and authority on the business, and not to displease the Vizier, it was granted
to him, and so he was dispatched the 25th for Aleppo. But the troubles of our
Merchants at Aleppo ended not here: For the-Tefterdar greatly enraged to see
his designs against us to have no better issue, thought to trouble us by a new
invention of prohibiting the Scale of Scanderone to all English and other
Christian Vessels, and that the Factories should be transferred again over to
Tripoli in Soria; a place formerly frequented by our Merchants, but by reason
of the danger and inconvenience of that Port, the Trade was transported to the
Scale of Scanderone. This alteration the Tefterdar pretended to have been
granted to the Merchants at their carnest Petition, and promise to the G.
Signior, of payment of 13000. Dollars Yearly, for discharge and maintenance of
those Guards which were requisite in that place for safety of the Coast, and
defense of the Caravans which pass with Merchants goods to Aleppo; but time and
corruption of the Ministers had deprived the Grand Signior of the benefit of
that duty. And this he urged with the greater instance and eagerness, knowing
that the Scale of Scanderone being prohibited, the Hattesheriff whereon
consisted the privilege of the Merchants, and their sole security must
consequently fall, and they forced to a new agreement. On this occasion our
Lord Ambassador had Audience with the Vizier, and insisted on that point of
our Capitulations, which gives us liberty to trade in any part of the Grand
Signiors Dominions; and therefore to consent to be restrained, or confined to
any particular place, was to assent to a breach of the Capitulations, which was
out of his power, and only to be dispensed with by his Master the King of
England, and the Grand Signior by whom they were established; and to connive or
assent to the breach of one particular clause, was to hazard the loss and
breach of the whole: for that our Capitulations (to use the Turks saying) are
like a string of Beads, of which, when one link is broken, the others drop off.
To which the Vizier replied, that the Scale of Scanderone was open, and clear
as before for the English Trade; but because the Tefterdar, and Customer,
pretended that the Grand Signior was put to great expenses for maintenance of a
Watch and Guard at that Port, which was only in respect to the security of the
Merchants Goods; Orders should be given for taking away those Officers, as
unnecessary and insignificant to the public Service; no Guards having ever
been in that place, the Ambassador judged his business to be granted, and so
thanked the Vizier and departed. But not many days after the Tefterdar procured
a Command for shutting the Scale of Scanderone, and transporting the Factory to
Tripoli: which Command was rather intended to affright our Nation into some
composition, than really to be put in execution, as appeared by the sequel; for
the Tefterdar better considered than to bring so great an odium upon himself
from the whole Country and City of Aleppo, and to enforce the Ambassador to
have recourse to the Grand Signiors own person, for redress of an abuse of so
high a nature, in derogation of his Imperial Capitulations. Howsoever it is
observable in the transaction of all this business, that it is difficult to
bring a corrupt Turkish Minister to Justice or punishment, merely for breach of
our Capitulations, or in respect to any difference or abuse offered to
Christians, unless the complaint be accompanied with presents or money, which
are most prevalent Arguments in the Turkish Court; and in this Case I really
believe, that had three or four thousand Dollars been offered as a reward for
bringing the Customer to capital punishment, the complaint had found
acceptance, and honorable success: for default of which, the Cause was
starved, and naked, and carried no fire or heat in those aggravations with
which it was represented. It is likewise observable, that business in the
Turkish Court does not always find that dispatch, or expedition, as is
generally believed in Christendom, unless it come accompanied with the
interest of the Ministers themselves, and then it is transacted in a moment,
which otherwise languishes with delays, and will never want excuses to defer it.

Anno 1666. Hegeira 1077.
WE shall begin this Year with the strange rumor and disturbance of the Jews,
concerning Sabatai Sevi, their pretended Messiah, which for being most
principally acted in Turkey, may properly belong to the History of this time
and place; which therefore for delight of the Readers, I shall here insert: for
though it may have been elsewhere published, yet being an issue of my Pen, I
may lawfully now own it, and annex it to this History, in respect of that near
coherence it may have therewith; and that many other particulars have been
added thereunto, which succeeded until the Death of this Sabatai.

According to the Predictions of several Christian Writers, especially Arabia,
supposed to be the ten Tribes and a half, lost for so many Ages. That a Ship
was arrived in the Northern parts of Scotland, with her Sails and Cordage of
Silk, navigated by Mariners who spoke nothing but Hebrew, and with this Motto
on their Sails, The twelve Tribes of Israel. These reports agreeing thus near
to former Predictions, put the wild sort of the World into an expectation of
strange accidents this Year should produce in reference to the Jewish Monarchy.

In this manner Millions of people were possessed when Sabatai Sevi first
appeared at Smyrna, and published himself to the Jews for their Messiah,
relating the greatness of their approaching Kingdom, the strong hand whereby
God was about to deliver them from Bondage, and gather them from all the parts
of the World. It was strange to see, how this fancy took, and how fast the
report of Sabatai, and his Doctrine, flew through all parts where Jews
inhabited, and so deeply possessed them with a belief of their new Kingdom and
richess; and many of them with promotion to Offices of Government, renown and
greatness; that in all places from Constantinople to Buda (which it was my
fortune that Year to travel) I perceived a strange transport in the Jews, none
of them attending to any business, unless to wind up former Negotiations, and
to prepare themselves and Families for a Journey to Jerusalem; all their
Discourses, their Dreams, and disposal of their affairs, tended to no other
design, but a re-establishment in the Land of Promise, to Greatness and Glory,
Wisdom and Doctrine of the Messiah, whose Original, Birth and Education is
first to be recounted.

Sabatai Sevi was Son of Mordechai Sevi, an Inhabitant and natural of Smyrna,
who gained his Livelihood by being Broker to an English Merchant in that place;
a person who before his Death was very decrepit in his Body, and full of the
Gout and other infirmities: But his Son Sabatai Sevi addicting himself to study
and learning, became a notable proficient in the Hebrew and Arabic Languages;
and especially in Divinity and Metaphysics, he was so cunning a Sophister,
that he vented a new Doctrine in their Law, and drew to the profession of it so
many Disciples, as raised one day a tumult in the Synagogue; for which
afterward he was by censure of the Kockhams (who are the Expounders of the
Law) banished out of the City.

During the time of his Exile he traveled to Thessalonica, now called
Salonica, where he married a very handsome Woman; but either not having that
part of Economy as to govern a Wife, or being impotent as to Women, as was
pretended, or that she found not favor in his eyes, she was divorced from him.
Again, he took a second Wife more beautiful than the former; but the same
causes of discontent raising a difference between them, he obtained another
Divorce from this Wife also. And being now free from the encumbrances of a
Family, his wandering head moved him to travel through the Morea, thence to
Tripoli in Syria, Gaza, and Jerusalem, and by the way picked up a Ligornese
Lady, whom he made his third Wife, the Daughter of some Polonian or German, her
Original and Country not being very well known. And being now at Jerusalem, he
began to reform their Law, and to abolish the Fast of Tamuz, (which they keep
in the month of June) and meeting there with a certain Jew called Nathan, a
proper Instrument to promote his design, he communicated to him his condition,
his course of life, and intentions to declare himself the Messiah of the World,
so long expected and desired by the Jews. This design took wonderfully with
Nathan; and because it was thought necessary, according to Scripture and
ancient Prophecies, that Elias was to precede the Messiah, as St. John Baptist
was the Forerunner of Christ, Nathan thought no man so proper to act the part
of the Prophet as himself; and so no sooner had Sabatat declared himself the
Messiah, but Nathan discovers himself to be his Prophet, forbidding all the
Fasts of the Jews in Jerusalem, and declaring that the Bridegroom being come,
nothing but joy and triumph ought to dwell in their habitations, writing to all
the Assemblies of the Jews to persuade them to the same belief. And now the
Schism being begun, and many Jews really believing what they so much desired,
Nathan took the courage and boldness to prophecy, That one year from the 27th
of Kislan, which is the month of July, the June.
Messiah was to appear before the Grand Signior, and to take from him his
Crown, and lead him in chains like a Captive: Sabatai also at Gaza preached
Repentance to the Jews, and Obedience to himself and Doctrine, for that the
Coming of the Messiah was at hand. Which novelties so affected the Jews,
Inhabitants of those parts, that they gave up themselves wholly to their
Prayers, Alms, and Devotions; and to confirm this belief the more, it happened
that at the same time that news hereof with all particulars were dispatched
from Gaza, to acquaint the Brethren in foreign parts; the rumor of the Messiah
had flown so swift, and gained such reception, that Intelligence came from all
Countries, where the Jews sojourn, by Letters to Gaza and Jerusalem,
congratulating the happiness of their deliverance, and expiration of their time
of servitude by the appearance of the Messiah. To which they adjoined other
Prophecies relating to that Dominion the Messiah was to have over all the
World, that for nine months after he was to disappear; during which time the
Jews were to suffer, and several of them to undergo Martyrdom; but then
returning again mounted on a celestial Lion, with his Bridle made of Serpents
with seven heads, accompanied with his Brethren the Jews, who inhabited on the
other side of the River Sabation, he should be acknowledged for the sole
Monarch of the Universe, and then the Holy Temple should descend from Heaven
already built, framed, and beautified, wherein they should offer Sacrifices for
ever. And here I leave the Reader to consider, how strangely this deceived
People was amused, when these confident and vain reports and dreams of Power
and Kingdoms had wholly transported them from the ordinary course of their
trade and interest.

This noise and rumor of the Messiah having begun to fill all places, Sabatai
Sevi resolved to travel toward Smyrna, the Country of his Nativity, and thence
to Constantinople, the capital City, where the principal work of preaching was
to be performed: Nathan thought it not fit to be long after him, and therefore
travels by way of Damaseus, where resolving to continue some time for better
propagation of this new Doctrine, in the mean while writes this Letter to
Sabatai Sevi as follows.

22. Kesvan of this Year.
TO the King our King, Lord of our Lords, who gathers the dispersed of Israel,
who redeems our Captivity, the Man elevated to the height of all sublimity, the
Messiah of the God of Jacob, the true Messiah, the Celestial Lion, Sabatai
Sevi, whose Honor be exalted, and his Dominion raised in a short time and for
ever, Amen. After having kissed your hands, and swept the dust from your seet,
as my duty is to the King of Kings, whose Majesty be exalted, and his Empire
enlarged. These are to make known to the Supreme Excellency of that place,
which is adorned with the beauty of your Sanctity, that the Word of the King
and of his Law has enlightened our faces, that day has been a solemn day unto
Israel, and a day of light unto our Rulers, for immediately we applied our
selves to perform your Command, as our duty is. And though we have heard of
many strange things, yet we are courageous, and our heart is as the heart of a
Lion, nor ought we to inquire a reason of your doings, for your works are
mavelous and past finding out, and we are consirmed in our fidelity without
all exception, resigning up our very Souls for the Holiness of your Name. And
now we are come as far as Damascus, intending shortly to proceed in our Journey
to Scanderone, according as you have commanded us, that so we may ascend and
see the face of God in light, as the light of the face of the King of life: and
we servants of your servants shall cleanse the dust from your feet, beseeching
the Majesty of your Excellency and Glory, to (...) from your habitation to have
a care of us, and help us with the force of your right hand of strength, and
shorten our way which is before us. And we have our eyes toward Jah, Jah, who
will make haste to help us and save us, that the children of iniquity shall not
hurt us, and toward whom our hearts pant, and are consumed within us, who
shall give us talons of iron to be worthy to stand under the shadow of your
Ass. These are the words of the servant of your servants, who prostrates
himself to be trod on by the soals of your feet.

Nathan Benjamin,


And that he might publish this Doctrine of the Messiah and himself more
plainly, he wrote from Damascus this following Letter to the Jews at Aleppo,
and parts thereabouts.

TO the Residue or remnant of the Israelites Peace without end. These my words
are to give you notice, how that I am arrived in peace at Damascus, and behold
I go to meet the face of our Lord, whose Mijesty be exalted; for he is the
Sovereign of the King of Kings, whose Empire be enlarged. Sabatai wrote a
Letter to elect one man out of every Tribe.
According as he has commanded us and the Twelve Tribes to elect unto him
twelve men, so have we done: and we now go to Scanderone by his Command to show
our faces together with part of the principal of those particular friends to
whom he has given license to a assemble in that said place.

And now I come to make known unto you, That though you have heard strange
things of our Lord, yet let not your hearts faint or fear, but rather fortify
your selves in your faith, because all his actions are miraculous and secret,
which humane understanding cannot comprehend; and who can penetrate into the
depth of them? In a short time all things shall be manifested clearly unto you
in their purity, and you shall know and consider, and be instructed by the
Inventor himself, and blessed is he who can expect and arrive to the Salvation
of the true Messiah, who will speedily publish his Authority and Empire over us
now and for ever.

Nathan.


And now all the Cities of Turkey, where the Jews inhabited, were full of the
expectation of the Messiah, no Trade or course of gain was followed; every one
imagined, that daily Provisions, Richess, Honors, and Government were to
descend upon him by some unknown and miraculous manner. An Example of which is
most observable in the Jews at Thessalonica, who now full of assurance, that
the restoration of their Kingdom, and the accomplishment of the times for the
Coming of the Messiah was at hand, judged themselves obliged to double their
Devotions, and purify their Consciences from all sins and enormities, which
might be observed by the scrutiny of him who was now come to penetrate into the
very thoughts and imaginations of Mankind. For which work, certain Kochams were
appointed to direct the people in the regulation of their Prayers, Devotions,
and Fastings: but so forward was every one now in his acts of Penance, that
they stayed not for the sentence of the Kocham, or Prescriptions or Rules, but
applied themselves immediately to Fastings; and some in that manner beyond the
abilities of Nature, that having for the space of seven days taken no
sustenance, were famished: others buried themselves in their Gardens, covering
their naked bodies with earth, their heads only excepted, remained in those
beds of dirt, until their bodies were stiffned with the cold and moisture:
others would endure to have melted wax dropped upon their shoulders: others to
roll themselves in snow, and throw their bodies in the coldest season of the
winter into the Sea, or frozen waters. But the most common manner of
Mortification was first to prick their backs and sides with thorns, and then to
give themselves thirty nine lashes. All business was laid aside, none worked or
opened shop, unless to clear his Warehouse of Merchandise at any price: who
had superfluity in Household Stuff sold it for what he could, but yet not to
Jews, who were interdicted from all bargains or sales under pain of
Excommunication, pecuniary mulcts, or corporal punishment; for their
comportment as to business and employment was esteemed the test or touchstone
of their faith. It being the general Tenent, That in the days that the Messiah
appeared, the Jews should become Masters of the Estates and Inheritance of
Insidels, until when they ought to content themselves with matters only
necessary to maintain and support life. But because that every one was not
Master of that Provision and Fortune as to live without daily labor; therefore
to quiet the clamours of the poor, and prevent the enormous lives of some, who
upon these occasions would become vagabonds, and desert their Cities, due order
was taken to make collections, which were so liberally bestowed, that in
Thessalonica only four hundred poor were supported by the mere charity of the
richer. And as they endeavored to purge their consciences of sin, and to apply
themselves to good works, that the Messiah might find the City prepared for his
reception; so lest he should accuse them of any omission in their Law, and
particularly in their neglect of that ancient Precept of Increase and multiply,
they married children together of ten years of age, and some under, without
respect to richess or poverty, condition or quality; but being promiscuously
joined to the number of six or seven hundred couple, upon better and cooler
thoughts, after the deceit of the false Messiah was discovered, or the
expectation of his Coming grew cold, were divorced, or by consent separated
from each other.

In the heat of all this talk and rumor came Sabatai Sevi to Smyrna, the City
of his Nativity, infinitely desired there by the common Jews, but by the
Kochams or Doctors of their Law, who gave little or no credence to what he
pretended, was ill received, not knowing what mischief or ruin this Doctrine
and Prophecy of a new Kingdom might produce. Yet Sabatai bringing with him
Testimonials of his Sanctity, holy Life, Wisdom, and gift of Prophecy, so
deeply fixed himself in the heart of the generality, both as being holy and
wife, that thereupon he took courage and boldness to enter into dispute with
the Grand Kocham (who is the head or chief Expositor of their Law, and
Superintendent of their civil Government) between whom the arguments grew so
high, and language so hot, that the Jews who favored the Doctrine of Sabatai,
and feared the Authority of the Kocham, doubtful what might be the issue of the
contest, appeared in great numbers before the Kaddee of Smyrna, in
justification of their new Prophet, before so much as any accusation came
against him; the Kaddee according to the custom of the Turks swallowed money on
both sides, and afterward remitted them to the determination of their own
Justice. In this manner Sabatai gained ground daily; and the Grand Kocham with
his Party, losing both the affection and obedience of his People, was displaced
from his Office, and another constituted more affectionate and agreeable to the
new Prophet, whose power daily increased by those confident reports of his
Enemies being struck with frenzy and madness, until being restored to their
former temper and wits by him, became his Friends, Admirers, and Disciples. No
invitation was now made in Smyrna by the Jews, nor Marriage, or Circumcision
held, where Sabatai was not present, accompanied to the solemnities with
multitudes of his Followers, and the streets covered with Carpets or fine Cloth
for him to tread on; but the humility of this Pharisee appeared such, that he
would stoop and turn them aside, and so pass. And having thus fixed himself in
the opinion and admiration of the people, he began to take on himself the Title
of Messiah and the Son of God, and to make this following Declaration to all
the Nations of the Jews, which being wrote Originally in Hebrew, was translated
for me faithfully into Italian in this manner. L'Unico Figliolo e Primogenito
di Dio Sabatai Sevi, il Messiah e Salvatore d'Israel, atutti li Figlioli
d'Israel eletti di Dio, Pace. Essendo che set fatti degni di veder quel gran
giorno della deliberatione e salvatione di Israel, e consummatione delle Parole
di Dio promise per li suoi Profeti, e Padri nostri, per il suo diletto Figlio
di Israel. Ogni vostra amaritudine si converta in allegrezza, e li vostri
digiugni si faccino feste, per che non piangerete, O miei Figlioli di Israel,
havendosi dato iddio la consolatione innarabile festegiateri con Timpani,
Organi, e Musiche, ringratiando quello chi ha adempito il promessa dalli
secoli, facendo ogni giorno quelle cose che solete fare nelle Calende, e quel
giorno dedicato all' afflittione e mestitia, convertite lo in giorno giocondo
pro la mia comparsa. E non spaventateri niente, per che haverete Dominio sopra
le Genti, non solamente di quelle, che si vedono in Terra ma quella che sono in
sondi del Mare. Il tutto pro vostra consolatione e allegrezza.




Which translated into English runs thus. THE only and firstborn Son of God
Sabatai Sevi, the Messiah and Savior of Israel, to all the Sons of Israel,
Peace. Since that you are made worthy to see that great day of Deliverance and
Salvation unto Israel, and accomplishment of the Word of God promised by his
Prophets and our Forefathers, and by his beloved Son of Israel, let your bitter
sorrows be turned into Joy, and your fast into Festivals, for you shall weep no
more, O my Sons of Israel; for God having given you this unspeakable comfort,
rejoice with Drums, Organs, and Music, giving thanks to him for performing his
promises from all Ages, doing that every day which is usual for you to do upon
the Calends, and that day dedicated to affliction and sorrow, convert you unto
a day of mirth for my appearance. And fear you nothing, for you shall have
Dominion over the Nations, and not only over those who are on Earth, but over
those creatures also which are in the depth of the Sea. All which is for your
consolation and rejoicing.

Sabatai Sevi.




Notwithstanding the Disciples of Sabatai Sevi, were not so numerous, but many
opposed his Doctrine, publicly avouching, that he was an Impostor, and
deceiver of the people, amongst which was one Samuel Pennia, a man of good
Estate and Reputation in Smyrna; who arguing in the Synagogue, that the present
signs of the Coming of the Messiah were not apparent, either according to
Scripture, or the Doctrine of Rabbis, raised such a Sedition and Tumult
amongst the Jews, as not only prevailed against his arguments, but had also
against his life, had he not timely conveyed himself out of the Synagogue, and
so escaped the hands of the Multitude, who now could more easily endure
Blasphemy against the Law of Moses, and Profanation of the Sanctuary, than
contradiction or misbelief of the Doctrine of Sabatai. But howsoever it fell
out, Pennia in a short time became a Convert, and Preacher up of Sabatai for
the Son of God, and Deliverer of the Jews; and not only he, but his whole
Family, his Daughters prophecy, and fall into strange ecstasies: and not only
this house, but above four hundred men and women prophecy of the growing
Kingdom of Sabatai, and young Infants who could scarce yet stammer out a
syllable to their Mothers, repeat and pronounce clearly the Name of Sabatai the
Messiah and Son of God. For thus far had God permitted the Devil to delude this
people, that their very children were for a time possessed, and voices heard to
sound from their stomachs and entrails: those of riper years fell first into a
trance, foamed at the mouth, and recounted the future prosperity and
deliverance of the Israelites, their Visions of the Lion of Judah, and the
Triumphs of Sabatai. All which were certainly true, being effects of diabolical
delusions, as the Jews themselves since have confessed to me.

With these concomitant accidents and successes Sabatai Sevi growing more
presumptuous, that he might correspond with the Prophecies of Greatness and
Dominion of the Messiah, proceeded to Election of those Princes which were to
govern the Israelites in their March toward the Holy Land, and to dispense
Judgment and Justice after their Restoration.

In this manner things ran to a strange height of madness amongst the Jews at
Smyrna, when appeared such Pageantry of Greatness, that no Comedy could equal
the mock-shows they represented. And though none durst openly confess any
scruple or doubt of this common received Belief, yet for confirmation of the
Jews in their Faith, and astonishment of the Gentiles, it was judged no less
than necessary, that Sabatai should show some Miracles, whereby to evince all
the World that he was the Messiah. And as the present occasion seemed to
require an evidence and conviction infallible of this truth, so it was daily
expected by the Vulgar with an impatience suitable to humors disposed to
Novelty, who out of every action and motion of their Prophet, began to fancy
something extraordinary and supernatural. Sabatai was now horribly puzzled for
a Miracle, though the imagination of the people was so vitiated, that any
leger-de-main or slight of hand would have passed more easily with them for a
Wonder, than Moses striking the Rock for water, or dividing the Red Sea. And an
occasion happening, that Sabatai was in behalf of his Subjects to appear before
the Kaddee or Judge of the City, to demand ease and relief of some oppressions
which aggrieved them; it was thought necessary a Miracle should be worked now
or never, when Sabatai appearing with a formal and Pharisaical gravity which he
had starched on, some on a sudden avouched to see a Pillar of Fire between him
and the Kaddee, which report presently was heard through the whole room, filled
with Jews that accompanied Sabatai. Some of whom, who strongly fancied it,
vowed and swore they saw it; others in the outward Yard, or that could not come
near to hear or see for the crowd, as speedily took the Alarm, and the rumor
ran, and belief received by the Women and Children at home in a moment. So that
Sabatai Sevi returned to his house triumphant, fixed in the hearts of his
People, who now needed no farther Miracles to consirm them in their Faith. And
thus was Sabatai exalted, when no man was thought worthy of communication, who
did not believe him for the Messiah: others were called Kophrim, Infidels, or
Heretics, subjected to the Censure of Excommunication, with whom it was not
lawful so much as to eat. Every man produced his Treasure, his Gold, and
Jewels, offering them at the feet of Sabatai; so that he could have commanded
all the Wealth of Smyrna, but he was too subtle to accept their money, lest he
should render his design suspected by any acts of covetousness.

Sabatai Sevi having thus fully fixed himself in Smyrna, and filled other
places with the rumors of him, declared that he was called by God to visit
Constantinople, where the greatest part of his work was to be accomplished; in
order whereunto he privately shipped himself with some few Attendants on a
Turkish Saike in the month of January (...), lest the crowd of his Disciples,
and such who would press to follow him, should endanger him in the eyes of the
Turks, who already began to be scandalized at the Reports and Prophecies
concerning his Person. But though Sabatai took few into the Vessel with him,
yet multitudes of Jews traveled over land to meet him again at Constantinople,
on whom all their Eyes and expectations were intent. The Wind proving
Northerly, as commonly it is in the Hellespont and Propontis, Sabatai was
thirty nine days in his Voyage, and yet the Vessel not arrived: So little power
had this Messiah over the Sea and Winds. In which time the News forerunning to
Constantinople that the Jews Messiah was near, all that people prepared to
receive him with the same joy and impatience as was expressed in other parts
where he arrived. The Great Vizier then also at Constantinople, (being not yet
departed on his expedition for Candia) having heard some rumors of this Man,
and the disorder and madness he had raised amongst the Jews, sent two Boats,
whilst the Saik was detained by contrary Winds, with Commands to bring him up
Prisoner to the Port, where accordingly Sabatai being come, was committed to
the most loathsome and darkest Dungeon in the Town, there to remain in farther
expectation of the Viziers Sentence. The Jews were not at all discouraged at
this ill Treatment of their Prophet, but rather confirmed in their belief of
him, as being an accomplishment of the Prophecy of those things which ought to
precede his Glory and Dominion; which Consideration induced the Chiefest
Persons amongst the Jews to make their Visits and Addresses to him with the
same Ceremony and Respect in the Dungeon, as they would have done, had he then
sat exalted on the sublime Throne of Judah. Several of them, with one Anacago
by name, a Man of great esteem amongst the Jews, attended a whole day before
him, with their Eyes cast down, their Bodies bending forward, and hands crossed
before them; (which are postures of humility and service in the Eastern Parts)
the undecency of the place, and present subjection not having in the least
abated their high thoughts and reverence toward his person.

For the Jews in Constantinople were become as mad and distracted, as they were
in other places, all Trade and Traffic forbidden, and those who owed money, in
no manner careful how to satisfy it; Amongst which wild Crew, some were
indebted to our Merchants at Galata, who not knowing the way to receive their
money, partly for their interest, and partly for curiosity, thought fit to
visit this Sabatai, complaining, That such particular Jews, upon his Coming,
took upon them the boldness to defraud them of their right, and desired he
would be pleased to signify to those his Subjects, his pleasure to have
satisfaction given.

Whereupon Sabatai, with much affectation, took pen and paper, and wrote to
this effect.

To you of the Nation of the Jews, who expect the appearance of the Messiah,
and the salvation of Israel, Peace without end. Whereas we are informed, That
you -- are indebted to several of the English Nation, It seems right to us to
enorder you to make satisfaction to these your just Debts: which if you refuse
to do, and not obey us herein; know you that then you are not to enter with us
into our Joys and Dominions.

In this manner Sabatai Sevi remained a Prisoner at Constantinople for the
space of two Months; at the end of which the Vizier having designed his
expedition for Candia, and considering the rumor and disturbance the Presence
of Sabatai had made already at Constantinople, thought it not secure to suffer
him to remain in the Imperial City, whilst both the Grand Signior, and himself
were absent; and therefore changed his Prison to the Dardanelli, otherwise
called the Castle of Abydos, being on the Europe side of the Hellespont,
opposite to Sestos, places famous in Greek Poetry. This removal of Sabatai from
a worse Prison, to one of a better Air, confirmed the Jews with greater
confidence of his being the Messiah, supposing that had it been in the power of
the Vizier, or other Officers of the Turks, to have destroyed his Person, they
would never have permitted him to live unto that time, in regard their Maxims
enforce them to quit all jealousies and suspicions of ruin to their State by
the death of the Party feared; which much rather they ought to execute on
Sabatai, who had not only declared himself the King of Israel, but also by
Prophecies published fatal things to the Grand Signior and his Kingdoms.

With this Consideration, and others preceding, the Jews flocked in great
numbers to the Castle, where he was imprisoned, not only from the Neighboring
Parts, but also from Poland, Germany, Ligorn, Venice, Amsterdam, and other
places, where the Jews reside; on all whom, as a reward of the expense and
labors of their Pilgrimage, Sabatai bestowed plenty of his Benedictions,
promising increase of their Store and enlargement of possessions in the Holy
Land: So great was the confluence of the Jews to this place, that the Turks
thought it requisite to make their advantage thereof, and so not only raised
the price of their Provisions, Lodgings, and other necessaries, but also denied
to admit any to the presence of Sabatai, unless for money, setting the price
sometimes at five, sometimes at ten Dollars, or more or less, according as they
guessed at the abilities and zeal of the Person; by which gain and advantage to
the Turks, no Complaints or Advices were carried to Adrianople, either of the
Concourse or Arguments amongst the Jews in that place, but rather all
Civilities and Liberties indulged unto them, which served as a farther Argument
to ensnare this poor People in the belief of their Messiah.

During this time of Consinement Sabatai had leisure to compose and institute a
new Method of Worship for the Jews, and principally the manner of the
Celebration of the day of his Nativity, which he prescribed in this manner.

BRethren, and my People, Men of my Religion, inhabiting the City of Smyrna the
Renowned, where live Men, and Women, and Fantilies; much Peace be unto You from
the Lord of Peace, and from Me his beloved Son King Solomon. I command you,
That the ninth of the Month of Ab (which according to our account answered that
year to the Month of June) next to come, you make a Day of Invitation; and of
great Joy, celebrating it with choice Meats, and pleasing Drinks, with many
Candles and Lamps, with Music and Songs; because it is the day of the Birth of
Sabatai Sevi the High King, above all the Kings of the Earth. And as to matters
of labor, and other things of like nature, do as becomes you upon a day of
Festival, adorned with your finest Garments. As to your Prayers, let the same
Order be used as upon Festivals. To converse with Christians on that day is
unlawful, though your Discourse be of matters indifferent; all labor is
forbidden, but to sound Instruments is lawful.

This shall be the method of your Prayers on this day of Festival. After you
have said, Blessed be thou, O Holy God; then proceed; and say: Thou have chosen
us before all people, and have loved us, and have been delighted with us, and
have humbled us more than all other Nations, and have sanctified us with thy
Precepts, and have brought us near to thy Service, and the Service of our King.
Thy Holy, Great, and Terrible Name thou have published amongst us; And have
given us, O Lord God, according to thy love, times of Joy, of Festivals, and
times of Mirth, and this Day of Consolation, for a solemn Convocation of
Holiness, for the Birth of our King the Messiah Sabatai Sevi, thy Servant, and
firstborn Sonin love, through whom we commemorate our coming out of Egypt. And
then you shall read for your Lesson the first, second, and third Chapters of
Deuteronomy to the seventeenth Verse; appointing for the reading thereof five
men, in a persect and uncorrupted Bible; adding thereunto the Blessings of the
Morning, as are prescribed for Days of Festivals. And for the Lesson out of the
Prophets, usually read in the Synagogue every Sabbath, you shall repeat the
31th Chapter of Jeremiah to your Prayer called the Mussaf (used in the
Synagogue every Sabbath and solemn Festival.) Instead of the Sacrisice of
Addition at the returning of the Bible to its place, you shall read with an
audible Voice, and clear Sound, and with holy Harmony the 95th Psalm. And at
the first Praises in the morning, after you have sung Psalm 91, and just before
you sing Psalm 98, you shall repeat Psalm 132; but in the last Verse where it
is said, As for his enemies I shall clothe them with shame, but upon himself
shall his Crown flourish; in the place of [upon himself] you shall read, Upon
the Most High; after which shall follow the 126th Psalm, and then the 113th to
the 119th.

At the Consecration of the Wine upon the Vigil, or Even, you shall make
mention of the Feast of Consolation, which is the day of the Birth of our King
the Messiah Sabatai Sevi, thy Servant, and sirst-born Son; giving the Blessing
as follows. Blessed be thou, our God, King of the World, who have made us to
live, and have maintained us, and have kept us alive unto this time. Upon the
Eve of this Day you shall also read the 81 Psalm, as also the 132, and 126
Psalms, which are appointed for the Morning Praises. And this Day shall be unto
you for a remembrance of a solemn Day unto eternal Ages, and a perpetual
Testimony between me, and the Sons of Israel.

Audite audiendo, and manducate bonum.

Besides which Order and Method of Liturgy for Solemnization of his Birth, he
prescribed other Rules for Divine Service, and particularly published the same
Indulgence and privilege to every one who should pray at the Tomb of his
Mother, as if he had taken on him a Pilgrimage to pray and sacrifice at
Jerusalem. The Devotion of the Jews toward this pretended Messiah, increased
still more and more; so that not only the chief of the City went to attend and
proffer their service toward him in the time of his Imprisonment, but likewise
decked their Synagogue with S. S. in Letters of Gold, making for him on the
Wall a Crown, in the Circle of which was wrote the 91 Psalm at length, in a
fair and legible Character; attributing the same Titles to Sabatai, and
expounding the Scriptures in the same manner in favor of his appearance, as we
do of our Savior.

Howsoever some of the Jews remained in their Wits all this time, amongst which
was a certain Cocham at Smyrna, one zealous of his Law, and of the good and
safety of his Nation; and observing in what a wild manner the whole people of
the Jewswas transported with the groundless belief of a Messiah, leaving not
only their Trades, and Course of Living, but publishing Prophecies of a speedy
Kingdom, of rescue from the tyranny of the Turk, and leading the Grand Signior
himself captive in Chains; matters so dangerous, and obnoxious to the State
wherein they lived, as might justly convict them of Treason and Rebellion, and
leave them to the mercy of that Justice, which on the least jealousy and
suspicion of matters of this nature, uses to extirpate Families, and subvert
the Mansion houses of their own People, much rather of the Jews, onwhom the
Turks would gladly take this occasion to despoil them of their Estates, and
condemn the whole Nation to perpetual Slavery. And indeed it would have been a
greater wonder than ever Sabatat showed, that the Turks took not advantage from
all these extravagancies to drain the Jews of a considerable Sum of money, and
set their whole Race in Turkey at a Ransom, had not these passages yielded
them matter of pastime, and been the subject of the Turks laughter and scorn,
supposing it a disparagement to the greatness of the Ottoman Empire, to be
concerned for the rumors and combustions of this despised people. With these
Considerations this Cocham, that he might clear himself of the blood and guilt
of his Countrymen, and unconcerned in the common destruction, went before the
Kaddee, and there protested against the present Doctrine, declaring, That he
had no hand in setting up of Sabatai, but was an enemy both to him and his
whole Sect. This freedom of the Cocham so enraged and scandalized the Jews,
that they judged no Condemnation or Punishment too severe against such an
Offender, and Blasphemer of their Law, and Holiness of the Messiah, and
therefore with money and presents to the Kaddee, accusing him as disobedient in
a Capital Nature to their Government, obtained sentence against him to shave
his Beard, and commit him to the Galleys.

There wanted nothing now to the appearance of the Messiah, and the Solemnity
of his Coming, but the presence of Elias, which the Jews began to expect
hourly, and with that attention and earnestness, that a Dream or Phantasm to
every weak head was judged to be Elias, it being taught and averred, that he
was seen in diverse Forms and Shapes, nor to be certainly discovered or known
before the Coming of the Messiah. For this Superstition is so far fixed amongst
them, that generally in their Families they spread a Table for Elias the
Prophet, to (...) they make an invitation of poor people, leaving the chief
place for the Lord Elias, whom they believe to be invisibly present at the
Entertainment, and there to eat and drink without diminution either of the
Dishes or the Cup. One person amongst the Jews commanded his Wife, after a
Supper of this kind, to leave the Cup filled with Wine, and the Meat standing
all Night for Elias to feast and rejoice alone, and in the morning arising
early, affirmed, That Elias took this Banquet so kindly, that in token of
gratitude and acceptance, he had replenished the Cup with Oil instead of Wine.
It is a custom amongst the Jews on the Evening of the Sabbath to repeat certain
praises of God, ( Haudola) which signities a distinction or separation of the
Sabbath from the profane days (as they call them;) which praises or blessing
they observe to perform in this manner. One takes a Cup filled with Wine, and
drops it through the whole house in the name of Elias, saying, Elias the
Prophet, Elias the Prophet, come quickly to us with the Messiah the Son of
David. And this, they affirm, is so acceptable to Elias, that he never fails to
preserve that Family so devoted to him, and augment it with the Blessings of
increase. Many other things the Jews avouch of Elias, so ridiculous, as are not
necessary to be declared, amongst which this one is not from our purpose, That
at the Circumcision there is always a Chair set for Elias. And Sabatai Sevi
being once invited at Smyrna to the Circumcision of the firstborn Son of one
Abraham Gutiere, a Kinsman of Sabatai, and all things ready for the Ceremony;
Sabatai Sevi exhorted the Parents of the Child to expect a while until his
farther order. After a good half hour Sabatai ordered them to proceed, and cut
the Prepuce of the Child, which was instantly performed with all joy and
satisfaction to the Parents: and being afterward demanded, wherefore he
retarded the performance of that Function; his answer was, That Elias had not
as yet taken his Seat, whom as soon as he saw placed, he ordered them to
proceed: and that now shortly Elias would discover himself openly, and proclaim
the news of their general Redemption. This being the common opinion of the
Jews, and that Sabatai Sevi was the Messiah, being become an Article of Faith,
it was not hard to persuade them that Elias was come already, that they met him
in their dishes, in the dark, in their Bed-chambers, or any where else
invisible, in the same manner as our common people believe of Hobgoblins and
Faries. For so it was, when one Solomon Cremona, an Inhabitant of Smyrna,
making a great Feast, to which the principal Jews of that City were invited,
after they had eaten and drank freely, one started from his seat, and avouched
that he saw Elias upon the Wall, and with that bows to him, and complements him
with all reverence and humility: some others having in like manner their
fancies already prepossessed, and their eyes with the fume of Wine ill prepared
to distinguish shadows, immediately agreed upon the object, and then there was
not one in the Company who would say, he did not see him; at which surprise
every one was struck with reverence and awe, and the most eloquent amongst them
having their tongues loosed with Joy and Wine, directed Orations, Encomiums,
and acts of thankfulness to him, courting and complementing Elias, as
distracted Lovers do the supposed presence of their Mistresses.

Another Jew at Constantinople reported, That he met Elias in the streets,
habited like a Turk, with whom he had a long communication, and that he
enjoined the observation of many neglected Ceremonies, and particularly the
Zezit, Numb. 15. 38. Speak unto the Children of Israel and bid them, that they
make sringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and
that they put upon the sringe of the border a ribband of blue. Also the Peotz,
Levit. 19. 27. Ye shall not round the corners of your head, nor mar the
corner of your beard. This apparition of Elias being published, and as soon
believed, every one began to obey the Vision, by fringing their garments; and
for their heads, though always shaved according to the Turkish and Eastern
fashion, and that the suffering hair to grow, to men not accustomed was heavy
and incommodious for their health and heads; yet to begin again to renew, as
far as was possible, the ancient Ceremonies, every one nourished a Lock of hair
on each side, which was visible beneath their Caps, which soon after began to
become a sign of distinction between the Believers and the Koparims, a name of
dishonor, signifying as much as Unbeliever or Heretic, given to those who
confessed not Sabatai to be the Messiah. Which particulars, if not observed, it
was declared as a menace of Elias, That the people of the Jews who come from
the River Sabation, as is specified in the 2. Esdras Chap. 13. shall take
vengeance of those who are guilty of these omissions.

But to return again to Sabatai Sevi himself, we find him still remaining a
Prisoner in the Castle of Abydos upon the Hellespont, admired and adored by his
Brethren with more honor than before, and visited by Pilgrims from all parts,
where the Fame of the Coming of the Messiah had arrived: amongst which one from
Poland named Nehemiah Cohen was of special note and renown, learned in the
Hebrew, Syriack, and Chaldee, and versed in the Doctrine and Kabala of the
Rabbis, as well as Sabatai himself: one (of whom it was said) had not this
Sevi anticipated the design, esteemed himself as able a Fellow for to act a
Messiah as the other. Howsoever it being now too late to publish any such
pretense, Sabatai having already prepossessed the office, and with that the
hearts and belief of the Jews, Nehemiah was contented with some small appendage
or relation to a Messiah; and therefore to lay his design the better, desired a
private Conference with Sabatai. These two great Rabbis being together, a hot
Dispute arose between them. For Cohen alleged, That according to Scripture and
Exposition of the Learned thereupon, there were to be two Messiahs, one called
Ben. Ephraim, and the other Ben. David: the first was to be a Preacher of the
Law, poor and despised, and a Servant to the second, and his Forerunner; the
other was to be great and rich, to restore the Jews to Jerusalem, to sit upon
the Throne of David, and to perform and act all those Triumphs and Conquosts,
which were expected from Sabatai. Nehemiah was contented to be Ben. Ephraim,
the afflicted and poor Messiah, and Sabatai was well enough contented he should
be so; but that Nehemiah accused him for being too forward in publishing
himself the latter Messiah, before Ben. Ephraim had first been known to the
World, Sabatai took this reprehension so ill, either out of pride and thoughts
of his own Infallibility, or that he suspected Nehemiah being once admitted for
Ben. Ephraim, would quickly, being a subtle and learned Person, persuade the
World that he was Ben. David, would by no means understand or admit of this
Doctrine, or of Ben. Ephraim for a necessary Officer: and thereupon the Dispute
grew so hot, and the Controversy so irreconcilable, as was taken notice of by
the Jews, and controverted amongst them as every one fancied; but Sabatai being
of greater Authority, his Sentence prevailed, and Nehemiah was rejected as
Schismatical, and an Enemy to the Messiah, which afterward proved the ruin
and downfall of this Imposture. For Nehemiah being thus baffled, and being a
Person of Authority, and a haughty Spirit, mediated nothing but revenge; to
execute which to the full, he took a Journey to Adrianople, and there informed
the chief Ministers of State and Officers of the Court, who (by reason of the
gain the Turks made of their Prisoner at the Castle on the Hellespont) heard
nothing of all this concourse of people, and Prophecies of the Revolt of the
Jews from their obedience to the Grand Signior. And taking likewise to his
Counsel some certain discontented and unbelieving Cochams, who being zealous
for their Nation, and jealous of the ill consequences of this long continued
and increasing madness, took liberty to inform the Chimacam (who was Deputy of
the Great Vizier then at Candia) that the Jew Prisoner at the Castle called
Sabatai Sevi was a lewd person, and one who endeavored to debauch the minds of
the Jews, and divert them from their honest course of livelihood, and obedience
to the Grand Signior, and that therefore it was necessary to clear the World of
so factious and dangerous a Spirit. The Chimacam being thus informed, could do
no less than acquaint the Grand Signior with all the particulars of this man's
condition, course of life, and Doctrine; which were no sooner understood, but a
Chaouse or Messenger was immediately dispatched to bring up Sabatai Sevi to
Adrianople. The Chaouse executed his Commission after the Turkish fashion in
haste, bringing Sabatai in a few days to Adrianople, without farther excuse or
ceremony, not affording him an hours space to take a solemn farewell of his
Followers and Adorers, who now were come to the vertical point of all their
hopes and expectations.

The Grand Signior having by this time received diverse informations of the
madness of the Jews, and the pretenses of Sabatai, grew big with desire and
expectation to see him; so that he no sooner arrived at Adrianople, but the
same hour he was brought before the Grand Signior. Sabatai appeared much
dejected, and failing of that courage which he showed in the Synagogue. And
being demanded several questions in Turkish by the Grand Signior, he would not
trust so far to the virtue of his Messiahship, as to deliver himself in the
Turkish Language, but desired a Doctor of Physic (who had from a Jew turned
Turk) to be his Interpreter, which was granted to him, but not without
reflection of the standers-by, that had he been the Messiah and Son of God, as
he formerly pretended, his Tongue would have been loosed into Eloquence and
perfection of Languages. But the Grand Signior would not be put off without a
Miracle, and it must be one of his own choosing; which was, that Sabatai should
be stripped naked, and set as a mark to his dextrous Archers; if the arrows
passed not his body, but that his flesh and skin was proof, like Armor, then
he would believe him to be the Messiah, and the person whom God had designed to
those Dominions and Greatness he pretended. But now Sabatai not having faith
enough to stand to so sharp a trial, renounced all his Title to Kingdoms and
Governments, alleging that he was an ordinary Cocham and Jew, as others were,
and had nothing of privilege and virtue above the rest. The Grand Signior
notwithstanding, not wholly satisfied with this plain confession, declared,
That having given public scandal to the Professors of the Mohammedan Religion,
and done dishonor to his Sovereign Authority, by pretending to withdraw from
him so considerable a portion as the Land of Palestine, his Treason and Crime
could not be expiated without becoming a Mohammedan Convert: which if he refused
to do, the Stake was ready at the Gate of the Seraglio to impale him. Sabatai
being now reduced to his last game and extremity, not being in the least
doubtful what to do; for to dye for what he was assured was false was against
Nature, and the death of a mad man: replied with much cheerfulness, that he was
contented to turn Turk, and that it was not of force, but of choice, having
been a long time desirous of so glorious a profession, he esteemed himself much
honored, that he had an opportunity to own it first in the presence of the
Grand Signior. And here was the Non plus ultra of all the bluster and noise of
this vain Impostour. And now the Reader may pause a while, and contemplate the
strange point of consternation, shame, and silence, to which the Jews were
reduced, when they understood, how speedily their hopes were vanished, and how
poorly and ignominiously all their fancies and promises of a new Kingdom, their
Pageantry and Offices for Devotion were past like a tale or a midnights dream.
And all this was concluded, and the Jews sunk on a sudden and fallen flat in
their hopes, without so much as a line of comfort or excuse from Sabatai, more
than in general to all the Brethren, that now they should apply themselves to
their callings and services of God, as formerly; for that matters relating to
him were finished, and the sentence past.

The News of Sabatai turning Turk, and of the Messiah to a Mohammedan, quickly
filled all parts of Turkey; the Jews were strangely surprised at it, and
ashamed of their casiness of belief, of the arguments with which they had
persuaded others, and of the Proselytes they had made in their own Families.
Abroad they became the common derision of the Towns where they inhabited, the
Boys houted after them, coining a new word at Smyrna (Poustai) which every one
seeing a Jew, with a finger pointed out, would pronounce with scorn and
contempt; so that this deceived people for a long time after remained with
confusion, silence, and dejection of spirit. And yet most of them affirm, That
Sabatai is not turned Turk, but his shadow only remains on Earth, and walks
with a white head, and in the habit of a Mohammedan; but that his body and soul
are taken into Heaven, there to reside until the time appointed for
accomplishment of these Wonders: and this opinion began so commonly to take
place, as if this people resolved never to be undeceived, using the Forms and
Rules for Devotion prescribed them by their Mohammedan Messiah. Insomuch that
the Cochams of Constantinople fearing the danger of this Error might creep up
and equal the former, condemned the belief of Sabatai being Messiah as
damnable, and enjoined them to return to the ancient Method and Service of God,
upon pain of Excommunication. The Style and Tenor of their Letter was as
follows.

To you who have the power of Priesthood, and are the knowing, learned, and
magnanimous Governors and Princes residing in the City of Smyrna, may the
Almighty protect you, Amen, for so is his will.

These our Letters which we send in the midst of your Habitations, are upon
occasion of certain Rumors and Tumults come to our ears from that City of your
Holinesses. For there is a sort of men amongst you, who fortify themselves in
their Error, and say, Let such an one our King live, and bless him in their
public Synagogues every Sabbath day; and also adjoyn Psalms and Hymns invented
by that man for certain days, with Rules and Methods for Prayer, which ought
not to be done, and yet they still remain obstinate therein. And now behold it
is known unto you, how many swelling waters have passed over our souls for his
sake; for had it not been for the mercies of God which are without end, and the
merit of our Forefathers which has assisted us, the foot of Israel had been
rased out by their enemies. And yet The Jews scruple to say the head of Israel.
still you continue obstinate in things which do not help, but rather do
mischief, which God avert. Turn you therefore, for this is not the true way,
but restore the Crown to the ancient custom and use of your Forefathers, and
the Law, and from thence do not move.

We command you, That with your Authority, under pain of Excommunication and
other Penalties, all those Ordinances and Prayers, as well those delivered by
the mouth of that man, as those which he enjoined by the mouth of others, be
all abolished and made void, and to be found no more, and that they never enter
more into your hearts; but judge according to the ancient Commandment of your
Forefathers, repeating the same Lessons and Prayers every Sabbath as has been
accustomary; as also the Collects for Kings, Potentates, and Anointed, etc. and
bless the King Sultan Mahomet; for in his days has great Salvation been
wrought for Israel, and become not Rebels to his Kingdom, which God forbid. For
after all this which is past, the least motion will be a cause of jealousy, and
you will bring ruin upon your own persons, and upon all which is near and dear
to you; wheresore abstain from this man, and let not so much as his name
proceed out of your mouths. For know, if you will not obey us herein, which
will be known, who, and what those men are, who refuse to conform unto us, we
are resolved to prosecute them, as our duty is. He that does hear and obey us,
may the blessing of God rest upon him. These are the words of those, who seek
your peace and good, having in Constantinople, on Sunday the 5th of the Month
Sevat, underwrote their names. Joam Tob, Son of Hanania Ben Jacar. Isaac
Alnacagua Joseph Kazabi. Menasse Barudo. Kaleb Son of Samuel. Eliezer Casti.
Eliezer Gherson. Joseph Accohen. Eliezer Aluff.



During the time of all these transactions and passages at Constantinople,
Smyrna, Abydos upon the Hellespont, and Adrianople; the Jews leaving their
mercantile course and advices what prices Commodities bore, and matters of
Traffic, stuffed their Letters for Italy and other parts, with nothing but
wonders and miracles wrought by their Messiah. As that, when the Grand Signior
sent to take him, he caused all the Messengers immediately to die; upon which,
other Janissaries being again sent, they all fell dead with a word only from his
mouth; and being desired to revive them again, he immediately recalled them to
life, but of them only such, who were true Turks, and not those who had denied
that Faith in which they were born, and had professed. After this they added,
that he went voluntarily to Prison, and though the Gates were barred, and shut
with strong Locks of Iron, yet that Sabatai was seen to walk through the
streets with a numerous attendance; and when they laid shackles on his Neck and
Feet, they not only fell from him, but were converted into Gold, with which he
gratified his true and faithful Believers and Disciples. Some Miracles also
were reported of Nathan, that only at the reading of the name of any particular
Man or Woman, he could immediately recount the story of his or her Life, their
sins or defaults, and accordingly impose just correction and penance for them.
These strong reports coming thus confidently into Italy, and all parts; the
Jews of Casal di Monferrato, resolved to send three persons in behalf of their
Society, in the nature of extraordinary Legates, to Smyrna, to make enquiry
after the truth of all these rumors, who accordingly arriving in Smyrna, full
of expectation and hopes, intending to present themselves with great humility
and submission before their Messiah, and his Prophet Nathan, were entertained
with the sad news, that Sabatai was turned Turk; by which information, the
Character of their Embassy in a manner ceasing, every one of them laying aside
the formality of his Function, endeavored to lodge himself best to his own
convenience. But that they might return to their Brethren at home with the
certain particulars of the success of these affairs; they made a visit to the
Brother of Sabatai, who still continued to persuade them, that Sabatai was
notwithstanding the true Messiah; that it was not he who had taken upon him the
habit and form of a Turk, but his Angel or Spirit, his Body being ascended into
Heaven, until God shall again see the season and time to restore it; adding
farther, that an effect hereof they should see by the Prophet Nathan verifyed,
now every day expected, who having wrought Miracles in many places, would also
for their consolation, reveal hidden secrets unto them, with which they should
not only remain satisfied but astonished: with this only hope of Nathan, these
Legates were a little comforted, resolving to attend his arrival, in regard
they had a Letter to consign into his hands, and according to their
instructions, were to demand of him the grounds he had for his Prophecies, and
what assurance he had that he was divinely inspired, and how those things were
revealed unto him, which he had committed to Paper, and dispersed to all parts
of the World.

At length Nathan arrived near Smyrna, on Friday the 3d of March, toward the
Evening, and on Sunday these Legates made their visit to him, but Nathan upon
the news of what success his Messiah met with, began to grow sullen and
reserved, so that the Legates could scarce procure admittance to him; all that
they could do, was to inform him, that they had a Letter to him from the
Brotherhood of Italy, and Commission to confer with him concerning the ground
and foundation of his Prophecies: but Nathan refused to take the Letter,
ordering Kaim Abolafio, a Cocham of the City of Smyrna, to receive it; so that
the Legates returned little contented, but yet with hopes at Nathans arrival at
Smyrna, to receive better satisfaction.

But whilst Nathan intended to enter into Smyrna, the Cochams of
Constantinople, being before advised of his resolution to take a Journey into
their parts, not knowing by which way he might come, sent their Letters and
Orders to Smyrna, Prussia, and every way round, to hinder his passage and
interrupt his Journey, fearing that things beginning now to compose, the Turks
appeased for the former disorders, and the minds of the Jews in some manner
settled, might be moved, and combustions burst out afresh by the appearance of
this new Impostor, and therefore dispatched this Letter as follows.

TO you who are the Shepherds of Israel, and Rulers, who reside for the Great
God of the whole World in the City of Smyrna, which is a Mother in Israel, to
her Princes, her Priests, her Judges, and especially to the perfect wise men,
and of greatest experience; may the Lord God cause you to live before him, and
delight in the multitude of Peace, Amen. So be the will of the Lord.

These our Letters are dispatched unto you, to let you understand, that in the
place of your Holiness, we have heard, that the learned man which was in Gaza,
called Nathan Benjamin, has published vain Doctrines, and made the World
tremble at his words and inventions. At this time we have received advice, that
this man some days since departed from Gaza, and took his Journey by the way
of Scanderone, intending there to Embark for Smyrna, and thence to go to
Constantinople, or Adrianople. And though it seems a strange thing unto us,
that any man should have a desire to throw himself into a place of flames and
fire, and into the sparks of Hell: Notwithstanding, we ought to fear and
suspect it, for the feet of man always Arab. Prove.
guide him to the worst. Wherefore, me underwritten, do advertise you, That
this Man coming within the Compass of your Jurisdiction, you give a stop to his
Journey, and not suffer him to proceed farther, but presently to return back.
For we would have you know, That at his Coming he will begin again to move
those tumults, which have been caused through Dreams of a new Kingdom, And that
miracles are not wrought every day. God Arab. Prove.
forbid, that by his Coming, the People of God should be destroyed in all
places where they are, of which he will be the first, whose blood be upon his
own head; for in this Conjuncture every little error or fault is made Capital;
you may remember the danger of the first Combustion, and it is very probable,
that he will be an occasion of greater, which the tongue is not able to express
with words. And therefore, by virtue of ours, and your own Authority, you are
to hinder him from proceeding farther in his journey, upon pain of all those
Excommunications, which our Law can impose, and to force him to return back
again, both he and his Company. But if he shall in any manner oppose you, and
rebel against your word, your Endeavors and Law are sufficient to hinder him,
for it will be well for him, and for all Israel.

For the love of God, let these words enter into your ears, since they are not
vain things, for the lives of all the Jews, and his also consist therein. And
the Lord God behold from Heaven, and have pity upon his people Israel. Amen. So
be his holy will written by those who seek your Peace. Joam Tob Son of Chanania
Jacar. Moise Benveniste, Kaleb Son of Cocham, Isaac Alnacagua, Samuel deceased,
Joseph Kizbi, Moise Barudo, Samuel Acazsina, Elihezer Aluf. Jehousual Raphael
Benveniste.



By these means Nathan being disappointed of his wandering progress, and partly
ashamed of the Events contrary to his Prophecies, was resolved, without entering
Smyrna, to depart thence; howsoever he obtained leave to visit the Sepulcher of
his Mother, and there to receive pardon of his sins (according to the
institution of Sabatai before mentioned;) but first washed himself in the Sea,
in manner of purification, and said his Tevila, or Prayers, at the Fountain,
called by us the Fountain of Santa Veneranda, which is near the Coemetery of
the Jews, and then departed for Xio with two Companions, a Servant and three
Turks to conduct him, without admitting the Legates to audience, or answering
the Letter which was sent him from all the Communities of the Jews in Italy.
And thus the Embassy of these Legates was concluded and they returned from the
place from whence they came, and the Jews again to (...) Wits, following their
Trade and Profession of Brokage, as formerly, with more quiet and advantage
than the means of regaining their possessions in the Land of promise. And thus
ended this mad frenzy amongst the Jews, which might have cost them dear, had
not Sabatai renounced his Messiahship at the Feet of Mahomet. These matters
were transacted in the Years 1665 and 1666; since which Sabatai has passed his
time devoutly in the Ottoman Court, educated at the Feet of the learned
Gamaliel of the Turkish Law, ( viz.) Vanni Effendi, Preacher to the Seraglio,
or as we may so term him, Chaplain to the Sultan, one so literate as to be
esteemed the Grand Oracle of their Religion, so precise, and conceited of his
own Sanctity as a Pharisee, and so superstitious, that nothing seemed more to
unhallow his Worship than the touch or approach of a Christian. To this Master
Sabatai was The course of life which Sabatai led after he turned Mohammedan.
a most docil Scholar, and profited, as we may imagine, beyond measure in the
Turkish Doctrine; so that in exchange of such impressions Vanni thought it no
disparagement, from so great a Rabbin as his new Disciple, to learn something
of the Jewish Rites, and rectify those crude Notions he had conceived of the
Mosaical Law. In this manner Sabatai passed his days in the Turkish Court, as
some time Moses did in that of the Egyptians; and, perhaps in imitation of him,
cast his eyes often on the Afflictions of his Brethren, of whom, during his
life, he continued to profess himself a Deliverer, but with that care and
caution of giving scandal to the Turks, that he declared, Unless their Nation
became like him, that is, renounce the Shadows, and imperfect Elements of the
Mosaical Law, which will be completed by adherence to the Mohammedan, and such
other Additions as his inspired Wisdom should suggest, he should never be able
to prevail with God for them, or conduct them to the holy Land of their
Forefathers. Hereupon many Jews flocked in, some as far as from Babylon,
Jerusalem, and other remote places, and casting their Caps on the ground, in
presence of the Grand Signior, voluntarily professed themselves Mahometans.
Sabatai himself by these Proselytes gaining ground in the esteem of the Turks,
had privilege granted him to visit familiarly his Brethren, which he employed
in Circumcising their Children the eighth Day, according to the Precept of
Moses, preaching his new Doctrines, by which he has confirmed many in their
Faith of his being the Messiah, and startled all with expectation of what these
strange ways of Enthusiasm may produce; but none durst publicly own him, lest
they should displease the Turks, and the Jews, and incurr the danger of
Excommunication from one, and the Gallows from the other.

Howsoever in January (...) appeared another bold Impostor amongst the Jews in
Smyrna from the Morea, as it was said, or not known from whence, who in
despite of Sabatai, and his own Governors, pretended to be Messiah; but with
so inconsiderable and petty a Deluder as this, the Jews thought to make quick
work; but being ashamed at first to bring another Messiah on the Stage, by help
of money they accused him of Adultery, and procured a Sentence from the Kadi,
condemning him to the Galleys; in order unto which, and in proof of his good
behavior he remained some time in prison, in which Interim he found means to
clear himself of that Crime by open evidence to the contrary, and had for the
present escaped out of the power of the Synagogue, had not their Authority and
money prevailed more than the Friends or Disciples of this Impostour; whom we
will leave in prison, and Sabatai in the house of Pharaoh; where he continued
until the Year 1676, and then died. And so we return to more important matters
of the Turkish Affairs.

Since that we have so long insisted on the frenzy of the Jews, let us return
to matters of greater Consequence, and more general concernment; and look back
to Count Leslie the Emperors Ambassador, who having departed from
Constantinople the 11th of December of the last Year, we find on the 10th of
March of this year on the Frontiers ready to make exchange with the Turkish
Ambassador. The Night before, Count Leslie was lodged at a Village called
Elmas, where the Inhabitants, as in the most parts of upper Hungary, are
Calvinists in Religion; and though they live between two Swords, do yet in time
of The manner of exchange of the Emperors and Turks Ambassadors.
War, by paying a Tribute to both Parties, and providing Forage for both,
remain more secure than in the Villages subjected to either, which are often
burnt, or in some other manner miserably destroyed. The next day the Emperors
Ambassador, conducted by the Pasha of Quinque Ecclesiae, with about three
hundred Horse, arrived at the place for many years observed for Exchange of
Ambassadors, which is about an hour and halfs Journey, or five miles (as we may
so say) distant from this Village, where in open Fields upon the Brink of the
Danube, are set three Posts; the two Ambassadors meeting at that in the
middle, after some Complements, take their leaves each of other, and so
exchange. The German Ambassador that day arrived near his Post about seven a
Clock in the morning, but the Turkish, not being as yet come from Komara, he
could not proceed farther. After some expectation here, advice came, That the
Turkish Ambassador was resolved not to depart from Komara, until he was
satisfied for the allowance of eighteen days, at a hundred Dollars for every
day, which he had spent at his entrance into Christendom, between the Frontiers
and the City of Vienna. But to this was replied, That it had never been the
custom to allow the Turkish Ambassador money for his daily provisions, until he
entered the Emperors Court; and in the mean time the expenses and charge of his
journey were to be defrayed by the Imperial Officers, who had performed the
same in a most ample and plentiful manner: But the Turk was resolved not to be
so satisfied, and therefore declared he would not depart without full payment;
hoping the more easily to prevail, in regard the German Ambassador was already
in the Field, exposed to the cold and sharp weather, without provisions either
for himself, Attendance, or Horses, whilst the Turk remained warm in his Boat,
accommodated with his Stove, and wrapped in his Furrs, so that he hoped there
might be a necessity of granting what he reserved for the rear-guard of his
pretensions. The matter seemed unreasonable to the German Ambassador, as also
to the Turks that attended him, who being in the open and cold Air, judged it
an unseemly time to capitulate. But in fine, the German gave him this Answer,
That an Ambassador ought to be contented with that hospitality and
entertainment which was accustomary, as he himself had done; for that since his
departure from Buda, which was then seven days, he had not received one Asper
of allowance, resting satisfied with the Pasha's word, that from Buda homewards
it was not accustomary to receive a farther treatment; so that if he insisted
on the first he was to be allowed the latter, since both Ambassadors are to be
used with terms of equality; and therefore to find an expedient to give him
satisfaction, he was contented to resign his seven days allowance from the
Grand Signior; and if any thing farther was really owing he would engage his
parole of honor for the payment. And farther he added, That none but a corrupt
Minister would make his private Interest to stand in Competition with a public
Design, and make the pretense of a few Dollars an interruption and impediment
to the progress of the great Affairs of the two Empires, professing that he
would have quitted all his right, rather than the least concernment of his
Master should have received a prejudice, on confidence of whose gracious favor
he depended for reparation of whatsoever he suffered for his service. He
thanked God that he had happily managed his Embassy to the satisfaction of the
Grand Signior, and the approbation of his Master, and was now ready to perform
the last office and ceremony, in which if he did (...), or was impeded, the
fault was not his, being ready to return to Buda, so the other in like manner
did to Vienna, there to remain until this difference was decided by their
Masters. The Turkish Ambassador's Kahya or Steward who was present, and heard
all this discourse, seeming not pleased to hear of a return to Vienna,
immediately replied, That he conceived his Master would not remove from Komara;
to which it was answered, That a man who so little understood the office of an
Ambassador, as it appeared his Master did, was to be treated with some other
kind of style than was agreeable to the respect due to a public Minister, and
should therefore be forced to it in case he should refuse. The Turkish
Ambassador having his stomach something taken down with the threats of
returning to Vienna, that afternoon loosed from Komara, and between three and
four a clock arrived at the place of Exchange; but the wind blowing hard, had
put some of his Boats ashore, which were most laden, and fewest men to govern
them, which asforded him occasion of farther delay, pretending that his Goods
might be arrested at Komara, and until he was satisfied to the contrary, he was
resolved not to make the Exchange. The German Ambassador was more moved with
choler at this humor than at the former; and the Turks that attended, growing
more hungry and more cold, bestowed on him a million of curses. The Sun now
declining toward its setting, Count Leslie sent word to the Turk, That he was
resolved not longer to abuse his own patience, but immediately to proceed
forward, giving order to his Coach to drive on, protesting, That if any
mischief was derived from this irregular proceeding, the fault was not his, nor
would he answer for any of those fatal consequences which might ensue; to which
also being added some persuasions of the Pasha of Quinque (...), the Turk at
length came out from his Boat and went to his Post. The Turks were drawn up on
their own Quarter to the number of about three hundred, and the Hungarian
Hussars or Horsemen on the other to about two hundred; the two Ambassadors
making a stand at their respective Poles, proceeded with equal paces to meet in
the middle, where some few Complements having passed between them and Salutes
interchangeably sent to the chief Ministers of each Empire, the German
Ambassador entered his Coach, and the Turk his Boat, and so both returned to
their respective Courts. Such as was the sordid and interessed humor of the
Turkish Ambassador in this transaction, so no less dishonorable was his way
of living at Vienna, where he sojourned with that miserable famine and penury
in his house, as discontented all his family, causing some to leave him and
return home; others with better motives (as it is hoped) to the number of
thirty became Christians, and embraced the Faith: at the same rate he was
generous in his Presents; for to the Master of the House where he lodged he
gave two five-Senars or eighteen Pence English, and to the Commissary who
conducted him to the Frontiers he presented a Bag of Rice, which was not
accepted, but returned with the like complement, as that with which it was
tendered.

But no sooner was this Peace concluded, and the Ceremonies thereof The Turks
meditate a new War.
thus happily finished, but the Turks, attentive to another War, which is the
life of their Empire, and their only security against intestine Discords, made
all the Preparations and Provisions this Year, that were possible, for the
total subjection of Candia, of which this Vizier was highly ambitious,
designing thereby to gain unto himself that renown of which his Predccessours
had been in pursuit for the space of twenty five years; so that all Ammunition,
Victuals, and whatsoever was necessary was in great quantities supplied from
all the circumjacent parts of the Empire.

The City of Candia was some time before governed by the Proveditor Priuli; but
afterward the Venetians, apprehensive of the succeeding War, conferred the
Charge on Marquess Villa, a worthy and experienced Soldier, with Title of
General of the Venetian Infantry, as we have before intimated; and having left
him and his Forces in the month of December last, on the Island of Paros; where
having, as is said, mustered his Forces, he embarked them on sixteen Galleys,
five Galleasses, and thirty five Men of War; with which sailing in company from
AntiParos, the whole Fleet on the 12th of February made their Rendezvous at
Argentiera; during which time the Turks landed eighteen hundred Janisaries at
Canea, being transported thither on thirty five Galleys, which having
incountred with the Cavalier Hoquincourt in the Chanel of Scio, received some
damage and loss of men in their way, though this Cavalier himself was wounded
in the Engagement, and forty of his men slain. The Venetain Fleet departing
from Argentiera on the 23th of February came in sight of Candia, when a very
great storm arising with Thunder and Lightning, put the whole Fleet in danger
of shipwreck; but by Gods Providence, though tossed with contrary winds, they
arrived on 26th in safety in the Port of Suda, being directed thither in a dark
night, by those Lights which the Fortress had put abroad, though the Turks on
the other side had put out false Fires to deceive them. The Army being landed
at this place, and a Muster made of the Forces, Pay was given to the Soldiery;
with which being become the more courageous, they marched toward Canea, with
hopes to perform some memorable Enterprise at that place. The
Lieutenant General Vuersmiller led the An Engagement near Canea.
Van consisting of six hundred Foot, and an hundred and eighty Horse, and
advancing beyond those bounds which Marquess Villa had prescribed him, was
incountred by a more numerous Force from the Garrison, by which being at first
put into some disorder, had been entirely defeated, had not the Marquess
opportunely arrived to his Succor: howsoever the Venetians lost in this
Skirmish three hundred Soldiers, forty Horse, and twelve Officers, amongst
which the Marquess Ceva was slain upon the place, and Captain Scot a Scotch-man
taken Prisoner, whom the English Factory redeemed at Smyrna; of the Turks seven
hundred were computed to have been killed, with the Aga of the Janisaries, a
stout and a well experienced Soldier. And as this beginning was not very
auspicious to the Christians, so neither did the Heavens seem much to favor
them; for an unusual rain with few fair days continued almost for the space of
three months, which filled all Rivers, Marshes, and Ditches with so strange an
inundation, that the Army beginning to want Forage for the Horses, and all
other Provisions for their Men; and the Garrison of Canea being reinforced from
Retimo, Chiramo, Armiro, and other places, discouraged the Commanders in that
manner, that they thought it more convenient to retire and incamp in the
pleasant and fruitful Valleys of Spina Longa, until better weather, and other
Recruits of their Army should open a way either to make another Attempt on
Canea or new Candia. But Fortune did not favor these designs; for the
CaptainGeneral Androa Cornaro arriving with his Fleet, part at Candia, and part
at Standia, (which is an Island or Rock about two Leagues distant from this
City) a new resolution was taken to remain on the defensive part, and to attend
wholly to the guard of the City: for as in the natural body, when it is
assaulted by acute and hot humors, the spirits retire to the heart to confort
and secure that from the violence of the distemper; so the Venetians perceiving
that their Enemies daily grew more numerous, resolved to contract their Force
into one Body for defense of that City, which was the heart or the most
principal instrument of life in that Island: wherefore Recruits both of Men,
Ammunition, and Provisions were daily sent thither; and the Captain of the Gulf
arriving at (...) with eleven Galleys and one Galleass, carrying fifteen
hundred Soldiers, with three hundred Pioniers, joined his Forces to the Body
of the Fleet; and all imbarking in diverse Squadrons, made haste to land their
men in the City of Candia with all possible expedition.

The Marquess Villa landed here the first of March, being conducted Marquess
Villa lands at the City of Candia.
from the Mole by the Proveditor to the Palace, which was provided for him;
where having been complemented, and having received and returned the usual
Visits, he in the first place took care to quarter the Horse, and the new
Forces lately arrived with due convenience; next he visited the Garrison and
every Fort in particular, where he amended what was amiss, and added what was
defective. The Captain General by this time arriving with the remainder of the
Militia, a general Multer was made in the Trenches of the Fort Panigra; of
which the Turks having advice, fell unexpectedly upon them with a strong Body;
the Christians being surprised hereat, and Versama a valiant Colonel being
(...), they began shamefully to run, nor could either the Bravery of the
Marquess, or his Authority stop their flight; howsoever the Musket Shot and
great Guns from the Walls were so plentifully bestowed on the Turks, that few
of those who were over-forward in the pursuit, returned to their Companions.

On the 12th of April a Fleet of Galleys arrived with new Recruits, with which
the Christians being reinforced, (...) Villa resolved to take the Field; so
that marching out of the City by night with seven thousand Foot and six hundred
and fifty Horse, he encamped between The (...) incamp.
that and the Valley of the River Gioffiro, drawing his Trenches just opposite
to the Enemies Camp; in the mean time two Squadrons of Ships were sent abroad,
one toward the Crociere, and the other toward the Coast of Canea, to
intercept and hinder such Succors as might be sent to the Enemies Camp. Nor
were the Turks less vigilant or valiant on The Turks assault them.
their side; for a Party of about two thousand men sallying from their
Trenches, and marching secretly under the covert of a Mountain, unexpectedly
assailed the Out-guards of about fifty Foot belonging to the Regiment of
Frischein, commanded by Captain Rades; which after a stout resistance retreated
into another Body of fifty Musketeers, and twenty five Arquibusiers of the
Regiment Arborio; who also being assisted by other detachments, recovered their
first Post; but being afterward overpowered by great numbers of Turks, were
forced to quit the place; which Marquess Villa observing, ordered fifty Horse
under Lieutenant Colonel Mattiazzi, and seventy Foot under Blane Sergean: Major
of the Regiment Arborio to their assistance, by whom the Post was again
recovered with great slaughter of the Enemy: but this advantage was of little
other benefit than to inflame the spirits of the Turks, who rallying again
their Force with fresh courage and extraordinary valor came to handy-blows
with the Venetians, forcing them to another Retreat with the death of
Lieutenant Cerusa a Savoyard, and some common Soldiers; but the Turks enjoyed
not long this advantage; for the Musketeers from the Line with some small
Guns, and the gross Artillery from the Walls did much execution on them; and at
the same time being charged by a Party of Horse under Command of Colonel Rades,
the Venetians with glory and encouragement recovered their Post, driving the
Turks in disorder and confusion to their Trenches. This success of the
Christians served to heat the spirits of the Turks, and animate them to another
Engagement: for having by private ways of The Turks make another assault.
hidden Valleys conducted their Men, about four hours before night made another
Assault upon the Venetians, I will not say surprised them; because remaining
always in apprehension of the Enemy, they kept themselves so watchfully on
their Guard, that in a moment they were ready to receive them; and that so
warmly, not firing until they came within the length of two Pikes, that in a
moment the field was covered with the bodies of Horse and Men; the Turks
startled hereat, not knowing whether it were better to stand to it or fly,
until encouraged by their Leaders, they kept their ground for a time: but being
galled by the continual Vollies of shot, and charged by a Body of Horse led by
Count Sforza Bissaro and Captain Casich; they were so shaken, that they turned
their backs, and began to run, until falling in with the gross Body of their
Party, they made head again; and mixing both Horse and Foot with the Venetians,
they forced them to retreat to the side of their Trenches; and so closely plied
them, that the fresh Troops of the Turks on the right and left wing had cut
them off, had not the Count Corradini by order of Count Sforza with a Regiment
of Curassiers, and likewise Colonel Scoppa with his Lieutenant Colonel Tadeo
Motta, with a good number of Archibusiers, assisted by a Squadron of the
Regiment of Count Bassaro, sallied from the Line, and being succored on all
sides, forced the Turks at length to sound a Retreat. The night coming on
dissuaded any (...) of the Enemy, lest unknown ways and darkness should betray
their men into ambushes or other snares. The Turks lost a thousand men with
diverse Commanders of Quality and Note: of the Venetians were killed Lieutenant
Cerusa, Gio. Tessari Captain to La Motte, eleven Horse, and some few Foot:
Motte, Corradini, Soupe, Count Corbelli, and some others were wounded.

About this time advice being come to the Captain General, That the Turks were
dispeeding fifty Galleys laden with Men and Ammunition, he resolved to
encounter them at Sea with four Galleasses and twenty Galleys, reinforcing his
Fleet with twelve hundred men, which he took from the Camp; which being thereby
considerably diminished, as also by the late Engagements; yet Marquess Villa
kept his ground, but contracted the compass of his Trenches, and raised a Fort
in sight of the Enemy, who had not the courage to give him the least
interruption; but rather after this example fortified their own Trenches,
shutting all Avenues or passages to Renegadoes, whom they suspected might fly,
and give advice to the Christians: howsoever some of them escaped to the
Venetian Camp, declaring that the Cannon from the Town did much incommode the
Turks in their Trenches; upon which Intelligence Marquess Villa ordered forty
eight shot to be made at that place, where they were most offended, which put
the Turks into great consternation: after which no considerable Engagements
happened, besides some few Skirmishes and Rencounters of no memorable note, in
which one Antiquario a Quartermaster, Count Pio Ferretti, and others
signalized themselves by particular Acts of Valor, as also Captain Vimes who
killed Mehmet Bey, a Turk of great esteem, with his own hand.

But now the Turks receiving daily Recruits, as of eight hundred Janisaries,
and six hundred Spahees landed at Gira-petra, and seventeen hundred more
disbarked at Chissamo; and advices daily coming of great numbers of Galeots and
Brigantines providing in the Gulf of Lepanto, and of eighteen Ships of Barbary,
all ready to transport Soldiers to Candia, The Venetian Camp raised.
moved the Captain General to persuade the removal of the Camp for better
security of the most important places: the which Marquess Villa performed
accordingly in the night preceding the first of June, with much order and care;
for first he caused the Artillery to be withdrawn, with the Mortar-pieces,
Ammunition, and Provisions of War, and placed in the Fort of Mocenigo; then he
caused half the Army to work in filling the Trenches, whilst the other half
remained in form of Battle, and two hours before day blew up the Fort; which
having done, they marched in three Bodies to the City, to the great joy and
satisfaction of the Turks, who on that occasion made a day of Festival.

These particulars of Action having passed under the Conduct of Marquess Villa
without any signal Victory or advantage over the Turk, administered subject to
such who in the parts of Christendom were emulous of his glory, and envious of
his eminent charge, to give liberty to their tongues to disparage the
management of his Affairs, as not agreeable to that high expectation of success
which the World conceived thereof, when he first entered on this employment: But
here it is observable at what rate men who lie soft and warm in their beds at
home, unconcerned in the dangers, labors, and hazards of those who live and
act abroad, can make their reflections, and pass their censures on active and
engaged men, not considering the state of affairs, the uncertainty of Succors
in so long and distant a tract of Sea as passes between Venice and Candia,
subjected to winds and a thousand casualties; nor yet the numerous Troops of
the Enemy, nor the Puissance of that Empire, which for its Power, Richess, and
the Valor of its Soldiery may be esteemed the most Potent and considerable of
all the Monarchies and known Kingdoms of the Universe. But what conjectures
soever envious men might make of the Conduct of Marquess Villa, yet the Senate
of Venice applauded his labors, and owned his services, as being such, which
having merited the admiration and esteem of all the World, did in a particulae
manner challenge their thankfulness and acknowledgments. About this time the
Galleys of Malta arrived at Candia, where some dispute arising touching the
place of precedence in the Fleet, which the Venetians denied to them: they
departed thence with some dissatisfaction, and returned to the Westward to
transport the young Empress out of Spain into Italy.

And now Intelligence coming to Candia by diverse Letters, that the Great Vizier
was departed from Adrianople with a numerous Army, and was already arrived at
Thebes, where a general Rendezvous was appointed of the whole Army, with
resolution to be transported from Malvoisia to that Island; the Venetian
Generals and Commanders in chief concluded The Great Vizier arrives at Thebes.
it necessary, if possible, to hinder their passage, and rather to fight them
at Sea, which was their more propitious Element, than to attend their landing,
where they would be forced to dispute with unequal numbers and on
disadvantageous terms. Accordingly the Captain General reinforced his Fleet
with two thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse under the Command of Count Licinio
Martinoni, appointing the Rendezvous to be at Argentiera, to which place also
Marquess Villa repaired, touching by the way at Milo for refreshment of his
Horse, it being an Island abounding with herbage; the Captain General being for
some days detained at Standia by contrary winds, a Consultation was held for
the more advantageous management of the War; after which the whole Fleet making
sail was on August the 9th scattered by a furious storm, and not being able to
recover Santoxini, they by good fortune fetched Stampalia, an Island abounding
with generous Wines, excellent Fruit, Partridges, and other Provisions; at
length after various fortunes arriving at Andra, which is a great and populous
Island, another Council of War was held, where it was again concluded, That all
care was to be taken to intercept the Succors which the Enemy daily sent to
Candia; to which end the Cavalier Grimani, Captain of the Galleons, was ordered
to cruise about the Coast; and hearing that twelve Turkish Ships were Twelve
Turkish Vessels taken.
lading Provisions in the Gulf of Volo, he repaired thither, and had the good
fortune to take them with all their lading; but the other Squadrons missed of
the like success; for notwithstanding the care and vigilance which was used,
all matters seemed to succeed prosperous for the Turks, and adverse to the
Christians; the designs of the first having an issue agreeable to their
intentions, whilst those of the latter were always disappointed either by
Nature or by Fortune, or rather by that secret hand of Providence, which had
allotted that Island for a Prize to the Ottoman Arms.

By this time the Turkish Army being at their Rendezvous at Thebes, the Great
Vizier prepared to imbark; and considering the difficulty of the passage,
thought it prudent first to make new Propositions to Signior Ballarino before
he entered on this hazardous attempt, supposing perhaps, that the rumor of this
March might have affrighted the Venetians to a Surrender of that Kingdom, that
they might spare the blood and charge of that War which afterward ensued:
wherefore Ballarino being called from his house at Constantinople, began his
Journey toward Thebes on the 25th of August, accompanied by a Capugibashee and
three Janisaries; and in twenty three days arriving at Thessalonica, now called
Salonica, he fell sick of a violent Fever, caused by that agitation of body in
his Travels to which he was unaccustomed, and for want of that sleep which he
used to take after his slender dinner, passing the rest of the day and night in
continual watchings: at first he felt only some little alterations, which he
hoping might pass over, resolved to proceed on his Journey notwithstanding the
persuasions to the contrary of Signior Patavino his Secretary, with whom I was
well acquainted, and ever esteemed for an honest and a worthy Person: but he
continued resolute to proceed, fearing left his delays by the way should lose
him the opportunity of that moment of Treaty, which was impossible afterward
to be retrieved; for in his Journey he would often reason in this manner: If I
should stop here, what censure would the World pass on me? I may possibly
excuse my self; but in the mean time the Vizier may engage too far in his
design, and frustrate all those methods and foundations which I have laid
toward a Peace: and then if I live, I shall be over-burdened with the
reproaches of the World, for having abandoned the grand incumbence in its
ultimate necessity, which is charged upon me, which will be a more sensible
affliction than the agony of death. My sickness will be esteemed by many to be
rather dissembled than real. The dead man lives in the memory of his
faithfulness and constancy, and the living man dies in the indelible characters
of his cowardice and misfortune. These were his own words. And thus traveling
forward his Fever daily increased to that excess, that on the sixth day he was
forced to stop at a City called Isdino, where having instructed Signior
Patavino in what manner he ought to manage affairs, and recommending his
services and children to the favor and protection of the Senate, he passed to
the other World, being honored by a solemn Funeral at the public Expense, and
interred in the Church of St. Mark, his Son Domenico Ballarino succeeding into
the Office and Inheritance of his Father. The Senate understanding by advices
from Signior Padavino, That the Vizier desired another Envoye qualified with
the Character of a public Minister to reside with him in Candia, dispatched
the Secretary Girolamo Giavarina, a Person of good abilities, to that place.
And at the same time the Captain General Andrea Cornaro pressing the Senate for
license to return to his own Country; his request was granted, and Francesco
Morosini was appointed to succeed him in that important Charge, and was
accompanied at a time of so great emergency with powerful Convoys, and with
Recruits of Men, Provisions, and Ammunition sitting to carry on so pressing a
War.

On the month of October the Great Vizier in person imbarking himself The
Vizier passes over into Candia.
and Army at Malvoisia with many Pasha's, and men expert and active in the War
passed over to the Isle of Candia, resolving by strength and dint of Sword to
force that strong City to obedience, the main Bulwark of Christendom, situated
at the entrance of the Archipelago; of the success of which famous Siege we
shall have occasion to discourse more at large and more particularly hereafter;
in order unto which the Great Vizier on the last day of this Year, went in
Person to take a view of this City, and having surveyed all sides of it,
apprehended that the Siege would be long and tedious; and therefore returned
again to Canea to take those measures which were requisite for an Enterprise of
that weight and consideration.

In the mean time the Princes of Christendom being for the most part either in
that discord amongst themselves, of which the Turks have always made their
advantage; or else living in parts remote, did not consider Candia as a Bulwark
to their Dominions, and therefore rendered little other assistance to the
Venetians than good words, and vain wishes for their success and Victory. The
Popes Forces only under Command of Muzeo Mattei which were in Dalmatia, were
transported to Candia, and five hundred Foot belonging to the Grand Duke of
Toscany, came into their places for defense of that Country. The most Christian
King in return to the Embassy of Venice performed by the Cavalier Alvise
Sagredo, remitted to that Republic an hundred thousand Crowns, and Cardinal
Barberini at his expense supplied four thousand Measures of Spain and Italy, as
well as, those of Malta, were employed in the transportation of the new Empress
Margerita of Austria. The Pope was infirm, and distracted with his own
domestic Affairs. The Emperor was a young Bridegroom, and besides the
Diversion which a Wife gave him from Cares, he apprehended that he might
speedily receive some disturbance from the Princes of the Rhine, and from
Sweden in the Dukedom of Bremen. The King of Spain was a Child of five years
old, laboring at the same time under a war with Portugal, and threatened by the
more powerful Arms of France, on the pretense of Flanders. Besides all which,
the Turks were as well in quietness amongst themselves, as they were at peace
with all other Princes; so that we may expect that the force and power of the
Ottoman Empire should now be turned, like a Torrent, to overwhelm this spot of
land, which seemed to be so situated, as well to resist the Waves of the Seas,
as the inundation of this mighty and Martial People.

Anno Christi 1667. Hegeira 1078.
AT the Beginning of this year the Winter and Cold which chilled and benumbed
the Earth, increased the heat, and gave vigor and action to the Tartars, who
made such an unexpected incursion into Poland, that they carried with them near
a hundred thousand captived Souls, as they were numbered before Jash, in their
return home. The Polanders, awakened hereat, but ill advised, resolved on a
Treaty where there was more just cause for an open War, and in order thereunto
dispeeded an Ambassador to the Sultan, to expostulate the reason of this
Breach of Peace, and require justice and satisfaction on those his Subjects,
who had, contrary to the Articles of Peace, committed such actions, and
outrages of open hostility; or at least, that the Turk would not take upon him
to abett the cause of the Tartars, whilst the Polanders took just revenge for
their late injuries. The Ambassador with this message put himself in a
readiness, and with a retinue of about two hundred and fifty persons, begun his
journey toward the end of April, and on the second of May crossed the River
Niestro, which divides Poland from Moldavia, where he was received by two of
the Boiars, or Moldavian Noblemen, and thence conducted to Jash, where the
Prince of that Country resided. The Ambassador expected the Visit of the
Prince, according to Custom and Articles of Peace; but the Prince being either
forbidden by the Port, or rather out of an ignorant stiffness and pride,
omitted to pass the Civilities of that Office, but yet supplied the Ambassador
with plenty of Wine and Provisions; which the Polanders enjoying freely,
dispensed perhaps more easily with other neglects and omissions which concerned
formalities and ceremonies.

The ninth of June the Ambassador arrived at Adrianople, and thence was called
to Demitochum, a City about a days Journey distant, where the Grand Signior,
for the sake of his hunting and divertisement, remained under Tents, as the
most convenient lodging in that Season of the year; By the number of Costans is
to be esteemed the honor the Turks bear to one Prince above the other.
the 25th the Ambassador had his first Audience with the Chimacam, at which
thirty five of his Retinue were vested with Coftans, nothing passing but the
usual Ceremonies and Complements. The 28th he had Audience of the Grand
Signior; but first made tender of his Presents as follows. A Crystal Cup in a
Case of Gold, adorned with Rubies and Diamonds. 2 Baskets rarely woven with a
very fine Rush. A Clock. A Cabinet of Ebony supported with four Eagles made of
Silver, in which also was a Clock with a perspective Looking-Glass. 2 Silver
Cups of considerable bigness. 2 Silver Flaggons. A Gun which discharged twenty
times. 2 Spotted Dogs. 4 Mastiffs. 100 Else of Holland.


These Presents preceding, made way for the Ambassadors Audience, at which he
declared, That the Commission from his Master the King of The Polish
Ambassadors Audience.
Poland, was to make Complaints unto his Majesty of the grand Incursions the
Tartars had made into Poland without any reason or cause of War; and that
therefore his Master did expect from him, as from a just and virtuous Prince, a
permission for revenge, and satisfaction of his injuries, to enter Tartary,
without assuming it as any ground of Breach or Infringement of that Peace which
he held with him; or else that he would by his authority enjoin the Tartars to
restore their Captives, and their spoils, and render them a reasonable
satisfaction. The Grand Signior returned no reply hereunto, but referred that
to be done by his Chimacam, silence being esteemed some part of his Majesty and
State, which he seldom breaks but with few and haughty words.

This Ambassador was a man of a bold and daring Spirit, a fit Orator for such
an Embassy, had not his immoderate Covetousness, the vice and folly commonly
incident to Old Age, much eclipsed many of those Virtues of which he was
Master. He was also a Man of a violent temper, feavered to a madness in the
height of his Choler, which strangely betrayed him to many undecencies in his
Language and Comportment. For at his Audience with the Chimacam, when he came
to receive the Grand Signior's Answer, his words were vented with that heat,
and so like to menaces, that the Turks taking exception thereat, returned his
course Speeches with the like Dialect, at which the Ambassador swelled with
that indignation and anger, as became not the Moderation and Gravity of his
Office; adding in Conclusion, That he was an aged man, full of years and
corporal infirmities, that nothing could arrive more happy to him than a death
in which he should triumph to suffer for the benefit and glory of his Country.
This excess and intemperance of Language moved the Turks to set a guard upon
him, and confine him to his own house in the nature of a Prisoner; which
violation of his Sacred Office, so worked upon his Spirits, that he often
vented some part of his fury in words and blows on the Officers of his Guard;
for which rude behavior having received some reproofs from the Chimacam, his
passion not knowing which way to ease it self, feavered him into a desperate
sickness, of which in a few days, phrensical and distracted, he departed The
Death of the Polish Ambassador.
this life.

The Secretary of the Embassy, being the next in Office, took upon him the
Function and Charge of the Ambassador, and having now nothing to act, but to
receive the Answer to the Message of his Master, for which a day being
appointed, he was presented with a Horse and Furniture by the Chimacam, of whom
having audience, he received no other satisfaction to the complaints against
the Tartars than these following, which were related to me by the Secretary of
the Embassy, who did me the honor to make me a Visit, when I was on my
recovery from a dangerous Sickness, at Constantinople.

First, That no compensation or pretense be ever hereafter demanded for the
late incursions made by the Tartars into Poland.

Secondly, That the Polanders make not War upon the Cossacks, who had lately
renounced their subjection, and were sled for protection to the Ottoman power.

Thirdly, That the Poles immediately make war upon the Moscovite.

Fourthly, That the Turk Merchants have free trade into Poland, and that the
Turkish Merchants receive satisfaction for what injuries and losses they lately
suffered.

With these propositions and conditions of Peace, the Secretary was dispatched,
which did not so well please the Poles as to return thanks for them or a
Messenger with Advice of their Acceptance or Ratification; and though they
could not but be sensible of the scorn and yoke the Turks would impose upon
them, yet having still remaining amongst them certain Relics of their former
dissentions and diversity about election of a Successor to their King, and
there being a certain spirit of Luxury, Pride, and Sedition which was crept in
amongst the Nobility, they considered not the advantage of the present time,
but willingly preferred a present ease, and enjoyment of their Feasts and
Banquets, before the hazards and uncertainties of benefit, which they might
receive by the doubtful lot and fortune of War; and though never any Season
appeared more opportune and advantageous to the Pole than this, when the flower
of the Turkish youth and Force was employed in Candia, and all places, in part,
dismantled of their usual strength and complement of Soldiers to defend their
Frontiers; yet they seemed resolved to pass by the former incursions, and
spoils, and robberies made on their people, so the Turk would but stop here,
and permit them, without farther provocation, to enjoy their quiet, and
debauched way of living: Only some of the Borderers on the Turks, who had
deeply suffered by the late incursions, moved with the loss of their Estates,
and the Captivitic of their nearest Relations, joined with a considerable
number of the Moscovites, entered Tartary in the Months of October and
November, and burned about three hundred Villages, carrying away Captives, and
other prey, from under the very Walls of Coffa.

At this time also the Pasha of Balsora began new rumors and an unseasonable
Rebellion, who being reported to have an Army of Horse and Foot consisting of
forty thousand men, gave no small disturbance and apprehension The Revolt of
the Pasha of Balsora.
to the Turks; who with their difficulties of War in Candia, and the jealousies
of a storm from Poland, remained with some doubts and hesitancy about the way
of their proceedings. At length Orders were dispatched to the Pashaws of
Erzirum, Aleppo, Damascus, and Darbiquter to unite against the Rebel, to divest
him of his Government and to send his forfeited head to his Master. These
Pashaws accordingly joining their Forces, defeated the Rebel; and as all
Conspiracies of open Rebellion distant from the Court, have had but ill success
in these Countries against the true Prince, so this Pasha was routed, and being
forsaken by his Servants, fled with a few horse to the protection of the King
of Persia. The principal Cause which moved the Pasha of Balsora (as I was
informed from the mouth of the Pasha of Damascus) to this Rebellion, was the
Confidence he had in his own strength, and the fidelity of his people, to whom
of ancient right, that Government was of hereditary Succession, descended to
him by his Ancestors for many Generations: by which means he challenged such
absolute interest in his Principality; that for many years he refused to
acknowledge the Grand Signior by any other tokens of homage, than in the bare
name of his Protector, and in making public prayers for his prosperity and
victories. But at length the (...) Signior coming to impose farther on him,
stirred his hot desires (...) Rebellion, and to an open defiance.

About the beginning of this year the Captain General Cornaro, with the
Proveditor of the Armata Francesco Barbaro returned to Venice, bringing with
them one Ramadam a Sangiac of Egypt, and other Slaves taken by the Captains
Grimani and Molino. The manner was this: Ramadam, with three and twenty Ships,
laden with Men and Ammunition, endeavored to enter into Canea, but being
charged by the Venetians, and overcome, set fire to their Ship, and leaping
into the Schiff to save their lives were taken by the Boat of Molino; and
though fourteen Galleys came out of Canea to their assistance, yet they could
not hinder the taking of five of their Ships, besides several others which were
put ashore and strand by four Maltese Corsairs, who entered into the fight,
being called at a distance by the sound of the Cannon. About that time also a
Turkish Gally was surrendered by the industry and ingenuity of the slaves, who
having secretly boared some holes in the bottom of the Gally, and plugged them
up afterward, so as that they might let in the water, or stop it when they
pleased; it happened that the Gally being near the Rock, which is called
Polycandro; they secretly drew out the plug, whereby so great a Flood of Water
on a sudden came in, that the Gally being ready to sink, the Turks affrighted
forsook the Gally to save themselves on the Rock, leaving the Slaves in the
Gally to shift as well as they could. The Slaves being thus freed of their
Masters the Turks, plugged up the holes again, and clearing the Gally of water
rowed away, and delivered themselves into the hands of the Venetians; upon
which advice, the Captain General dispatched the Captain of the Gulf Lorenzo
Cornaro with two Galleys to that Rock, where they became masters of all the
Turks except two, who threw themselves into the Sea, preferring death before
slavery.

In the mean time the Duke of Savoy recalled Marquess Villa, who was his
Subject, from Candia; the reasons for which was attributed to an appearance of
Breach with Geneva, the Switzers and the Valtelines, who were his Subjects, or
rather to the ill Offices of those who envied his preferment, being desirous to
have him recalled from a place of so much honor and reputation. In obedience
to this revocation Marquess Villa taking his leave of General Cornaro, returned
from Candia as far as Zant; where meeting the new Captain General Francesco
Morosini, and being by him assured, That the Pope, and Senate of Venice
representing the difficulty of Affairs in Candia, and the present urgency and
necessity for his presence there, had obtained License from the Duke of Savoy
for his continuance in that employment; upon which assurance, Marquess Villa
took a resolution to return again to Candia, being accompanied with a strong
Squadron of Vessels carrying considerable quantities both of Ammunition and
Provisions.

The History of the famous Siege of Candia.
On the 27th of April the Forces from Egypt under the Command of Messir Bey
appeared in the field, and on the 5th of May N. S. the General of the
Janifaries encamped on the right side of New Candia, that he might better view
and survey the ground near the Lazaretto.

At the beginning of the New Moon of this Year's May, being the (...) day of
the month, public Prayers (...) first made through the Monday and Thursday for
the space of a year; the Great Vizier first appeared before the renowned
Fortress of Candia, and began the memorable Siege of that City, which for the
space of twenty five years preceding had been the subject to which the special
care and expense of Venice, and the Art of the most subtle Engineers of the
World, as far as humanely was possible, did concur to render it the most
impregnable Fortress of the Universe.

The Town was fortified with seven great Bastions, viz. the Sabionera, Vetturi,
Jesus, Martinengo, Betlem, Panigra, and St. Andrea; these were all encompassed
with a large and deep Ditch, of which were the Revelin of St. Spirito, the
Revelin of Panigra flanked to the right with the Half Moon of Mocenigo: next
hereunto was the Revelin of Betlem bordering on the Work of St. Mary's, which
to the left had the Revelin of St. Nicholas, and this adjoined to the
Fortification of de Palma, next whereunto was the Revelin of Priuli, with the
Redoubt of Crepa-cuore; and over all was the Royal Fort of St. Demetrio, which
commanded the Work of Molino and Sabionera unto the very Sea.

Marquess Villa at his last return was chiefly intent to strengthen the
Fortifications, and repair the Outworks, especially that of St. Andrea which
was almost ruined, and the old subterranean Traverses were so full of water,
and the old Galleries so high, that the Enemy could easily pass under them, all
which he repaired and amended in a short time. In confidence of gaining this
strong Fortress, the Turks demolished New Candia, situate about two miles from
the Old, which the Vizier now pointed out to them as a better Seat, and
encouraged them to win and inhabit it; so that (...)th of May the Turks
encamped over against St. Mary's along the Valley of Gioffiro with the sound of
their Drums and Trumpets, and firing great Guns and Vollies of Muskets. Their
Forces at first consisted of about forty thousand fighting Men, and eight
thousand Pioniers, but soon afterward increased to seventy thousand, and so
for the most part were maintained during the Siege.

The first Traverses began from the side of St. Mary's, and were carried to the
Sea, the Great Vizier took his Quarters over against Panigra, the Janisar-Aga
against Martinengo, and other Pasha's between that and The disposition of the
Turks Camp.
Betlem. On the other side the Pasha of Romelia encamped against the Lazaretto,
and Catirgi-Ogle Pasha of Canea against Sabionera, Achmet Pasha Vizier of the
Camp, and Zagargibashee Major General of the Janisaries, who had the reputation
of old Soldiers and good Engineers, were ordered to enlarge and lengthen the
Traverses on the side of the Half Moon of Mocenigo. Quarters being thus
assigned, they raised three Batteries, the first against the Bastion of
Martinengo, and the right side of the Work St. Mary's; a second against
Panigra; and soon after a third The Batteries raised by the Turks.
against the Half Moon and Bulwark of Betlem, from whence they continually
thundered with their great Cannons, shooting Bullets of sixty, ninety to an
hundred and twenty pound weight.

Nor were the Besieged within less industrious or wise in the disposition of
their Affairs; for Marquess Villa took his Quarters at the entrance of the
Bulwark Jesus, Proveditor Barbaro at Panigra, the Proveditor General of the
Kingdom at Martinengo, the Duke of Candia, Francesco Battaglia, in the Fort of
Sabionera, and other Officers between the Curtains of St. Andrea, Betlem, and
Sabionera.

Things thus disposed on both sides, many and various were the valiant Aslauts
and Sallies, the Traverses extraordinary, the Rencounters bloody, the
resistance vigorous, not known or recorded in any Siege before; which though
they can never be fully expressed, or particularly denoted, yet I should do
injury to the ashes of those Heroic Christians who so freely entered the List,
and on this Theater of the World sacrificed their lives in defense of
Christendom, should I not signalize some of them of diverse Nations for their
Prowess and Valor. And here pardon me, good Reader, if I come short or fail in
this relation, where many of unparalleled Valor and Virtue dyed obscurely and
unknown, and the numbers of others so great, that to specify them all, were to
swell this Work to a larger Volume than the Book of Martyrs. Here was that
Martial field into which remote Nations and unconcerned descended, carried
thither by zeal to the Christian cause, or by certain Principles of Valor and
Magnanimity; so that though the War bore no other denomination than of the
Venetian and the Turk, yet so great was the confluence of both parts of the
World to this little Isle, as if it had been chosen by unanimous consent for a
Stage to try the Title to the Universal Empire. The Town being thus beleagured
on all sides, but where Neptune the Spouse of Venice kept it open, the
Christians endeavored The first Mine blown up.
first to disturb the Traverses of the Turks by a Mine of Powder which they
blew up; but through the neglect or little experience of the Engineer, it being
the first which they had fired, reverted, and did more hurt to themselves than
to the Enemy; the error of which being observed, another Fornello was fired,
which taking its due place and measures, so affrighted the Turks, as yet not
acquainted with this manner and invention of War, that they began at the first
onset to be discouraged, considering that if the ground was unsecure and
unstable at that distance, what abysses and chasmes must there be prepared to
make them graves under the Walls or entrance to the City. To second and
justify this Gunpowder Plot the Christians made two Sallies, one by the
Savoyards under Command of Colonel Profito Torse, who issued forth from the
Revelin of Betlem, and made great slaughter of the Turks with Grenades on the
side of Panigra; another was performed by Colonel Arborio and Colonel Marini,
accompanied with Count Brurasco Two Sallies made by the Christians.
Captain of the Guards to Marquess Villa who assaulted two Redouts of the
Turks, and forced them to flight, and afterward with some loss retreated
victoriously to their Works. In like manner Colonel Frigeri Commander of the
Fort St. Demetrio, made a Sally on Catirgi-Ogle near the Lazaretto, and with
some loss returned triumphant.

About this time arrived at Standi the Captain General Francesco Morosini, who
after some Consultation disarming his Fleet of about a thousand men, entered
with that Succor into the Town, and yet fitted out a The CaptainGeneral
disarms his Galleys.
convenient Squadron of Galleys and Galleasses to rove in the Archipelago to
hinder the Enemies Succors and Recruits, which were designed for Candia. In
this interim the Turks repaired the old Battery against the Lazaretto, and
labored continually in their Galleries and subterranean Five Mines the
Christians sprang.
Works; so that by that time that the Christians had sprang five Fornelli upon
them toward the point of the Half Moon of Mocenigo, the Turks had advanced so
well toward the Borders of Panigra, that they sprang two Mines; but these
being but the first proofs or essays of this kind of invention, reverted on
themselves with the loss of two hundred of their men, and again fired a third
with little success: which the Christians answered to better purpose, blowing
up sixty or seventy Turks. Wherefore the Turks made a farther trial of two
Mines by the Half Moon, rather to their own loss, than to the damage of their
Enemy.

In all the month of July passed not a day without some considerable action,
sometimes to good, sometimes with bad success to both Parties; every day Mines
were sprang on both sides, destroying the Lines, and overthrowing the
Galleries; but the main force and heat of the War as it were concentring it
self toward the Quarters of Panigra, to defense Attempts of the Turks on the
side of Panigra.
thereof the Engineer Castellan as freely as courageously proffered the use of
his Art, and the hazard of his Person. In which whilst he employed himself, and
endeavored to cleanse the Galleries of their rubbish, which the Enemies Mines
had thrown down, the Turks threw such quantities of Bomboes and Stink-pots into
those Caverns, as made the stench thereof so suffocating and noisome, that two
Officers were choked or smothered that went to view the place, and
Lieutenant Colonel Cavalli and the Engineer Castellan himself were brought away
half dead, poisoned with Sulphur and pestiferous smoke; to purify which Grota,
nothing could render the air more wholesome, in expulsion of the preceding
vapor, than the smoke of Juniper and burnt Aqua vitae, which being made use of
with good success, the Christians fired two Mines, which opened so dreadful an
abyss, as served for the grave of great numbers of Insidels.

During this time of daily rencounters arrived the Auxiliary Galleys Arrival of
Galleys from the Pope and Malta.
from the Pope and Malta, commanded by Prior Bichi and Bali del Been, as also
the Galleys of Naples and Sicily commanded by Gianettino Dorta and the Duke of
Ferrandina, of whom the Captain General would have borrowed some Forces to have
served at Land; but their Commissions it seems or their courages were too
strait to afford any such Supplies, being designed to cruise in the
Archipelago; only the generous Chevalier d'Harcourt with ten other Camerades
that were embarked on the Galleys Chevalier d'Harcourt.
of Malta agreed to enter the Garrison, having come with no other design from
France, than to offer themselves in defense of the Christian cause, and in a
time of Peace, when their Prince had no need of their assistance and service,
to give the World true evidences and proofs of the value and greatness of their
souls. In all Enterprises this Person, worthily descended of the House of
Lorrain, was a Companion to Marquess Villa, and one day venturing on a design
to disturb the Enemies approaches, was shot in the face with a Musket-bullet;
of which wound recovering some time after, he with his Companions returned to
France, having like Gavaliers Passant acted the parts of true Chivalry. But
neither did the Prior Bichi Commander of the Popes Galleys, nor Doria Admiral
of those of Naples, act agreeable to the bravery of those French Gentlemen; for
they not only denied, as we have said, to land a small number of their men, but
as if they came only to make them a visit, sent this short Letter of Advice
dated the 24th of August, in these words. The Auxiliary Galleys are obliged to
depart this night and to return to Suda, where they are to remain until the
expiration of that time which is appointed for them in these Seas. Prior Bichi
likewise sent word to Marquess Villa, That he judged it fit to depart, by
reason that no action presented for them to undertake: to which the Marquess
replied, That he who seeks may find, and that such opportunities never offer to
those who endeavor to avoid them. Doria also, to color his excuses, said,
That his Orders were not to land men, unless the Town were in the extremity of
danger of being taken; to which Villa replied, That he could not well be
assured in what condition the Town was, since he never vouchsafed to set his
foot ashore, or conceived a curiosity of seeing the greatest and the most
famous Siege that ever was in the World. In short, these Holy and Catholic
Squadrons departed without contributing any assistance to the Christians,
incurring thereby the severe censure of the Commanders in chief, with the anger
and disdain of the Soldiery.

The Venetians have always thought it Policy to maintain an Agent in the
Ottoman Quarters, perhaps with design to afford them Intelligence, or to be
ready to apply Terms of Peace in times of most urgent necessities. According to
which Rule Signior Giavarina was sent An Agent arrives at Candia to treat with
the Vizier.
to Candia upon the Venetian Armata, now governed at Sea by one Pasqualino,
with Instructions to treat with the Vizier, and perhaps to grant him any thing
besides Candia, though without this nothing could come either welcome or
satisfactory to the Turks. Howsoever to introduce him into the Camp, a white
Flag was displayed on the side of the Lazaretto; which when the Turks
perceived, they flocked in great numbers to know the mystery of this Signal of
Pacisication. And though nothing appeared, besides a Letter directed to the
Great Vizier, yet they hoped it might portend something of Treaty, which in the
end would produce a Peace, and a conclusion of their labors, before the Winter
surprised them in their colder Lodgings. The Vizier having read the Letter, had
his thoughts raised as high as was possible in hopes of a Surrender; and
therefore most freely ordered, That Signior Giavarina should the Sunday
following come to the Valley of Gioffiro with what Attendance and Followers he
judged sit, proffering at the same time a cessation of Arms and all acts of
Hostility: but the Christians who were not reduced to that extremity as to
crave Peace, or a respite from action, kindly refused his gentle proffer, which
so enraged the Vizier, that in The Turks assault Panigra.
a fury he gave fire to a Mine on the left side of Panigra, which was seconded
with that furious assault, that Panigra had boen put into great danger, had not
the courage of the Defendants been supereminent; and repulsed the Enemy with so
great a slaughter, that the earth round about was covered with dead bodies:
which action was seconded by a brisk Sally performed by some Knights of Malta,
asla Maison Neufve, do Langeron, de Clement, de Monrosier, de Charboniere, and
de Blanbuisson, though against the advice and counsel of Marquess Villa, of
which the two first were slain, and the rest returned with honor and success.

At the end of this month of July the Garrison received a Supply of six hundred
Foot under Command of Ottavio Abia, a noble Venetian, who likewise made his
entry more acceptable by twenty thousand Ducats which he brought with him. At
the time of his arrival the Christians sired a Mine with good success, but the
Enemy had prepared another in revenge, which took such effect on the right
Angle of Panigra, as broke the counterscarp ten paces, and filled the Ditch
with Earth, on advantage of which the Turks came to an Assault, but through the
courage of Luca Grandis Sergeant Major, and other gallant Officers, a stop was
given to the Enemies fury, and they beaten off with considerable loss.

And now for the present all Sallies ceased, whilst both sides carried on their
designs under ground, thwarthing and crossing the Mines, each of other; in
which subterranean Travels and Passages, the Miners often met, and had frequent
and bloody Encounters, those that were strongest robbed the Powder and Utensils
of the weaker, so that the Scene of War seemed to be transferred ad inferos,
and to be carried on with more fury and violence in the Grave, or the other
world, than it was in the open Air of the Cydonian Fields. The Turks becoming
now as expert as The Turks fire a dreadsul Mine.
the Christians in their secret and hidden Traverses, had penetrated so far,
that on the 8th of August they fired a most dreadful Mine on the side of the
half Moon, which made so great a Breach in that work, that eight men could
march a breast; which so animated the Enemy with the advantage, that
immediately in great numbers they mounted the breach to give an Assault; but
supplies being timely afforded in assistance of the Guard, the Enemy was
precipitated headlong, and overwhelmed with such showers of Musket shot, that
the Retreat into their works was not only disorderly, but the number of those
who survived so few and diminished, as gave proof how hazardous it was to
attempt other more difficult and better fortified Bastions.

Nor was the success of the Turks less on the side of Panigra, where having
made a Breach, they endeavored to make good their ground under shelter of
Sacks of earth, which the Christians drew away from them with long iron hooks,
which was such a piece of sport to the besieged to see their Enemies dismantled
of their shelter, and lie open to their shot, that a young Page of Marquess
Villa, called du Clos, venturing in this action beyond his years, was shot with
a Musket Bullet in the head, and so hastened to the other World covered with
glory and renown.

There was scarce now a day which passed, that was not signalized with the
springing of several Mines both on one side and the other; most of those made
by the Christians were seconded with Sallies, and those of the Turks with
Assaults and Stormings of one Fort or other. On the 10th of September Signior
da Riva, a noble Venetian, arrived with a Recruit of five hundred Soldiers,
and a great number of Pioniers, and the same day was celebrated, after the
usual manner, by springing of Mines; one of which threw a Turk on the Fort of
Panigra, and ruined the Galleries of the Enemy; the next day likewise several
Fornelli were fired by the Enginier Lubatiers from the parts of the half Moon,
and of Panigra, which filled up the Line, and spoiled the Redoubts of the Turks.

On the 15th the Christians vigourously sallied out with seventy Foot, under
the Command of Colonel Vechia, and two other Captains from the Revelin of
Panigra, who after a valiant skirmish, orderly retreated under the rampart of
the Revelin; to which place the Turks eagerly pursuing them, were entertained
with a Mine, and tossed into the Air; which being done, the Venetians returned
again, and were in the same manner encountered by the Turks, whereby a very hot
fight began; during which time the Captain General, who stood on the Bastion of
Betlem to observe the motions of the Enemy, saluted them with a plentiful
shower of Musket shot. In short, after the Venetians had for the space of an
hour resisted the Force of the Enemy with much slaughter, they retired with
good order into the Ditch of the City.

On the 18th Captain Fedeli, with a hundred Soldiers, made another Sally, but
being wounded, he retreated with some loss; which was retured again on the
Enemy by a Mine which the Enginier Quadruplani sprang with happy success on the
Quarter of Panigra; and on the same day the Captain of the Galleasses, called
Gioseppe Morosini, arriving with five hundred men, and two hundred thousand
Ducats together with good quantities of Ammunition and Victuals, gave
encouragement and relief to all the City; with whom also came the Cavalier
Gonges and his Brother, in quality of Adventurers for Honor and Religion.
There was not one day in all this Month, but diverse Fornelli and Mines were
fired on one side and the other; and though the Christians exercised as much
military Art, Industry, and Valor, as men were capable to perform, yet the
Turks still gained ground, and daily advanced their works upon the Christians;
wherefore the Captain General ordered that a Mine and three Fornelli should be
fired; by which a small Fort of the Turks, near the Counterscarp, was
overthrown, with diverse other works lately raised.

The Turks had such good success with their last Mines, that a Week after they
fired another, which was calculated so well that it ruined the Gallery of
Communication between Panigra and its Outworks, and threw the Counterscarp
into the Ditch of the Town; For the necessary The Turks spring another Mine.
repair of which Breach, and clearing of the Ditch, the Governors gave
immediate Order, and appointed a strong Guard for defense and protection of
those that labored; and to make better dispatch, a most ingenious Engine was
contrived to remove and rid the Ditch of Earth, which whilst it worked with
admirable success, the Turks, by help of a Mine, blew it into the Air, and
shattered it into a thousand pieces. Howsoever, the Christians desisted not
from their intended work, but still labored with Baskets, Sacks, and
Wheelbarrows to carry away the Earth; which that they might do quietly and
undisturbed, the Savoyards and Sclavonians made a furious and desperate Sally,
which continued for the space of two hours; and though in that time the Enemy
had opportunity to collect their greater Force into a Body, yet the Christians
were not put to slight, but retreated orderly, and in a fighting posture,
though with the loss of several Officers, of which were Captain Two Mines of
the Christians.
Re, and others. To revenge these mines of the Turks, the Christians fired two
others as dreadful as the others; the first near St Spirito, which being under
the Enemies Traverses, performed its desired Effect; the second was on the side
of the half Moon, which swallowed up two of their Redoubts; And on the third of
October they fired four other mines on the sides of Panigra and Betlem, one of
which consisted of six and thirty Barrels of Powder, and another of fourteen,
ordering at the same time a furious Sally from diverse places; as namely,
Captain Four Mines and a Sally of the Christians.
Gamba sallied from the Revelin of St Spirito, Sergeant Major Arasi from under
the Bulwark of Panigra. Colonel George Maria was ordered to assault the
Redoubts which were opposed to the Breach, Colonel Vecchia to attaque the
Redoubts between Panigra and the half Moon, Colonel Cremasco and Marini to
assault the redoubts between the half Moon and Betlem. Count Brusasco defended
the work of St Maria, Colonel Inberti defended the Revelin of St Nicholas, and
Sergeant Motta with thirty able Soldiers advanced to the farthest Lines of the
Enemy, killing and putting to flight all before them. Colonel Frigeri Captain
of the Fort St Dimetry, and Lieutenant Colonel Vimes possessed several
Redoubts; and in the conclusion all retreated in excellent order with success
and triumph, to yield the Turks evident arguments of their fortitude and
courage; and that the Town was still so well provided, as not only to be in a
Condition of defending it self, but offending the Enemy.

Yet the Turks were still laboring to countermine the Fornelli of the Enemy,
and to revenge the former Plots; to which end they had penetrated to the most
inward works of Panigra; but the Pioniers, employed by the Engineer
Quadruplani, discovering their Gallery, entered boldly in, and drove away the
Turks, from whom they took thirty two Barrels of Powder, and by that means for
the present preserved that work, and the Lives of many Soldiers.

The 17th of October the Christians sprang two Mines, one of thirty, Two Mines
of the Christians.
and another of five and thirty Barrels of Powder, which did the desired
execution upon the Turks; which some brave spirits seconded by a bold Sally,
amongst which none was more eminent than a Greek Priest, who, moved with zeal
to his Country, entered far into the Enemies Trenches, where having killed a
Person of Quality hand to hand, he was returning with the Trophy of his head;
but being in the way intercepted by three at once, he was unequally matched,
and slain, and died with the highest honor imaginable under the Walls of his
Native City.

Soon after the Cavalier Verneda, another Engineer, fired a Mine of One Mine of
the Christians.
forty Barrels of powder, which made the very City and Works tremble, like an
Earthquake; for whereas this Mine should have taken its effect on the Enemies
Redoubts, Providence ordered that it should take its passage through an old
Gallery, with so much violence and smoke, that it suffocated the Miners,
Carpenters, and Masons, to the number of sixty men.

Toward the end of this Summer the Turks at Constantinople and Adrianople grew
big with the expectation of the happy News and Arrival of that messenger that
should declare the taking of Candia, and the end of the Venetian War; to
entertain which joy with the more readiness, they had prepared Lights, and
Lamps, and artificial Fireworks to solemnize their Which is their Triumph for
Victory.
Dunalma, and made public prayers and procession of the youth of the City
twice a week; but finding their hopes frustrated, and their joys from Month to
Month deferred, their expectations became tired and wearied, and growing almost
ashamed of their disappointment, began to throw the blame of the miscarriage of
their Affairs on the ill Conduct of the Vizier, and the sluggishness of their
Soldiery. The The G. Signior sends a Messenger to bring him certain
information of the State of his Camp in Candia.
Grand Signior also more impatient than the rest, dispatched away a Messenger
with Letters to the Vizier, reproaching his cowardice and sloth; that being
provided with a most puissant Army, and with all other appointments of War,
should suffer the Ottoman Force to be baffled and entertained in taking a
single Fort for longer time, than formerly it had been in subduing whole
Provinces and Kingdoms; and moreover charged the Messenger to bring him a
faithful and true Relation of the state of all Affairs, and what was the real
cause and difficulty that so long obstructed the progress of his Arms; but yet
sent the Vizier for his encouragement a Sword, and a Vest of Sables, as tokens
of his favor. The Great Vizier moved with this message, resolved to give some
certain proofs of his industry and valor, and either to take the place, or
else at least to convince his Master, by the knowledge and testimony of his
Inquisitor, that the Work was of more hazard and longer time than was
apprehended in the Seraglio. Whereupon preparations were made, and the time of
assault was appointed chiefly on the side of Panigra, so that pressing
valiantly forward, they planted six of their Colors on the ruins of that
work; so that now, full of hope and courage, they adventured to descend into
the Ditch, but being prevented by three Mines, which contained seventy Barrels
of powder, they were mounted in the air with so much noise and violence, that
many Bodies were tossed on the Rampire of the Town, many of their greatest
Redoubts overthrown, and Graves made for multitudes of the Assailants. This
Assault as it began with great fury, so it continued for many hours; in which
action Signior Pisani, Proveditor General of the Kingdom, was killed by a
Granado. Howsoever, the Enemy was repulsed by the valor of the Christians,
insomuch that the Turks growing faint were pressed forward by the Vizier, who,
to encourage his Soldiers, promised an extraordinary reward of honor and money
to him who should but first touch the Walls with his hands. The hopes of riches
and honor so pricked forward all conditions of the Soldiery, that the
Commonalty desperately threw themselves at all, and endangered so far the
taking of Panigra, that they had certainly possessed themselves of it, had not
the Venetians had recourse to their last refuge of Mines, and blown the whole
Work into the Air, by which perished three Pashaws, and great numbers of common
Soldiers. And this for the present astonished the Turks, and gave a stop to
the farther proceedings of this Assault. This proof gave an evident Conviction
to the Grand Signior's Inquisitor of the strength of the place, and difficulty
of the Work; and having been an Eyewitness of all, returned with dismal
Stories of a cruel War, reporting perhaps, and it was related in the parts of
Christendom, That this was a place where blood was spilt day and night, where
Gallant Men had forgot to sleep, living in perpetual labors, enured to
intolerable sufferings and hourly dangers, there being none secure either in
the Church, in the house, or in the street; for Grenades rained, Cannons
thundered, Arrows flew, with stones like a Tempest; so that there was none in
that place, but who quartered on the Brink of the Grave.

It now grew toward Winter, and yet the Vizier thought of no other Quarters
than his Trenches, judging that if he should quit his station, the labors and
progress of the former Summer would be lost, and the Work to be again begun in
the Spring. Wherefore resolving to keep his Works, provided all conveyances to
carry away the Water, and sheds to cast off the Rain, and warmer Tents for the
Soldiery, which yet could not so artificially be contrived, but that the Camp
was full of mire and dirt, tedious and troublesome to Man and Beast, and the
Quarters of the Soldiery, so damp between their Banks of Earth, as caused
Catarrhs, Fluxes, Fevers, and other Camp Diseases with much mortality.

It was now the dead of Winter, and yet Martial Exploits were as frequent as
they had been in Summer; and though the great rains and floods The Winter
causes all action to cease.
of water extinguished the fires, and made, as it were, a cessation of Arms,
and of all acts of hostility; yet this interval of calmness and tranquillity
the Christians made use of to repair the Palisade of St Andrea, and the Lines
of Communication within the Ditch. And because the main Bulwark was also
shaken, and in some danger, all the Chiorma or Slaves of the Galleys were
commanded ashore to labor in the reparation, and to make aninward
retrenchment, which in short time, with admirable diligence, was perfected, and
on all sides completed.

The Turks in the mean time carried their Traverses forward as much as they
could, for they were now entered into the very Ditch of the Town; and because
there was no possibility to work in the Mines, by reason that the Galleries
were filled with water, they attended wholly to employ their great Guns, and
fire Grenades, so that they raised a new Battery near the Work of Mocenigo,
which began to batter the lower parts of St Andrea, and raised another Battery
on the ruins of the Revelin of Panigra, which being lower ground could not
much prejudice the main Bulwark.

The Sultan satisfied with the Relation given by his Messenger concerning the
progress his Vizier had made upon the Town, and of the hopes there was in time
to gain it, encouraged him with a Letter of Praise, accompanied with a Sword,
and Vest of Sables, the magnificent Signals of the Sultans favor., And now
besides the Force of Firearms, the Turks made use of Arrows, shot into the
Town, carrying papers written in Italian and French, persuading the Soldiers
to fly to their Camp, where they should receive civil treatment, and a secure
refuge; which gave that encouragement to those wearied with the labors of the
Siege and hard usage, that many of them made Trial of the Turks entertainment,
and escaping out of the Works, fled to the Enemies Camp, where they were
clothed, received Conduct Money, and were permitted License to embark
themselves for what place they pleased.

About this time the Proveditor General Barbaro and the Licutenant General of
the Artillery Uvertmiller having obtained license from the General Barbaro and
Uvertmiller depart from the Army.
Senate, returned to Venice; the first was displeased, that Marquess Villa
should take the precedence of him; and the other, because his opinion of making
a general Sally of all the Garrison on the Enemy was not followed, but rejected
by the Council of War, as a design pernicious and over-hazardous; for that the
fighting with an Enemy more numerous than themselves, fortified in their
Redoubts and Works, and hidden under ground in inextricable Labyrinths, was an
Enterprise so rash, that no man wishing well to the Garrison, and of sound
judgment ought to advise.

The Turks having in this Campaign fixed themselves well in a formal Siege, and
gained ground, and many advantages on the Christians, of which the destruction
of the Work of Panigra was none of the least; the The deaths of Secretary
Giavarina and Padavino.
Vizier supposed it a seasonable time to enter into a Treaty by the hand of the
Secretary Giavarina, who was there entertained for that purpose; but he falling
sick of the Camp-distemper dyed in a short time, whose death was soon after
followed by that of Signior Padavino, who finished his days at Caned; the
Plate, Money, and Household Stuff of both were carefully inventored, and by the
justice of the Vizier duly accounted for, and administered to the Venetians. The
Instruments of Treaty being thus taken away, the Captain-Pasha was dispatched
to Constantinople, carrying with him four thousand wounded and sick men, and a
Letter to the Grand Signior and Divan, signifying his resolutions to win the
place, or dye under the Walls of it; and to that end desired them to send him
such Recruits of men and supply of Provisions as were requisite. He complained
of the cowardice of those to whom they had incharged the Convoys; that he
wanted both Powder and Bullet, for default of which they could neither ply
their great Guns, nor go forward in their Mines; that bread was so dear, that
no price could be set to it; that his Soldiers by slaughter and sickness did
daily diminish, so that his Army was reduced to twenty three thousand Foot,
seven hundred Horse, and two thousand Pioniers; and in fine concluded with
urgent instances to have Recruits of all dispeeded to him, without which it was
impossible to gain the Town, or save himself. Hereupon Recruits came from all
parts, both of Men, Ammunition, and Provisions, especially from the Frontiers
or adjacent places, which by such vast evacuations were almost dispeopled, more
particularly in Albania and Castelnuovo extraordinary Preparations were making
both of Men, Horse, and Camels; and a report was spread, that the Grand Signior
intended to pass over in Person to Candia; but this was soon disproved by his
residence at Larissa, where he remained to render assistance more easily, and
receive advices more speedily than could be performed at Adrianople.

Great quantities of Corn were also sent from diverse places, particularly from
Smyrna, where English, French, and Dutch Ships were taken up for that service,
to the prejudice of the Trade, and damage of the concerned: some of which
Vessels were taken in their passago to Candia, whilst others arrived in safety
through the negligence, as was supposed, of the Commanders at Sea. And indeed
the Turks plied their business with that industry and diligence, that
notwithstanding the Force which the Venetians had at Sea, their Recruits for
the most part arrived safe, and Corn began to be so plentiful, that the Vizier
gave a prohibition against having more imported; and in short, nothing wanted
for prosecution of the War, which was carried on in the Winter, as far as the
season or the weather would permit; so that scarce a day passed without
something of action, either of storming or blowing up of Forts, overthrowing
Galleries, filling Trenches, the particulars of all which are so numerous, that
to recount them would fill a Volume, and are more proper to be related in a
Journal than a History, in which minute matters ought to be passed by, and
nothing but acts of greatest moment be recorded.

Howsoever great Actions at this season ceased for a while on one side and the
other, only continual discharges of great shot and Bomboes were practiced. And
the Turks endeavoring with artifice to cover their designs, dispatched a
Letter to the Senate of Venice by way of Suda, and thence in a Galley to
Candia, touching certain Motives of Peace, supposing that Propositions and
Offers of Accommodation would loosen the minds of the Officers, and render them
less intent and diligent in their Affairs; on receipt of which Letter, though
Marquess Villa replied, Palma under the caution of a white Flag, desiring that
it should be forwarded to Venice. About this time arrived to the great comfort
of the Besieged the new Proveditor Bernardo Nani with five hundred Soldiers,
and Matteo Matheus Sergeant General with some Recruits from the Pope, bringing
with him three hundred Medals of Silver to bestow on such as deserved them,
with Jubilees and Indulgences without number, and thus ended the Action of this
Year.

Anno Christi 1668. Hegeira 1079.
THE Spring approaching, toward the end of January the Turks full of hopes to
complete their Conquest, vigorously in all maritime Ports of the Empire made
provisions of Corn and other Victuals to be sent to the Camp, when occasion
should require, and opened a door for Janisaries according to the Turkish
phrase, the Formality of which is in this manner: The Chief Officer appointed
for that purpose asks severally such as come to be listed, Of what Chamber they
desire to be; to which Formality in making sanisaries in these days.
they making reply, That they will be of the fifth, sixth, or seventh, or the
like, the Officer gives them a blow under the ear with the palm of his hand,
and bids them repair to their Chamber, with which they nimbly pass away. But
herein the due form and order of Janisaries was corrupted; for in former days
Janisaries were educated in that condition from children, and from thence named
Yenisheri or Tyrones, or the young Soldiery; but now on this necessity of
raising Forces, ancient men, Fathers of Families with long beards were
admitted, to the disparagement of that Order, and corruption of the exactness
of that Discipline. Considerable Supplies also were sent of Beldargees or
Pioniers; so that this year from several parts, according to the best
computation, the Forces of Candia were recruited with a Supply of seventy
thousand men, for transportation of which and of their Provisions, all
Christian Ships were imbarged at Smyrna and Constantinople, several of which in
their voyage to Candia, were intercepted by the Maltese Corsaires, and
particularly a French Ship called the Arms of France, on which were between
four and five hundred Turks, was taken, and in boarding of her about an hundred
Turks were killed upon the Deck: some other small Vessels (one of which was a
Ligornese under English Colors) were taken, the French Barks which had in this
manner lost their Corn, unadvisedly returned to Smyrna, supposing the excuse of
having done their endeavors, and of being overpowered by a stronger Force was
sufficient: But the Turks who judge of nothing well, but by the success, having
gotten them into their hands, made them not only return their Freight, but
satisfy the loss of the Cargason.

In the Month of March the Vizier having intelligence of six or seven Venetian
Galleys to be at Fodile, not far from Standia, under the Command of the
Proveditor of the Armata Lorenco Cornaro, gave order to Regep Pasha of Romelia,
who was Captain of the Soldiery, and Durach A Fight at Sea.
Begh, who commanded a Squadron of twelve Galleys, to weigh Anchor in the
night, and there surprise them: Durach Begh, though sore against his will,
doubting the truth of the report, yet readily obeyed and fitted his Galleys for
the Enterprise. The Captain General having intelligence of the design, prepared
four Galleys in Port, and embarked that night with a French Regiment and some
Italians to the number of six hundred, besides two Companies of the Guards, and
one of the Proveditor Nani, under the Command of Colonel Andre Facile and
Montalto, accompanied also with the Proveditor Extraordinary, Daniel
Justiniani, Commissary of the Treasury of the Militia, with several other
Captains and Officers; and arriving at Standia, found the Proveditor General
Cornaro newly entered there from crusing the Seas with sixteen Galleys, to whom
having communicated the design, they immediately loosed from the Port, and
arrived at Fodile before midnight. The Turks having from the place of their
Anchorage discovered two Sail, hoped there might be no more, and therefore came
forth to sight them; but engaging farther, met such a number as evidenced the
danger, and the little hope there was in other than in their Courage and Arms.
The night being dark, the Venetians not to mistake each other, carried such
great Lights on their Mast-heads, as not only distinguished them from the
Enemy, but also directed them to give battle to the Turks, which they
prosecuted so home, that they took and sunk five of the Turkish Galleys, of
which the Admiral commanded by Durach Bey was one; the rest, though much
shattered, and for the present unserviceable, did yet by the help of their
Oars, and the darkness of the night, find a way to escape: nor was this Victory
gained by the Venetians in a Fight of seven hours without the loss of two
hundred Soldiers killed, and about five hundred wounded, besides some Persons
of Quality and Command, viz. the Cavalier Arasi Justiniani, the Commissary
Francesco Cornaro, Foscarini, etc. the wounded were Georgio Greco, Lorenco
Bembo, and Marco Balbi. The Turks lost many of their best Seamen and
Soldiers, besides Slaves and others, counting on every Galley one with another
three hundred persons; amongst the Prisoners which amounted to four hundred and
ten, the Beys of Cyprus and Navarine with Mustapha of Anatolia, and the Chiaus
of the Pasha of Aleppo were taken, together with eleven hundred Christian
Slaves who were all freed, on condition that they should serve the Summer
following in the Venetian Armata. Of the Turks were slain Durach Bey, the Bey
of Coron, and Hastam formerly Bey of Coron. The Great Vizier from the Camp
could all the time behold the flashes of the small and great shot, and by help
of the Venetian Lights perceive the success of his own Fleet, not answerable to
his expectation. What loss the Turks sustained with Slaves and Soldiers is
uncertain, only an hundred Christian Slaves were released, and four hundred
Turks captivated, and amongst the slain was Durach Bey himself, a stout
Seaman, and a known Pirate, who from a small Brigantine had raised himself to
be Begh of the Morea, and to command four or five Galleys of his own. In like
manner, and not long after, a Squadron of Venetian Ships were forced by storm
in the night to anchor under Cape Spada, where accidentally six Turkish Galleys
were riding. The Sky being very dark and close, the first Ship ran foul of a
Galley, and so shattered and crushed her sides, that being ready to sink, the
Turks forsook her, and run aboard the Ship to save a life which was to be
afterward miserable and slavish. The others assrighted at the arrival of these
unexpected guests, slipped their Cables to seek harbor in a tempestuous Sea; but
the weather being too boisterous for Galleys, one of them was cast away, and
about an hundred and seventy men lost: the news hereof being brought to Venice
by Colonel Vecchia with the Ensigns and Spoils taken from the Enemy, the Senate
bestowed the honor of Knighthood on the Captain General, comforting the
families of the slain and wounded with signal marks of Honor and Glory.

The Captain-Pasha put this year to Sea more early than was usual, designing to
make as many Voyages to Candia as was possible, with Succors both of Men and
Ammunition; his design and work was wholly to avoid the Venetians, and to steal
ashore his Recruits; to which end he made such expedition in every Voyage, that
scarce could the The success of the Turks at Sea.
Christians have advice of his arrival in any part of the Isle of Candia,
before he was well forwarded in his return: yet his haste was not so great, but
one time having fifty three Galleys in his Campany, he adventured to look into
the Port of Nio, where he met four Corsaires or Free-booters under Maltese
Colors, commanded by two Brothers Themericort, and by the Knights Verva and
Bremont: two of the Ships were on the Careen washing and tallowing their
Vessels, whilst the other two, viz. the Themericort Brothers were on the Guard,
being at anchor in the narrowest entrance to the Harbor. The Turks supposed at
first, that so formidable an appearance of their Fleet would affright the
Christians to a Surrender, rather than to contend on those unequal terms. But
it seems the Corsaires were more resolute than was imagined; for no sooner did
the Turks approach, than the Christians discharged their Cannon and Vollies of
small shot so plentifully, as caused the Galleys to dispute at a farther
distance, where shooting as it were at rovers with their long Cashee Pieces
(not adventuring to come to a nearer Fight) for the space of eight hours made
(as reported) about eight thousand shot, with little or no execution; so that
the Captain-Pasha made his sign of Retreat, and forsook the Engagement, as
being too dangerous and difficult an Enterprise. But better success had the
Turks the next month at Sea against Captain Georgio, an old and subtle Pirate,
who for many years had vexed and pillaged, not only the Turks, but Christians
on all Isles of the Archipelago: great fortune he had in taking Turkish Saiks
and Vessels, and some of them considerably rich, and when that prey failed him,
or was scarce, he then pursued his game on the shore, from whence he often
carried men, women, and children into slavery, and oft-times had the fortune of
considerable Booty. The Islands which lay open and unguarded Captain Giorgio
taken by the Turks.
were his common Rendezvous, where the men attended his service, and the women
his lust. In this manner this Pirate passed for several years, having obtained
unto himself a fame and terror with the Turks, and richess at home: the place
which he commonly chose to wash and tallow his Vessels, was amongst certain
small Isles in the Bay of Edremit, anciently Adrimetum, opposite unto Mytilene,
from whence he had as from a Thicket or Wood a view of such Vessels as passed
the great Road toward Constantinople: these frequent successes rendered him so
confident and secure, that he still continued his station, notwithstanding the
Turkish Naval Forces, which in the Summer season made their Rendezvous at Scio.
But at length the Captain-Pasha with the whole Turkish Armata being at Scio,
and with him three Ships of Tripoli, advice came that Captain Georgio had not
forsaken his little Isles, but was there careening his small Fleet which
consisted of two Ships and a Brigantine: hereupon the Tripoleses were commanded
out to encounter the Enemy, whom the next day they found so secure and
negligent, that he discovered not his Foes before they were ready to attaque
him. The Captain Pasha also fearing that the Tripoleses were not of sufficient
Force to encounter so valiant and experienced a Commander, both to make the
Enterprise the more easy and certain, and to gain the reputation of that
business to himself, went out in person with all his Galleys. The Tripoleses
had began to fire on Captain Georgio before the Pasha came in to their
assistance, but it falling calm, and the Ships not able to join in a nearer
fight, gave way for the Galleys, which being above fifty in number, overpowered
the Christians on all sides; howsoever, the two Ships defended themselves
against all this Force, until the Captain himself being killed, his own Ship
surrendered, but so shattered, that she was scarce able to swim above water.
This Ship being overcome, the Turks boarded the other, commanded by Captain de
Leseases, who seeing no remedy to avoid being taken, he leaped into his Boat,
and blew up his Ship; howsoever could not escape his destiny, for having his
Arm broke, he became a prey and a slave to his Enemy.

The News of this Victory was celebrated with so much the more joy, by how much
this person was feared and hated; and was not only a subject of rejoicing to
the Turks, but also to the Christians, whose Parents and Relations this
Corsaire had pillaged and enslaved; so that the Inhabitants of the Archipelago
for the most part were pleased with the revenge, and promised more security and
quietness to their open Coasts. With no less triumph was this News posted to
the Grand Signior, who rewarded the Messenger with two thousand Dollars
gratuity, and caused demonstrations of joy to be made through the whole Court;
so dreadful was grown the Name of so inconsiderable a person, in respect of the
greatness of the Ottoman Empire.

But the success of this advantage did not heighten the courage of the Captain
Pasha to that pitch, as to make him more bold with the Venetian Armata; for in
the month of July having great Recruits of Men and Provisions to land, and
hearing that the Venetians lay before Canea, having fortified a Rock, called St
Todoro, at the mouth of that Port, he resolved for Retimo; but pursuits, or
intelligence of the Enemies being in the way, or his own fears still prevented
him, until at length he was forced to Gira-Petra, a small and obscure place,
far distant from the City of Candia, and the way thither by land rocky, and
almost unpassable for Beasts of Burden; howsoever, the Men and Ammunition were
there landed with that haste and expedition, that in less than thirty hours
time the Captain Pasha was again upon his return for Scio, leaving the
Soldiery, and the Ammunition he had disbarked to find a passage through the
Rocks and Mountains: At which the Vizier was so displeased, that he sent the
Captain Pasha this Message, That the next time he should forbear to bring
farther supplies, until he could find a more commodious Port wherein to land
them.

In this manner the Marine Affairs passed this year at Sea, the Turkish Fleet
having, besides other succors, transported Ibrahim Pasha of Damascus with
eight hundred Spahees unto Candia, whom we mentioned formerly to have been
Pasha of Grand Cairo, and married to the Grand Signior's Sister; and being one
with whom I had a former acquaintance, and who was a great friend to the
English Nation, I made him a visit as he passed through Smyrna.

Whilst these matters were transacting at Sea, on the 7th of January arrived
the new Proveditor General Bernardo Nani, and Sergeant General Mutio Matei with
five hundred Foot, sent by the Pope, who gave icence for destruction of some
Monasteries, whose Orders were judged less necessary in the Venetian State,
that their Revenue might be applied to the service of this War; after Arriva of
which succors, a general Muster was made of the whole Garrison, and the number
thereof reckoned to amount unto eight thousand fighting Men; though soon
afterward continual action and exploits of War decimated the number, and many
of the brave Commanders being taken off, every tenth man perished, and rendered
the place in a condition which required continual supplies.

For many and various were the attempts and actions performed on both sides
under the Walls of Candia; and first the Turks began to make appear a Battery
which they had raised on the side of the Lazaretto, which so offended the Port,
that there was no harbor or access for Vessels. On the contrary to which, by
the Fort of St Andrea another Battery was raised, which offended Tramata very
much, which was another small harbor, capable only to receive Boats or Barks;
the passage to which was so annoyed now by the Enemies Cannon, that no Vessel
could go in or out, unless in the Night, and that too with some difficulty and
danger.

The Turks gaining advantage on the side of St Andrea, applied their The Turks
resolve to make their passage by St (...).
whole strength and diligence to that part; and one dark Night passing
undiscovered along the Seas, they silently fixed a Cord to the Palisade of St
Andrea, and with an Engine strained it so violently, that they tore away
several of the main Stakes of the Work without being perceived by the
Sentinels, who paid for that neglect with the price of their lives; upon which
success they continued to advance their lines on that side, which Marquess
Villa perceiving, resolved to hinder by some valiant sallies. And first two
hundred brave men selected out of several Regiments, conducted by Sergeant
Major Motta, issued out from Panigra, and taking their way along the Sea,
bravely mixed with the Turks, and put them to slight; and though the Alarm
thereof brought a Concourse A Sally made by the Christians.
of Turks from all parts of the Camp, yet the Christians stood so stoutly to
it, that they struck a terror to their Enemies, and once forced them to a
Retreat within their Trenches; and at length, after they had overthrown certain
Redoubts and Traverses, they gave back with good order, returning with Victory
and Glory; which bravery the Captain General acknowledged to all, and
encouraged in the common Soldiery with a Present of fifty Zechins. This
success gave the besieged opportunity to finish their Platforms which they had
raised on the side of the Ditch adjoining to the Bulwark of St Andrea, on which
they planted two pieces of Cannon which carried fifty pound Bullet a piece;
which much disturbed the Enemies Traverses: Howsoever, the Turks with
indefatigable pains, and invincible patience battered the little Tower of
Priuli, the Curtain, and Revelin of St Andrea, and employed all their power and
attention to fill the Ditch with Faggots, Earth and other Rubbish.

On the 29th of February, after the Christians had first made a Breach on the
Enemies Redoubt, which confronted the Revelin of St Andrea, and sprang five
Mines one after the other, a second Sally was made by a considerable Body of
the besieged, consisting of two hundred French and Savoyards, three hundred
Italians, two hundred Germans, and a hundred and twenty horsemen, who issued
forth with that Gallantry, that driving the Turks under Covert, advanced far
within their Works, Another Sally.
with which Demonstration of honor the Captain General being satisfied, they
made the smoke which was a Signal for their Retreat; so that returning
victorious without much loss, that day was remarkable, and numbered amongst the
other days which were esteemed successful and fortunate in that Siege.

Howsoever, the Turks with admirable patience and assiduity crept forward by
their Traverses, and help of their great shot on the Bastion of St Andrea,
which whilst Augustine Rostayne, Adjutant of Marquess Villa, considered, he was
taken off by a Cannon Bullet; and yet the Turks could not advance so fast, but
that the Engineer Maupassan gave some retardment to their progress by firing a
Mine, which overthrew two of their Redoubts, and afforded them new work to
repair them and the adjoining Traverses.

This was the present state of the miserable Candia, when the Duke of Savoy
recalled his Subject Marquess Villa from his honorable employment; and a Ship,
called Alexander the Great, by appointment of the Marquess Viils returns into
Italy.
Venetian Senate arrived at Standia to transport him and his Family to Venice;
so that on the 11 of April, accompanied to Tramata by all the principal
Officers of the Garrison, he embarked in order to his Voyage, whose place was
about two Months after supplied by the Marquess St Andrea Montbrun, a Nobleman
of France, with whom the Venetian Ambassador at Paris, by order of that
Republic, had prevailed to take upon him the defense and protection of that
deplorable City, reduced now almost to its ultimate Crisis.

I cannot adventure to assign the reasons that might induce the Duke of Savoy
to recall the worthy Governor from this glorious action. Some say, that those
who were emulous of his glory procured his revocation; Others, that the
Marquess himself desired it; and that finding Causes of Marquess Villa's
departure.
the Forces of the Town to decline, and the Turks to encroach and penetrate
daily into the innermost parts of strength, he was desirous, after so long a
Siege, to return with untainted glory; or perhaps weary of a Siege so tedious
and perilous, he might desire to retire, having performed sufficient already in
his own person, and enough to make all Christendom his Debtors and Admirers. So
that I cannot but reproach those tongues and pens, which in report and writings
attribute the cause of Marquess Villa's retirement to certain just occasions of
discontent given him by the Captain General Francesco Morosini, who, envious of
his Fame and actions, and unwilling to have a consharer with him in his
honors, did usually thwart his Counsels and Proposals; and more particularly
contemned a Redoubt which Marquess Villa had built, and of which he had a
singular esteem. Yet that Morosini might evidence the unsufficiency thereof,
it is reported that he wrote a Letter to the Vizier, to assault that Redoubt;
for if he did, he promised to afford him opportunity to take it, by withdrawing
all Forces from thence; which Letter, it is said, was betrayed to Marquess
Villa, and brought to his hands, which he with great prudence and moderation
dissembled until the hour of his departure, and then produced it to the
astonishment and shame of Morosini. To this particular I give the less belief,
because I find it wrote in a Journal of this Siege by a person who was a great
Favourer of the French, and willing to share the entire glory to that Nation,
and the miscarriages to the Italian. Whatsover might be the motive to Marquess
Villa to persuade his return, is uncertain; howsoever, it is reported, that
being arrived at Zant in his way to Venice; and there meeting a strong Convoy
bound for Candia, with recruits of Men, and plenty of provisions, he conceived
new thoughts of the greatness of the Republic; and beholding also with what
vigor and vigilance they attended to the conservation of that place, he began
to testify some remorse and dissatisfaction for having abandoned a Charge
which rendered his Fame great through the World; and the continuation of which
labors being crowned with that success which his courage and conduct merited,
might have brought a Blessing to all Christendom, and perpetuated his honor
and glory to all posterity. The Marquess being arrived at Venice was received
with the usual Ceremonies and Honors from the Public, and being introduced,
after private Audiences, into the College, he spoke in this manner.

IF the thanks which I render to your Serenity, and to your Excellencies
Marquess Villa's Speech.
could equal the greatness of those favors which I have received from you, it
would have been but an ordinary glory to you not to have infinitely surpassed
the bounds of my acknowledgements, as you have infinitely outdone the utmost of
my Deserts; Nor could this August Senate have been exalted to the most elevated
point of Sovereign Power, had I been able to render Services worthy of that
generosity which composed it. For as the affection of the Creatures toward
God, makes excuses for their wants and infirmities; so having a zealous desire
to contribute to the glories of this most Serene Republic, not only my
endeavors, my labors, and my blood, but also my life, and my whole being; I
beseech you to accept thereof as an atonement for the weakness of my
abilities. This, my Lords, is that desire which I have ever demonstrated in all
the wearisome performances of my Charge under the generous Conduct of the
Captain General of your Arms, whose Valor I have endeavored to second and
imitate. This is that Desire which would have entertained me in the service of
this most Serene Republic to the ultimate period of my life, if the Command of
my Prince, concurring with the Assent of your Serenity, had not enjoined my
return. I confess, that I should feel in my self an inward Consolation, could I
assist at the triumph of Candia, which I hope in a short time to see victorious
over all her Enemies; until when, my Lords, the honor which you have been
pleased to do me hitherto, cannot but be relished by me as a Comfort of my
life. And what greater Glory can I imagine to my self, than to have served a
Republic, which may be called the most perfect work of the hand of God, which
being founded like the Firmament upon the Waters, communicates happy
Tranquillity through all the World? I am able now to boast, That I have seen a
City which of it self alone is able to resist the Puissance of all Asia, and
that I have proved and tried the valorous opposition which it made against a
formidable Enemy. I can (I say) glory that I have awakened in the hearts of
your Soldiery, their ancient Valor, and that I have sprinkled your Laurels
with my own Blood; and it is but just that I should distill it to the last drop
for the service of this most Serene Republic, which after so many Ages resigns
it self up a Sacrifice for all Christendom. It is by your Arms (my Lords) and
by your immovable Constancy, that the City of Candia, which in former Days was
esteemed the weakest of all the Fortresses of Greece, is become at present the
most famous Theater of War. I dare not only hope, that the conclusion thereof
will be happy, so long as your Serenity watchfully attends to the conservation
of that place, but that also this August Senate will extend their Conquests
into the most remote parts of all the East. This would be, most Serene Prince,
and most Excellent Lords, the consummation of all my desires, and also that I
might finish my days in the Service of this most Serene Republic, toward
which I shall for ever conserve a most passionate zeal and an immortal
acknowledgment.

The Senate, that they might testify the esteem they entertained of the person
of Marquess Villa, presented him with a Basin of Gold valued at six thousand
Ducats, together with a Patent recounting at large the many famous Exploits
which he had performed in their Service, which they expressed with a style so
generous and obliging, as may serve for a Record to transmit the Fame of his
Merits to all Posterity.

Marquess Villa being departed from Candia, the Captain General recalled all
his Forces from diverse parts of the Archipelago, which he had sent thither with
the Soldiers wounded in the last Battle; and being returned, they brought with
them great numbers of Pioniers and Workmen to labor in the Fortifications and
Mines: at the same time also the Captain-Pasha arrived at Canea, bringing two
thousand Janisaries with him.

The Marquess St. Andrea Montbrun, a Gentleman of the French Nation, Marquess
St. Andrea visits the Works.
was transported to Candia by the General Proveditor Cornaro, where being
entered into the Charge and Office of Marquess Villa, wanted nothing of the
vigilance and circumspection of his Predecessor. And therefore in the first
place having visited all the Forts, Outworks, and Retrenchments of the Town,
ordered what was necessary for repair of the breaches, and amended what was
deficient in the most distressed Fortifications. And though the Turks fired a
Mine the 22th of August at the point of the Fort St. Andrea, which made a most
dangerous breach; yet it was so valiantly defended, and so speedily repaired,
that the Enemy gained little or no advantage, and all by the extraordinary
diligence of this Marquess St. Andrea, who passed whole months without
uncloathing himself; and as his nights were without sleep, so his days consumed
without repose, applying himself personally to all places where was most of
danger, especially at the Fort of St. Andrea, where he took up his constant
Quarters.

The Turks now daily pressing the Town more nearly than before, Skirmishes and
Sallies were more frequent and more bloody; so that about this time the
Proveditor General Bernardo Nani applying himself with all earnestness in the
performance of his Charge, was slain by a Musket Shot in his head; his death
was much lamented by all, being a Gentleman who was born (as may be said) in
the Fleet, having had his Education there, and passed his youth in Wars and
dangers for the safety and honor of his Country. Girolamo Bataglia was elected
by the Republic to succeed him in the Office, whose death was also seconded by
that of Francesco Bataglia, Brother of the Duke of Candia, being shot in the
breast with a Musket-bullet; and though he was sent thither to administer
Justice to the People, yet his zeal and courage carrying him to Martial Acts
beyond his duty, made a grave for him amongst the other Heroes and Worthies of
that place.

The Turks approaching daily nearer with their Works, infested very much the
passage of Vessels to the Town, and shot so directly into the Port, that no
Ship, Galley, or Bark could remain in any security from their Cannon; to remedy
which, a small Redoubt was raised at Tramata, which being well and strongly
fortified served for a small Port, under the shelter of which the lesser
Vessels found some protection, and was of great relief to the distressed City.
About this time the Popes Galleys with those of Malta arrived, commanded by
Fra. Vincenzo Rospigliosi, the Popes Nephew, who having not brought a greater
number of people than what served to man their Galleys, they were not able to
spare many for defense of the Town.

The long continuance of this Siege, and the fame thereof noised through the
whole World, moved the heroic and gallant Spirits of our Age, to descend into
this Campus Martius, this Field of War, and give proofs of their Prowess and
Valor in defense of the Christian Cause; some being moved by a principle of
vainglory, proceeding from the briskness of a youthful and aerie Spirit, and
others from the sense of Devotion and fervor toward Religion: amongst which
none were more forward than some Gentlemen of the French Nation, as namely
Monsieur La Fueillade, alias Duke of Roanez, with the Count St. Paul, a young
Cavalier; to forward which design, taking first the License and Benediction of
their King, they appointed their Rendezvous at Tolon, Some French Gentlemen,
Adventurers for honor, arrive at Candia.
where they listed two hundred Gentlemen, Cadets or younger Brothers, who went
in quest of Honor, and not of Pay, with four hundred ordinary Soldiers who
expected their maintenance from the bounty of their Leaders. The chief of whom
was Monsieur La Fueillade, and his Lieutenant the Chevalier De Tresines. Their
whole Body was divided into four Brigades.
The first commanded by Count St. Paul. The second by the Duke De Carderousse.
The third by the Count De Villa Maur. And the fourth by the Duke De Chateau
Tiery.
When these Persons of Honor and Courage arrived at Candia, they found the
City hardly beset, and reduced to a strait and difficult condition; for the
Turks were advanced so near to the Fort of St. Andrea, that the Soldiers
within and without could cross their Muskets, and reach Tabaco one to the
other: howsoever this breach was so well repaired with a good Palissado
fortified with several Bonnets, and a double Retrenchment on the Bastion it
self, and a third Retrenchment of squared stone withal, that the oourage of the
Besieged being nothing abated by the many and furious assaults of the Enemy,
the Town still remained in a defensible posture, and still capable with good
Succors and Supplies to yield matter of employment for several years to the
Ottoman Forces. These worthy Champions, as I said, being arrived, moved with
the sense of Religion, and desire of glory to themselves, challenged the
privilege of mounting the Guard of St. Andrea; but that being already
prepossessed by the Knights of Malta and other Officers of the place, was
refused to them. Howsoever the Captain General Morosini was pleased to gratify
them with the Guard of a small Chapel over that Bastion on the right hand of
the breach, a place of no less danger, and therefore of no less honor than the
other; with which the Cavaliers being satisfied, Monsieur St. Paul mounted the
Guard one day at six a clock in the morning, and continued there until the same
hour of the day following; during which time he lost his Major Dupre and
Monsieur De Marenval, the latter of which had his brains knocked out with so
violent a blow of a great shot, that some pieces of his skull dangerously
wounded the Sieurs De Chamilly and De Lare, who were near to him: and more
maliciously did the Turks ply the stations of these new-come Guests than any
others, throwing Bomboes, Grenades, Stink-pots, and other sorts of artificial
Fire without cessation into their Quarters, notwithstanding which, this young
Prince and Monsieur La Fueillade exposed themselves like common Soldiers,
animating their men more with their example than their words.

And now by this time by so many Works and removals of Earth, by so many
Traverses and Mines under ground, and throwing up the caverns and bowels of the
Earth into the Air, the soil became so brittle, crumbling, and as it were
sandy, and like ashes, that it seemed not capable longer of enduring the
Pick-ax or the Shovel, and was so porous, that the light of some Mines
glimmering into the others Traverses, easily discovered each others Mines,
whereby it became equally a trade and custom to steal Powder. Howsoever the
Venetians so closely worked The Christians overthrow a battery of the Turks.
with those Props and Arts, that they formed a considerable Mine, which on the
first, of December they sprang with so much success, that they wholly overthrew
a Battery of the Turks directed against St. Andrea, and buried all their Cannon.

But these French Gallants intended not from the first of their design to make
this War their Trade, or the Town of Candia their place of habitation, but as
Passengers or Pilgrims, whose souls are active, and hate idleness, to give the
World some proofs of their Valor, and so away: wherefore La Fueillade their
General pressed Morosini to give leave, that he and his Fellow Soldiers might
make a Sally, and enter into the Enemies Trenches, so as to yield a
divertisement to those on the Walls; and perform that Action and Enterprise for
which they had designed and undertaken this Voyage: of which some of them were
so impatient, that they would not expect Orders for their Sally, as the
Chevalier De Tresmes, who alone entered into the Enemies Works, and returned
with his Sword all bloody; at which La Fueillade his Commander was so incensed,
that he reproved him with this short reprehension, I would as gladly see a
Butcher as you. Others by this example scarce refrained from the like; amongst
which Monsieur De Ville Franche drew a Turk by force from his Trench, and
brought him to the foot of the Bastion; but there he was forced to quit his
Prize, for being shot in the Leg with a Pistol-bullet, soon after dyed of the
wound: By these examples the Commanders seeing it impossible to repress or
abate the mettle of these vigorous Spirits, their bridle was taken off, and
license given to make their excursion; so that all things being ordered and
contrived for a Sally, before break of day in the morning they silently issued
forth, and leaping into A Sally made by the French.
the Enemies Quarters, valiantly mingled with them, cutting and hewing down all
before them; their Banner was a Crucifix carried in the Front by Father Paul a
Capuchin Friar, who little regarding those who followed him, proceeded with his
Ensign as unconcerned, as if he had been in Procession; which so animated the
Soldiery, that like men conducted by miracle, they broke through the gross
Body of the Enemies Force: and so violent they were in their combat, and so
intent to their business, that they neither observed the multitudes of the
Enemy which came upon them, nor the signal of their Commander for a Retreat;
until at length discovering their danger, they made speed with some disorder to
return, having lost an hundred and twenty Gentlemen in this rencounter, whose
heads being cut off (as the custom of the Turks is) were pitched upon the Pikes
end, and ranked before the door of the Viziors Tent, amongst which the head of
the Marquess Doradour did beyond all the others draw the eyes of the Turks, who
admired the clearness of his complexion, and fairness of the hair; which being
breaded in tresses for the more convenience in fighting, made death it self
beautiful, and was at the same time both his Enemies glory and their
compassion. The French having thus evaporated their fury with this Phlebotomy,
there not remaining above two hundred and thirty after this Sally of all those
six hundred brought into Candia, Monsieur La Fueillade with his relics
departed: at which time the whole strength of the Town consisted of about seven
thousand stranger Soldiers, four thousand Inhabitants, and two thousand
Savoyards, which was too weak a Garrison to resist so potent an Enemy, so
formally and strongly encamped, unless supplied with new Recruits. Wherefore
the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg. mindful of their Christian Brethren in
this distressed Siege, contributed three Regiments toward their relief,
consisting in all of The Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg sent Forces to
relieve Candia.
three thousand three hundred men. The first under Count Waldeck, the second
under Molleson, and the third under Count Radesfeld. They made their Muster
first at Verona, and imbarking at Venice the 28th of March, on the 12th of May
1669: they arrived at Candia. These valiant Soldiers desiring to ease the long
besieged Companies, demanded the Guards of Sabionera and St. Andrea; which
being by this time become hot and dangerous stations, were not disputed with
that heat of honor as formerly, but were easily yielded to the fresh and
new-come Soldiery. Many now and various were the assaults which the Enemy made
upon the Town, hoping to carry it by dint of Sword; but the Christians
unweariedly maintained their valor and courage, and particularly the
Lunenburghers, whose gallantry deserved its due praise and reward. Their
General Count Waldeck whilst he undauntedly encouraged his men, and openly
exposed himself on the Works, received a mortal wound, of which soon afterward
he dyed; but before he expired, he assembled together his Fellow Soldiers, and
encouraged them in the Holy cause they were come to maintain, giving them as a
Farewel-Sermon, Count Waldeck dies of his wound.
instructions, and persuasive arguments to a godly life, and having confessed
his own sins in the presence of them all, he resigned his spirit into the hands
of his Creator, leaving not only his own Forces, but the whole Town
disconsolate for the loss of so able a Commander.

And now the time of year approaching, wherein the Town expected its ultimate
Relief, and the Union of all the Princes of Christendom for raising the Siege,
which had continued for the space now of about two years; the valiant
Christians full of hopes, daily animated each other, casting their eyes to
Sea-ward, promised a reward to the first Descryer of the long desired Fleet.
The Turks also being advised of the expected Succors, resolved if possible to
perform the business designed before their arrival; and thereupon made one of
the greatest assaults that ever was yet given to the Town, in which though the
Christians behaved themselves with all valor imaginable, yet the Turks still
gained farther footing and advantage. And now it fared with the Town after
every storm, as it does with a physical body after every accession of a Fever,
which though it intermits for some time, yet it leaves the Patient always more
weak and debilitated than before. Wherefore the Christians increasing in care
and diligence, the Captain General disarmed several of his Galleys to supply
the Town with what Force he could possibly contribute, and the Engineers
employed their brains for destruction of the Enemy, so that they fell again to
their Mines, and sprang one which took good effect; soon after they sprang
seven others, after which four more near the Revelin of St. Spirito, which blew
up many Turks, ruined their Lodgings, and buried one of their Batteries: these
also were followed by another Mine of an hundred and sixty Sacks of Powder,
which took its way between St. Andrea and the Revelin of St. Spirito with
extraordinary A Mine of an hundred and sixty Sacks of Powder fired by the
Christians.
execution and violence, throwing up that vast quantity of Earth and Timber,
that it not only overwhelmed the Enemy in the neighboring Trenches, but
overthrew a Battery of three Pieces of Cannon, which the Turks had raised on
the Revelin of St. Andrea: yet all this served to increase the heat and fury of
the Enemy rather than abate it; for they imagining this to be the ultimate
force and the last blast of the expiring Fortress, plied their assaults with
the more fury and madness, pressing forward the crowds of the Soldiery
collected lately in Villages, and the Janisaries newly created taken from the
Plough to be matter and fuel for the Christians Powder.

Winter now approaching, and the Vizier resolving to quarter a second year
under the Walls of Candia, began to provide against the weather, and resolved
to lie still until the Spring should renew the time for action, but never
intermitted his employment of plying constantly his Batteries, and shooting
Bomboes into the Town. In the mean time the Besieged being animated by their
new additional Forces, whose spirits also were high, and desirous of action;
the Commanders thought it not policy to suppress the heat and mettle of their
courage at the beginning, but gave way to the Soldiers proposition of a Sally,
which was effected in the month of December with no bad success. For the
Christians surprising the Turks unawares, little dreaming of any such design,
fell in amongst them on the side of Sabionera, where they took The Christians
sally on the side of Sabionera.
a Battery, dismounted and spiked the Cannon, with the loss of the Duke of
Candia, being shot in the breast with a Musket-bullet; of the Turks near three
thousand were killed, amongst whom was Benglee the Sampsongibashee or Major
General of the Janisaries, and Katirgi-Ogle Pasha of Canea, whom we have
already mentioned, and so returned with Triumph into the Town. This
Katirgi-Ogle which signifies the Son of a Mulatier, Katirgi-Ogle his original
and life.
was formerly a common Thief, who robbed on certain Mountains near Antioch in
Pisidia, called Ock-shaher, which now have their names from him: and being a
courageous man and fortunate, drew a considerable number of Miscreants from all
parts to follow him in his Enterprises. His profession was not to rob Caravans
or Merchants traveling in their honest employment; but Knight-Errant-like
pretended to revenge the injuries and abuses of his Country by the unjust and
corrupt Ministers, whom for robbing and oppressing the people, he esteemed it
Justice and Virtue to deprive of their ill gotten Wealth. In which Trade he
gained such Richess and Power, that at length he came to Scutari, from whence
acquainting the Grand Signior of the abuses of his Officers, and his own course
of living was upon promises of duty and submission received into Grace and
Favor, and not only obtained pardon, but preferment. For the Grand Signior
discovering in him a spirit of much resolution and bravery sent him unto
Candia, and conferred on him the Pashaluck of Canea, in which on all occasions
he comported himself with much bravery, dying at last before the Walls of
Candia.

Various were the Sallies and Conflicts the Christians made upon the Turks
toward the end of this Year; one of which, after that foregoing, was made by
Marquess Villa, who with a thousand two hundred men fell in upon the Turks
Trenches, where he had so good success, that he brought back with him a hundred
Turks heads, which he planted on the Walls.

The Turks also as they had made strong Assaults, and gained on the Fort of St
Andrea to the East, so they undauntedly pressed forwards on the Bastion of
Sabionera to the West, with a Force of ten thousand men, having the advantage
of three Batteries, each consisting of ten pieces of Ordnance. The next Night
the Turks gave a general Assault The Turks (...) three Bastions at once.
with all their Forces to the Bastions of Panigra, Sabionera, and St Andrea,
and the great Fort St Demetrius; but the Besieged were armed with all caution
and vigilance against surprise, and with that Conduct and Valor, that they
gave the Enemy three Gallant Repulses with much slaughter and confusion; but
yet this success was diminished by the loss of the Count de Mare, an
experienced Venetian Soldier, who, after proofs of an invincible Valor, lost
his life in defense of the Christian Cause. But not long after the Marquess
Cornaro, and the Baron Spar arriving with a Recruit of three thousand Men, as
if they intended to requite the Turks last Assaults, made so resolute and so
successful a Sally, that they left above two thousand Infidels dead upon the
place, with a considerable number of their Officers.

The State of Affairs in the Turkish Court, and other Parts of the Empire
during the War in CANDIA.
BUT whilst we are in relation of the Wars abroad, we must not forget the
proceedings of Affairs at home. The Grand Signior now weary of his repose and
abode in his Seraglio at Adrianople, and impatient of the delays in his Affairs
at Candia, judged it as well agreeable to the present convenience of his
Empire, as to his own humor, to seat himself in some place of nearer distance
from Candia, than his present abode; from whence by his presence and authority,
his Army might with better expedition be supplied with all necessaries of War
and provision. After various Arguments about the choice of the place, Larissa
was fixed upon, a City anciently renowned for Antiquity and Plenty. And that
the Court might not abound with unnecessary The Female Court sent to
Constantinople.
Attendants; the Queen Mother, and Hasaki Sultana, with all the Ladies of their
Retinue, were sent to Constantinople, a policy perhaps to amuse the minds of
the people, and afford them an occasion of discourse, and hopes that the Grand
Signior himself might shortly follow. But before the departure of this Female
Court, the disposal of the Grand The Janisaries jealous of the safety of the
Sultans Brothers.
Signior's Brothers was moved and questioned by the Janisaries, who having long
since been jealous and doubtful of their safety, did demand, that the
protection and custody of them should be committed to the Queen Mother; who
willingly received the Charge, and gave security by Hoget to defend and
preserve them from all private Treachery, or public Attempts with the same
tenderness and care as she should her own life, or the life of her Son. In this
manner these Princes and Princesses departing, made a solemn and magnificent
entrance into Constantinople. The chief of the Cavalcade was Kul-ogli, the
Grand Signiors Mosayp, or Favorite, attended with a hundred and fifty Pages in
Coats of Male, and Satin Vests; in one Coach was the Valede Sultana, or the
Queen Mother, in the next was the Hasaki Sultana, or the Grand Signior's Queen,
in the third were the Brothers, in the fourth was the young Prince, or the
Grand Signior's Son, after came the Conehes of more ordinary Ladies attended
with about a hundred and fifty black Eunuchs, in Vests of white Satin.

The Grand Signior also preparing for his journey to Larissa, pitched his Tents
without the City; from whence one day vjewing round the Camp from a Jardac, or
Tent, elevated above the rest, he espied with a Prospective Glass a certain
person taking Tabaco in his Tent, whilst a Slave rubbed his Legs: His
Attendants not able or willing upon his Demands to inform him who he was, he
sent an Officer to make Enquiry, The Gran. Signior displeased with Tabaco.
who returned with Answer, that it was Ibrahim, Aga, the Kahya or Steward to
the Chimacam, and in effect Chimacam himself, having a great share in the
mannagement of Affairs; but the smoke had like to (...) smothered him and all
his Fortunes; for this Grand Signior, who is as great an Enemy to it as King
James was, or Sultan Morat, would have made him the Sacrifice to that Incense,
had not those present interceded for him; who with the Chimacam's own
mediation, and the cost of fifty Purses, or five and twenty thousand Dollars,
ransomed his Life.

The Sultan being arrived at Larissa, News came of the near approach of the
Excellentissimo Alvise de Molino, Ambassador from the Venetian An Ambassador
sent from Venice.
Republic, with propositions of peace. But the Turks before they would admit
the Embassy, or the person which brought it, to a nearer approach than a Days
Journey from the Court, would be resolved first whether he brought with him the
Keys of Candia; To which it was replied by the Interpreter, That he was not
able to give them satisfaction in that particular, being but a mean and
ordinary servant, to whom the Secrets of State, and resolutions of great men
were not committed, his Office being only to render faithfully the words and
sense of his Masters, and not to enter into the private thoughts and Cabinet of
their Counsels. To which the Chimacam proudly and barbarously made answer, Go
tell thy Master, that unless he brings the Keys of Candia, thy head shall pay
for it. And that he presume not in person to approach nearer unto this Court.
So the Ambassador remained at a distance for some weeks, and at length was
transferred over to the Vizier at Candia; who being more ready to hearken to
propositions, in hopes by some overture or other to hook in Candia, gave an
easy Audience to the Ambassador and controverted several Articles and
Propositions with all freedom and patience. So that on the Venetians part, the
Surrender of Suda was offered, and a Sum of money, in compensation of the War.
The Vizier on the other side would be contented with nothing less than the
Surrender of Candia; and in lieu thereof to grant a License to rebuild
Paleo-Castro, an ancient Fortress. But the Fortress it self of Candia being the
prize and aim of both, nothing could be concluded without that; so that, the
Ambassador in fine, declared plainly, That the City of Candia was maintained
and defended by the Arms of Foreign Princes, without whose consent it could
not be resigned; all the rest of the Island should be the reward of their blood
and labor, only Candia was capable of no Conditions, but what were imposed on
it by force of Arms.

The Vizier, whose honor could be salved, and the glory of the Ottoman Empire
maintained, at no other rate than the subjection of Candia, would hearken to no
other terms or proposals; so that the Treaty broke off, and the Ambassador
returned to Canea, there to remain until farther Overtures of an Accommodation
should present.

It was now toward the depth of Winter when three men of War and a Fire-Ship,
sent by the most Christian King, steered up the Hellespont with words and
boastings as full of Wind as their Sails; and being (...) Ships (...) War sail
to Constantinople.
arrived at Constantinople, vaunting of their Force, as if sufficient to subdue
the Turkish Dominions, they uttered certain rumors, that they were come to
revenge the late affront offered to their Merchants, to cause that money to be
repaid, which in late and frequent Avanias had been extorted from their Nation;
and to renew their Capitulations with more advantageous terms. As namely, That
their Customs from 5 be reduced to 3 per Cent. as the English, Dutch, and
Genoeses pay. That their King be treated by the Sultan with the equal Presents
and Gifts, according to the Custom used with the Emperor; and that at all
times interchangeably Ambassadors be sent to reside in each others Dominions;
with other propositions which seemed as extravagant to the Turks, as they
appeared to others vain, and to have no foundation but in the report of the
Vulgar.

But that which was reported by the most judicious concerning these Ships was,
That his most Christian Majesty being made to understand perfectly the affronts
put on his Nation by the Turks; and not fully satisfied (as is supposed) with
the respect they had shown to his Ambassador at Constantinople, made it the
chief Design of his Ships to withdraw him from thence, supposing it a less
diminution to his honor, to have the person of his Agent subjected to
affronts, than of his Ambassador, to which (it was imagined) he might be
obnoxious, in consideration of those great supplies, which were in the
following year designed for Candia. In what manner soever the Turks deemed of
this appearance of Men of War to hector and brave them at their Imperial City,
they did yet for the present cunningly dissemble the matter, giving the French
fair words, and what plenty of Provisions their occasions did require. In what
manner this Affair was transacted, I shall not adventure to relate, nor is it
well or certainly known; Yet not long after came Orders for the Ambassador to
repair to the Court at Larissa; and that until the Grand Signior's pleasure was
farther known, the Ships of War were to be detained. The Commander in chief,
called Monsieur d' Almeras, was not a little trou bled to have his Ships thus
embargued, and laboring in his thoughts between the time limited in his
Instructions by his Master and the restraint by the Turks, he once bravely
resolved to hazard his passage through the Castles; but protracting the
execution thereof from day to day, even until the end of April; at length
License came for their departure, and Orders to repair unto Vola, near Larissa,
there to take an Ambassador, or Agent, or Envoye from the Sultan to their
King. For, it seems, the Vizier had intimated to the Grand Signior, That it was
not time to disgust the French King, and to bring him under the notion of a
declared and public Enemy, or at least to irritate him so far as might provoke
him to send greater Forces, than perhaps he designed the next year, for Candia:
and that he ought to comply with the present conjuncture, and salve that up for
a time, which he might afterward open at his pleasure. This counsel seeming
reasonable to the The Gr. Signior sends a Messenger to the French King.
Grand Signior, and agreeable to the present necessity, he ordered (as I was
credibly informed) a thousand Dollars only to adorn his Ambassador; so
pitifully do the Turks esteem of Christian Princes, and so highly do they value
themselves, as if a Message from them would be reverenced in Christendom as a
favor, though brought by a Porter or a Slave. But the French Ambassador
considering this allowance too mean a provision for a person qualified to
appear before his Master, did (as it is said) out of his own Purse and generous
Soul contribute a far greater Sum, with two Vests of Sables toward his better
Equipage. In this manner the Sultan dissembling an appearance of good
correspondence with his Christian Majesty, dispatched away his Envoye on the
Ships of War, being a Person in quality of a Mutafaraca, one of the same degree
with a Chaous, to expostulate with the King concerning several Particulars, and
especially his Reasons for sending for his Ambassador, without sending another
according to ancient custom to supply his Office, wondering much at this sudden
alteration of friendship, without any cause given on the Ottoman side: and with
these smooth and fair words the Turks imagined they might charm the Spirit of
the King for a while, and suspend his Succors from Candia, until at last it
were beyond his power and wisdom to relieve. In the mean time the Ambassador
from the most Christian King was detained as a Hostage for the other, of whose
return we shall speak in its due place.

Toward the end of this year Sir Daniel Harvey Lord Ambassador from (...).
His Majesty of Great Britain arrived at Constantinople, succeeding in the
place of the Earl of Winchelsea, who could not obtain Audience with the Sir
(...) Ambassador from his Majesty.
G. Signior until the end of the following year, by reason of the Sultans
unsettled abode and far distance; who at length coming to Salonica, summoned the
Ambassador thither, and there conferred on him the usual Ceremonies and
Honors due to the Ambassador at sirst Reception.

Candia was now hardly assailed in four places, viz. on the side of A Relation
of the state of Candia toward the end of this year.
Betlem, Panigra, St. Andrea, and Sabionera. These places being twice stormed,
in which the Turks lost thirty thousand men, so many Mines and Fornelli were
fired, that the ground lay open like a vast abyss, with strange heaps of
confused and undigested Earth, and hindered the Enemy from approaching to the
Wall; but Sabionera and St. Andrea being esteemed the most weak, because they
were not sortified by any considerable Outworks, or compassed with any depth
of Ditch, were pressed and forced upon by the Turk with more violence than any
parts of the City. The Enemy having by their great number of Andrea, being
destitute of all Mines to stop their proceedings; and having at length blown up
the Revelin, and with fire and earth having taken the Out-work, they penetrated
into the Ditch (which was not deep) with four Traverses, and came now to the
very foot of the wall of the Bulwark, fortified with eighteen pieces of Cannon,
six of which carrying fifty pound Bullet shot into the Ditch, eight flanked
that side which was opposite to Panigra, and four on that part toward the
Revelin of St. Spirito, notwithstanding which they stormed the Walls in nine
places. And beginning to make a breach by firing certain Mines, which opened a
wideness of forty two paces at the point of that Bulwark; and continuing their
breaches toward the Sea, breaking in their way the Front of the Fort Priulo,
they proceeded almost to the Gate of St. Andrea, and opened forty eight paces
more, in all ninety paces. Afterward they ruined the remainder of the Wall,
and that which was called the Scotch Fort to the very Sea; so that the
Christians were forced to retire from their Outworks, and contract their
Precincts to the Walls of the City.

To add unto the misery of this place, an unfortunate shot from the Turks Camp
entered that Magazine which was near St. Peter's Church, where the artificial
Fires were made; and meeting several shells of Grenades already charged, with
thirty Barrels of Powder; all took fire, and blew into the air, and burned all
the houses which were near thereunto. At this unlucky accident the Besieged
fearing a general assault, and seeing the Turkish Horse draw into a Body near
Sabionera, the whole Garrison ran to the Walls; but no farther Attempt being
made, toward evening they blew up a Lodge of the Enemy, with all the people
that were therein.

Anno Christi 1669. Hegeira 1080.
Toward the end of the last Year, and at the beginning of this the Turks began
to open their eyes, and find themselves defrauded with the grossest cheat that
ever was imposed on a people who had either reason or humanity. For now three
or four years had ran on, that the French, Dutch, Italians, and other Nations
had introduced into all parts of the Turkish Dominions (unless in those
Eastward, as Aleppo, and farther) a sort of small Money called by some
Luigini, by others The story of the false Reaux or Temins.
Ottavi, and by the Turks Temins, worth about five pence English; which
appearing pleasant and bright to the eye, and commodious for change, and common
expenses, so bewitched the Commonalty, that Pieces of Eight, Zaichins, and
other merchantable Money were laid aside, as neither current or valuable. At
first about nine years past they were of good and warrantable Silver, but
afterward with time by little and little grew worse, and of baser alloy: at
length the people doting more and more upon them, they came coarser every day
than other; and being still currantly passable, every person that was failed,
and of bad reputation entered into the Trade, who knowing no bounds of honesty
or of gain, composed their Money wholly of Copper or coarser Metals, with a
fair gloss and resemblance of Silver, buying therewith the Commodities of the
Country; and at length amassed up all the Gold, Silver, and whatsoever came to
hand was the price of their false and bastard Coin, with which they filled and
abused all Asia: nor was this Money only of one Mint, but of diverse Stamps and
Mottoes reproachful to the Turks, and it is pity they had not wit enough to
understand them, as namely, Voluit hanc Asia mercem De procul pretium ejus, and
such like, which were so various, that many who had the curiosity to make a
collection of them, found no less than an hundred and twenty several Stamps.
The Commonalty still enamoured with the brightness of their color, and
commodiousness of their change, little reflected on the ill consequence to the
generality, having seldom more than to supply their daily wants. And the
Officers of the Customs finding a benefit extraordinary to themselves upon the
vast Sums of Money imported, little cared how it fared with the public. In the
mean time the whole current of Merchandise in the Levant was dispossessed of
its ordinary and true chanel; for vast quantities or a glut of Turkish Goods
filled all Christendom, the prices low and cheap, and no profit to any Merchant
dealing upon the square, or upon the old and legal way of Traffic. At Ligorne
and other parts of Italy complaints were made, That the Silver and Bullion of
the Country were melted down to make a composition with baser Metals for
Turkey, and exchanged for decaying and perishable Commodities. In short, no man
seemed satisfied with the Trade, and yet the World, like their sins, which they
disapprove, pursued it with all heat and violence imaginable. This Trade being
thus over-laid, and vast heaps of adulterate Money imported daily worse and
worse, caused the Jews and other Merchants at first to except against some
sorts, and admit of others. This seruple, together with the prohibition of them
two years before by the English Factory at Smyrna, obliging themselves unto the
Levant Company under a considerable penalty not to receive this money for Cloth
or other Commodities of the growth of England, together with the circumspection
and contrivance of the English Consul, awakened sirst the blind minds of the
Turks, who having long been infatuated with this beloved money, began now to
reject and abhor it like the false and farded countenance of a Courtisan: so
that from eleven they fell to twelve, and so to thirteen and fourteen to the
Lion-Dollars. In which conjuncture a Dutch Convoy arrived at Smyrna, importing
vast Sums thereof; which for a Bribe to the Officers of the City, or what the
Customer would ask, were permitted License to be landed; which overflowing in
great abundance, and rather of a worse than better alloy, went declining to
eighteen, and so to twenty, at which Rate for a short time they passed current.
And now at this price the Officers did what was possible to keep them up,
conceiving it impossible, in a time of so much scarcity of all sorts of other
Coins, that the Countries could subsist, or that Trade in buying or selling
could proceed, if this money should wholly lose its esteem and value: nor were
the people so much the care of the Governors, though for many years they had
known no other price or reward of their labors, as were the vast damages of
the Sultan, in whose Coffers were considerable Sums, which were never known to
have been placed unto the loss of the Exchequer; for it is a Proverb amongst
the Turks, That the Grand Signiors Lead cannot sink. But that which raised most
of tumult was the rigor of the Tax-gatherers, who refused to take that money
from the people for their Duties to the Grand Signior, but demanded of them
Lion-Dollars, Sevil and Mexico Pieces of Eight, or the like; which they not
being able to find, beat and imprisoned them in all places, where this question
came into dispute: the people hereupon, though patient, and accustomed to
violence and burden, could not yet support longer an oppression so
unreasonable, but that Insurrection was made in all places where this came into
dispute: and as injured patience turns to fury, at Prusa and Angora the torrent
of the peoplesrage was not appeased without the blood and lives of some of
their Officers, alleging with good reason, That their Ministers and Governors
having introduced or permitted this money amongst them, and allowed it as
current in that manner, as that they had for some years known no other, nor
received other for all the fruits of their labor or possessions, they ought
not now to refuse to receive that which they themselves had made passable;
which argument and reason was pressed in sundry places with that violence, that
the Officers were forced to submit to the necessity of the times, and the fury
of the multitude. And now this money had wholly lost its reputation, and began
to be refused generally at any rate whatsoever; so that though the Government
thought fit to license them at thirty to the Dollar; yet the people prosecuting
the abasement of it with a hate and disaffection equal to their former desires,
refused generally and absolutely to accept them in payment. Wherefore the
Sultan perceiving that the power of his Officers was not sufficient to render
this money longer passable at any rate, at length he commanded, that every one
should bring in his money of these sorts into the Mint where it should be
melted down, and the Silver it produced should be delivered to the Proprietor.
At which Summons several Great men voluntarily brought in their money, others
had it seized and condemned to the Furnace, amongst which was a French Merchant
engaged to the import of sixty thousand Dollars. As yet the News of this
alteration not having reached Christendom, diverse Ships arrived at
Constantinople with vast Sums of this money, which were all seized and forced
to the Mint. In like manner other Ships arrived at Smyrna with the same
Commodity, which my self would not suffer to be landed, and some of them having
no other foundation of Stock or Freight, returned empty, to the great loss of
the Employers. It was strange to see, how on a sudden all Trade ceased, no
money being left in the Country, few Bargains were made but by Barters; and
though all this ruin might wholly be attributed to the ill Government, yet the
people were contented, and sat down with the loss. And thus concluded this
extravagant Trade of false Money, being supposed to have wrought more of
destruction and loss at the end, than it brought of benefit at the beginning;
memorable for nothing more than for expiring so quietly, though it had the
chief part of the Turkish Empire to support and defend it.

During these Troubles the Grand Signior passed his time in hunting near
Larissa, where he ruined the Country round about, and tired the people with
beating and driving the Woods for Game and wild Beasts to divertise him, in
which, as formerly, he continued so excessively immoderate, that without
consideration of the heats, or colds, or moisture of the season, he compelled
the people, but especially the Jews (of which great numbers inhabit that
Country) to continual labors in the Woods and Fields; by which many died
through the rigid Frosts of the Winter and Calentures of the Summer. But yet
notwithstanding these Divertisements, the Grand Signior could not easily cast
off the melancholy apprehensions and fears he had for the state of his Affairs,
imagining that the long delays and ill success at Candia, and defaults in
Government had begotten in his Subjects a hate toward his Person, and a desire
of alteration. Wherefore the Spring approaching, he retired into a solitary but
pleasant shade amongst the Mountains, where sprang cool and crystalline waters,
about sixteen hours Journey from Larissa. In this solitude his melancholy
thoughts again disquieted him with a jealousy and suspicion, lest his Brothers
now at Constantinople should take their advantage, and one of them be by the
Peoples consent and assistance The Grand Signior designs to cut off his
Brothers.
placed in his Imperial Seat: which imagination made that impression in him,
that he immediately dispatched away a trusty and valiant Officer with all
secrecy, without making any noise, to bring him their Heads, directing his
Commands to his Mother, in whose custody they were; and not doubting of her
help and assent, as being most nearly concerned in his interest, expected every
hour the return of his Messenger with that grateful Present, which could only
cure the torture of his jealousy, and alleviate his cares. But no sooner was
this fatal Command arrived the hands of the Queen, but she trembled so much,
that she could scarce hold the Paper. At length considering, that (as has been
said before) she had given in caution to the Janisaries for the lives of these
Princes, and that to her care they were committed, she immediately disclosed
and published the design of the Grand Signior to the Janisar-Aga, craving his
help and protection, protesting that she was resolved to maintain the faith she
had given to those Princes, whose life she tendered equal with her own. This
advice and resolution of the Queen Mother being brought to the Janisaries, was
heartily approved, and protestations given, that they would never abandon her,
nor the lives she preserved. The rumor hereof in an instant flew through the
streets; but with such variety of reports, that nothing of certainty was known,
only in general some great ruin was apprehended to threaten the City;
whereupon a strange outcry was made to shut up the shops, and every one to
consult the safety of the Public. But some few hours after, it being more
distinctly known, that the Grand Signior had sent for the Heads of his
Brothers; the People of Constantinople, whose sole hopes of seeing the Royal
City restored to its ancient Honor, was by the conservation of these Princes,
were in a greater combustion than before; for every one then betook himself to
his Arms: so that in a short time were assembled forty thousand men at Okmedon
well appointed, where considing in the strength of a general Cause, in which
they were engaged, they vented many opprobrious speeches against the
Government, calling the Chief Ministers Orsysler, which is unfortunate Fellows,
a term amongst the Turks, of the greatest ignominy, especially to a Governor,
and loudly exclaimed and wished for a reformation. In the mean time the
Queen Mother desired aid from the Janisaries, and Guards about the Apartments
of the Princes, lest the Bostangees, who are the Creatures of the Grand
Signior, should assault their Quarters. The Consultations also amongst the
Janisaries were long and secret, and the Queen Mother dispatched several
Messages to the Grand Signior, advising him to forsake the Mountains, and
repair to one of his Imperial Cities, as became the Majesty of so great a
Sultan, being the only means to secure to him the establishment of his Crown.
And now the Reader will with impatience attend the conclusion and issue of so
great rumors and disturbances; but it is now, as it has been experienced in
other Commonwealths, acribus, ut ferme talia, initiis, incurioso sine, matters
violent in their original, Tac. Lib. 6.
spend themselves at first, and produce nothing remarkable in their end. And so
was the effect of these recesses, and mutiny of the people at Constantinople,
whose humor of novelty and change venting it self, and in four or five days
tired with expectation; at length every one began to return to his dwelling and
employment. The face likewise of things at Constantinople seemed quiet and
appeased, carrying with it, as it were, a still modesty and shame for the late
disorders; and nothing was heard or murmured for the space of twenty or thirty
days after, until the Grand Signior trembling with the fears of this confused
Rebellion, kept more strict Guards than ordinary within his mountains, and
after being better recollected, entered into Consultation, and being advised of
the Heads and Leaders of the late Insurrection, proscribed such as were the
prime Actors, and having dispatched away two or three Messengers on this
Errant, they entered secretly in the Night to their Lodgings, where they
quietly, and without noise, took off the heads of four or five of them, and
banished as many without the least noise, or notice taken thereof by the
Vulgar. And because this disorder happened at Constantinople, for which the
chief Commander ought to answer, the Chimacam passed not without a jealousy
either of negligence or consent; wherefore the Vizier sent for him and the
Janisar-Aga to Candia, as if he had occasion of their service, though not
without their own fears and suspicion of others, to answer and make
satisfaction for the late mutiny. And thus for a while this Flame is
extinguished, and the fire raked up in the Embers. We must expect a while, and
observe when and where it will again burst forth.

The Spring now approaching, which supplies new Spirits, and warm and fresh
blood into the Veins of Man, as well as sap in Trees, and life in other
Vegetables; let us return again to the Wars, and survey the Camp, and posture
of Affairs before the walls in Candia. The Turkish Army, which, like worms
benumbed with the Cold of Winter, had lain immured between their Banks of
Earth, did not ply their Assaults so frequently as they had done in Summer,
only for a Winters exercise, battered the inward Works of St Andrea's Fort,
which as we said before, they had hardly beset. And now the time for action
being again come about, they renewed The Turks storm again the Fort of St.
Andrea.
their storm on that side so violently, pressing forward the least esteemed of
their Soldiery, that with the help of Spade and Mattock, and blowing up of
some Mines, they penetrated forty paces within the Walls of the City. But the
Christians having long since foreseen the weakness of that side, made it part
of their Winters labors to draw another Wall from the Fort Panigra (whose
Revelin or Out-work was before blown up) crossing over almost to the Tramata,
which they fortified as well as could be expected, and made constant and bold
resistance against the Enemy. Notwithstanding which the Turks pressed so
constantly and boldly forward, that though the Christians were strong within,
and provided with all sorts of provisions both of war and sustenance, yet
nothing supported their Courages and Spirits more than the expectation of
promised Succors from France and Italy; it being reported, and generally
believed, that they would be so numerous as might be able to give Battle in the
Field unto the Turk, and force them out of their Trenches; for by no other
means was it possible for this City to be relieved: for it might fare with this
place, as it did formerly with Rhodes and Ostend, which, though wanting neither
men nor provisions, were yet taken by palms and inches of ground, till not so
much was left, as would hold men to defend them. A pregnant example (as Sr
William Tample well observes) how impossible it is to defend any Town that
cannot be relieved by an Army strong enough to raise the Siege. Whilst the
Christians were entertained with these hopes, the Turks fortified themselves
without as strongly as the besieged had within, heaving like Moles with their
numerous Army of Pioniers, whose lives being not valued, they were wholly
intent unto Mines, blowing up all before them, in that manner that every day
they gained a pace of ground within the City. So that in effect (as will be
seen by the Sequel) this most impregnable Fort of the World was forced and
taken by the Spade and Shovel, and by a Crew of unarmed Laborers, who
understood nothing more than the Plough and Harrow. So that now this Town
seemed to be reduced to its utmost Crisis, either of being taken, or for ever
freed of this malignant Enemy. And indeed the Turks had so far advanced upon
the Bulwark of St Andrea, that now nothing remained of it, more than ruins,
and undigested heaps of Earth and stone, in defense of which the chief
Commanders applying themselves in person with all diligence, the Marquess St
Andrea Montbrun was wounded by a stone in the face, the Cavalier de Bret was
buried in the ruins to the very Neck, and with difficulty drawn out of the
Earth by Assistants about him; two other Cavaliers were wounded with Grenades,
and the Cavalier Feuillere, who carried the Standard of Malta, was shot into
the Eye with a Musket. The Proveditor General Corndro serving at the repair of
the Breach, was so wounded in the Belly by a Granado, that his Bowels burst, of
which he died in three hours; and with a piece of the same Granado the Count
Vignole, a French Gentleman of great Valor, was likewise slain: And so hotly
the Turks plied this Breach, that from the 28th of May to the 2d of June they
sprang five Mines, which brake all the Palisades of the Christians; the which
the Turks seconded with that fury and mettle, as if they intended to win the
place and make an end of their work, before the arrival of the Forces expected
from Christendom. And this Post was now grown so dangerous and weak, that the
Captain General, the Marquess of Montbrun, and all the chief Officers took up
their Quarters at this place, where his Excellency kept an open Table, and the
Marquess took up his Lodgings at Night, that so the other Officers might have
no excuse on account of attendances or orders to abandon these Quarters.

The Princes of Christendom all this time forgot not their besieged Succors
sem out of Christendom.
Brethren in Candia. Popo Clement the IX. pressed the most Christian King to
make ready his succors in due time, who had already himself prepared all
things, and elected the Duke of Beaufort his General of all the Forces by Sea,
whether of French or other Nations. This Duke, like a courageous and brave
Prince, thinking it little glory to command at Sea, where the Enemy was of an
inferior and unable Force to encounter him, did therefore desire License from
his King to make trial of his Fortune in the Field, where he might evidence his
Valor in the face of the Infidels, and signalize his Fame either by Death or
Victory. The King, unwilling to hazard so worthy a person of his blood out of
his due Command in the rank of an ordinary Soldier, at first denied his
requests; but the Pope interceding for him, whose General he was, with holy
Arguments, and devout Contemplations of Martyrdom, and Glory of dying for the
Christian Cause, at length obtained a concession from the King, who of himself
was flexible to so pious a request, esteeming it unholy to deprive his Kinsman
either of the Palm of a Martyr, or the Laurel of a Conqueror.

The Summer being come, and all things provided, the Duke ascended his Ship at
Tolon a City in Provence, the 6th of June, New-style, The French Fleet loose
from Tolon.
with about seven thousand Land Soldiers, commanded by the Duke of Navaille,
with the Marshals Lebret and Golbert, and several other Worthies and Heroes of
undaunted Courage, and arrived before the Town of Candia the 19th of the same
Month, having casually encountered together in the Seas on the 17th with
fourteen Sail of Venetian Ships, laden with Horse and Ammunition to mount the
Troops, and relieve the Town; which happy encounter and speedy passage, seemed
a happy Omen of the future success. The appearance of this succor seemed to
the Besieged as sent from Heaven, and administered unto them new hopes and
courage; and the salutes passed between the Town and the Fleet with the usual
Ceremonies, and all the imaginable testimonies of joy and triumph.

No sooner were they arrived than the two Generals, with other principal They
arrive at Candia.
Officers, immediately in their Shallops took the best view and survey they
could of the Enemies Camp, and the Condition of the Besieged; in which whilst
they entertained themselves, they espied a small Vessel making toward them
with St Mark's Colors, in which was the famous Engineer Signior Castellano,
dispatched by the Captain General Morosini with an exact plat of the Town, and
disposition of the Turkish Camp, which being particularly viewed and
considered, it was evident, That if the Turks should make some very forcible
Attempt before the new Forces could be landed (as it was very probable they
might) they would put all in hazard of being lost; wherefore the Captain
General pressed to have some succors immediately supplied to be assistant in
that case of extremity; To which the Duke of Navailles immediately consented,
and landed himself that Night in person with sufficient Force to mount the
Guard on the Breach of St Andrea, whose first Retrenchment was continually
battered by the Turks; and though there was a second Retrenchment in hand, yet
time being required for completing thereof, that part of the Town would be
reduced to its ultimate hazard; for should the Enemy spring a Mine (which they
feared was already formed under the present Work) it would lay all open and
naked, without other Fortification. The Duke being ashore, was received by
Morosini with all demonstrations of Civility and Respect due to a personage of
his Quality and Employment; and with a welcome suitable to the present
extremity of his Affairs: all Ceremonies and Complements were soon passed over,
the urgency of matters not permitting them time to be long impertinent; so that
falling into the Discourse of the common safety, it The French Forces landed.
was resolved that the succors should be immediately landed, which was
performed with that diligence and expedition, that in two days the whole Army
came safe on shore, excepting only some few, cut short by shot from the Enemies
Camp.

On the 23d the Generals and other Officers, held a Council of War, amongst
whom was also the Marquess of St Andrea; and did unanimously conclude, that the
Town was no longer tenable, or to be maintained, A Council of War held in
Candia.
unless by some extraordinary enterprise attempted on the Enemy, and by some
furious Sally performed with resolution, and stratagems of War, in order unto
which it was resolved, That the 27th should be the day of sally both with Horse
and Foot, and that the Fleet not to lose their part in this action, should play
with their great Guns on that side of the Turkish Army which lay encamped on
the Quarters of St. Andrea. All The order of the Christian Army to make their
Saily.
the Forces were landed on the 26th, and the whole night following was spent in
preparations for the next days sally: the Army being drawn up made four
Batalions, the first called the Admirals commanded by the Sieurs Martel,
Vandre, and Gravier; the second was the Vice-Admirals commanded by the Sieurs
de la Mothe and Planta; the third was the Rere-Admirals under Command of
Chevalier de Bouillion, Gabaret, and the Chevalier Dailly; the fourth was the
Batalion of the Sieur d'Almeras commanded under him by the Sieurs Panetier, de
la Rogue, Fontier, Bitault, and the Chevalier de Nemond; and on the left hand
of these aforesaid Batalions, the Guards of the Duke of Beaufort were disposed.
The Duke of Beaufort unwilling to be a Spectator in this glorious Action,
without bearing a part in his own person, after he had given order to the Fleet
to accost the shore on the side of St. Andrea, as near as consisted with their
security, and from thence with their great Guns to annoy the Enemies Camp as
much as was possible, came that night on shore, resolving to fight in the Head
of the Forlorn Hope, from which hazardous adventure no entreaties or counsel of
his friends could prevail to dissuade him.

The Forlorn consisted of 400 men, on the head of which marched fifty men with
hand Grenades, flanked with three Troops of Horse, Commanded by Count
Dampiere: the Regiments of Guards, with four Troops of Horse for their Wings,
flanked also with three Regiments of Foot, followed the Forlorn. The Reserve
consisted of the Regiments of Harcourt, Conti, Lignieres, Rosan, Montpesat, and
Vendosme, slanked with four Troops of Horse under Command of the Count
Choiseul, which placed themselves on a rising ground, to hinder all
Communication between the Vizier, whose Camp was before St Andrea, and the
Janizar Aga, who lay before Sabionera. Between the first and second line, were
placed fifty Musketeers of the King, to be assistant on occasion; and the other
Troops of Horse were to take the left hand along the Trench leading to the
Sabionera: the Regiment of Montpeyroux was to mount the Guard on the Fort of
St. Demetrius to secure the Retreat, if occasion should require. In like manner
five hundred Pioniers were ordered to level the Trenches of the Enemy on the
Quarter of St. Andrea, whilst the Body of the Turks Army was employed in
repulsing the violence of the Sally.

Things being disposed in this manner, and the morn approaching, the Forces
marched out by the Gate of St. George with all silence possible, covering their
Matches, that the fire might not alarm the Enemy; the Onset was to begin with
the dawning of the day, and the Signal was The Christians sally at the Gate St.
George.
to be given by siring of the chief Mine Royal; which being large, and
furnished with a great quantity of Powder, might (as was supposed) make way to
the slaughter of the Turks whom the Christians might sind terrified and
disordered by such an unexpected accident. This Mine was reserved for the last
extremity, but being low was full of water; so that the Powder was stowed on
floats and rafts to support it, but yet received so great a damp and moisture,
that when they came to spring it, the Powder took not fire, which was the first
disappointment of this Enterprise. Though some are of opinion, that the Mine
was so vast, and contained such a quantity of Powder, that the Engineers were
timorous to spring it, lest it should reverse on the Besieged, as well as take
effect on the Enemies Camp. But be it how it will, a quarter of an hour before
day the Generals expecting no longer, the Forlorn Hope which lay within half a
Musket Shot of the Enemy, assaulted two The Christians fall upon the Turks.
Redoubts, took them, and put them all to the Sword: with the like courage the
other Regiments entered the Line, and making themselves Masters of the Trenches
after much blood and slaughter, and storming a Fort on which was the Battery
directed against St. Demetrio, possessed themselves of it, and therewith of a
great Magazine of Powder belonging to the Enemy, spiking all the Cannon that
were found therein.

The day by this time being clearly broken out, discovered the action; so that
the Turks with all expedition put themselves into a Body on the Hill near New
Candy, from whence observing and contemning the small number of the Christians,
came thundering down in great numbers to regain their Trenches. The Duke of
Navailles perceiving his Forlorn hardly beset, came in to their assistance with
two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, which behaved themselves with
that gallantry, as engaged the Turks again to quit their Trenches. But whilst
success seemed thus to smile on the Christians, the Magazine of Powder which
was newly won, containing an hundred thirty four Kintals of Powder (by what
accident is not known) took fire, and blew up all into the air, by which many
were destroyed and wounded, especially of the Batallion of the Guards, with
many Officers. This fatal blow quite turned the Scale of Fortune. For the
Soldiers hearing the dreadful clap, and feeling as it were the Earth to
tremble under them, supposed it to be the eruption of some Mine near them, with
which they were so amazed, that they began with confusion to disperse to the
right and left, The Christian Army in consusion.
and put themselves into shameful flight. In like manner the Forces near the
Sea sensible of the blow, began to retreat, and abandon their design, which no
persuasions of their Officers, or other encouragement could animate them to
prosecute; but that the faintness of a second Attempt (an infirmity recorded of
ancient Times to be incident to the nature of the French Nation) prevailed upon
their spirits, beyond any possibility of arrest, so that in a disorderly manner
they fled into the Body of the first Battalion, where being now united with the
Reserve, they for some time sustained the shock of the Enemy; until other
Bodies of the Turks from New Candia and St. Andrea overpowered them with
greater multitudes, so that then they wholly abandoned the field, and every one
as well as he could, sought his Sanctuary and refuge within the Precincts of
the Fortifications. Howsoever Choiseul and Lebret, each of which had a Horse
killed under him, encouraging their Troops, disputed the case yet longer, and
still with other Officers made head upon the Enemy; but at length with the Duke
of Navailles, and several other Gentlemen, who made their way through the Enemy
with their Swords, they were forced to retreat honorably into the Town. The
Duke of Beaufort was said to have labored much in resisting the shameful
flight of his men, and venturing his Person into danger, from whence he
resolved never to retreat, was overwhelmed with unequal numbers, and so fell
amongst the common heaps: but his body, though much sought after, being not
found, it was believed rather, that he perished by that fatal Magazine of
Powder, which blowing up, affrighted and disordered the whole Christian Army.

But not only did misfortunes attend the Landforces, but the Fleet at Sea
shared in the disasters. For some few days after the wind blowing hard from the
Sea, caused the Ships to ride at a distance from the shore. The whole Fleet
consisted of eighty Ships small and great, fifty Galleys, and six Galleasses,
being the whole Force of that Year from France, Italy, and Malta. All which
being at Anchor in due order as near the shore as was safe or convenient, made
many shot into the Turks Camp, but with little execution: during which Action,
the Santa Teresa, a French Ship of seventy Brass Guns blew up, and her whole
Company lost, being about three hundred men, of which seven only were saved;
the Admiral of France being near to this Ship, received five shot from her
which passed through her, and by the Splinters and fall of Timbers; the Vessel
called La Reale had six Cavaliers killed, and forty Soldiers Slaves were
killed and wounded. After this it was proposed in Council, That another Sally
should be made of ten thousand French; to which the Duke De Navaille assented,
on condition that they might be preceded in the Van by four thousand Venetians,
who were well acquainted and versed in the nature of the place, and knew the
several Redoubts, Galleries, and Trenches of the Enemy. But the Captain General
being desirous to reserve his own experienced Soldiers to the ultimate and
last occasion of emergence, refused to assent thereunto.

The loss the Turks sustained that day was uncertain, of the French were only
an hundred thirty five heads brought in by tale, as I was informed from one who
was present when they were counted, amongst which were many principal Officers.
For besides the Duke of Beaufort were slain French Officers slain.
the Count Rosan, the Chevalier di Villarceaux, the Chevalier de Quelas, the
Sieur de Guene-gaud, Marquis de Fabert Major of the Regiment of Lorrain, the
Sieurs de Montreuil Captain of the Guards, de Beauvais and Do, Garnier, La
Paneterie Touvenin, Lanson, Bellebrune, Hautefage d'Avenne, Maran de S. Jean de
Chauveniere, Goindreville Captain of the Regiment of Bretagne, Forcan, du
Boulet Captains of the Regiment of Harcourt, Chaselet, Martinval de Bossemoat,
de la Hay, de Bourneuf, de Vandre Martel Captain of a Ship, the Chevalier
Lodeve, with nine Captains and eight Lieutenants Reformades of the Brigade of
Picardy, Navarre, and Normandy. The Sieur Lebret was shot through the Buttocks
with a Musket-bullet; besides whom were wounded the Sieurs de Montagne Colonel
of a Regiment, de Castelan Major of the Guards, de Cavison, Croiselles, de
Montigny, and de Moissac by the Battery which blew up: the Chevalier d'Ailleurs
was hurt with an Arrow through the Arm; De la Marliere Lieutenant Colonel of
the Regiment of Lorrain with five or six Officers of that Body, and Villiers
Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment Jonzac were all wounded. The Marquess of
Lignieres had his Thigh broken, and a Finger shot off, and his
Lieutenant Colonel had his Arm broken. The Marquess of St. Vallier Colonel with
five or six of his Officers, the Chevalier de Novion Colonel with several
Officers of the Regiments of Bretagnie, Montpezat, Harcourt, and Conti were all
wounded, with four other Captains of Horse, and four Lieutenants; also the
Marquess of Uxelles, the Chevalier de la Haugette, the Count de Loss Captain
of the Guards to the Duke of Navailles, the Count de Montbrun Commander of the
Kings Musketeers, and the Sieur de Tagni Quarter-master-General were wounded:
who being Persons of great Quality as well as Courage that left their Country,
and exposed themselves to dangers, with no other motive than their own
gallantry or defense of the Christian Cause, ought be numbered amongst the
Heroes and Champions of our Age. Of Prisoners there were not above seven or
eight taken, amongst which were the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin a Norman, and Son of
a Marshal of France, and the Sieur de Chateau Neus, the first for his Youth,
Beauty, and Courage greatly esteemed by the Turks, and both entertained by the
Vizier with more generosity than usually possesses the Nature of Turks: who
after this success, having gathered and thrown the heads of the slain according
to their manner into a heap, did one day in merriment pitch them upon the
points of their Lances, and ranking them in file and order, with Hats and
Feathers on them, beat the French March amongst them with shouts and Vollies of
Muskets.

Matters succeeding in this manner unhappily, and the Enemy already almost in
the midst of the Town, being come to the last Retrenchment, beyond which could
be raised no more inward Fortisications; the Officers as in like cases of
misfortune began to throw the blame upon each other, and the contest between
the French and Italians grew as hot within the Town, as the War was without; so
that the Duke of Navailles appearing discontented, though in reality he might
well be discouraged, The French leave the Town.
and might be apprehensive with due reason that the Town was in a desperate
condition; howsoever he pretended, that the time was almost expired, which the
King had prefixed for the continuance of his Forces in Candia, and that
therefore he could not think of any other design for them, than that which was
in order to their imbarking. The Captain General being greatly surprised at
this resolution, endeavored to persuade him to the contrary, and being
accompanied with the General of Candia and the Proveditor General waited on the
Duke at his own Quarters, where he represented to him in the most efficacious
terms possible the present dangerous condition to which the City was reduced;
until which time, under the Providence of God, they acknowledged the
preservation thereof to the magnanimous Arms of their religious King; and
therefore in such a conjuncture of misfortunes and extremity they knew not unto
whom they might have recourse for assistance, but to the Generosity of his
Excellency, and of those Gentlemen, who for no other end but that of Religion
and Honor, had undertaken so great a Voyage, and had voluntarily cast
themselves into the hourly dangers of this Siege: That the Succor they
demanded was really great and most important for defense of the place, in
regard that thereon their whole safety depended. Howsoever it might have cost
some labor, though not much blood to the French Forces, if they would have
worked on a new Retrenchment with the same celerity and deligence, as they
formerly used, whereby the Siege might be prolonged until the Winter, or till
the Christian Princes might take new measures, and send greater Recruits.
Hereunto Navaille gave answer, That the zeal which the King his Master
conceived for the conservation of Candia, was evidenced by better effects, than
the empty promises without fruit of other Princes; and that accounting the
present number of Forces and Gentlemen of considerable Quality which were
engaged in this War, together with the great expense and charge his Majesty had
been at in maintenance of a Fleet to transport them, his Majesty's affection to
the Republic was unquestionable: and that both he and his Officers who had the
honor to command those Forces had undertaken a long Voyage, and entered into
dangers with constancy and readiness of mind, and had assaulted the Enemy
almost before they saw them, and given relief to the Town before they set their
foot in it; but if the issue of affairs did not correspond with a success
agreeable to their good intentions, and the primary design of this Enterprise,
they must have patience, seeing that it cost no other than the slaughter of
Frenchmen, and that there had been a large effusion of the Noble and
Illustrious as well as of the common blood. It was a species of ingratitude not
to remain contented with such forcible arguments of friendship; and it was a
breach of modesty to pretend, that because his King had lent them eight
thousand men, that therefore they should continue in Candia so long as one
remained alive. It was true, that besides the Kings service he was acted by
some inward motives of Religion, but that he could not transgress the Commands
and Instructions of his Majesty, which enjoined him to imbark his Forces in
order to their return about the 20th of that present month of August. In reply
to which, though the CaptainGeneral and the other Venetian Officers, and also
Bali Rospigliosi the Admiral of the Popes Galleys urged his stay with all the
instances and arguments imaginable, yet nothing could prevail to detain him
until the arrival of other Forces, only he was contented to leave six hundred
men in the Town during the time that he continued at Standia: so that by this
time having embarked his Forces, and lastly the six hundred men lest on the
Works, the Duke took his farewell and departed: so that the Town being as it
were deserted and forsaken of its chief hopes, all things were given for
desperate, and men began to be weary of their lives, as well as of the War and
of their labors; and whereas with the assistance of the French, (as it was
said in the Council) the Town might have held out until the next Spring, it was
now by this grand revulsion reduced to its last Crisis, and so weakened, as
that no possibility of preservation remained but in honorable terms of
Surrender. And though the French in their Voyage home about Malta encountered
positive Orders to remain on the place, yet judging the Town might already be
surrendered, and so the return disgraceful and in vain, proceeded not
withstanding in their course for France, for which default and want of
constancy the Duke of Navailles being arrived at Tolon, sustained the
punishment of his Princes disfavour, and ordered for some time not to approach
the Court.

The Turks, by departure of the French, increasing in hopes and courage, made
an assault on the Quarters of Sabionera and St. Andrea; and The Turks make an
assault.
first: attaquing some Soldiers to the number of about thirty, who were placed
on the Guard at the Post of St. Pelagia, they cut most of them off, and put the
rest to slight; with which the Turks being more animated, advanced to the
Palisade of the new Retrenchment; but Vollies of Cannon, and showers of
Musket Shot, and stones pouring on them, gave some stop to the sury of their
career. Grimaldi observing that the Enemy was at a stand, brought up his
Volunteers and Cavalry which served on Foot, and together with the Forces from
Brunswick so plied the Turks with stones, Grenades, and shot, that the Fight
was confused, bloody, and horrid; howsoever the Enemy so persisted, that the
Commanders gave Order, That the gross of the Army should fall on; but the
Soldiers were so broken and torn, that they refused to advance, though thrust
forward with the point of Sword and Spear. The Captain General in the mean time
taking his course along the Marine, on which part also the Turks were far
advanced, caused a Mine to be sprang under the thickest crowd of the Turks:
which consisting of an hundred Barrels of Powder, made such a destruction, as
abated much of the storm, and induced the Enemy to retire within their
Redoubts. The Marquess St. Andrea, in like manner performing the office of a
valiant and experienced Soldier, applied himself to all places where danger
most required his presence, and recovered certain Breast-works which the Enemy
had gained in this Skirmish.

Nor was the storm less furious and bloody on the part of Sabionera, nor was
the success and advantage on the Christians side less considerable, in all
which the Soldiery deserved great commendations and renown; the two French
Regiments of Perasi and Jonsac under the Command of the Sieur Choiseul did
wonders; as also those few which remained of the Regiments of Savoy commanded
by Signior Arborio: Signior Rados, Nicolo Polani a Noble Venetian, the
Proveditor Cornaro, the Colonels Gabriel, Givii, and the Sergeant Major of the
Troops of Brunswick, and Sergeant Major Bellegarde, as also the Commander in
chief of Malta gave honorable testimonies of their Bravery and Valor. In
short the Captain General praised them all, which was the best reward he could
bestow on such generous Souls; and then sent Orders to Standia, That the Forces
arrived with the Duke Mirandola should immediately be landed: these Forces,
which when they were first embarked, amounted to the number of a thousand five
hundred men, were now by Calentures and other sicknesses caused by the
excessive heats of the season reduced to six hundred; and though they were
unhealthy and unexperienced Soldiers, yet the extremity of Affairs was such,
as called them to immediate service, and to be placed on the Guard of the new
Retrenchment.

But all this could give little relief to the perishing condition of this
miserable Town; which was not only weakened by departure of the French, but by
at least five hundred others, such as Swedes and Germans, and other Nations,
who notwithstanding all care and endeavors to the contrary, crowded under the
French Banner. Likewise the Batalion of Malta embarked, which though reduced to
a small Body, was yet very considerable for the Quality and Valor of the
Cavaliers; which example all the Volunteers followed, and thereby reduced the
Town to a condition beyond all possibility of defense; for that in actual
service not above four thousand men remained, and of these at least an hundred
a day being killed, the Town must necessarily in a short time become a prey to
the Enemy; wherefore the Captain General A Council held for to consider of the
state of Candia.
called a Council of the most eminent Officers; and because the matter was of
great importance, he judged fit also to have the opinion of the Commanders of
the Galleasses, and of the other Captains of the Fleet. At this Council were
present Francesco Morosini Captain General. Giacomo Contarini Duke of Candia.
Girolamo Battaglia Proveditor General of Arms. Daniel Morosini Proveditor of
the Kingdom. Giacomo Cornaro Proveditor of the Kingdom. Alvise Minio Commissary
of the Ammunition and Provision. Marquis St Andrea Montbrun General of the
Army. Marquis of Frontenac Lieutenant General. The Baron Frederick de Spaar
General of the Tramontani. The Cavalier Bartolomeo Varisano Grimaldi Sergeant
General. Baron Chilmerseck Sergeant General. Count Francis Salvatico Governor
of the Arms of the City. Cavalier Verneda Chief Engineer, and Superintendent
of the Artillery.


On the other side sat the Commanders at Sea, which were as follows. Lorenzo
Cornaro Proveditor of the Fleet. Alvise Magno Captain in Extraordinary of the
Galleasses. Iseppo Morosini Captain in Ordinary of the Galleasses. Georgio
Benzoni Captain of the Gulf. Ascanio Giustiniano Governor of the Gulf. Angelo
Morosini Play Master. Gio. Batt. Calbo Commissary of the Ammunition and
Provisions. Alexandro Locattelli Cancellier.


All which having taken their places, the Captain General began to declare,
That the extremity of the place was so well known and evident to them all, that
there was no need for him to inform them of the particulars; only that he had
called them together to know their opinions and counsels in what manner the
defense of the Town might be best prolonged, and what advice they would give
him touching the present premures and emergency of Affairs. He added further,
That he had by good experience proved them to be as well judicious and wise in
their Counsels, as they were valiant in the Execution; and that now was the
time to lay aside all ostentation of speech, and to attend unto that which was
solid reason and advice, which he desired every one to deliver freely with a
clear and real sense and affection toward the grand Concernment. Then he
ordered the Cancellier to read a short preamble of the matter on which they
were to deliver their opinions, desiring every one to express his judgment in
Writing; But after some few had subscribed their Declaration, so much time was
spent therein, that it was conceived more expedite for every person to declare
his opinion by word of mouth.

As to the first point all generally concurred, that considering the small
number of the Defendants, the Town could not hold out much longer; for that the
Enemy on the side of St Andrea was arrived to the last Retrenchment, which
being low, weak, and composed of bad matter, could not long resist their power;
that on the side also of Sabionera they were so far advanced by the lower
grounds toward the Arsenal, that in a short time they would block up the Port,
and cut off all provisions and succors from the Town; and that if the Enemy
were resolved to adventure the loss of two or three thousand men by a general
storm, there would remain no possibility of withstanding their Force. This
being generally assented unto, and concluded on all hands, another Question was
propounded; namely, That considering the premises, what was to be done which
might render the most effectual service to the Republic; it was well known how
important that place was to the Public, and what vast Treasures of Gold and
Silver, and what plentiful Effusions of blood had been expended and poured
forth in defense thereof; and that therefore it ought to be maintained to the
utmost and last gasp of strength; but that it ought also to be considered, That
the Town being either taken by assault, or the Port blocked up, there would
certainly ensue such deplorable Consequences as every person may imagine; and
the Republic be damaged by losing all that which is now in a possibility of
being saved. It was therefore put to the Vote, beginning on the side of the
Inferiors, as the custom is, and so ascending to the chief; and it was
resolved that they should capitulate, and enter into a Treaty with the Turks.
When it came to Grimaldis turn to speak, he confessed clearly, That the Town
could not hold out for many days, and though it was more glorious to the
Defenders to dye on the Walls of it, yet it would be of worst service to the
Public; howsoever, he was of opinion, that rather than surrender, it would be
better to burn it, or blow it up with Mines; in execution of which, the wounded
and unserviceable people should in the first place be shipped away, then taking
the opportunity of a dark and quiet Night the Infantry might be all embarked;
it was true, as he confessed, that the action was difficult and full of hazard;
howsoever, two things moved him to this Counsel; One was, The little assurance
he conceived of the faith of the Turks; and the other was, The gloriousness of
the action: for as this City had been in an extraordinary manner defended, and
of which the World cannot give the like example; so the end thereof would not
be less renowned and famous, it not being a greater triumph to drive the Enemy
from the Walls, than being vanquished to leave a bloody Victory, and instead of
a Palace a heap of stones and ashes. Many of the Council, and amongst them
Marquess St Andrea Montbrun was of the same opinion, and the Commissary Minio
endeavored to second it with efficacious Arguments; But in fine, after a long
Discourse, they all concluded that the resolution was more generous than
practicable; by reason that so many people could not be embarked without
knowledge of the Enemy, who was not only quartered near, but within the very
Walls of the City.

The Captain General was of a different opinion; for that besides the
difficulty of embarking the Soldiery, there were also some other
considerations which might dissuade this resolution, and render it more
prejudicial to the Public than a Surrender by Composition. After some short
debate, all at length concurred in the same sentiment, from which also Grimaldi
did not much dissent, confessing that the proposition he had made would prove
difficult in the Execution; howsoever, considering the little faith which the
Turks observe, he thought it more secure to confide their safety to Fortune and
their own Swords, than to the engagements and moderation of a perfidious and
enraged Enemy. In short, he submitted wholly to the better judgments of the
Council, and more particularly to the Captain General, and the Marquess of St
Andrea, who were best acquainted with what more nearly concerned the service
and interest of the Prince.

In fine, the conclusion was, That they should enter into a Treaty with the
Vizier, and en leavour to obtain the most advantageous Conditions possible.
Howsoever, it was thought sit to advertise sirst this their determination to
the Auxiliary Forces at Standia; and to renew the Result of the Council.
instances they had formerly made to them for three thousand men, with which,
and with two thousand Gally Slaves they would endeavor the making of another
Retrenchment, whereby the Town might be conserved for some time longer.
Howsoever, in this Interim the Captain General being willing to touch the
Viziers pulse, that he might better discover in what manner he stood assected
toward a Treaty, dispatched one Colonel Thomas Anand, an Englishman, of
courage, and of able Parts, and of entire honesty, together with one Stefano
Cordili, an intelligent young man to the Vizier's Camp; and that his design
might not be discovered by those of the Town, they were ordered to pass from
Standia with a white Flag up the River Giossiro; and that being come to a
Treaty, they should only discover the mind and inclinations of the Turks,
without making known their intentions, or entering into particulars.

Being come in this manner prepared to the Vizier's Camp, they told the Turks,
That they were come to renew the Treaty begun by Signior Molino, which had been
broken off by the Arrival of the French and Pope's Forces; to which a Turk,
then come srom the Vizier's Tent, resolutely answered, That they should think
of no Articles nor Treaty without a Surrender. To which Anand replied, That
they would do well to acquaint the Vizier so much, for that perhaps he might be
of another opinion; and so not urging farther they departed; but returning
after Dinner the same Turk came down again, called Achmet Aga, a Confident of
the Vizier's, together with Panaiotti the Vizier's Interpreter; and then with
more earnestness declaring, That nothing would be heard, unless in the sirst
place they were resolved to deliver the Town, and threatened them in case they
returned without this Proposition: The Captain General being advised hereof,
the next morning Anand and Scordili went again on the same message; and meeting
the Turks under Paleocastro, they acquainted them that they had orders to treat
about a Surrender; but sirst desired to know what Articles they would give
them, and what Town in exchange for this. In this manner a Treaty being begun,
it was resolved for better expedition to erect Tents nearer to the Town for the
place of Conference, where the Plenipotentiaries on both sides were to meet.
Ibrahim Pasha, late Pasha of Aleppo, Achmet Aga, the Kahya-begh of the
Janisaries, the Spahyler Agasi, and the Interpreter Panaiotti, were the persons
chosen by the Turks: on the part of the Christians, after some Debate, no other
persons were chosen besides Anand and Scordili, who meeting the Turks at the
time and place appointed, demanded of them some other place in exchange for
that of Candia. To which the Turk's with some heat replied, That it was against
their Law to deliver Towns where Moschs were built, into the hands of
Christians. To which the others answered, That this could not be their Law,
since that in a Treaty some months past begun by the Cavalier Molino, they had
offered to deliver up into the hands of the Christians Candia Nuova, Silia, and
Girapitra, all places where Mohammedan Moschs were erected; and though the Turks
might now imagine it easy to win the Town by sorce, they assured them that
greater difficulties remained; and that if they remembered what blood, what
labors, and what Treasures their small acquests and advance had cost them,
they might thence calculate what Force still remained to conquer, and that the
last gasp of this dying Fortress would spend it self with more ruin and
destruction than they had felt in all the other approaches and assaults
thereunto. In fine, the Turks seeming resolved to be fool Masters of the whole
Kingdom of Candia, the Venetians began to condescend to receive some
compensation in another manner.

Howsoever, the difficulties were not yet ended but greater appeared, for the
Turks demanded satisfaction for the charge of the War; and the Haratch or
head-money, which for all those years of the Wars they had not received from
the people of the Isles of the Archipelago; they demanded also a Tribute for
the Forts and Islands of Cerigo, Tino, and Clissa, and the other Conquests in
Dalmatia; all which points caused new Disputes, which were maintained with
those heats, and with that obstinacy, as if it had been impossible for both
parties ever to meet in a conclusion. Notwithstanding, after long Debates, on
the fourth of September they came to agree of giving hostages, and to certain
proposals concerning the manner of surrendering the place. The Turks demanded to
have the Outworks put into their hands, with one of the Gates of the City, and
the Palisade of the new Retrenchment: To which Anand and Scordili answered,
That this was not a proposition to be made to the Captain General, for that
they were assured, the Garrison would sooner suffer themselves to be cut in
pieces, than to commit themselves to the mercy of the Turkish Soldiery; whose
faith is recorded in the History of Famagusta, and may serve for a true example
and mirroir of their treachery and faithlesness to all Ages. In this manner the
Treaty had like to have been Broken off; but at length they concluded, That it
was necessary to render an account to the Vizier of the particulars of this
Conference, adjourning the Treaty until the next Morning.

Notwithstanding all which, the Turks did not abate in the least point their
progress in the War, laboring in their Works, and fighting with more heat than
ever. The Venetians on the other side were not less active, firing continually
their Cannon and Grenades, and making some little Sallies, endeavored as much
as they were able to cover the weakness of their Forces. The Turks had raised a
new Battery which broke a great part of the Palisade of the new Retrenchment,
upon which it was expected that they should make a strong attempt, for whose
better entertainment two Mines were prepared to receive them; but they
deferring the assault, the Captain General gave orders to fire both the Mines
at once, which consisting of a hundred and fifty Barrels of Powder, made the
ground to tremble both in the City and in the Camp, overthrowing several works
with miserable slaughter of the Enemy.

The Turks observing this resolution in the Defendants, became more tractable,
and less severe in their demands; so that Ibrahim Pasha with the rest contented
themselves with no other security for performances of Conditions than Hostages;
of which three were consigned mutually on both sides. After which, other
Articles were, with less difficulty, concluded; so that in the morning of the
6th of September the Turks demanded that the Christians should give all their
Articles in Writing; whereupon the Council ordered Grimaldi to draw them up;
which were in substance as follows.

First, That for obtaining a good and lasting Peace, it is agreed, The
Conditions of Peace.
That the City of Candia, with all its Cannon which were planted there before
the time of the War, be consigned into the hands of the Vizier.

Secondly, That quiet possession be given to the Republic of Suda, Carabusa,
and Spina Longa, with the Territories thereunto belonging, with the Fortress of
Clissa in Dalmatia.

Thirdly, That the Venetians may carry away all the Cannon which have been
brought into the Town since the beginning of the War.

Fourthly, That for embarking the Soldiery, Pioniers, and Inhabitants of all
Qualities and Conditions, with their Arms, Provisions, and Baggage twelve days
time shall be granted and assigned.

Fifthly, That what shall remain unshipped at the end of the twelve days
aforesaid, the Vizier shall, with his own Boats, assist to the lading thereof.

Sixthly, That during this time of truce, no person whatsoever shall transgress
his Limits, or pass the bounds of his Station or Quarters; and that he who does
shall be treated as an Enemy.

Seventhly, That so soon as these Articles shall be subscribed under the white
Flag, all Acts of Hostility shall cease both on one side and the other.

Eighthly, That for security of performance of these Articles, three Hostages
be mutually given on one side and the other.

Ninthly, That for better assurance, that the Venetians will use all their
endeavors to embark their Men and Goods, the Turks may employ two Officers for
Eyewitnesses of the same.

Tenthly, That for better effecting hereof, all Ships, Galleys, and other
Vessels may freely approach near unto the shore, and enter into the Port both
by Day and Night.

Eleventhly, That the Venetian Fleet may remain at Standia, or at any other
Island in the Archipelago, until such time as they are dispatched, or that
things are duly prepared for their departure.

Twelfthly, That all Commissions given by one side and the other be revoked,
and that whosoever shall after the space of forty days commit any Act of
Hostility against the tenor of these Articles of Peace, shall be punished with
capital punishment.

Thirteenthly, That so soon as an Ambassador from Venice shall arrive at the
Port, all Slaves or Prisoners of War taken under the Venetian Colors shall be
sreed and released.

Fourteenthly, That what depredations shall be made at Sea or Land after these
Articles are subscribed, and before the publication thereof, shall be
faithfully made good and restored.

Fifteenthly, That a general pardon be given to the Subjects of both sides, who
have acted contrary to their Faith and Allegiance, during this War.

Sixteenthly, That in Virtue of these Capitulations the former Articles be
likewise confirmed which were made in the Year 1571, and that no Tribute or
Present be demanded from the Port, unless as has formerly been paid for such
Islands as the Venetians hold in the Archipelago.

Seventeenthly, That of these Articles two Copies be made, one in Turkish with
its Translation into Italian, subscribed by the Vizier, and sealed with the
Grand Signior's Signet; and the other in Italian underwrote by the
Captain General, and sealed with the Seal of the Republic.

These Articles being signed, the Hostages were given both on one side and the
other. Those given by the Venetians were Faustino da Riva Lieutenant General,
Giovanni Battista Calbo Commissary, and Zaccaria Mocenigo who had been Duke of
Candia. Those given by the Turks were Belir Assan Pasha, Mahomet Aga of the
Janisaries, and Gurgi Bei Testerdar or Treasurer.

During this Siege, of the Venetians side there were killed and wounded thirty
thousand nine hundred eighty five, of the Turks one hundred eighteen thousand
seven hundred fifty four.

The Batteries which the Turks raised against Sabionera and St. Andrea,
consisted of fifty nine Pieces of Cannon, carrying from fifty to an hundred and
twenty pound weight of Bullet.

The Storms which the Turks made upon the Town were fifty six.

The Combats under ground forty five.

The Sallies made by the Venetians ninety six.

The Mines and Fornelli sprang by the Venetians eleven hundred seventy three,
by the Turks four hundred seventy two.

The Venetians spent Barrels of Powder fifty thousand three hundred and
seventeen.

Bomboes of all sorts by the Venetians of fifty to five hundred weight, were
forty eight thousand an hundred and nineteen.

Grenades of Brass and Iron an hundred thousand nine hundred and sixty:
Grenades of Glass eighty four thousand eight hundred seventy four.

Cannon-shot of all sorts two hundred seventy six thousand seven hundred forty
three.

Pounds of Lead eighteen millions forty four thousand nine hundred fifty seven.
Of Match pounds thirteen millions twelve thousand five hundred.

What quantities the Turks might consume of Ammunition is not certain; only it
is observable, That the Brass taken up in the streets which came from the
Enemies Bomboes was so much, that whole Warehouses were filled with the Metal,
and so much sold as yielded many thousand of Crowns.

The Articles being subscribed, and Hostages given, the Captain General
attended with all application of mind and industry imaginable to imbark the Men
and Ammunition, committing in the mean time the care of the City to Cornaro the
Proveditor of the Fleet.

During these days that all things were providing in order to a Surrender,
there was great silence in the Turkish Camp, and no disorder in the City; the
Soldiers on the Ramparts, and the Turks in their Trenches saluted each other
with civility, and entertained communication and discourses together with
friendship and freedom of several passages relating to their War, nothing of
quarrel, or scuffle, or rude words happening out between them in all the term
of the twelve days. The Vizier sent diverse times civil Messages and Presents of
refreshment to the Captain General and Marquess St. Andrea, which they returned
with equal respect and generosity; and so excessive were the Turks in these
offices, that the Venetians began to be jealous, left under this mark and guise
of courtesy some fraud or design should be covered according to their own
Proverb: Chi ti fa piu carezze che suole; o ti ha engannato o enganar ti vuole.

In short, all things were dispatched with that diligence and care, that on the
27th of September the City was consigned; all the Inhibitants departed thence,
not one remaining in the City, except only two Greek Priests, a Woman, and
three Jews.

In this manner the whole Isle of Candia, the cause and occasion of all that
Blood and Treasure that was spilt, and exhausted in twenty five The War began
in April 1645.
years Wars, fell at length to the fortune and increase of the Turkish Empire,
with its most impregnable Fortress of the World, strengthened with as much Art
and Industry, as the humane Wit of this Age was capable to invent, after a
strait Siege of two years, three months, and twenty seven days. For the space
of twelve days allotted for the Surrender being expired, on the (...)th of
September being Friday, the great Candia delivered.
Cross erected on the Wall was after midnight taken down, and advice given to
the Venetians, so soon as the morning dawned, that the Turks did that day
attend the Surrender, which was accordingly performed by the Principal Citizen
about nine of the clock of the same morning, who offering the Keys of the City
to the Great Vizier in a Basin of Silver on the breach of St. Andrea, was by
him presented with a Vest of Sables, and five hundred Zechins in Gold, and to
his Servants were given two hundred. To Morosini also a Present was offered
worthy his Quality; but he refused it, saying, That he would never give a
seeming occasion to the malicious World to slander him with the least
appearance of having sold his important Charge. Whilst these things were
transacting on the breach, some of the most cowardly and disorderly amongst the
Janisaries pressed forward to have entered by force, in violation of the
Articles so lately agreed and confirmed; but some of the Garrison not yet
embarked, keeping themselves still on the Guard, repulsed the most forward in
the Riot by killing three or four of their Companions: which disturbance and
insolence of the Soldiery, when made known to the Vizier, he assembled the
disorderly together; and first upbraiding their cowardice, who durst not enter
in the time of War, would now counterfeit Valor in the time of Peace,
sentenced fifteen of them to be impaled on the breach, which piece of Justice
and Gallantry was immediately executed. This rumor being appeased, the
Topegibashee and Gebegibashee, or the Generals of the Ordnance and Arms took
quiet possession of the Forts and Cannon of the City, and whilst the Turks
entered over the breach, the Christian Army withdrew and embarked themselves as
fast as convenience and decency would permit, who after the departure of the
French, and of such who accompanied them, were not computed to be above two
thousand five hundred men, and those sickly, ill accoutred, and half naked; and
thus this City and whole Island became subject and a prey to the Ottoman Arms.
Amongst the Officers which took possession of the Town were the Tefterdar and
the Aga of the Janisaries. The Tefterdar as he passed over the breach of St.
Andrea, and observing how low and weak the Works were on that side, turned to
the Aga of the Janisaries, and with some disdain said to him, We have here
spent ten days in the Surrender of this Town which we might have taken in two
hours.

The Turkish Army taking possession on Friday the (...)th of September, the
Vizier made his Entry on Friday the 4th of October; in which time they had
erected a triumphant Bridge over the breach of St. Andrea, on which the Vizier
entered into the Town, and passed directly to the Church of St. Francis, which
was converted to a Mohammedan Mosque, where having said his Namaz or Prayer, he
went to the house where the Marquess St. Andrea was lodged, which was prepared
for him, with a sumptuous Entertainment of five hundred Dishes at the expense
of the Grand Signior.

This City in four parts of five was ruined and demolished in the time of the
Siege, all the Bells and Ornaments of the Churches and Houses to the very Locks
of the doors were carried away; the Arms remaining were old and rusty, and not
above three hundred and fifty Pieces of Cannon left on the Walls, and those for
the most part very small: the Inhabitants remaining were only five, as we have
said before, unless some few decrepit Jews and Greeks, which might make up the
number of about thirty; so that never could be a more sad spectacle of
desolation, nor a more clear Mirroir of the miseries of War.

The Great Vizier being possessed of the Town, dispatched away an Express with
the good News thereof to the Sultan, who posted as fast as wind and weather
would permit. And here the Reader may easily apprehend what joy possessed the
minds of the Turks in all places where the rumor slew of this Cities
Surrender, which had for so many years baffled and put a stand to the Ottoman
Sword. And though the joyful tidings added wings to the Messengers haste, yet
the uncertainty of the Grand Signiors abode retarded some days the arrival of
the News: which will seem very strange to him that considers, that the motion
of so great an Emperor in the Glory of his Fortunes should be less obscure
than the light of the Sun, perceptible by all conditions, who inhabit that side
of the Globe, where his rays are visible. At length the Messenger found the
Sultan within the Woods and Mountains of Negropont where he had The News
brought to the Grand Signior at Negropont.
passed the heats of the Summer, and some part of his discontent in those
solitary retirements: it being now toward the end of September, and the Winter
approaching, the Isle was incapable to entertain so great a Court, and to
return back seemed as dishonorable as it was dangerous, the Soldiery and
People being equally discontented, the one by the ill success and government of
Affairs, and the other by oppression of Taxes: but this joyful News cleared all
those clouds and ombrages of doubtful and disconsolate thoughts, which the
Grand Signior received like a dream, being at first so surprised with such an
unexpected happiness, that he could scarce believe it; but at length
recollecting his scattered spirits, without delay returned the Messenger again
with his Embrahore or Master of his Horse to the Vizier with the Present of a
Sable Vest, a Dagger, and a Sword, being the usual signals of the Sultans
favor, and with a Letter freighted with Encomiums and Praises of his Valor
and Fortune. And whereas the Vizier had persuaded him to return to
Constantinople, he answered, That he was resolved to winter at Salonica, where
with the Spring he expected his presence, and from thence in company with him,
should be ready to choose any Seat, which in his judgment the Vizier apprehended
most conducing to the benefit of the Empire.

The Captain General Morosini having in the mean time embarked his Forces,
failed to Suda to provide and fortify that place, Spina Longa and Carabusa,
poor Rocks and Appendages to the greater Isle of Candia, with all necessary
supplies of Victuals and Ammunition: which only serve for a Prospect into
Candia, and to keep alive the Title of the Venetian Republic to that Kingdom.
Suda is the most considerable of the three, but yet not strong, the Sea being
fordable between that and The Venetians at Suda.
Candia, and not of long resistance, whenever the Turk shall think it worthy
his time to subdue. Here Morosini attended the Ratification of the Peace from
Venice, and the disbanding of the Turkish Army, in which time four French Ships
with Succors of Men and Ammunition arrived at Candia; but coming late were
disappointed of their design, and so returned back into their own Country.

The Turks having now finished their work, dispeeded away their Janisaries and
Pioniers by all occasions of shipping: those that remained were employed all
the Winter in filling the Trenches without the City, and many Slaves taken out
of the Galleys to repair the breach of St. Andrea: in which work, whilst they
threw up the disordered rubbish, so poisonous a stench evaporated from the
bodies of the slain, which lay buried in those ruins, as begat a Pestilence
and other diseases in the City and in the Galleys; but laboring continually on
that work, they soon acquitted themselves of the contagion, by help of the
Winters cold which then approached.

In this manner expired the Action of this Year fortunate in its success to the
Turks; for though they gained but thirty Acres of Land with expense inestimable
of Blood and Treasure, yet the Glory and Fame which attended it, being the
consummation of twenty five years Wars, and the Theater where the whole World
were Spectators, was of greater value to the Turks than any other
consideration, and may with time prove a place of advantage to the farther
increase of their Western Empire, unless God Almighty by his Mercy and
Providence give a stop to the progress of this Grand Oppressor.

But before this Year ended, behold the misery of Christendom, by reason of
discontents and animosities in the Imperial Court, the Count Serini Prince of
Croatia, the Marquess Frangipani and Count Nadasri, Serini and the Nobles of
Hungary offer themselves to the Turk.
joined with other Nobles of Hungary, sent Messengers to the Great Vizier at
Candia, offering themselves Subjects and Tributaries to the Turk, desiring his
Protection of their Religion and Liberties, designing to act the part of
Bethlem Gabor: of which Conspiracy and Rebellion we shall have occasion to
speak more hereafter.

The Great Vizier employed himself this whole Winter past in repairing the
Fortifications of Candia, regulating them in some measure according to the
Turkish Model, and in repairing and beautifying the Town, which was done with
such admirable expedition, that in a few months most of the houses demolished
in the time of the Siege were again erected, and the Churches converted into
Moschs and adorned, three of the principal whereof took the Names of the Grand
Signior, Great Vizier and Captain Pasha, and were endowed by them with an
honorable Revenue, sufficient to maintain them in Reparations, Lamps, and
Talismans. But the Turks were not more pious toward their Mosehs than the
Christians were careless and cold toward their Churches; for the Venetians
inserted not one Article in favor of a Christian Church or a Religious House,
which would have been granted as soon as demanded, only a Greek who was
Interpreter to the Great Vizier called (...), a Person of Parts and Learning,
at the expense of two thousand two hundred Dollars; and an Armenian Merchant
called Apro Chelabei at the charge of a thousand four hundred purchased two
Churches for their respective Nations.

The Grand Signior in the mean time returned to Salonica to pass the remainder
of the Winter, which place being famous for multitude of all sorts of Game,
drew his heart, and made him impatient till he arrived those Plains, more
desired by him than the Elysian fields; for having The G. Signior returns to
Salonica, and hunts.
made his Entry into that City, the next day he designed to hunt: but being put
in mind that the English Ambassador Sir Daniel Harvey, who (as we said)
arrived at Constantinople the year before, attended his Audience, Sir Daniel
Harvey, his Majesty's Ambassador, has his Audience of the Grand Signior.
he was contented to grant it to him the next morning. But yet not to lose his
hunting, at midnight he sent Officers to the Ambassador to prepare for the
next days Audience very early; and to gain time, ordered his Horses to be all
ready, that so having dispatched that Ceremony, he might immediately mount into
the Saddle and pursue his Game. Howsoever he was not in so much haste, but he
testified due respect to His Majesty of Great Britain, and the esteem he had of
the English Nation, ordering the Capitulations to be renewed; and commanding
the Chimacam, that if any one should break or insringe them, that he should cut
him off without farther argument. But as to renewing the Capitulations, the
Chimacam falling at the Grand Signiors feet, beseeched him, That that
particular might be deferred until the arrival of the Great Vizier, whose
proper power and act it was to make War and Peace; and therefore for him to
intermeddle about Capitulations was to invade the Viziers Authority, which he
durst not do without putting his life in danger, or at least rendering his
Person obnoxious to his irreconcilable displeasure; with which the Grand
Signior being satisfied, ordered that the renewing of the Capitulations should
be deferred until the return of the Vizier, and so dismissed the Lord
Ambassador from his Presence; but this work of renewing the Capitulations was
reserved for the care and conduct of Sir John Finch, who succeeded in the
Embassy after the death of Sir Daniel Harvey.

The Grand Signior arising from his Throne mounted into his Saddle to follow
his excessive delight in Hunting, which now he pursued every day without
respect of cold or wet, or Horses or Attendants; but like an impetuous Nimrod
raged amongst the timorous Hares and flying Hearts, over-spreading the Woods
with vast numbers of poor Jews and Peasants, which he had commanded sorth to
drive for Game, not respecting the extreme rigor and Frosts of Winter, by
which many of those poor Wretches, lying abroad in the nights, were benumbed,
and dyed. And so far did his humor transport him in this Recreation, that he
was discouraged at no inconvenience or labors which attended it; for one day
appointing his Hunting at a certain place, which to pass on Horseback was a
great circuit, but a nearer cut over a Gulf or Arm of the Sea, he ordered his
Horses round, whilst he in Person attended with the Chimacam and several of his
Grandees, passed over to the other side in a Gally. But being impatient of his
Sport, and not able to give time to his Horses to make their way, ascended his
Gally, commanding them to row away with all speed; and arriving at the other
side some hours before his Horses could come, would yet land: and being weary
of expectation, resolved to meet them on foot through all the dirt and mire of
a low and rich soil: where whilst he traveled heavily, and almost tired, by
good fortune they espied a Miller driving his Horse laden with two Sacks of
Meal; whom when they had called, and made him to lighten his burden, and take
off the Pack-saddle, the Chimacam himself stripped off his own Sables Vest, and
covered the Horse with it, on which the Grand Signior mounting in great state,
rode like a Prince till he met his own Retinue, which passage served to fill
the discourse at night of that days Hunting, and deserves to be chronicled with
our English Dialogue between the Miller and the King: howsoever we make use of
it here to demonstrate the strange and passionate humor which possessed this
Sultan in his Hunting.

Little other recreation did this Grand Signior take, unless it were in the
Company of his chief Sultana, called the Hasaki Sultana, by whom The G. Signior
delights solely in his Queen.
having had a Son, which beginning now to play and speak, reconciled much of
his affection to the Female Sex, but yet with that moderation and well
regulated love, that he confined himself wholly to this one Woman, having sent
for her to be his Companion in all journies and adventures of Errantry, whilst
the other Ladies as encumbrances and impediments to the speedy motions of the
wandering Court, were dispeeded to Constantinople under the Government of the
Queen Mother, as we have before declared; of which privilege this Sultana
beginning to be sensible, endeavored to increase and conserve the Affections
of her Lord by all the arts and tricks of love imaginable; for she was really,
or else feigned to be, so enamoured of him, that she pined and macerated away
her self for his absence; and when he was indisposed in his health, or intended
a long Journey from her, she would fall into Swoundings, and Paralytical Fits,
or something else, which was an undoubted symptom of true affection, such as
commonly intervenes amongst us in the chaste embraces of single marriage; that
the Grand Signior, whose loves to Women were not naturally as vagrant as his
delights after the chase of wild Beasts, was so much satisfied in her alone,
that he could be no more without her than she without him; so that, like Diana,
or some Mountain Nymph, she became a Huntress after her Prince, as he a Ranger
after his Game.

Anno Christ 1670. Hegeira 1081.
THE Spring coming forward, the Great Vizier declared, That after St George's
day, which is the 23d day of April, (called by the Turks Cassim gheun) he
resolved to depart from Candia; and therefore ordered, That all Ships, Saiks,
Brigantines, and other Vessels, which were found in any Port of the Grand
Signior's Dominions, should be sent to Candia, to transport him and the
remainder of his Army to Rhodesto in Romelia, from whence he designed his March
to meet the Grand Signior at Adrianople. But before his departure he took a
view of the Island, taking his progress through the whole circumference of it,
and numbering The Vizier takes a survey of the whole Isle of Candia.
all the Inhabitants which paid Harach, or Pole Money, found them not to exceed
two and twenty thousand persons. For though in the time of Dellee Mehmet Pasha,
who was the first that brought the Ottoman Sword into that Country, there were
listed fifty five thousand, who paid duties of Harach; yet now the Plague, the
Sword, and other miseries of War had reduced them to that small number, of whom
ten thousand (as is reported) perished in the Mines, and before the Walls of
their own City; and great numbers of Olive Trees being cut down and burned by

The Ambassador of Venice Signior Alivise Molino, before mentioned, was now at
Candia, designing to accompany the Vizier in his Voyage to the Grand Signior;
for adorning which Embassy the Republic had appointed a Ship to carry the
Presents and several Persons of Quality for attendance of the Bailo (for so
their Ambassador is called;) and in regard in that passage the ship was to
touch at Zant, they laded on her a hundred thousand Zechins for payment of that
Soldiery, which with the Captain General were returned from Candia to that
place, with Presents for the Grand Signior and his Court; but it pleased God,
that this Ship sailing down the Gulf, met with so furious a storm of Wind, that
she suffered shipwreck on the Coast of Italy, where not only the ship and goods
were lost, but every soul upon that ship perished; amongst which was Lorenzo
Molino Son of the Ambassador, and Ottavio Labia, another noble Venetian.

The Great Vizier entertained himself so long in Candia that the month of May
was well entered before he departed thence; and by the way The Vizier departs
from Candia, and arrives at Scio.
touched at Scio, where he was met by all the Officers and Governors of the
adjacent Jurisdictions, who came to make tender of their Presents and Services;
but the Vizier in a plausible manner, accepted of their courteous Offers, but
returned their Gifts, saying, That he was so sensible of the great oppressions
and expenses the neighboring Countries had suffered by reason of the War, that
he was resolved to superinduce no new Charge by Victory and Peace.

In like manner from all parts was a confluence of poor oppressed people, who
came to petition for justice and relief against the corruption and tyranny of
their Governors in the respective Countries. But the Vizier admitted no
Audience for Complaints, whether it were to maintain an apprehension of his
clemency and gentleness, by acting nothing that was cruel or severe, or to
enjoy himself after his cares and turmoils in the War; he almost for fourteen
days continuance entertained himself in private by the cool and crystalline
Fountains of Scio. Some report, that he gave himself at that time so
excessively to Wine, being overjoyed at his success, and conclusion of the War,
that he was never capable, during his abode there, of serious thoughts or
counsels; so that his Kahya, or Secretary, could never be admitted access,
unless he were called, though on the most urgent occasion of business. Others
interpreted his retirements to be in order to serious considerations about the
mannagement of Affairs at his return; as how to satisfy the expectations of
the Grandees, who patiently attended an amendment of abuses in the Government;
how he might pacify the minds of the Soldiery, who were jealous of
Conspiracies against the lives of the Royal Brothers, and how to steer in an
even course at Court between the security of his Master, and satisfaction of
the Vulgar; for all the World lived in hope that alteration of times would
amend abuses, and that the last remedy of all was the return of the Viziers
Authority. Howsoever, it is certainly reported, That the Vizier was become
exceedingly intemperate in wine, and drowned much of his cares in the fumes and
vapors of it, supposing The Great Vizier persuaded to drink wine.
himself, as Tiberius did in Capreae, exempt from the eyes of the World, whilst
he remained in Scio, which the Sea had separated from the greater Continent.
And yet the Vizier, is believed, never to have tasted Wine, or known whether it
was bitter or sweet, till the pride of his success in Candia transported him to
make his joy extravagant, to which the Officers about his Person invited him,
as that which cheared the spirits, strengthened the nerves, and induced a
strange kind of delight and pleasure in the fancy, beyond any thing of Poppies,
or Opiate Compositions, or Biram-Pasha's Pills, or Berse, or a thousand other
inventions, sit only to confuse men's reason, and stupifie the brain, and benumb
all the senses, in which some, as I have heard, had so practiced themselves by
degrees, that they could swallow five drams in twenty four hours, though I
never knew any, unless one Turk, whom I saw eat above three; but then they
could eat nothing else, nor were they sit afterward to receive or digest any
other nourishment, Nature being used to that poison, rejected all other sounder
nutriment. But Wine (they said) cheared the heart in that manner, and comforted
the stomach, that the Turks began now generally to drink it; unless he were
some Pharisaical Hypocrite of the Ulamah, or some superstitious aged and
ignorant Profeslour. So that The Souldiers' and other Turks drink Wine to
excess.
the vice of drunkenness became more common amongst the Turks than amongst the
Germans, or our selves: I am sure more intolerable, and administered to more
mischiefs, by how much the Turks being unaccustomed to Wine, knew less how to
comport the heats of intemperance.

And here I shall make a little digression from my purpose in hand to acquaint
my Reader of the effects which I have observed to be produced in those who
accustom themselves to the use of Opium. In all the Country A digression about
Opium.
Villages amongst the Turks, the more aged sort of men who have most leisure,
and least necessity to work, addict themselves to Opium for alleviation (as
they say) of their cares, and to forget their sorrow, for pleasure in the taste
there can be none, being very bitter to the palate; which being taken in a
morning in a small quantity, about the bigness of a Tare, superinduces at first
a strange cheerfulness about the heart, and thence raises a more pleasing
vapor to the head, than any can proceed from the spirits of the best and the
highest Wines: but afterward as it begins to digest, the vapor becomes more
gross, and consequently a kind of stupefaction is induced over the brain and
nerves, which with drowsiness and sleep passes away like a drunken fit. The
Youth amongst them which drink Wine abhor Opium, until growing into years, and
to the care of a family (as a sign of which they suffer their beards to
increase) they are taught by their Imaum, and more by example of others, that
Wine being against their Law, is only dispensable in wild and unbridled Youth,
but in those of riper age is a vice to be reproached by all sober and
well-governed men. In the place of which they take up the lawful and innocent
Pill of Opium, which makes men serious and settled (as they say) because that it
operates not like Wine, which makes men mad, and rash, and violent, but
disposes them to be Sots, and to sit grave and quiet without doing hurt to any
man, which is a qualification accounted very laudable amongst them, and is one
of the greatest Virtues which they endeavor to acquire in their Tekees or
Monasteries. This being the reason for which it is taken and allowed, it is
grown a common custom almost amongst all the Countrypeople, who in the morning
before they go to work take first their Opium, and upon it three or four dishes
of Coffee; for it is observable, that none eats Opium but who accompanies it
with great quantities of Coffee, which is doubtless a kind of Opiate in it
self, and partakes very much of a Narcotick Quality; by this means and constant
use some arrive to take strange quantities; the most that ever I knew any man
take was three drams in twenty four hours, viz. a dram and an half or
thereabouts in the morning, and as much an hour after noon: the which for more
exactness I had the curiosity to see weighed. The same person offered for a
small reward to take five drams in twenty four hours; but then he said, it
required a long time to digest, and did not doubt but to overcome it: but I was
too scrupulous to put a man into a sleep, from whence I feared he might never
awake. This person was of a thin and livid complexion, his skin shriveled, no
more beard than a few hairs, his mouth commonly open, because his chap was
fallen; his countenance putting me osten in mind of the Picture I have seen of
the Gorgons head; for had it been encompassed with Snakes instead of his
Turbant, it might have served for a perfect Original. He had arrived to the
years of forty eight, and from the years thirty he had entered into Opium from a
great excess of Wine: in which condition he found that his stomach required
little other nourishment, being content with a small quantity of bread and
water for his other Diet, Opium supplying him with all the other Delicacies he
could desire: he was the father notwithstanding of two or three children, which
he confessed to have begot in the strength of his Opium, having no desire to
accompany with his wife, until he was first invigorated with his usual Dose,
being till then like a Trunk or Log, wanting spirits almost to turn his body.
For his Opium was that only which could revive all, which about a quarter of an
hour after it was taken began to operate, and then we discovered in his eyes,
which before were dull and heavy, scarce opening, a certain quickness and
sparkling, and then soon after he was sitted for the work of the day, and could
labor as others, and take a journey on foot of seven or eight miles to Market,
and return home at night: his body was always bound, or his belly constipated
with the hardness of his excrement, and yet he was subject to no other
sickness, unless his vitiated desire to this Poison which can nourish no
wholesome or healthful body. The Turks, as I have learned, make little other use
of Opium than this; yet sometimes they will put it into their Camels ears, and
the nostrils of their Horses, when faint and weary, wherewith they revive
again, and soon recover their strength and force to travel.

The Vizier having thus passed some days of Entertainment at Scio, entered again
his Gally, and passing through the Streights of the Hellespont arrived at
Rodesto, where having landed many of his Janisaries and such of the Army as
remained with him, after a few days continuance he marched to Adrianople, where
he was received by the Grand Signior with all evidences of satisfaction, and
entered the City triumphant after the manner of the Turkish Allai.

The Ceremonies and Complements being past, which usually intervene between
Great Personages after a long absence, the grand Consultation was, In what
manner to prevent the seditious irruptions of the Soldiery, and how to
reconcile the Jealousies between the Grand Signior and his Brothers. For the
former, two things were concluded necessary. First, to divide the Militia of
the Janisaries, which was immediately executed, and eight thousand of them,
under pretense of Incursions, were sent through Moldavia to remain on the
Frontiers of Poland. Secondly, it being observed, that most of the Soldiery
drank Wine, from whence in ancient times arose many Mutinies and Seditions of
the Soldiery, dangerous to the Ottoman State, as namely in the time of Mahomet
III. when the Janisaries in the heat of drunkenness entered the Seraglio by
force, and demanded the Heads of the chief Favorites: And as then it was
judged the best Expedient to cool the hot brains of the Janisaries, to proclaim
a Prohibition of Wine at Constantinople, and to command upon pain of death,
That those who had any Wine in their Houses should bring it forth, and stave
it; so now the use of it was universally forbidden in all the parts of the
Grand Signiors Dominions, and a Wine forbidden in all parts of the Grand
Signiors Dominions.
special Command was sent to all places respectively under the penalty of
death, and a thousand maledictions, cursing Wine as come from Hell, and as a
Liquor produced by the Devil to ensnare men's souls, and inebriate their heads,
and confound States. And so generally was this Prohibition enjoined, that his
Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople with long solicitation and charge
obtained license for his Family, and the Merchants there to make Wine; but for
the Merchants at Smyrna there was more difficulty, and this year Wine was not
made in their Houses according to custom, and not without scruple permitted to
be imported from the Greeks Islands and other parts where the Command extended
not its force; for the Prohibition was to all places where were Moschs or Turks
Inhabitants, the Villages or Isles where Christians only lived were not
included. To this Prohibition were added on every Friday Sermons to the People
inveighing against Wine, and cursing the Drinkers of it, in which affair Vanni
Efendi the Grand Signiors Preacher was much concerned, from whom the Original
of this Counsel was judged to proceed. And now to please the Reader, who
perhaps may be curious to know the style of this Prohibition, I have here
inserted the Command verbatint as translated out of the Original, and directed
to the Kadi of Smyrna.

TO the most persect of the Judges amongst Musulmin (or Believers) the most
worthy amongst those Powers which profess one God, the Mine The Command against
Wine.
of Virtue and Wisdom, the Exemplar of Justice to all People, the Inheritor of
the Sciences of the Prophets and Apostles, the Ornament of his Office and
(through the Grace of God assisting) our President in Smyrna, whose Virtues may
they ever be augmented. At Receipt of this my Royal Command know, That Wine and
Games at Dice, and figured Cards, and of Arrows without feathers, which are
Lotteries, are the filthiness of Diabolical work (according to the testimony of
the miraculous Revelation) are Fomenters of malice and wickedness, and are the
ferment of that Faction and Sedition which corrupt and seduce the Servants of
God, which being prohibited by Authority, and yet used, provokes the anger and
disdain of Almighty God against us: And whereas by this Mother of all
wickedness (that is, Wine) the Musulmin Kingdoms are desiled, there appears an
evident alteration of the Musulmin Law and Faith, and an inlet to actions of
foul impression. Praised be the high and most great God, that in the days of my
years abounding in Felicity, the observation of lawful Precepts has been
confirmed, and unlawful things have been prohibited; and now I know that this
is the sum of the most important Affair conducing to my Kingdoms and my own
Felicities, and in general the principal and greatest care, and the best and
most necessary Canon of my Empire: so that being desirous to satisfy the
Creator of the World, my Royal and immutable Will resolves to cleanse and
purify the Musulmin Kingdoms of this prohibited and silthy abomination;
wherefore when this Royal Command comes to your hands, wheresoever there are
Taverns of Wine, let them be rased and thrown down in all Cities and Towns
ennobled with Musulmin Moschs, let the buying and selling thereof be
prohibited, with all drinking and use of Wine; and likewise I command, That in
Constantinople, Brusa, and Adrianople the Imposition thereupon be wholly taken
off. And that in all other Cities and Towns adorned with Musulmin Moschs, there
be not a drop of Wine suffered or admitted in; and that Musulmins neither
privately nor secretly drink Wine; and whosoever is or shall be Author of this
sin, and to alter my Command in this particular, either now or hereafter, may
he be punished by the Universal Lord of all the World. Likewise when this my
Command of high Reputation appears, which is a Royal Writing, let it be annexed
to the Decretal Rolls, and be put in execution according as it is obligatory.
And when this Command comes to your hands, you are to have all due care of this
enjoined particular, That it operate according to the Tenor of this Royal
Injunction, participating of Prosperity and Majestic Power, by virtue of which
you are to reprove, reprehend, hinder, and prohibit, according to the Law of
God, the drinking of Wine; and that it may be wholly taken away, let the Tax
and Revenue which proceeds front thence be taken off, and in all guarded and
governed Cities and places of my Kingdoms, let the Taverns be ruined and
overthrown. And therefore you are to make known and publish to all Citizens and
Inhabitants the force of this my Royal Command, as well in the City of Smyrna,
as in other Cities and Towns ennobled with Musulmin Moschs, and you are to
ruin the Taverns which are found there. And you are to take away the Houses of
Entertainment amongst the Franks which are in Smyrna that sell Wine, nor shall
they sell Wine in their own houses, but you shall hinder and prohibit them: and
if those Taverns shall be the Possessions of private men, you shall advise the
Owners of them; or if they be bequeathed by Testament to the Deputies of the
Muteveli, you shall admonish them with carnestness' and threats, That in the
place of Taverns they raise other more profitable and lawful Buildings, and
that they re-edifie them in a different form from the first. And the Taverns
being ruined and demolished according to my Royal Command, and the Butts and
other Utensils thereof taken away, you shall make a public Arz thereos, and
send it to my Royal Stirrup; and you being admonished thereof by my Royal
Admonition, you are to have a care that neither in the City nor Suburbs
thereof, nor in Cities adorned with Royal Moschs any person whatsoever bring in
Wine, or one drop thereof, or that the buying or selling thereof be admitted,
and that no Musulman drink Wine. For if aster this I come to understand, That
any person have brought in Wine, though it be but one drop, I swear by the Holy
Souls of my Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers, that those who bring it in,
or sell it, or drink it, shall be punished with such tortures, as were never
inflicted on any before. In short, this being a business so important as to the
Faith, as to my Empire, my strong intention and firm resolution is to cleanse
and purify in the highest degree as well the Frontiers, as the Royal Seats of
my Empire from so foul a sink of so much silthiness and dissension; and
therefore do enjoin this Royal Writing of high felicity so far, that nothing
shall be able to change or alter it, or revoke this Command of Majestic
Reputation. And for the future, let him be who he will, that shall offer to
oppose, or alter, or change this my Command declared by these Presents, or have
intention or design to the contrary, may the curse of God be upon him. In
conformity hereunto know you, that are Judges, that this being my Will and
Pleasure, and ultimate

Dated in the Month Rabiul Evel, Hegeira 1081. in Adrianople.

And now one would imagine that this Command being a Hattesheriff signed with
the Grand Signior's own hand, would have been of durable and perpetual Force
and Authority. But experience has showed us the contrary, that in one Year
after, License being first given to Franks, to make Wine in their own houses,
and especially to all Christian Ministers; in one year more the indulgence
became universal, and Taverns were again admitted, and still continue as common
and free as in former times.

Anno Christi 1671. Hegeira 1082.
THE Ship which carried the Presents for the Turks, and designed to transport
the Ambassador, being cast away, new preparations were made, and the Gally
Brazzana, commanded by Alexandro Zeno, a noble Venetian, was dispatched with
them, being ordered to transport Signior Molino the Ambassador to the Port,
who was received with the usual honors due to his Quality and Character; all
which Ceremonies and Offices being past, several matters occurred which were
not so The Venetian Ambassador at the Port.
well expressed in the Capitulations, but that they needed an explication; and
new Orders and Models for redress of Affairs in Dalmatia: For the Morlacchs,
who in time of the War had submitted themselves to the obedience of the
Venetians, began now to infest the Country, and to enter into those places,
which in the first years of the War they had destroyed and abandoned; the Turks
on the other side opposed them, and the Country being open, many skirmishes
happened, and as many troubles ensued as in the time of the War. For adjusting
these differences Mahomet Pasha of Bosna was dispatched into those Countries
with Authority and Instructions; where on the other side he was met by Antonio
Barbaro, Proveditor General of Dalmatia and Albania, appointed by the Senate to
accord and settle the differences of the Confines; and the place designed for
meeting of the Commissioners was appointed to be between Climno and Clissa; but
such was the fury of the people, and the passion that both parties had to
recover their ancient possessions, that the Turks in the Month of November by
force of Arms made themselves Masters of Obronzo and Dernis, which were
surrendered without much opposition, by reason of the small numbers of the
Morlacchs, who neither having Garrison nor Fortifications were easily
surprised, under the pretense of peace. But it succeeded otherwise at Scardona,
where by the assistance of a Gally and some Brigantines, the Turks, who were
the Aggressours, were repulsed; and in like manner at Risano they were beaten
off, and put to flight with much confusion and slaughter, with the death also
of Usuff Bey, their chief Commander, and Author of all these troubles.

The Relation of these disturbances was carried to the Port by the Bosnacs, who
were concerned in these Affairs, with all circumstances of aggravation which
might incense the Grand Signior, and move the Vizier to take part in their
Quarrel; But he being desirous to maintain that Peace which he himself had
concluded, moved the Grand Signior to dispatch a Hasachee, or one of his Royal
Officers, to render him an exact account of the true state of the Affairs of
that Country. In which Commissioners appointed for determining the differences
of the Confines in Dalmatia.
Interim Mahomet Pasha of Bosna, the Commissioner, happening to dye, the Vizier
moved, That the Morlacchs should surrender up those places which they had
lately possessed, and that new Commissioners should be again sent for adjusting
the Limits of the Confines, and the Possessions of the Inhabitants. The Senate
of Venice accepting this proposition, gave Orders to their General Barbaro to
withdraw the people from the places in dispute, and in the Month of May 1671
made and constituted the Cavalier Nani Procurator of St Mark, their
Plenipotentiary, with full authority to compose all differences touching the
Frontiers. On part of the Turksone Mamut, once Pasha of Buda, and late Chimacam
of Constantinople, was nominated and empowered with like faculty; he was a
person with whom I was well acquainted, and of whom we have had occasion to
discourse, when he was Kahya to old Kuperlee. He was a Native of the Country of
Bosna, who are reputed for men of much more affable and courteous disposition,
and of more pleasing Conversation, than the common temper of the Turks, who are
for the most part of haughty, sullen, and saturnine Complexions.

These Commissioners, with Thomas Tarsia Interpreter, met about the end of
July, in the plains of Island between Zara and Sebenico under Tents erected for
that purpose: At this meeting were present also the Mufti, and Treasurer of
Bosna, and all the Kadi's and Military Officers of that Province, which might
make a Body of four or five thousand men, ill armed, and badly accoutred: With
Nani the Commissioner for Venice, were present, Alberto Magno Captain of Zara,
Farsetti Proveditor of Clissa; diverse military Officers, such as the Cavalier
Varisano, Grimaldi Sergeant General, Count Rados, the Count Scorto, Vimercato,
Cesarini, with diverse other Colonels, and Persons of Quality, and Nobles of the
Province, some of which were Representatives for their principal Cities, such
as Zara, Sebenico, Spalato, and Trau. His Excellency the Comissioner Nani had
three Troops of Horse, and as many Companies of Foot, for his Guard, and at
Possidaria were two Galleys and four Brigantines to attend him: so that his
Equipage appeared as well Martial, as agreeable to a place ordained for a
Treaty of Peace.

On the 27th of July the Commissioners had their first Conference in the
Pasha's Tent, the Debate continued many hours with much heat; which did not
only relate to the late Conquests, but new difficulties arose, in regard that
Ferat Aga, appointed Commissioner for the Port, had in the year 1573 assigned
Bounds and Limits to the Confines, according to his pleasure and arbitrary
will, which not being assented unto by the Venetians, a new regulation was made
by the said Ferat, together with Cavalier Soranzo in the year 1576. Time
afterward, and the turbulent spirits of the Inhabitants had altered these
Limits, and by reason of the long War the Landmarks and Bounds of the Confines
were removed or wholly destroyed. The original Copies of the Writings of
Agreement were rotted, and much defaced, the names of the places and the
scituations being wrote in diverse Languages, were confused, 'and the reports of
the people were so different, proceeding from the diversity of their Interests,
that little of judgment could be founded on their relations. At length, as to
the Consines of Zara, it was agreed, That they should be regulated according as
they were limited by Soranzo and Ferat; for better settlement of which, and to
avoid all doubtfulness or mistake, the Commissioners took the pains to travel
several days journey in person to erect the bounds and Limits of each people;
in which though many contests and differences arose between particular persons,
yet at length personal interests were forced to give way to public
determinations.

In like manner the Consines of Sebenico were determined, being bounded by the
River Checa, and being arrived at Scardona, the Pasha Mamut desired that he
might have the convenience of passing in the Gally, and accordingly he was
received aboard, and treated with that generous entertainment which is
agreeable to the magnificence of the Republic; and landing at the River of
Belulla on the Banks of the Valley Daniel, where the Pasha had placed his Tents,
the Turks who with a greedy eye swallowed in their thoughts the possession and
enjoyment of all these Plains, would have enlarged their Confines to those
marks which Ferat Aga had singly placed according to his own arbitrary
pleasure, including The difference about Verpogly.
also Verpogly within their Limits. This Verpogly was a small Redoubt on the
top of a Hill once belonging to the Venetians, which at the beginning of the
War they abandoned, as costing more to maintain and defend, than the value or
consideration of it; the Turks afterward possessed it, when they had a design
to besiege Sebenico, but afterward forsook it, and retired; upon this place
Mamut much insisted, producing a Command from the Grand Signior, ordering that
it be taken in, fortified, and garrisoned. But Nani with more force of Argument
insisted on the contrary, producing ancient Writings, and undeniable
Testimonies to prove that this place did really, and of right belong to the
Republic; by which though the Pasha was fully convinced in his own mind; yet
being overawed by the insolent importunities of the Inhabitants, he was
cautious and fearful of declaring his true sense in the case; but rather
endeavored to overcome the Venetians sometimes with flatteries, and anon with
menaces, having to that purpose, besides his own Forces, ordered the Beglerbey
of Greece to approach those Confines with an Army of about ten thousand men.
But all this did not move the steady Constancy of the Venetian Commissioner
from his reason and right; for maintenance of which he appeared firm and
resolute, and being necessitated for convenience of Water to remove his
Quarters to the Lake Rebenich, gave some jealousy to the Pasha by this
retirement of an intention to break the Peace; howsoever, Nani declared his
meaning to the contrary, and that there might be no interruption to their
proceedings, proposed that these differences might be remitted to the Supreme
Powers; and that in the mean time, until answers came, they might proceed in
the adjustment of other parts of the Confines. But the Pasha assented not
hereunto, but desired rather the dispute should be referred to the Port, and
that in the mean time he himself should retire to Cettina, and the other to
Spalato. Scarce were the Messages sent, and the Dispatches made (by Isaac Aga,
a Person whom I well knew) before Mamut Pasha, Mamut Pasha dies.
after a short indisposition ended his days: he was a man of about ninety two
years of age, at which years I have admired to see him ride abroad, and
transact his affairs with great dexterity, with a strong memory, and a sound
judgment. And here it is admirable to observe with what constancy and patience
the Turkish Officers do usually support their laborious employments; they
contemn all difficulties and incommodiousness of living, as if they did not
feel them, inuring themselves to colds and heats, to watchings and labors,
being abstemious in their diet, and as occasions require, not indulging to
sleep: and no question but this aged man traveling in the scalding heat of the
Sun, and suffering much for want of plenty, as well as of good water, dried up
that little radical moisture which remained, and caused this Autumn-fruit to
fall, which perhaps might have continued a short time longer on the tree, had
it not been desiccated by drought, and shaken too hard by the motion of travels
and labor.

The News of Mamut Pasha's death being arrived at the Port, a Commission was
immediately granted to Chusaein Pasha Imbrahor, or Master of the Horse to the
Grand Signior, to succeed in his government and business of Treaty concerning
the Limits of the Consines; with which Authority and Instructions Chusaein
posted away, and being well informed by Isaac Aga of the ill nature and
rapacious disposition of those Borderers, arrived with intentions to agree, and
with courteous and benign thoughts toward Cavalier Nani, who had gained an
esteem and repute amongst the Turks of a generous and noble disposition.

On the (...)th of October the Commissioners met in the Valley of St. Daniel,
showing a courteous and kind aspect each toward other. Wherefore A new (...)
of the (...)
laying aside all considerations concerning the Limits assigned by Ferat Aga,
and the Contests about Verpoglie, the Line drawn from the Mountain Tartarus was
agreed, and determined to be the true and undoubted Confines of Schenico. The
Valley of St. Daniel, for the pleasure and fruitfulness of it, administered more
of difficulty; but at length the Arguments of Nani prevailed, and induced the
Pasha to assent to those Bounds, which had been assigned by Soranco in the year
1576. giving, to avoid future mistakes, the true names to those places, which
the Turks for their advantage, and to confuse things, had altered and
disguised, that they might not be known. Thence proceeding to the Territory of
Trau, where was less of difficulty or trouble; for the Wars not having made
much alteration in that place, the Lines were evidently described by Soranco,
according to whose description the Fields, Plains, Rocks, and Mountains were
measured out and allowed.

Lastly, They came near to Spalato, where before the War there was little of
any Territory assigned; but now by the Conquest of Clissa there was assigned
unto it a spacious and fruitful Country, extending it self to the foot of the
Mountains. As to Clissa there was no difference at all: howsoever the Turks
would on no means admit, that the Venetians should keep Salona and Vragnizzo,
because by that means they would cut off all communication between Clissa and
Spalato, and thereby render it a place useless, and of more charge than
benefit; and because those two places of Salona and Vragnizza had been the
Dowry of a Sultana Wife of Russen Pasha, and by her given to endow a Mosch,
which therefore according to their Religion could not be given away, nor
alienated. But Nani insisting as vigorously on this, as on other points, showed
himself resolute to maintain this particular, as being that, which if not
granted, would certainly in a short time be occasion of those quarrels and
dissentions, which must necessarily break forth into an open War: for that
there could be no security of Peace to the Inhabitants of Salona, whilst they
lived amidst their Enemies, and just on the Skirts of Clissa, Spalato, and
Sasso. Chusaein having well comprehended this consideration, and being desirous
to dispose matters toward a durable Peace, slighted the opinion and sense of
the Borderers, and so concluded all matters, and in presence of Nani subscribed
the Agreement on the 24th of October in open Divan held in the Campaign of
Salona; the which was also mutually subscribed, and Copies interchangeably
given. And in this manner the difference about the Consines was concluded, and
the long War between Venice and the Turks had an end.

Whilst all things were reducing themselves into a posture of Peace, the
Timariots disbanded, and the Janisaries retired to their Chambers, in the month
of October returned the Turks Envoye from France, bringing with him an
Ambassador from that King called Monsieur De Nointel, a Person of an excellent
temper, grave and serious in his Treaties and comportment; and to give this
Embassy the greater reputation, he was attended with three Men of War and a
Fire-ship, which sailing along the Hellespont and Propontick without
opposition, came to an Anchor near the seven Towers, from whence sending advice
of their arrival to the Chimacam demanded to be resaluted by the Seraglio, they
promising as they passed to show the first demonstrations of courtesy; but
that being denied, as not usual or customary, the French Ships passed the
Seraglio silently without siring a Gun, or any significations on either side,
whether of Friendship or Hostility: the Ships came to an Anchor at Fonducle,
where the Ambassador remained aboard unsaluted and unacknowledged by the
public Ministers of the City; until the Great Vizier, who supposed that a
breach with France ought to have better foundation than a mere Punctilio of
Honor, seemed more to despise than take notice of the affront. For he who knew
so well to dissemble, after he had seen the French Troops ranged both in
Hungary and Candia, against the Ottoman Forces, and yet politickly connived
thereat, and accepted an excuse, did not esteem it prudence to ground a War for
want of the smoke of a few Guns; but on the contrary ordered, That the
Ambassador should be received with the usual Form and Solemnity of Reception.
The French having the advantage by this success, the Soldiers and Seamen
belonging to the Ships committed many insolences in Pera and Galata, which
never were revenged or accounted for; and when the Ships departed, above an
hundred Slaves escaped from the Galleys and parts of Constantinople, and gained
Sanctuary aboard: amongst the rest one Monsieur De Beau-jeu a Knight of Malta,
who had for a long time been Prisoner in the seven Towers; but at length
knocking off his Irons, and by help of a Cord letting himself down from one of
the highest Towers in the night, recovered the Ships, and regained his liberty.
Nor yet did this nor other affronts, whereby the French did really brave the
Turks, administer sufficient subject of choler to the Vizier; for passing all
by, as if nothing had been done, or nothing worthy his notice, frankly gave his
Orders to let the Ships pass the Castles, which upon the foregoing causes and
pretenses had been before detained: adding, That it was natural, as well for
men as for birds, to endeavor to procure their liberty, and therefore were not
blameable: but that those to whose care they were committed, wanting due
circumspection and vigilance in their Office, should pay for the escape of
their charge by the price of their own lives or liberties.

The French Ambassador in the mean time proceeded in his Journey to
Adrianople, where the Court resided; and having passed through the several
degrees and Punctilio's of Visits and other Ceremonies, at length descending to
matters of business, proposed the renovation of the Articles of Peace, with an
addition of thirty two Particulars to be altered or adjoined. The Vizier who
all this time kept more in his heart than he evidenced in his countenance,
refused to condescend to a concession of the most easy and reasonable of their
demands, offering only to renew the Capitulations verbatim according to the
Tenor of the ancient Canon, without other alteration than the Name of the
present Sultan, and the Date of the Month and Year, and herein he was so
constant and fixed, that no arguments or colors of reason could seem to move
him in the most minute and less important points of circumstances; and this
perhaps lest the World should imagine, that the Turks were affrighted into
Terms and better Treatments of Friendship, or that Immunities and Privileges in
the Ottoman Court were acquired rather by rude usage adjoined with menaces and
neglects, than by more candid and fawning Addresses.

In this manner the French Affairs rather went back than forwards in the
Ottoman Court, and it seemed that the Turks late Embassy into France and of the
French to the Port served to augment the differences more than allay them. For
the new Ambassador falling short in his expectation, having obtained nothing
of those many Particulars which he demanded, retired malcontent from
Adrianople to his usual Residence at Constantinople, where he resolved to
attend what farther Instructions should be given him from France; and supposing
his Master would ill resent his usage so contrary to what was promised in
general terms, did suppose, that his next Orders would be of revocation, and
that those frequent disgusts and disrespects so often received, and given on
one side and the other, would at length burst out into an open defiance. The
Turks apprehended so much themselves, and as their afsairs and designs proved
afterward with Poland, they were displeased that they had given the most
Christian King so just an occasion of quarrel: for understanding toward the
latter end of the Year 1671. that great Preparations for War were making in
France both by Sea and Land, they were conscious that their demerits had justly
deserved the chastisement of the French Arms, in revenge of the many injuries
they had offered that Nation, and therefore paused a while, and observed the
motion of these Enemies, before they would engage themselves in a War with
Poland. But at length the beginning of the Year 1672. having discovered the
designs of France to be only intended against Holland, the Turks reassumed
their purposes so long premeditated against Poland, with an arrogance natural
to Turks, and with a scorn not only of France, but of all Christendom. For his
most Christian Majesty judging perhaps, that the rude treatment of an Infidel
Prince so far remote, entrenched not so much on his Honor and Interest, as the
quarrel he had with the neighboring States, seemed to contemn for the present,
or rather to defer the revenge of former injuries until a more fit and
commodious season; wherefore in the mean time his Ambassador upon new
Instructions from France brought purposely by a Man of War, repaired a second
time to Adrianople, where he intimated unto the chief Ministers the great
desire his Master had to maintain that League and Friendship, which for above
an hundred years had continued inviolate and uninterrupted: and therefore
waving all other former Particulars of demand, declared himself satisfied, only
to renew the Capitulations, with that single alteration of their Customs from
five to three in the hundred, according to that Privilege which the English
and all other Christian Merchants enjoyed, whose League and Friendship was
subsequent to that of others. The Great Vizier being now freed of that
suspicion and fear he apprehended of the French Fleet, and being assured that
their Arms were not now probable to disturb him in his designs intended, he
seriously smiled in his sleeve at these Addresses, and with a kind of scorning
neglect bid the Ambassador welcome to the Court, saying, That he should have
what he desired. Wherefore the Capitulations were transcribed, and the
alteration made in the value of their Customs; but the Vizier who meant nothing
less than to yield them this Privilege, deferred the signing thereof from day
to day, pacifying the daily importunity of the Ambassador with dilatory
excuses, until at length having protracted the time to the very day that the
Grand Signior and he began their March toward Poland, without so much as
granting the Ambassador a personal Audience, did then with soft and gentle
words signify to the Interpreters the grand pressures of his Affairs at
present, that would not permit him time to perfect all matters with the
Ambassador, whom they should assure, that at his return with Glory and Victory
from the Enterprises in hand, those requests should be granted, and his
promises performed; and in the mean time his Nation should remain secure in
these Dominions, as in former times, and the League and Friendship continued
and maintained. The Ambassador was strangely surprised at this last Farewell;
but being a Gentleman of great Morality and Virtue, knew, no doubt, how to bear
such a disappointment with an equality of mind agreeable to the greatness of
his Soul; and therefore with a due resentment of the injury received, he
returned to Constantinople, whilst the Sultan and his Vizier proceeded in their
March toward the Confines of Poland.

But before I enter into a relation of the motives of that War, and the success
thereof, which is the subject of the following Year, let us return to the place
from whence we have digressed, and observe in this Year of Peace and repose of
this Empire, what the Sultan contrived for security of himself by the death of
his Brothers.

We acquainted you formerly in what manner the Sultan was disappointed in his
designs against his Brothers, by means of his Mother, to whom the Janisaries
had committed the care of their safety, which she according to her promise had
maintained, and tendered equally with her own. But now the Vizier being
returned from the Wars, and the most seditions amongst the Janisaries withdrawn
from Constantinople, it was thought sit to make a new attempt on the Princes
still residing in the old Seraglio, which was performed with those due
preparations and secrecy, that it took effect on Sultan Orchan, the eldest of
the two, who in the month of September 1671. dyed by a draught of poison, which
Sultan Orchan put to death by his Brother.
was administered to him as a Present from his courteous Brother; some say he
was strangled, and that before he submitted his neck to the Bowstring, he
killed one of the Executioners with his Hanjarre. This Prince was reported by
the people to be a comely Person, of a strong and robustious body, of large and
black eyes like Sultan Morat: his death was lamented by all, and presaged as
fatal to the Empire, in regard that that very night that he was murdered the
Moon suffered a greater Eclipse than it had done for many years before, which
happening out in this conjuncture was interpreted as ominous, and served to
increase the maledictions and evil speeches, which the Turks in all places cast
out upon those who gave this counsel to the Sultan.

About this time the State of Genoua desirous to change their Officers in
Turkey, sent a new Resident to Constantinople, and a Consul to Smyrna, A new
Resident sent from Genoua.
which change was principally obtained at the request of the old Ministers, who
weary of an employment so tedious, without a benefit corresponding to their
melancholy life, and perceiving their Trade decline before it was arrived to
any tolerable state or degree of reputation, by the assistance and mediation of
friends solicited their Letters of Revocation. For the Trade of Genoua being
chiefly founded on hopes of those advantages which they expected from a coarse
or base alloy of money, did instantly decay so soon as the Turks discovered
themselves to be abused by the vast quantities of Temins imported, as we have
before related: after which their profit failing, the Consulage consequently
decayed, which is the only subsistence and encouragement of such Officers as
are necessary to reside for the continuance of that Peace, which but a few
years before they unadvisedly made with the Turk. The new Resident had no
sooner arrived at Constantinople, and considered the poor and mean estate and
ill foundation of their Trade, the growing charge of the Residency, and the
great debts thereof that were to devolve upon him from his Predecessor; but he
perceived into what a Labyrinth of troubles he had ingulfed himself, instead of
being preferred according to his hopes into a place of Honor and happy
retirement. In which confusion of thoughts arising one morning before day from
his bed, and sitting on his Close-stool (as the servants of the house report)
reached at a Towel, which being entangled within the Lock of a Carbine that
hanged always charged near his bed, unfortunately drew the Trigger too hard,
which with that gave fire, and shot the poor Gentleman into the belly with a
brace of Bullets, of which being mortally wounded, after Confession and some
Prayers in a few hours he passed to another life: unhappy mischance, if it may
be called a chance; for I have understood from a sober person of that Nation,
that the anguish of mind which he conceived at the evil condition of his
Affairs, wrought in him a deepness of melancholy and despair, under which
languishing some days, did at last most miserably lay violent hands upon
himself.

And now it is time to recall to mind the Conspiracy of Count Serini, Marquess
Frangipani, and Count Nadasti, Persons of Quality and of great The Conspiracy
of Serini, Frangipani, and Nadasti.
Power in Croatia and Hungary, who (as we said before) had sent their
Messengers to the Great Vizier then remaining in the Leagure of Candia, with
overtures of submission to the Ottoman Power. It was strange News to the World
to hear that the House of Serini should abandon the Christian Party, and those
renowned Defenders of their Country should apostatize, though not from
Christianity, yet from that Cause and Liberty which their Ancestors and
themselves had defended with Blood, Treasure, Valor, and Constancy. But
dissentions and animosities sown by Satan, the Enemy of the Christian Church,
did strangely corrupt the minds of those famous Persons, and raise in them a
Spirit resolved to avenge the neglect and injuries put upon them by the
Ministers of the Imperial Court, though at the expense and hazard of their
fortunes and lives, and ruin and shipwreck of their Honor and Consciences:
For the neglects and affronts undeservedly cast on Nicholas Serini during the
late War (as before related) and the contempt and scorn put on the Croatian and
Hungarian Nobility, was supposed to have fired the hot and ambitious Spirits of
these Persons, who could more easily endure the slavery of the Turkish yoke,
than condescend to the Government and prevalency of a contrary Party. Wherefore
in prosecution of their design, being resolved to submit to the Turk, they
dispatched two Gentlemen to the Ottoman Court, who arrived at Adrianople the
11th of February 167; demanding the protection of the Sultan, for which they
promised a Tribute of thirty Purses, or fifteen thousand Dollars every year for
those Lands they held in Croatia. To make Answer hereunto a Divan or Council
was called, in which were weighed all the Arguments and Reasons on one side and
the other. The Muftee opposed their receiving into protection, as being against
the Capitulations and Agreement so lately concluded with the Emperor, wherein
the receiving or abetting of Rebels is expressly forbidden, and provided against
by one side and the other; but Vanni Esendi the Preacher who used to be always
of a different opinion to the Muftee, urged to have them received, because that
the advancement of the Mohammedan Cause, and enlargement of their Empire was
more sacred than the conservation of their League with an Insidel Prince. And
that the Ottoman Court was no longer to be termed the Refuge of the World, if
it could not yield that protection which oppressed Kingdoms and distressed
Princes petitioned to obtain. In this manner the matter being controverted
without Agreement, it was in fine resolved to refer the matter to the
determination of the Grand Vizier, who was now in a few months expected to
return triumphant from Candia. But in that interim Intelligence coming by way
of Bosna, that the Emperor had already entered Croatia with thirty thousand
men, that he had taken Chiacheturno in Cotoriba, and that Serini and his
Associates were already fled, either to Vienna to beg pardon of the Emperor,
or Transylvania, or to some other place, that the Marquess of Bada had
sortified Sequas and other Castles of Serini with German Garrisons; the Turks
esteemed it too late to administer help to this desperate cause, and therefore
refused to own the Patronage of a People, to whom they could neither pretend
by Reason, nor defend by Arms. The Vizier also being returned, like the Fox,
contemned those Grapes which he could not reach, and with an abhorrency as it
were of the Revolt or the Rebellion, as a zealous Hater of all perfidiousness,
refused to afford protection to any of the Accomplices in the late Confederacy,
which he politickly designed in reference to the Emperor, whose friendship he
would seem to conserve most faithfully, left he should interrupt him in the
carrying on of that War, which he then meditated against Poland. But what
became afterward of these Conspirators Poland, which now was the next prize
held up to the Turkish Militia, and was that adventure which was to consummate
the glories of the Great Vizier. Howsoever, this gave beginning to that
Rebellion in Hungary, which to this Year 1679 has been continued, without
prospect how far it may proceed, and what may be the issue of such direful
Effects.

Anno 1672. Hegeira 1083.
WE have formerly acquainted you how coarsely the Chimacam of Adrianople had in
the year 1667 treated the Ambassador of Poland, who came to complain of the
incursions made into their Country by the Tartars; desiring that not only
satisfaction might be made for the late spoils, but that that unruly and savage
people might be restrained from the like Attempt for the future. But the Vizier
being now returned in person it was thought necessary, That to preserve this
gross Body of Empire from corruption, it should be exercised with motion, and
the vigorous agitations of a new War. To what place they should The Turks
deliberate of a War.
now convert or employ their Arms, was the important subject of a grand
Consultation; they had lately made up a peace with the Venetians, so that on
that side it was too early to make an irruption, the parts of Persia were too
remote and distant to carry on a War with success and pleasure; the sields of
Hungary had been lately traced, and they were satiated with the blood of
Austria and Germany; something now of novelty must be proposed, and the
forgotten ways of Poland must be again opened, there being something, it seems,
of wantonness in prosperous Arms, which delight in variety, and abhor as much
to fight often in the same Country, as Travelers do to see the same place
twice. The Polanders had unto this day so preserved the Limits of their Country
with honor and gallantry, that the Turks could never secure to themselves one
palm of Land within their Territories, until the civil and most detestable
Discords of that Country laid them open to the fury of their Enemies, who
embraced this most grateful opportunity, which facilitated their Design, and
made that easy which they had so long desired, and with care studied and
contrived. But for the better understanding of these Affairs it is convenient
for us to take the Thread of History at some distance off, that so we may with
better light comprehend the Causes, Original, and Occasions of this War.

The hatred and jealousies which the Ottoman Port has always nourished and
conserved against the Kingdom and Dominions of Poland, are ancient and
inveterate, having their rise from the valiant opposition and successful
repulses it always made against the various attempts of the Turks; whereby the
Poles were animated to treat always at equals with The Causes of the War with
Poland.
them, and with terms agreeable to that vain glory and swelling pride, which
are natural to their Nation. But that which renewed the memory of past actions,
and raised an expectation in the Turks to avenge the injuries by subjugating
the Cosacks, was one Bogdan Chimilniczki General of the Cosacks, who growing
powerful in that Country, with the strength of a numerous Army, abhorring the
Pride of the Polish Nobility, denied obedience to their Kingdom, resolving to
make himself the absolute Prince of that Province, from whence various fortunes
of War succeeding, he was at length forced to join himself to the Tartars, and
crave the protection of the Turkish Arms. In the mean time, Poland, invaded by
the Swedes, Moscovites, and Transilvanians, was dismembered of Livonia, and a
great part of Lituania and Verania, the first possessed by the Swedes, and the
latter by the Czar of Moscovy, and the Rebel Cosacks; which confusions rejoiced
the Turks, and gave them the first hopes, not only to free themselves from the
frequent Piracies the Cosacks committed on them in the Black Sea, but to impose
upon them the Ottoman Yoke; to which end they maintained a secret
correspondence with the Generals of that people, promising them the assistance
of Men, Money, and Arms, but yet with that caution, that they would not seem
unprovoked to quarrel with the Poles, or without just cause to violate the
peace of Choccin, to which they pretended a most religious and reverend regard.

Wherefore, that they might not appear causeless Actors against that solemn
League, they secretly encouraged those Incursions, which in the Years 1666 and
1667 we have already mentioned to have been made by the Tartars into Poland, as
far as the Walls of Leopolis; which action, that the Tartars might not have
occasion to abett and maintain, the Poles resolved to send a most splendid
Embassy to the Turks, desiring that the Tartar Han might be deposed, for having
unjustly violated the sacred peace of Choccin. For that as the Poles were
obliged to restrain the Piracies and Depredations of the Cosacks in the Black
Sea, so the Turks were become security against the incursions of the Tartars.
Scarce had the Ambassador Radiowski delivered this message, before he
unhappily died at Adrianople (as we have before signified;) to whose Complaint
and Demand, after many delays, no other answer was given, than that the Poles
should sirst break their League which they had contracted with Moscovy for
thirteen years, without the consent, and against the pleasure of the Port, and
then after that they might expect and promise themselves all due satisfaction.

In this manner Affairs stood when King Casimir, weary of the Factions and
Discords of the Nobility, resigned up his Crown to retire unto a private life.
And now it being necessary to proceed to a new Election we may consequently
expect various Commotions and Disturbances in this State, sufficient to attract
the eyes of the Turks, and encourage the Cosacks in their intended Revolt. At
length Prince Michael Korebut Wisnowieski being elected King, it seemed
agreeable to reason, that all Verania should have returned to obedience of him,
to whom the best part of that Country did by right of patrimony, and natural
inheritance belong; but the success thereof fell out contrary to all
expectation, for Dorosensko, then General, designing to usurp that Government,
proposed the project of uniting Verania to the Body of Poland, as a member of
the Crown, by which means that Province would not only become free from its
Vassalage to the Nobility, but obtain equal suffrages in the Diet, with all the
other more free and privileged Countries; and in this manner he might not only
compel Poland to condescend to his designs, but confirm himself in the absolute
and supreme Authority of the Cosacks: This proposition therefore seemed so
insolent, and savouring of Rebellion to the Polish Court, that a severe and
menacing Message was dispatched to Dorosensko, threatening to take from him his
Bulaua, or Truncheon of General, if ever he entertained any such imagination so
highly derogatory to the Majesty of the Polish State; he therefore thought it
his time to cast himself wholly into the protection of the Sultan, and
accordingly dispatched Ambassadors to the Port to signify their submission,
begging to be received into the Arms of the Ottoman Power; and as an assurance
thereof, that he might receive the (Tough) which is the Ensign of Authority,
carried by Pashaws. The Vizier at the first motion hereof, reflecting on the
evil consequences, in case the Grand Signior's honor should be foiled in this
action, suspended a while a complete answer thereunto; but at length being
instantly solicited, and perceiving the Disorders and Factions of Poland to
increase, the Cosacks were received for Subjects of the Empire, and obliged to
wage War against all Enemies to the Ottoman Power.

Duke Michael being elected King, the first Act he performed was to send an
Ambassador extraordinary to the Grand Signior, with no other Design than to
acquaint him of his Election to the Crown, only in case an opportunity
presented, then to move for a ratification of the Articles concluded at
Choccin. This Ambassador, called Wisozki, being of a haughty and proud spirit,
became the Author of all the mischief which ensued; for being of a temper
which could not equally bear the honor of his important Office, lanched out
into matters beyond his Commission, and instead of imparting his Message, would
become sole Arbitrator of all the differences between those two powerful
Princes; for he being unacquainted with the Power or Affairs of the Turks,
supposed nothing in this World comparable to the number, richess, and valor of
his own Nation, and therefore gave himself that liberty of arrogant Language,
that by way of Command and Menaces he rather seemed to act the part of a
Governor or Umpire in the differences of State, than of an Orator or
Suppliant for peace. In his conceit the Turks wanted both courage and power to
invade Poland, and therefore supposed he might safely brave them into a
ratification of former Articles, especially when he mentioned a hundred
thousand Horse, which he undertook before the Vizier to be able on his own
account to conduct as far as the Walls of Adrianople. It was a strange humor
of Rodomontado that inspired these two last Ambassadors, and if from them we
may take a pattern of the disposition of the rest of the Polish Nobility, it
will be no wonder to hear and read the Distractions that are amongst them, that
they carry themselves with disrespect to their Prince, are emulous and factious
amongst themselves, and that their pride and ignorance, which have flattered
their humor, and triumphed amidst their Tenants and Vassals, should betray
them to all those evils which we may fear may be the consequences thereof.

The Great Vizier, considering the confidence which this person used in his
Discourse, imagined that the differences in his Country might be composed, and
therefore in compliance with his desire, offered in general terms to confirm
the peace made at Choccin, without Addition of any new Article in reference to
the Cosacks, being a business of that nature which admitted of no present
determination; this, he said, was his ultimate resolution, which if the
Ambassador approved not, he might then advise it home, and expect a farther
result of their Counsels. Wisozki being really possessed in his fancy of the
Turks weakness, gave way to his passion, and with little judgment replied, That
he approved not of the Proposition, nor needed he to transmit any such advice
into Poland, he himself being a Plenipotentiary of as full a Power as the King
and Council; for being a Nobleman, he was by consequence that necessary Member
of the Republic, that nothing could pass without his Suffrage.

The Vizier amazed at this extravagant way of discourse, the which he supported
with moderation and contempt, dispatched away a Chiaus into Poland with
Letters, desiring that this Ambassador should be recalled, as being a Person
unable to manage matters of the least concernment; and if they supplied his
place with another, he should be received with due respect, and a plain way
laid open to conclude his Negotiations to the satisfaction of both Parties.

Wisozki abounding in his own sense and humor, represented matters in a far
different manner into Poland, alleging, That the Law of Nations was impeached
by the violence offered to his Person, being imprisoned, and the usual Tain or
Allowance of Ambassadors withheld from him; both which were not absolutely
true: for the maintenance he refused as too mean for his Quality and Office;
and for his Imprisonment, it was no other than a Confinement to the City of
Constantinople, with a prohibition only from passing over unto Pera, where
formerly in a house he had taken, he committed a thousand irregularities and
disorders, which caused the Vizier to recall him again over to Constantinople,
denying him the liberty of passing more to the other side. These were the
injuries which he complained of into Poland, still fancying, That if the
Nobility were assembled to consider of these matters, the Turk would be so
afsrighted at it as to condescend unto any terms he should propound. These
reports of Wisozki took that impression with the Court, that esteeming all
authentic which he said or wrote, without farther examination issued out
Orders for a general Insurrection, and that all people should prepare for the
War, rendering the Vizier no other answer, than that when their Ambassador was
set at liberty, and had license to depart, the like should be permitted unto
theirs, and in the mean time the Chiaus was committed to safe custody. The
Grand Signior highly angered at this obstinate misunderstanding, immediately
ordered that Wisozki should depart, and at the same time commanded his whole
Militia to rise and follow him to the War; and so much the rather was he
animated by the reports sent him from Dorosenzko, seconded by the Vayvods of
Moldavia and Valachia, whose Letters declared the miserable confusions in
Poland, divided into diverse Factions and Parties, their want of money, and the
mutiny of the Soldiery inclined rather to betray than defend Verania. And now
a Sword and other Presents usual in these cases, being sent to the Tartar Han,
he was ordered to unite with the Cossacks, and to invade Poland, where being
encountered near Batowa, by a Body of Horse under the Command of Luzecki
Governor of Podolia, the Poles were defeated, and was the first bad Omen of
the ill success of this unhappy War.

To second these beginnings, the Grand Signior having raised an Army of an
hundred and fifty thousand men, marched toward Poland already sick and
languishing with its own intestine distempers, and unable to contend with a
Body united within it self, wanting neither internal vigor, nor nourishment to
maintain its strength; the first Enterprise was the impregnable Fortress of
Caminiecz, which had often in former times baffled the Ottoman Arms; but now
being ill provided, destitute of Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, and but weakly
manned, and what was worst, despairing of any Relief, after eleven days Siege
surrendered it self to the pleasure of the Conqueror. Hence the Turks had an
open passage through all Podolia and Volhinia to the very Walls of Leopolis,
which they passed over like Travelers rather than Enemies, there not appearing
one person in Arms to oppose them, delighting and sporting themselves in these
most fruitful and delicious Countries of Europe: thus had private animosities
and civil rancour possessed the minds of the Poles one against the other, that
they had rather yield themselves to the servitude of an Enemy, than condescend
to the humor or counsel of a Citizen. Thus had the Turks passed all this Summer
in the Plains and Cities of Poland, where it seemed rather Peace than War, all
places submitting without difficulty unto the Grand Signior as to their true
and natural Lord and Sovereign, by which means the Inhabitants redeemed their
Lives and Estates; for the Sultan willing to demonstrate his clemency, and to
spare those who voluntarily yielded, and encourage others to submit to so
gentle a yoke, forbad all the common outrages of Soldiers, not permitting
Plunder or Booty to be brought into the Camp; nor greater Spoils to be
committed, than if his Army had passed through his own Dominions; whether this
obliging or winning manner of proceedings overcame the stout hearts of the
Polanders more than blows, will be experienced in the sequel of this story; it
is certain the Militia returned home poor and weary, and more broken by this
years Expedition than by the long and tedious March to Persia, and hazardous
Battles during the Siege of Babylon; but the Sultan was desirous to return
home, and give this first proof and testimony to the World of his warlike and
invincible Spirit, of his clemency and of his success in Arms, that at his
first appearing in the Field, all Armies and Fortresses submitted to his Power.
The Poles on the other side being of an opinion and temper far different to
that of their Ambassador Wisozki, resolved to purchase the departure of their
new Guests on any terms; so that these following Articles were agreed and
concluded.

That the King of Poland should quit all Claim to Ukrain, Podolia, and Rusland.

That for Leopolis and the Country thereabouts should be paid a Tribute of
seventy thousand Dollars a year; all other Capitulations formerly made were to
stand in force and virtue.

These Articles being signed, the Grand Signior committed the Government of
Verania and Podolia to Dorosenzko, and the defense of Caminiecz to Chusaein
Pasha with a Garrison of twelve thousand Janisaries; so that now being returned
home, the Militia was permitted to repair to their several Countries and
Dwellings, the following year being dedicated to the repose and ease of the
Soldiery.

Toward the end of this Year, when the Ships of Barbary returned home, those
of Tripoli conceived a certain discontent against their Pasha named Osman for
his covetous behavior toward his Soldiers; for having that Summer taken very
rich Prizes from the Venetians and other Nations, the Soldiers expected at
their return home to receive a division of their Spoils according to their just
and equal shares. But the Pasha grown old and covetous, getting the whole into
his hands, appropriated the greatest part to his own Coffers, distributing to
the Soldiers an inconsiderable proportion of what they had gained the year
before. Hereupon the chiefest Commanders amongst them becoming greatly enraged
began to incense the Soldiery, which for interest or want of Pay, being always
ready to mutiny, took fire immediately, and easily were blown into a Rebellion;
so that first making Parties, and retiring into secret Junto's and Councils,
they resolved to destroy the Pasha, and alter the Government, and thereby make
themselves Masters of all the Treasure and Richess which Osman Pasha had in the
space of thirty years amassed together. The Pasha having notice of all that
passed, and apprehending the Conspiracies of this unbridled People to be
dangerous, began to provide for his safety, and getting together so many as he
supposed of his Party, and that were, or might be faithful to him, which joined
with his Slaves and Servants, made up a small Garrison, wherewith to defend and
preserve himself within his Castle, which being well provided of Ammunition and
Victuals, he shut his Gates, denying access or admittance unto all persons upon
any pretense and account whatsoever. Hereupon the Mutiny appearing, the
Soldiery drew into a Body in the open field, against whom several shot were
made from the Castle; so that now the Civil War was begun, and the whole Force
of Tripoli raised against the Pasha and his Castle, which being straightly
besieged, the Defendants who were for the most part Servants and Slaves,
failing in their courage, resolved to make Conditions for themselves to the
best advantage; wherefore conspiring against their Master, entered his Chamber
and strangled him in the night; and the next morning opening the Castle-gates,
received the Enemy within the Walls, making manifest the death of their Master
and their own Treachery. Osman Pasha being dead, every one acted for a time
what the wildness of an unruly multitude could suggest, till such time as the
Heads of the Rebellion could frame themselves into some form of Government,
which for the present was resolved to be by a Dei, as most convenient for
commanding of the Soldiery, intending for the future to take the Algier
Government by a Divan for their Pattern and Model of Rule, under which the
people of that place had found and experienced the sweetness of liberty,
richess, and success. These matters being agreed upon, some of their Men of War
were sent to give advice unto the Grand Signior of the revolutions of their
City, supplicating him to pardon the violence used against their Pasha Osman,
whose Covetousness and Tyranny forced them for self-preservation to precipitate
that Authority, which they knew on their complaints, his Majesty would have
granted them; and that he would be pleased to receive them into his protection
and favor, as his faithful and humble Subjects and Slaves, and as an evidence
thereof would grant them a Pasha confirmed by his Royal Signature. The Sultan,
though at first showed himself much displeased with this manner of proceeding
against Osman Pasha; yet seeing that there was no remedy, suffered himself to
be mollified by their Presents and submission, granting them a Pasha for their
Governor, whose power proved as unsignificant as his does, who bears that
Title at Algier. Matters being thus reduced to some tolerable condition amongst
them, they concluded, That Osman Pasha reserved to himself and his Confidents;
and finding at present that they were able to set out six Sail from forty to
fifty Guns, and four more from twelve to thirty, intending to accomplish in all
the full number of fifteen Sail; those who traded in the Levant Seas began to
apprehend, that this faithless and heady people would at a time, when they
found their advantage and the temptation of a rich Prize, break their Peace
with his Majesty our King, the which Osman Pasha had notwithstanding conserved
for several years without violation, moved perhaps thereunto out of an
apprehension, that in such troubles which a War with England might bring upon
them, he might lose or impair his richess, and bring the like confusion on his
people, as he had lately heard of in Algier on the like occasion: but how and
in what manner these matters succeeded, and how at length this people broke
their Peace and Faith, we reserve to be recounted at the end of the Year 1674.

Toward the end' of the month of August it pleased God to take out of this
life unto a better Sir Daniel Harvey his Majesty's Ambassador at
Constantinople: a man whose person being comely, was extremely grateful to the
Turks; and for the experience he had at the Ottoman Court, was equal in the
happy management of Affairs to any of his Predecessors.

Anno 1673. Hegeira 1084.
BUT it seems the Turks had made too much haste in their return to digest a
Conquest of so large Extent; so that they were scarce well warmed by their
Winter-fires, before they were alarmed again with Jealousies of Poland, and the
Seditions amongst the Cossacks, whom Dorosenzko wrote he could not keep in
subjection, unless he had some Succors sent him from the Port. The rumors
likewise that the Muscovite armed, and was resolved to assist the Poles in
recovery of their lost Country, increased the apprehensions of the Turks, who
too late perceived the error they had committed in so soon disbanding their
Army, which before some were scarce got home, they were forced to recall. But
now the year was well begun, and no grand preparations made; so that it was
impossible to collect an Army in so short a time considerable enough to be
honored with the Conduct of the Sultan; wherefore it was resolved, that all
things this year should be disposed in a readiness against the next. But the
Grand Signior had a project of his own to depart speedily with his Court, and
to pass the heats of the Summer in the Mountains of Zegna about five or six
days Journey on his way toward Poland, which being reported to be a place well
planted with Trees, watered with cool and fresh Springs, and abounding with all
sorts of Game, made him impatient to take up his Summer-quarters in a Country
so agreeable to his humor; and that he might cover the design of pleasure with
that of profit and policy, he pretended that the report of his proceeding so
far would both hasten the Army, and give a terror to the Enemy. But the Great
Vizier and his Council who weighed all things better, were of another opinion,
judging it neither honorable for the Court to be retired into Woods and
Mountains, nor the advantage of such a surmise able to countervail the expenses
and inconveniences of that Journey; and therefore it was concluded to stand
unto the first resolution, That the Grand Signior with the main Body of his
Army should not move until the following year, but that in this interim all
preparations should be made for Provisions and Ammunition, in order unto which
three thousand Janisaries were already sent away to Keminiecz under the Command
of the Sampsongibashee, and six thousand more under the Zagargibashee were to
be landed on that Isthmus, which joins the Crim Tartar unto the Main, from
whence they had a short March to the assistance of Dorosenzko. Chasaein Pasha
lately come from Damascus, was nominated for General to be sent into Silistria,
and there to command in Chief over the Militia of Dobriza, Bosna, and Runtelia
in case of any alteration and disturbance in Poland: this Person was always
accounted a stout and valiant Soldier, though seldom fortunate, and was the
same that lost the Battle before Lewa in the last German Wars, as we have
before intimated: he was about this time grown infirm by a hepatical Dysentery,
which reduced him to a weak condition of body, with little hopes of recovery.

In the mean time arrived at Adrianople an Ambassador from the great Czar of
Muscovy, bringing Letters dated in April of the preceding The unseasonable
Address of the (...) Ambassador.
year, which was before the time that the Turks had entered Poland, the contents
of which were, That the Grand Signior would do well to desist from his design
against that Country; for that if he did proceed and invade those Dominions, he
should find himself obliged to make War upon him, and with his mighty and
puissant Power to drive him back to his own Jurisdiction. This Message appeared
very unseasonable, and caused much laughter at first; for that the Turk had
since the Date of that Letter invaded Poland, and possessed himself of vast
Countries, and yet neither encountered any opposition from the Muscovite, nor so
much as heard any rumor of his Motion. Wherefore the Turks with scorn forbad
the Ambassador any farther Addresses, and commanded him to be gone speedily,
saying, That his Master had neither courage nor force to maintain his word of
War, nor wisdom to manage a Treaty of Peace.

The Reports now from the parts of Poland spoke matters to be in a quiet
posture, and not likely to concern the Turks much for this year; wherefore the
Grand Signior began again to renew his purposes of pastime and pleasure in the
Mountains of Zegna; but because no true or perfect account could be given of
the delights, refreshments, and situation of that place, the Olack Celebi or
chief Postmaster was sent to survey the Country, and to return with a relation
of all matters: but in the interim the design was altered; for the Grand
Signior having begun a Fabric in which he had expended about eighty thousand
Dollars, at a small Village about nine or ten miles from Adrianople; the place
and novelty of the Building so well pleased him, that he sound in himself an
inclination to pass the whole Summer there; and becoming likewise enamoured of
a young Lady in his Seraglio, notwithstanding his former tenderness to his
Queen, and late aversion to all other Women, he judged it was possible to
divertise his time well in those parts, and more to his contentment, than in
wild woods and uninhabited mountains. Whereupon the intentions of Zegna were
laid aside, and nothing thought of but the rest and quietness of the Court for
this year.

But because it was reported, That the Czar of Muscovy made great Preparations
for War, it was judged necessary to command the Crim Tartar to be watchful of
his motion by Land, though the natural slothfulness of that people gave them no
apprehension of their Arms for this year: howsoever it being probable, that
they might prove more active and forward in the Black Sea, than they were
capable to do by Land, by sending forth their small Boats down the Volga to
take and pillage the Saiks and Vessels belonging to Constantinople and other
parts; the Captain-Pasha was ordered to pass into that Sea with thirty five or
forty Sail of Galleys for defense of the Coast, and for fortifying and
repairing Asac, and the Fortresses thereabouts: but whilst these Preparations
were making for the Euxine or Black Sea, the other Seas were neglected and
undefended; for the Alexandrian Fleet consisting in all of eight Sail, were The
Alexandrian Fleet taken by the Malteses.
encountered not far from Rhodes by some Maltese and Ligornese Corsaires: the
Ships of the Turks were most of them very great and potent Ships, one of them
was at least fifteen hundred Tuns, and was capable to carry an hundred Guns,
the others, of eight hundred or a thousand Tuns, able to have resisted and
overcome, had they been well armed, double the force that assaulted them; but
being now engaged with an Enemy, though not so strong, yet better experienced
in marine Affairs than themselves, they fought with them stoutly the first day;
but the next day six Galleys coming to the Christians assistance, (which had
been harbored in some Port not far distant, and led thither by the noise of
the Cannon, to which also a calm giving the greater advantage) the Turks began
to faint in their courage, so that four Gallions and two Saiks yielded to
mercy, which was a Prize of so great value, that it was supposed never to have
been equalled since the time of Sultan Ibrahim, when the loss of the grand
Sultana and other Ships gave the first occasion of War with Venice. This great
Ship which was reported by those who saw her to be both longer and broader than
the Sovereign, carried only sixty Guns, and was manned accordingly only with
about an hundred Seamen, and about two hundred more which were Land-men, wholly
unacquainted with the Sea or with Naval Fights: the biggest Ship amongst the
rest was belonging to the Queen Mother, and the others to the Grand Signior,
being freighted principally with Sugar, Coffee, Rice, and other Provisions for
the proper maintenance of their Courts, which we may suppose will highly
inflame these grand Personages with anger and disdain, when they reflect on
their own proper losses which touch them so nearly as their peculiar Goods and
the Furniture of their Kitchins.

The Turkish Court now angered with this loss, was more moved in the midst of
May, when a Messenger from Poland arrived with Letters from the Grand
Chancellor, declaring with modest terms, That their Kingdom was unable or
unwilling for many respects to pay the promised The Poles refuse to pay their
promised Tribute.
Tribute; so that if they did not judge sit to wave or lay aside those
pretensions, they should be forced to take up Arms in defense of their Honor,
Safety, and Privilege of their Dominions. The Turks surprised with this
unexpected Message, too late perceived the error of the last years
proceedings, which were carried on with a clemency and confidence not agreeable
to the disposition and humor of such an Enemy, as is unacquainted with
servitude, and so far from being able to fupport a Foreign Yoke, that they
cannot endure subjection to their own Civil Government, every Nobleman (of
which there are many in Poland) being ambitious to be a Prince, judges himself
better than his elected King. Hence proceeded all those dissentions which laid
them open to the late invasion of their powerful Enemy, the apprehension of
whom having obducted for a while those sores of Faction which festered amongst
them, and that principle of self-conservation, which by a forcible nature
inclined them to Union, at length armed them with a resolution to avenge the
Liberties of their Country, and assured them of the Truth of that Saying, That
a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

The Turks now wished that they had either made a true use of their Victory,
and the opportune Conjuncture of the last years Affairs to have settled and
secured their Conquests, or that they had never begun the War; for now finding
themselves engaged in it, they were in honor obliged to proceed, and lose the
fair opportunity which presented to make their advantage in Hungary; to which
place they had been, and were still The Rebels in Hungary renew their Petition
to the Turks for assistance.
invited by the Rebels of that Country, who to revenge the Cause of Serini,
Nadasti, and some other Discontents and Aggrievances of which they complained,
and to defend the Protestant Religion; in which by the zeal of some Churchmen,
they were disturbed, resolved to abandon their Allegiance to their natural
Prince, and rather seek a protection for their Estates, and allowance for their
Religion under the Turk, than remain beholding for either to a prevailing party
at the Imperial Court. The chief Authors of this Rebellion were Petrozy,
Sepesi, Tend, Gabor, Sutrey, and other principal persons amongst the
Hungarians, who having on their own strength opposed themselves against the
Emperor the last year were defeated in diverse engagements, and at length
reduced to a very low and miserable condition. Wherefore they renew again their
Petitions and Presents to the Sultan, sent by their Agents about the beginning
of this Month of April, begging his assistance and protection, representing the
easiness of the Conquest, and how large a Gate they were able to open to his
Armies, and make a plain way for him into the most fertile and opulent
Countries of the World, of which he seemed already half possessed by reason of
those Discontents and Factions that were amongst them.

The Turks though well satissied of the reasonableness of the design, yet being
engaged in honor against Poland, knew not how to retract, and therefore
dispatched away the Messengers for the present with fair hopes and secret
promises, well treated in private, though they received rather a Denial than
Encouragement in public. For the expedition against Poland was that which
employed solely the wisest heads of the Empire, who as it were in fury issued
out immediate Orders, That all those who eat the Grand Signior's Bread, should
without farther delay The rage of the Turks against Poland.
prepare themselves for the Wars against Poland; and that Provisions and
Ammunition should be supplied in all places according to the usual proportions;
The Tugh, or Horse-Tail, (the Signal for departure) was set forth, the Tents
ordered to be carried into the Field, and such haste made in all parts, as if
the raising of an Army were the business but of one day; resolving immediately
to proceed against their Enemies, to whom the Sultan returned a most dreadful
and menacing Letter, full of expressions agreeable to the Turkish Style, which
threatened Confusion Sword, Famine, Fire, Destruction, and a thousand other more
direful Judgments: but the Collection of this great Army, and the appendages
belonging thereunto, were not so suddenly provided as to admit of such a
dispatch as the Sultan's fury pretended; wherefore in cooler blood it was
concluded, That for this Summer they should not pass much beyond the other side
of the Danube, that the Winter Quarters should be designed in Silistria, from
whence they might more effectually threaten and affright their Enemies with
their near approach.

About this time the French found an opportune season to accommodate all their
Affairs with the Port, and to put a period to the several Articles and
particulars they had for many years demanded. For now the French King not only
appeared very formidable by reason of his success against Holland, but likewise
instrumental to promote the designs of the Port, whilst he kept the
Brandenburghers employed, and diverted the whole Armies of the Empire; and now
also that they might engage him not to contribute assistance to the Poles, they
judged it reasonable policy to evidence to that Ambassador more external
demonstrations of kindness, and strain their courtesy beyond the terms which
they could cordially, and in reality afford them. Wherefore, at length the
Capitulations were renewed, and some Articles and Privileges superadded, which
are these that follow.

First, That all religious Persons and Bishops of the French Church shall
remain and continue quiet and unmolested in their respective habitations and
dwellings, with liberty to perform all their Ecclesiastical Rites and
Ceremonies.

Secondly, That the religious of Jerusalem and of Bethlem shall conserve those
religious places which they have anciently possessed, and there may continue to
celebrate their Worship of God, and all their Devotions, without any
disturbance.

Thirdly, That if these Religious of Jerusalem or Bethlem have any difference
or dispute with the Officers thereof, it shall be remitted to the decision of
the Port.

Fourthly, All Frenchmen, and all under their Banner, shall safely at all times
go to Jerusalem, and return without molestation.

Fifthly, The two Churches in Galata belonging to the Jesuits and Capuchins,
and anciently possessed by them, are now again confirmed by these Presents; one
of which belonging to the Capuchins having been burnt, free liberty is given
for the rebuilding thereof, and to remain as formerly in the hands of the
French; and in the Hospital in Galata, if they will read the Gospel after their
fashion, none shall give them disturbance or hinder them.

Sixthly, Whereas the French Nation formerly paid 5 per Cent. Custom, now in
regard they have been ancient friends to the Port, and that they have renewed
their Capitulations, they shall pay no more than 3 per Cent. and accordingly
let no more be demanded.

Seventhly, All Portugueses, Sicilians, Catelans, Messineses of Ancona, etc.
that have no Ambassadors at the Port, if they come under the French Banner,
shall pay no more than 3 per Cent. according as the French pay.

Eighthly, In payment of their Customs, they shall pay the Current Money such as
passes in our Treasury, and the Farmers of the Customs shall not refuse the
same.

Ninthly, The Mesteria they shall pay according to what the English Merchants
pay, and no more.

Tenthly, All the Merchandise they bring, or shall bring, shall be valued
according to the present estimation, and no more pretended of them, and if the
Customers will notwithstanding raise the esteem of the Goods above the value,
then if the Merchant will pay his Custom in specie, it shall not be refused.

Eleventhly, The Custom of Silk being paid -- a new Custom ought not to be
demanded.

Twelfthly, The Custom being once paid, the Customer shall not refuse to give
his Teschare, and the Merchant being willing to transport his Goods to another
Scale, another Custom shall not be demanded.

Thirteenthly, The Officers and Customers at Sidon, Birut, Aleppo, or Cairo
shall not compel the Merchants to take Goods by Force, not under any pretense
whatsoever take one Asper from them, nor demand money to be lent unto them.

Fourteenthly, The French Vessels may bring Goods from the Indies, by way of
the Red Sea, unto the Port Suucis, and having paid their Custom once there,
whatsoever Goods they cannot sell in that Country, they may have liberty to
transport over land to Alexandria, and there relade them again on their own
Vessels without paying another Custom, or receiving molestation from any
person. Howsoever, this Capitulation is to be understood with this condition,
that this point shall be signified to the chief Officers of Cairo, who having
called a Council of the most knowing and experienced persons to consider
hereof, and they concluding that this point is in no wife prejudicial to that
Country, nor to the interest of the Believers, then this Article to be of
force, but if they advise the contrary, then this to be of no effect.

Fifteenthly, If the Friars, or Merchants, or Druggermen will make Wine, and
transport it abroad, none shall hinder them.

Sixteenthly, The French Consuls, and all under their Banner, having a
difference with any of, or above, four thousand Aspers, it shall be decided at
our public Divan.

Seventeenthly, If any manslaughter shall happen in the street where French
dwell, they shall not be liable to pay the price of the Blood, unless it be
proved before the Justice that a Frenchman was guilty thereof.

Eighteenthly, The Druggermen in service of the French Nation shall enjoy the
same privileges, as before specified.

Nor was the French interest only available at that time to obtain the
foregoing Articles, and renew their Capitulations with such Additions; but
likewise to procure License for the Ambassador to travel into the The French
Ambassador obtains license to travel.
remotest parts of the Ottoman Dominions; for though it were a thing never
practiced before, and denied (as is well known) to other Christian
Ambassadors; yet it was granted to Monsieur de Nointel with so much freedom,
that first in a Brigantine he went to Scio, thence visited the chief Isles of
the Archipelago, thence crossed to Rhodes, and so proceeded to Satalia, Cyprus,
and Jerusalem: so much confidence had the Turks, contrary to their custom, in
this Ambassador: for as they style all Representatives from Foreign Princes
their pawns or pledges of Peace, so had not the Turks in that conjuncture
thought the interest of France worth the obliging, they would never have
deviated from their ancient Custom, and given an example for other Ministers to
demand a privilege of the like nature.

But to return again to the designs against Poland, the Sultan about The Turks
resolve on a war against Poland.
the end of July marched with such Forces as were then in a readiness toward
the Confines of the Country; and though he had not with him above fifteen
thousand men, yet it was concluded that the Fame and terror of the Grand
Signior's motion would either abate and bring low the spirits of the Poles, and
induce them to dispatch an Ambassador with terms of Peace, or at least this
readiness of the Turkish Camp would be an early preparation for the designs of
the next year, and put the whole Empire into a timely motion, and that uniting
with the Forces of the Frontiers, they might make a Body sufficient to resist
any sudden Incursion. This resolution being taken, the Great Vizier led the
Van, and encamped on the Banks of the Danube near a place called Isacgee, where
he with all diligence built a Bridge of Boats to pass his Forces with the
greatest facility to the other side, on which lies the Country of Moldavia. The
Sultan about a days journey short of the Vizier, fixed his Court and Camp at a
place called Babadog; with intention after some days to cross the River, and
proceed as far as Kemenitz, that by the influence of his powerful Presence he
might encourage his Army there, and provide all things necessary for security
of that Garrison. But in the mean time advices coming that the Polish Army,
consisting of about twenty thousand men, was roving about the Confines of
Leopolis, under the Command of General Sobieski, and that a reconciliation was
passed between the King and him; and that Zircha, Commander of the Cosacks,
joined to considerable forces of the Moscovite and Calmuck Tartars, had made
incursions into the parts about Osac, caused the Sultan to desist from his
designed progress to Kemenitz, and to pass no farther than over the River into
Moldavia for hunting or other pastimes. By these matters the Turks being fully
convinced, that the Poles resolved not to pay their promised tribute, nor to
send an Ambassador with propositions, which were condescending or supplicating
for Peace; the Sultan himself dispatched away an Aga with Letters into Poland
full of threats, menaces, and protestations of bringing all that ruin, misery,
and destruction on their Country, which always attends the most cruel and
bloody War, if they did not retrieve their error by a speedy submission and
compliance with those Articles which were the last year accorded. And this was
the last motion the Turks made toward a Peace, which they were desirous to
embrace on any terms honorable, that so they might have opportunity to divert
their Arms to the more mild Climates of Hungary, where, besides the
entertainment they expected to receive from friends, who invited them, they
should not be liable to half those inconveniences of Cold, Frosts, and Famine,
as they were probable to meet in the parts of Poland.

But the Poles were so much in earnest, and so little esteemed the menaces of
the Sultan, that they anticipated his threats by some acts of hostility, and
showed that they so much scorned his anger that they were resolved to be the
first Aggressours. For the great Marshall Sobieski The Poles pass the Niester.
with his Lieutenant General Wisnowitzki marched forward, and boldly passed the
Niester with fifty thousand select Soldiers. The General of the Turkish Army,
Chusaein Pasha, alarmed hereat, immediately issued sorth such Orders for
preparing and sitting his Camp as were agreeable to a speedy Battle; and that
he might understand the state of his Camp, he called the Prince or Vayvod of
Moldavia to examine him concerning the state and condition of his Forces; the
answer he gave proving not satisfactory to the expectation of the Turk, who was
enraged at the approach of the Enemy, with high and proud words insulted over
the Prince, giving him no better terms than Dog and Insidel, and at length
struck him over the head with his Pole-Axe; notwithstanding which, and the
disgrace he put upon him, imprudently that night committed unto him, and to the
Prince of Valachia, the care of the Guards, which consisted of three thousand
Men. The Valachians The Prince of Valachia carried by his own Soldiers to the
Poles.
as near Neighbors and Associates with the others, seemed at first more
grievously to resent the affront, than did the Moldavians, and therefore that
Night took their Prince by force and carried him to the Polish Army. The
Prince, that he might make a Virtue of Necessity, complained of no force or
violence offered unto him by his Soldiers, but as if he had voluntarily
revolted, showed outwardly a fair and serene countenance toward the Poles,
until such time as with forty of his Men, he found an opportunity to escape;
but being by next morning at break of day overtaken by five Troops of Polonian
Horse, his whole Retinue was slain by them, excepting five of his men, who with
himself, saved themselves by the swiftness of their Horses; Howsoever, the
Prince received a wound on his left hand with a Sword, with which presenting
himself before the Great Vizier, and by that testimony boasting of his Faith
and Loyalty to the Ottoman House, was conducted by him to the presence of the
Sultan, who, in reward of his fidelity and valor, vested him with a rich
Coftan, and restored him again to his Principality with addition of three
hundred Aspers a day pay. His Wife and Children which remained as Hostages at
Constantinople, being upon the News of the Princes Revolt clapped into the seven
Towers, were again released, and conducted to their house with all imaginable
honor and magnificence.

But the Moldavian Prince was more in earnest, and heartily disdained the
affront offered him by Chusaein Pasha, toward whom, and the other Turks,
though he carried a serene and calm countenance, yet he nourished a secret
flame and storm within himself; to vent which, and revenge the affront, he
maintained a correspondence with Sobieski, giving The Prince of Moldavia
revolts.
him intelligence of all matters in the Turkish Camp, how he might most easily
surprise the Forces of the Pasha of Sivas, and the four Generals of the Spahees
of Alchabolick.

The Christians made use of this intelligence accordingly, by making their
assault on the enemy on the weakest side, when the Prince having reserved his
anger until an opportune Season, turned his face against the Turks, and with a
courage agreeable to his spirit and command, he entered the Tabor, or
Intrenchment of Chusaein Pasha, and wounded him with his own hand. The heat of
the Fight continued fourteen hours, in which none behaved himself more
valiantly than did Solomon Pasha the Beglerbeg of Bosna, who though he was as
brave, and fought as stoutly as any man could, having six Horses that day
killed under him, The Turks overthrow.
he was at length forced to fly and abandon the field, following Chusaein
Pasha, and the Pasha of Sivas and Ciddi-ogla, who made better use, in saving
themselves, of their horses heels, than their own Arms; But in this Flight his
Horse pitching his foot into the hole of a wooden Bridge, which he was to pass,
was there stopped until he was overtaken by a Soldier with a Hat, who shot him
through the Body; so that continuing his flight more faintly than before, he
was overtaken by a Polonian Hussar, who with a Lance bore him to the Ground,
where he was trod under foot, and cut in pieces by the Enemy: The other three
Pashaws were wounded; the Generals of the Green and Yellow Sangiacks of the
Spahees were taken Prisoners, and two other principal Commanders of the Spahees
were killed. The Zagargeebashee, who commanded eighteen Chambers of Janisaries,
was taken prisoner, the Standard of the Janisaries taken, and they wholly cut
in pieces and destroyed, consisting of eight thousand five hundred men; all the
Troops and Attendants of those Pashaws, with four Sangiacks of Spahees, were
slain upon the place, which in all were computed to be about twenty five
thousand men. The booty taken was very considerable, for besides the ordinary
Baggage they took two thousand purses of money, then newly brought for payment
of the Soldiery, and twenty five thousand Wagons of Provisions and Ammunition.

After this success and important Victory the Poles became Masters of the
strong Fortress of Chotin, and other smaller Palanchas, on the Banks of the
Niester, making their Incursions into Moldavia, as far as Jash, which is the
principal City of that Country. And thus far was Kaplan Pasha proceeded with
the Recruits of about four thousand men, when the News came of the fatal Rout,
and the fame thereof increasing by the fearful Relations of such as fled from
the Battle, alarmed the Turks with such frightful apprehensions, that they
retreated back again to the other side of the Danube, and united themselves to
the Forces of the Vizier. But Chusaein Pasha, though he saved his life, yet
could not Chusaein Pasha imprisoned.
conserve the Air of the Sultan's favor; for so soon as he arrived at the
Court, he received an ill welcome; for according to the manner of Turks, who
punish the ill success of a General equal to Crimes committed, he was
immediately put into Chains, deprived of his estate and honors, and sent
prisoner with the attendance only of two servants unto the Castles of the
Dardanelli, where the disturbance and unquietness of his mind reduced him to an
insirmity of Body; so that being sick, and without Friends or Physicians, he
sent to Sir John Finch, his Majesty's Ambassador, as he passed up the
Hellespont, to afford him the use and assistance of his Physician; but the
Ambassador excused himself, letting him know, that his Retinue being passed
before on another Vessel, he was sorry it was not in his power to accommodate
him in the manner he desired.

The Winter being now well entered, which is very wet and cold in those
Countries, caused the Armies on both sides to draw into their warmer Quarters,
there to meditate and contrive their designs for the more active season. During
these Affairs the King of Poland died; so that the Election of a new Prince,
the manner of reconciling their intestine The King of Poland dies.
Differences, and the means to defend their Countries, were Subjects of
important Consideration, and matters more than sufficient to employ the wisest
heads of that Nation for a longer time than their common Enemy was resolved to
afford them. The Turk on the other side though full of revenge and anger for
their last mifortune, yet patiently took this loss as the paring only of his
Nails, that his Claws might grow the longer, and was so rowsed with this blow,
that he summoned all the Nations of his large Empire to come in to his
assistance, toward which forty thousand Carts laden with Provisions were
appointed to rendezvous on the Banks of the Danube toward the end of the month
of March. Yet in the mean time the Turks not having patience to see their
perfidious Prince avail himself of his Revolt, and in despite of the Ottoman
Power to seat himself in his Principality of Jash, were resolved to drive him
thence; and in order thereunto not expecting a milder season, immediately
dispeeded some Troops of Tartars, and two thousand Spahees under the Command of
a new Prince, to drive him out of the Country. In the mean time the Poles,
since their late Victory, kept the Fortress of Kemenitz straightly blocked up on
all sides, and thereby reduced them to such a want of food and other
provisions, as might probably cause them to surrender before the Summer could
open a way to their relief.

But before I conclude this Year, I must not omit to acquaint the Reader, that
in the month of September an English Factor at Smyrna descended of good
Parents, and educated under a severe and religious Master, one who had a
reasonable Estate of his own, and in good business and employment, did
notwithstanding in the absence of his Partner, with whom he was joined in
Commission, carry out of the house 215; fine Cloths belonging to several
Principals of England, with a considerable Sum of ready Money, Jewels, and
things of value: of which having possessed himself, he went before the Kadi,
and there in presence of diverse Officers of the City turned Turk, hoping by the
Privilege of the Mohammedan Law, whereby no Christian testimony can pass
against a Turk, to appropriate unto himself that whole Estate, which he had
thus treacherously got into his sole custody. And it being impossible for Turks
to attest the Marks, Numbers, or know the Estates of Persons being in England,
he judged himself out of the reach of any Power or Art to dispossess him of his
unjust and wicked acquests. Howsoever the Consul did so closely pursue him both
at Smyrna and at the Turkish Court, that in the space of seven months he
regained all the Cloth, and the best part of the Money and Jewels out of his
hands: and in fine reduced this Renegado to so low a condition, that he humbly
supplicated the Consul to contrive a way for his passage into England: at which
time His Majesty's Frigate the Centurion being then in Port, he was embarked
thereupon, and so returned into his own Country.

The Particulars of all which having been amply related in Writing and Letters
to private Friends, I purposely omit the same in this place, that so I might
cast a veil over the nakedness and shame of our Nation in that City. Howsoever
I judge it requisite to recount this Story in brief and in general heads, That
men may know there is a God who rules above, who rejects impious and licentious
persons, confounding the designs of those who betraying their Trust, deviate
from the common Rules of Morality and Honesty.

Anno 1674. Hegeira 1085.

THis Year began at Smyrna with the happy Arrival of Sir John Finch, sent by
His Majesty for Ambassador to the Grand Signior in the place of Sir Daniel
Harvey, who dyed in August 1672. at his Country House not far from
Constantinople. His Excellency entered the January (...) rejoicing the English
Factory with the sight of their new Ambassador, (that Office having been now
void for the space of sixteen months) who was welcome also to people of the
Country, judging him fortunate for arriving at the Feast of their great Biram:
nor less pleasing was the News thereof to the Court, especially to the late
Pasha of Tunis, whose Goods and Moneys taken by one Dominico Franceschi, out of
an English Ship called the Mediterranean, in her passage from Tunis to Tripoli,
this Ambassador had recovered from Ligorne and Malta; which being an action
without example, was greatly admired and applauded by the Turks, and esteemed
an evident demonstration of that great Interest and Power which the Glory of
our King has acquired in Foreign parts, and of the singular dexterity of such
a Minister. But to proceed to the Wars.

The Polanders being thus prosperous, made use of their success, and the sharp
cold of the Winter-season to make their Incursions, and Winter Quarters through
all the Principalities of Moldavia; for they being born in cold Countries, and
accustomed to the Snows and Frosts, were more patient and enduring of extremity
of weather than were the Turks, who were brought forth from more mild and
moderate Climates: so that neither could the Poles be driven out from those
Countries, nor Keminitz be relieved by them, until such time, that the Sun
getting high, and thawing the Snows, and warming the Earth, prepared a season
fit for return of the Turks again into those Countries; who marching according
to their custom with an Army composed of great multitudes, quickly compelled
the Poles to retire. For the Grand Signior and Vizier having both seated their
Winter Quarters on the Banks of the Danube, were ready at the sirst opening of
the Summer to enter their Arms into the Enemies Countries; and having called
the Tartars to their assistance, did according to the usual custom make
Incursions for depredation of Slaves, Cattle, and whatsoever else was portable
in a running March.

The Chan or King of this People was at that time greatly indisposed in his
health, of which he advised the Great Vizier, as if he intended thereby to
obtain a release from his personal attendance that year in the War: But the
Vizier, who either supposed this excuse to be only a pretense, or that he had a
kindness for his Person, immediately dispatched away his own Physician called
Signior Massellini, an Italian born, a worthy Learned man, a good Christian,
and my intimate Friend: with whom maintaining a constant correspondence by
Letters, he wrote me, That from the Grand Signiors Quarters which were at
Batadog near the A Journey into Tartary.
Banks of the Danube, he arrived after seventeen days Journey in Chrim, where
(he said) he was received with singular honor and kindness by the Great Chan,
whom he found to be a Prince of admirable prudence, gentleness, and generosity,
but greatly afflicted with a Hypochondriacal Melancholy; which being an
infirmity of some years standing, was with the more difficulty removed;
howsoever he was so far from being incapable to follow his Army, that he
advised him to divert his mind with the thoughts of War: which counsel having
taken, after thirty days abode in the Camp, he found himself much more cheerful
than before, and greatly relieved of that pressure of Melancholy and caliginous
Vapors which offended his Brain. We are now (said he) at Ussia at the Mouth of
the Boristhenes, which we have passed from the other side unto this, where the
River is nine miles broad, from hence we are marching toward Bender upon the
Niester to pass into Moldavia, and there to join with the Ottoman Army. The
Poles have sent to demand Peace, but with condition, that Kemenitz be restored
to them; which Proposition was with great disdain rejected, and will never be
granted whilst this Emperor reigns. These people greatly desired a Peace with
Poland, which the Election of Sobieski for King may probably facilitate; for
not only they, but the Turks also dread a March into Poland, and are so
inveterately bent to take revenge on the Muscovites and (...), who lately
became their Subjects, that they could accept of any reasonable Terms of
Accommodation with Poland. I for my part found Tartary a very pleasant Country,
plentiful of all Provisions, and the people much more courteous and obliging to
Strangers and Christians, than those Turks with whom you and I have conversed.
Thus far Massellini writes in commendation of the Tartars, and in farther
confirmation hereof, I have read in some Books, That as to their Morals, there
are very few Nations to be found less vicious, they are extremely severe and
faithful, they have no Thieves or false Witnesses amongst them, little
Injustice or Violence, and live in union and great tranquillity: the mavelous
fidelity of the Captive Tartars in Poland is every day to be observed, who
never fail to return at the time appointed, when they are licensed upon their
word to go and procure their Liberties by the exchange of Polish Prisoners,
which they execute punctually, or return themselves, not failing a minute. And
it is observed, That the Polish Gentlemen do rather trust the young Tartars,
which are in their Service, with the keys of their Money and Jewels, than any
of their Household.

The time for Armies to draw out of the Winter Quarters, and take the Field
being now come, the Grand Signior and Vizier, with great numbers both of Horse
and Foot passed the Danube, and prosecuting their March to the Confines of
Poland, they relieved Kemenitz in the first place, the Poles at the News of
their approach rasing the Siege. Kemenitz relieved.
Thence they proceeded to Chuozim, a strong Fortress on the Niester, taken from
them the last year by the Christians, after the defeat given to Chusacin Pasha,
as before related, the which was surrendered without much difficulty on
Articles, which were ill observed, the whole Garrison being afterward put to
the Sword. Nor had they worse success against the Muscovites, who retreated
backward as the Turk advanced, leaving Asac, aster it had been sacked and
almost destroyed, to be again rebuilt, which was speedily effected by the
assistance of the Captain-Pasha, who was that year with thirty nine Galleys
dispeeded into the Black Sea, and with great numbers of Slaves and Soldiers
repaired the ruins which the Muscovites had made. In the mean time, whilst the
chiefest strength of the marine Force was thus employed, a small Squadron of
about ten Galleys were ordered for the Archipelago and the Levant, under the
Command of one Mahomet Pasha, a Person that managed sundry great Employments;
but his prodigality and profuse way of living was the cause that he could
thrive in none, only he thereby gained so much interest and credit with the
Grandees and Monied men of the Court, who are the Pages and Eunuchs, as served
him to contract a debt of a thousand Dollars without any ability of his own to
give them satisfaction: of which these Creditors being assured, made it their
Petition to the Grand Signior to grant him the Command of that Squadron of
Galleys, which was that year designed for the Archipelago, supposing that he in
this Expedition being to pass unto many Islands and Countries, Mahomet Pasha
sent with a Fleet of Galleys into the Arches.
knew how to make such use of his time, and the advantage of his Employment, as
would gain him a sufficient benefit whereby to satisfy and clear all scores
and accounts with them. This Office being accordingly conferred, Mahomet Pasha
prepared himself to depart, whilst the Creditors remained in full expectation
of a profitable Voyage and speedy returns; which to improve to the best
advantage, the Pasha first visited the open and undefended Isles, from whence
with the greatest severity and rapine imaginable he pillaged and plundered what
he was able, making some of them to ransom their whole Country with money.
Thence he proceeded to Scala Nova, called by the Turks Koush-adasee, a place on
the Coast of Asia, not far from Ephesus, where he demanded of the people
(though all Turks) the Sum of five thousand Dollars, which they not finding to
pay, were treated with all kind of force and violence, till at length paying
down 1500, and engaging to pay the rest in a months time, the Pasha departed,
leaving an Aga, a Servant of his, to receive the money at the time agreed. In
that interim, the Kadi coming to be changed, and another of more courage and
spirit succeeding in his place, believed that the best service at his beginning
and entrance into Office which he could perform toward the people, was to
relieve them from the oppression of the Pasha, and persuade them positively to
refuse the payment; who taking courage from their Chief, drove the Aga out of
Town, with a thousand menaces and reproaches. Upon this News Mehmet Pasha
returned again full of anger and indignation, but found not that easy
reception nor kind entertainment, as before; but on the contrary, the Gates
were shut against him, and the people abandoning their Habitations, with common
consent resolved to make a Journey to the Grand Signior; and to show they were
in earnest, proceeded so far in their way as to Ephesus, which is about ten
miles distant from thence: the prejudice and danger of which complaint Mahomet
Pasha greatly fearing, sent Messengers to pacify them with good words and
promises to relinquish his pretensions, in case they would return; but the
uproar was so great, that they found as much difficulty to quiet it, as the
Town-Cerk in ancient times had to appease the Tumult raised by the Silversmiths
about Diana of the Ephesians. Being thus baffled at Koush-adasec, he vented his
fury on some poor Islands which he could more easily master, and thence
proceeded to Napoli di Romania, where the people being already alarmed with his
behavior, and violence of his actions in other places, and encouraged by the
example of Koush-adasec, upon his arrival there, without farther ceremony shut
their Gates, and appeared armed against him upon the Walls; at which
entertainment and unexpected opposition, the Pasha fearing some evil
consequences, set sail from thence, and crossing again the Seas into Asia, made
Rhodes his next Port. Thence he passed to Satalia, to Cyprus, and Scanderone,
and so again returned for Constantinople, taking Smyrna in his way, committing
most extreme rapine and violence on the people, whose complaints having gone
before him to the Court, he was immediately cut off at his arrival; but in the
first place, his gains and ill gotten goods were seized on to satisfy the
Grand Signior, and his Creditors of the Seraglio, who being sent to fish for
Wealth, was served like the Cormorants in the Indies, which being made tame,
and taught to fish for the benefit of their Masters, have a Ring clapped about
their necks to prevent them from swallowing the prey they take.

But to return to the Actions at Land, which were matters of the greatest
importance. The Turks had no sooner relieved Kemenitz, recovered Choczim, and
caused the Muscovites to retreat, and draw their Forces into their Country; but
being Masters of the Field, and having The Turks secure their Conquest.
the choice of acting according to their own pleasure, resolved to secure the
places they already possessed, esteeming it more wisdom to make sure their late
acquisitions, than to add thereunto new conquesls, which they could not
maintain. And therefore considering the inconstancy of the Cosacks, who having
abandoned their subjection to Poland, had submitted themselves to their yoke;
and also how unable Dorosenzko their Governor was either to keep them in
obedience, or else to defend them from the Polonian Incursions; they resolved
for prevention of these inconveniences, and for a secure remedy against any
sinister accidents of this nature, to make seizure of that Party of the
Cosacks, who had not submitted to them, and transport them into other parts,
which they accordingly put into execution, and sweeping all the Countries as
they passed, carried away men, women, and children into Captivity: part of
which, such as belonged to the Grand Signior, had some Lands assigned them
along the Coast near the Black Sea; the Armenians, who were a Trading people,
and lived at Kemenitz, were transported to Philipopoli; of the Jews some were
carried to Adrianople, and others to Constantinople; but the younger sort of
both Sexes were permitted to the Soldiery to carry them for Slaves to their
own homes, and were in great numbers dispersed through all parts of the Empire:
a Policy anciently used by Pharaoh to his Egyptian Subjects, who having bought
their Lands of them, did afterward transport them from one end of the Land
unto the other, that so he might keep them in the greater servitude and
subjection, Genesis 47. 21. And as for the people, he moved them from one end of
the borders of Egypt to the other. And in this manner the success concluding
the year, without any great Enterprise or Feats of Arms, the Sultan returned to
his Court at Adrianople about the end of November, licensing all the Asian
Horse and Soldiers of remotest parts to return to their own Countries, with
liberty to appropriate the following year to their repose and care for their
peculiar concernments.

To these Wars amongst secular Persons and men of Arms were added The
difference between the Latins and Greeks at Jerusalem.
Differences, and never to be decided Controversies between the Religious of
the Roman and Greek Churches at Jerusalem, who contending for the possession of
the Holy Sepulcher of the King of Peace, rent that seamless Coat of Christ, and
managed their Controversy with more malice and rancour each against other,
than Princes do, who invade one the other with Fire and Sword. For the Franks
or Western Christians subjected to the Popes Dominion, had possessed for
several Ages a right to the Holy Sepulcher, and enjoyed the honor of the
custody thereof, notwithstanding the pretenses of the Greeks thereunto, who for
many years in vain attempted at the Ottoman Court to obtain that Privilege;
for the Franks being ever more powerful by charitable contributions brought
from Christendom, besides large Sums of Money from the King of Spain, did
always outbid the Market of the Greeks, and consequently made use of stronger
arguments, than the adverse Party could produce in defense of their cause.
Until such time, that one Panaioti, a Greek born in the Island of Scio, having
by his parts and excellent address arrived to the honor of being Interpreter
for the Western Tongues to the Great Vizier, at length obtained that favor
with his Master, that he seldom refused whatsoever he with reason and modesty
requested; and being a great Zelot in his Religion, and esteemed the chief
Patron and Support of the Greek Church, he secretly begged in behalf of his
Country, the recovery of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem out of the hands of
the Franks; which the Vizier would not deny him, both to reward him for some
services already performed, and likewise because he knew that a concession of
this nature would again raise the spirits and animosities of Christians; the
allaying and appeasing of which being an office solely in the power of himself,
and the supreme Authority, would certainly prove beneficial to the Ottoman
Court. Panaioti having obtained this Command, and considering that the defense
thereof would be a trouble to him, for that thereby he should create Enemies
which were no less than Kings and Princes to contend with, and perhaps should
live to see it reversed, wisely laid it by him, there to remain dormant until
the time of his death; which happening the year past, the Command was produced
and brought to light, and was before the Easter of this year set on foot at
Jerusalem, and by virtue thereof the custody of the Sepulcher sentenced by the
Pasha and Kadi of that place to belong unto the Greeks, the which was occasion
of so great trouble and confusion, as disturbed the Holy Feast, and polluted
the Sacrifices with the blood of one or two persons, who most earnestly
contended for the Privilege of their Nation and Religion. Nor could this
difference be decided here, but both sides appealed to the Court above; which
being heard and debated in public Divan, the possession of the Sepulcher was
adjudged in favor of the Greeks; the Franks being only to enjoy a precarious
use thereof, as Pilgrims and Strangers to the Country. Howsoever the Friars of
Jerusalem would not tamely yield up their Right, but again resolved to try
their Fortune at the Court, having by means of F. Canisares their Commissario
with expense of a great Sum of Money obtained a review of the case, but without
success; for all these endeavors and charge proved fruitless, the former
sentence being confirmed in favor of the Greeks; and the Franks having no
other Expedient, applied themselves to the assistance of the French
Ambassador, to whose protection the Holy places are assigned by Capitulations.
But neither the power of the French Ambassador, nor of any other Christian
Representative was available; for the Vizier either mindful of his promise to
Panaioti, or being resolute to maintain the Command he had given, would on no
terms be persuaded to revoke it; the which intention of the Vizier being made
known to the Greeks, their Patriarch earnestly pressed a hearing of the case;
but the Friars not willing to abide the shock, retired to Constantinople, lest
the Greeks forcing them to Justice, they should be condemned in Judicio
contradictorio, and a Hoget or Sentence passing, they should be condemned in
Law as well as by Authority of the Hattelheriff. Which to put in execution, the
Patriarch took out a Command whereunto was added, That the Friars in token of
their subjection, should pay a Dram of Silver a head to the Patriarch, and
hold all their places of them. This was the issue of the present controversies,
which is certainly determined for the time of this Vizier without viz. The
covetousness and pride of Friars, and the conclusion of their Lawsuits before
Infidels. The Franks, or the Western Christians, had until this time the
custody of the Holy Sepulcher, and the Greeks that of the Chapel of Bethlem,
but the use was free to both; but the Franks not being able to enjoy the
Sepulcher with contentment, whilst with envious eyes they beheld the Greeks in
possession of Bethlem, were always contriving designs by force of money, and
power of Christian Ministers to eject them from that Right; until that now in
these contentions they have lost both; being neither able to recover the one,
nor conserve the other.

Anno Christi 1675. Hegeira 1086.
PRopositions of peace not being so earnestly pressed, nor so advantageously
proffered by the Poles, as the pride of the Turks did expect, the War still
continued, but not prosecuted either on the one side or on the other with the
same violence with which it began. For the Sultan designing this year to
circumcise his Son, the young Prince, now about twelve years of Age, and to
marry his Daughter of seventeen to his Mosayp, or Favorite, Pasha of Magnasia,
commonly called by the Name of Kul-ogli, which signifies the Son of a Slave, he
resolved to dedicate this whole Year to quiet repose, mirth, and jollity at
home, only two thousand Janisaries were sent to Ibrahim Pasha to recruit the
Soldiers on the Frontiers of Poland, and the Tartars were reinforced with some
Turkish Troops under Usuff Pasha to assist Dorosensko against the Poles, who
were with a considerable Army fallen into Ukrania; And the Captain Pasha, with
twenty eight Sail of Galleys, was dispeeded into the Black Sea for carrying of
such Provisions and Ammunition for War as was necessary for supply of the Army;
Besides which, no preparations of War were designed, these being judged
sufficient, though not to conquer, yet at least to repress the Incursions, and
amuse or keep the Arms of the Enemy employed.

For at the Ottoman Court the face of all things was become serene and calm, no
Seditions of great men, nor discontents of the people, nor The happy state of
the Ottoman Court.
black and cruel designs of State disturbed or clouded the splendor of the
Solemnities, or the brows of the great Statists, but all matters ran in an
uninterrupted course of Joy and Festivity. The Sultan, who in his actions
showed himself a most benign Prince, sparing and compassionate of the blood and
misery of his Subjects, has, since his arrival to a mature Age, exercised a
wise manner of Government, severe and just, and yet void of the cruelty and
tyranny of his Ancestors; under whom the trading Christians enjoyed the
privilege of their Capitulations with more justice, and less frequent Avanias.
The Vizier also, and other great Officers, being sensible of the benefit which
Trade begat, treated Merchants with more gentleness and respect than in former
times, their Ships not being forced on every occasion into the Grand Signior's
service but rather persuaded to it by rewards and fair promises, otherwise than
in the times of former Viziers; and it is to be wished also that the like might
be said under the Government of those which are to succeed; though if we look
forward to the years 1678 and 1679 we shall find the Scene of things altered,
and not only Merchants, but even Ambassadors, and the Representatives
themselves, remain under sad discouragements. Amongst these joys and gentle
ways of Government, the manner of this Court was much altered; the Divan had
not for two months space been opened for business, to the great prejudice and
interruption of Justice; Wine, that great abomination to the Turkish Law, which
four years past was by the Imperial Decree forbidden under pain of Death and a
thousand Execrations and Curses, was now the common Drink, and divertisement in
fashion, used immoderately by all, excepting the Grand Signior, the Mufti, and
Reis Effendi; the Vizier himself having been excessively intemperate therein,
had extinguished the natural heat of his stomach, which could be warmed by no
less heat than what proceeds from Aqua Vitae; by which debauchery and
indisposition all businesses were slowly and negligently dispatched, and
according to his example the Officers and Ministers acted in their Affairs,
which in former times being always dispatched by nine a Clock in the Morning,
that became now the time and hour of rising.

The Grand Signior himself, though not taught by his Attendants to drink Wine,
lest it should perhaps betray him to some actions dangerous to them, gave
himself to Amors; for falling in love with a Polish Woman, lately captivated
at Kemenitz, he made her his Second Hasakee or Sultaness; for having had the
good fortune to bring him a Son, that honor was the reward of her
fruitfulness; and that he might give other testimonies of his favor, he cast
his eyes on a poor Chinganee, or Gipsy Boy, who with singing and dancing so
pleased him, that he gave him six purses of money, containing three thousand
Dollars, with Horses and Servants, and took him into the Seraglio. Amidst these
Delights the Grand Signior gave order to the Vizier not to speak to him of
three things, Neither of returning to Constantinople, nor against his
Favorite, nor against his Hunting; in other matters he might use freedom.

Another alteration of a better nature, with reference to Learning and
Knowledge, seems also remarkable in this Court; for the Grand Signior having
been some years past presented by the Dutch Resident, with twelves large
Volumes of the new Atlas, upon an accidental sight thereof was so pleased, that
he commanded it should speedily be translated into Turkish; to which Work Dr
Alexandro Mauro Cordato, the Viziers Interpreter, who succeeded in the place of
Panaioti deceased, was nominated; but he finding it too unweildy for him,
desired the assistance of a French Jesuit, then at Scio, skilful in the Turkish
and Arabic Languages, who was immediately sent for, and therein employed; and
though it is thought, that this business is above their Element, and that it
will soon cool and be neglected, yet it seems to be the first step which the
Turks have made unto Learning, and therefore is the more observable.

And now the Festivals beginning on the 16th of May, we must for The great
Festivals in what manner celebrated at the Turkish Court.
some days lay aside all business, and observe with what order and form these
Solemnities were performed. In the first place, On this day the Grand Signior,
with the young Prince his Son, went to their Tents, which were pitched very
sumptuously in the Plain near the City, and indeed were truly stately and
magnificent; all the great men, as the Vizier, Mufti, and others, having their
Pavilions erected; amongst which was raised a very stately Throne, with a
Canopy of Cloth of Gold, extended under the shady leaviness of two tall Elms,
which, set off with many Lamps, in the Night represented a very pleasant and
glorious Scene. On this Seat of State the Sultan placed himself in the morning,
being accompanied thither by all the Pashaws then present, and by the
Representatives of those who were absent; who according to their Degree, in
order kissing his Vest, delivered in a Silk Purse a Note or Schedule of their
Presents, which were afterward put into the Tefterdar's or Lord Treasurers
hands to see and compare them with the particulars received; which were so
great and considerable, that they far surpassed the Charges and Disbursments of
the Solemnity. Opposite to the Tents were several poles fixed, between which at
Night were hung Lamps of several shapes, which being varied every Night made a
very pleasing and magnificent Object; by light of which in the Evening were
exercised several tricks of Activity, as Wrestlings, Dancing, and Singing, and
sometimes were acted Turkish Comedies, which consist only of Farces, and some
ridiculous Dialogues, and at last the divertisements of the night concluded
with Fireworks, which were so many, that (as reported) 240 men were employed
for four months time in the making of them, and yet there are better made in
Christendom; only one seemed to excel the rest, being a sort of Rocket, which
went up very high, without any tail of fire, like the common ones, carrying
only a small compacted Globe of red fire like a Star, and making no noise in
mounting, but raised to its height breaks. These were the pastimes of the
Night; in the day time all the several Arts and Trades, some one day, and some
another, passed before the Tents, every one offering their Presents, as they
passed, representing by some kind of Pageant and Procession their diversities
of Trade: this continuued for fifteen days. On the 25th of this instant May,
was a solemn Cavalcade, in which marched the Janisaries with all their chief
Officers, Chiauses, and Mutafaracas, etc. And of the Great Men, the Vizier,
Mufti, and Kul-ogli the Favorite, the first on the right hand, and the second
in the middle; after them followed the young Prince who was to be circumcised,
extraordinary rich in the Furniture of his Horse, and the number and largeness
of the Diamonds, which were on his Tulbant and Breast. In this Cavalcade were
carried twenty four small Nachils, and two large ones, as high as the Mast of a
Ship, which were carried by a hundred Slaves, and set before the Seraglio,
which are in form of triumphant Pyramids, adorned with Tinsils in thirteen
Divisions, according to this following Form or Description.

A Turkish Pageant


On the 27th, being the day of Mahomet's Birth, the Grand Signior rode
publicly to the Mosch of Sultan Selim, having no other attendance than the
Retinue of his own Court; his Pages were very rich in Cloth of Gold, each
carrying a Feather studded with a rich Jewel on his Head; after the Grand
Signior rode the young Prince, who that Night was circumcised. During this
Festival, a vast number of people was fed at the charge of the Grand Signior,
and about two thousand circumcised, every one of which had a Quilt given him,
with a small pay of three Aspers a day for his Life.

This Solemnity for the Circumcision being ended, on the 10th of June began the
Feast for the Marriage. The Kuzlir Aga, who is the black The manner of the
Marriage of the Grand Signior's Daughter,
Eunuch of the Women, was Brideman or Compare to the young Princess, and the
Tefterdar or Lord Treasurer to Kul-ogli, both which in the name of the Bride
and Bridegroom went before the Lord Chief Justice called the Kadelescher, and
by him had the Articles of Marriage wrote, and passed into public Act; which
being (...), the Presents were sent, and sirst those from the Bridegroom to the
Bride, which were these, a great number of Beasts and Birds ill-favouredly made
in Sugar, thirty Mules laden with two Chests of Sweetmeats apiece, and about
their necks each carried a Vest of Satin for the Muletiers, then were carried
a great many Pots of Sherbet, then an hundred and twelve men carrying Vests of
Silk, Cloth, Velvet, and Cloth of Gold, some had three, some five or six at
least wrapped up in Linen; then went five Horses, one with rich Furniture; then
followed a noble Vest of Cloth of Gold lined with Sables and nine Buttons and
Loops on a side embroidered with large Pearl, on the top of which on the one
side was a very large Diamond, and on the other a Sapphire, with Shoes, Boots,
and Pattents for the Bagno, all covered with Pearl; likewise two
Dressing-boxes, with Looking-glasses, and a Cap in form of a Crown, a little
Cabinet embroidered all over with Pearl, eight Girdles set with Emeralds,
Rubies, and Diamonds, a large Diamond-ring, a pair of Pendants of two great
Emeralds, with many other particulars, which in passage were impossible to be
remembered.

These Presents being thus performed on the part of the Bridegroom to his
Bride, the next Presents concerned the Grand Signior to his Daughter, which
were in place of her Dowry according to the custom of the Eastern Countries:
wherefore the 19th of this month the Presents were ushered with a most solemn
Cavalcade of all the Grandees of the Court to the House of the Bridegroom,
which were two Gardens made of Sugar, sorty little Nachils, eighty six Mules
laden with Household Stuff, ten men with her Dressings, as Boots, Shoes, etc.
embroidered with Pearl as the former; then were carried her Jewels set in
Girdles, Bracelets, etc. promiseuously together, not in that rule as those were
which were sent her by the Bridegroom. The Household Stuff was made up with
coverts, yet howsoever some parts were left open on the sides, to show that the
Cushions were embroidered with Pearl, and others were of Velvet embroidered
with Gold. At last came twelve Coaches with Slaves and thirty six black
Eunuchs. The 23d the Bride was conducted to her Bridegrooms Palace with a
solemn Cavalcade, with two great Nachils of the same form and bigness as those
carried at the Cavalcade of the Prince, with two smaller ones of Silver. The
Bride was seated in a handsome Coach drawn with six Horses, and covered with
Plates of Silver, and the sides adorned with long Streamers of Tinsel: before
which went the Kuzlir Aga or chief black Eunuch of the Women: after followed
four Coaches with six Horses apiece, and twenty one more with four Horses, each
carrying two Eunuchs: then at some distance off came the Hasakee or
Queen Mother to the Bride in a Coach all covered with Plates of Silver, and
attended with ten other Coaches more: the night following the Bride was
conducted to the Nuptial Chamber in ceremony only, she not being yet ripe for
consummation of Marriage: all which Solemnity was attended at the Bridegrooms
Court, with the same Sports and Fireworks which were made at the Tents, with an
addition of dancing on the Ropes, and sliding down a Rope fastened to the top of
the Steeple of the Mosch of Sultan Selim, which had like to have proved fatal
to one who came down with a Boy at his back; for when he was about twenty yards
from the ground, the Rope broke, but falling on a tree first, and then on a
man, he was taken up with little hurt. The most remarkable of all these Shows,
was a man that walked up a Rope as high as the second Balcony of the Menareh or
Steeple of Sultan Selim, which is as high as commonly our Spire-Steeples are in
England: And another hanging on a Rope with his hands, with his body extended,
turned himself twelve times round with his hands: at all which Sights the Grand
Signior was a constant Spectator. In this manner these Solemnities ended, the
Mosayp or Favorite rich in the esteem of his Prince, and in high honor with
all, had yet some allay to attemper and moderate his joy; for the Princess not
yet fit for consummation, in case she dyed before that time, all her Jewels and
Goods must return to the Grand Signior, notwithstanding which he would be
obliged to pay her Dowry, which was said to be the Sum of two years Revenue of
Grand Cairo; but let it be what it will, he will be insolvent, being, as
reported, three hundred Purses already in debt. And now to demonstrate the
uncertainty of the Courts of Princes, as well as of all other places and
conditions of the World, the Great Tefterdar or Treasurer, who had for the
space of thirteen years managed this Office with singular industry and
advantage, was now removed from thence, and under a specious show of
preferment, was advanced to the Dignity of Pasha of Grand Cairo: this change
was the more wondered at, because he was a Person so acute and so proper for
the Office, that no man that held the The Tefterdar put out of his Ossice.
place did ever manage it with greater reputation, nor with greater benefit to
the Interest of his Prince; for besides his good husbandry in other matters, he
was so skilful in knowing the price of Commodities, and so near in making his
Bargains, that the Merchant could scarce live by him, which in that consumption
of Goods made in the Seraglio, will produce a considerable abatement, when all
things are bought at the best hand; considering which, many reasons were
alleged, and conjectures made of his removal: some said, That the Grand
Signior having a liking to a young Man of his, to prevent his being taken into
the Seraglio, the Testerdar gave him a Wife, and thereby greatly displeased the
Grand Signior, as if he had purposely contrived it, to defeat his desires:
others said, That the Grand Signior would have borrowed money of him to pay the
Arrears of the Spahees, which he refused to lend: but others talked, and that
with best reason, That Kara Mustapha the old Chimacam, who is always with the
Grand Signior, had found an opportunity to represent him amiss, suggesting,
that the Tefterdar should say, That want of money in the Treasury was caused by
the vast Sums consumed in the fooleries of the late Feasts: and the Vizier,
though he entertained no personal animosity against him, yet was willing to
sacrifice him to the friendship of Kara Mustapha. And so being dispossessed of
his Office, thereunto succeeded the Janifary Esendi or Judge-Advocate of the
Janisaries, a great Drinker of Wine, and one not to hold any comparison with
the parts and abilities of his Predecessor. Money now wanting greatly in the
Treasury, several ways were sought to bring it Ways for ralsing Money.
in, and to save expenses. The first of which was, that a review be made of all
Otoraks, such as Milites emeriti, who are excused from the War, and yet receive
their pay; from which number those were excluded who had bought it, or were not
come legally by it, which would save the Grand Signior a vast Sum of Money
yearly: and to help at this time of need, the late Treasurer must refund and
ease himself of money, before he enters on that rich and important Office of
Grand Cairo. And Chusaein Aga the chief Customer, who was a man that had
enriched himself by many bad ways and arts, was displaced from his Office, and
caused to disgorge great Sums of Money to add unto the Supplies of the
Treasury. He was a Person of a subtle disposition, raised from the mean degree
of a Shoemaker, and being well acquainted both with good and bad ways of
gaining money, was a proper Instrument for the Turkish Government, it being his
fortune to fish riches rather for others than himself. And now being deprived
of his Office and the best part of his Wealth, he resolved, like all other
discontented Ministers, to take a Pilgrimage to Mecha, and to that end made a
solemn Visit to the Pasha of Cairo, then in his Tents near Scutari, acquainting
him of his intentions to wait on him, and perform his Respects in his passage
to the Holy Kebleh or Mecha.

The Turks have not of late years been very prodigal of the blood of their
Subjects, nor have those Executions been done of late on any Officer, unless
his Tyranny and Oppression of the people did justly draw due punishment upon
himself. And such was the case of the Kahya or Secretary of the Chimacam or
Governor in the Viziers absence of Constantinople, who taking on himself the
management of all the Affairs of his Master, acted every thing according to his
own pleasure; for finding that whatsoever he did or propounded, was always
confirmed and assented unto by his easy Lord, he assumed a boldness to
undertake any thing upon the proffers of money, so the Sum was in any manner
agreeable to the greatness of the matter required, or to the danger he
incurred; by which means he involved his careless and unwary Master in such
intrigues, The Chimacam of (...) his Steward cut off.
as could have no excuse besides his own supineness, and the corruptness of his
Servant. At this manner of administering Justice, the people being discontented,
hastened the removal of the Chimacam: and now another entering on the Office,
the Kahya remained exposed to the malice and complaints of all his Enemies,
amongst which none was of greater force than an accusation laid against him,
for having granted leave to the Armenian Christians at Constantinople for a Sum
of Money to erect a Church; for which, though a Command was granted by the
Great Vizier, obtained at a good price, to build one there of Timber, but of a
low and mean Fabric; yet the Kahya for a greater Sum of twenty Purses of
Money, or ten thousand Dollars, improved this Command, and changed their
Materials from Timber to Stone and Mortar: the which Building beginning to rise
with some magnificence, offended the neighboring Turks with so much scandal,
that great numbers of them carried the Complaints thereof to the Grand Signior;
who calling the Vizier, and examining the Case, the Vizier would own no other
Command, than for repairing of an old Church, but not building one new.
Whereupon Sentence of Death being passed on the Kahya, an Officer was sent to
execute it. And in his way to Constantinople, at a place called Selebrea,
meeting with the Offender, he caused him to return again with him to
Constantinople, where having strangled him, his Body was thrown into the Sea.

We have thus far discoursed of the Affairs at home, which consisted for the
most part in jollities and divertisements; let us now look on the enterprises
and attempts abroad, and we shall find no great matter of action this year
performed against Poland, more than some incursions made into Ukrania by the
Turks and Tartars under the Conduct of Ibrahim Pasha, in which we have no
Battles, nor great Skirmishes to recount, only a seizure or surprise of those
Cosacks, which were not under the jurisdiction of Dorosensko, who like sheep
were driven from their pastures, and Men, Women, and Children carried away into
Captivity, and transplanted into Countries, where they might better serve the
purposes and designs of the Turkish Empire; to which ends also vast numbers of
Tartars with their Families, were called to inhabit the circumjacent parts of
Kemenitz, for better security of that Conquest, to which the Tartars most
willingly concurred, esteeming it a happy Bargain to exchange the Soil of
Tartary for the fruitful Plains, and more gentle Air of Poland. And thus we may
consider what the intestine Discord of the Poles has brought upon themselves;
that they, who in former days maintained their honor and reputation with the
Turks, beyond any of the bordering Nations; not having ever suffered them to
continue in their Country, much less to sojourn or possess one palm of Ground
therein; can now more easily see them before the Walls of Leopolis or Cracovia,
and planted in the very Bowels of their Country, rather than a King of their
own Country set over them not agreeable to their own humor and fancy; or
perhaps rather than behold the envied exaltation of some persons to dignity, or
some little disorders in their Government; of which the Turk knows well to make
use, it being no new Lesson for him, to profit himself of the Discord and
Animosities of the Christians.

In like manner the Marine Affairs of the Turks this year afforded little
worthy of observation, unless it were, That the Captain Pasha was employed with
about thirty Sail of Galleys into the Black Sea, for transporting of Ammunition
and Provision to those Forces in Ukrania; but he returned not with an equal
number of Galleys, with which he departed, having lost five of them by storm,
and then arrived at Constantinople on the 26th of October, called by the Greeks
the Feast of St Demetrius, and by the Turks Cassim-gheun, a day which is
commonly remarkable for Storms at Sea; of which the Turks and Greeks are so
apprehensive or superstitious, that on that day or near that time, either
before or after, until the storm has vented its fury, and taken its course,
they will not adventure themselves unto the Sea, upon the most pressing
occasion, or hopeful inducement whatsoever.

And here I judge it requisite to conclude this Year with two matters very
observable relating unto Trade: The first is with reserence unto the Genoueses,
who in the Year 1666. first sent their Ambassador Signior Durazzo, with many
Presents and great Magnificence to conclude a Peace with the Ottoman Empire,
with the sole design and intention of Trade; which having been established on
no other foundation at the beginning, The Trade of (...).
than that of their Temins, and the Fabric of their own Cloth, when the first
failed, as it did in two years after, and that their Cloth turned not to
account, but was out-sold by the English and Dutch, then their Trade began to
decay, or rather never came to perfection, like the fruit of a young tree,
which buds fairly, and produces fruit, but has not strength to digest or bring
it to maturity: Even so it was with the Genoucses, who having been at the
charge of an Ambassador Extraordinary, and settled a Resident at
Constantinople, and a Consul at Smyrna, and all the other Formalities of Trade,
wanted that nourishment thereof from their own soil, which produces the true
and natural fruit of Commerce, which is gain and profit; and being outdone by
other Nations in shipping, there could little or no benefit be expected from
their own Navigation in the Levant. For these reasons, their Trade failing, the
Duties of Consulage on Goods appointed to maintain the Officers, and desray the
public Expenses, were consequently wanting; so that the Count Fieschi Rosident
for that Republic at Constantinople, finding himself in great distresses and
necessities, and unable to maintain himself and his Attendants agreeable to his
Character and Quality, often advised his Prince and the Senate of the unhappy
state of their Affairs, desiring from them either to provide a Supply agreeable
to the occasions, or to recall him from that Office, where he could no longer
live in that Honor required. This importunity produced the exchange of
Officers, and the Mission of Signior Giustiniano to reside at Constantinople,
and Signior (...) at Smyrna; the first of which, some few days after his
arrival, being unfortunately killed with a Carabine in his Chamber at
Consiantinople, as before related, the Office of Resident came to be still
continued in the person of Fieschi, who remaining without provisions necessary
to maintain his degree, and the annual Presents expected by the Turks, which
they esteem as due as their Income, and as part of their Revenues, was forced
to take up money on Pawns, and his own credit at the Interest of 20, 25, or 30
per cent. according as his necessities increased; and the apprehensions men
conceived of an insufficiency and hazard in their security, was the cause that
the debt, which in the beginning was inconsiderable, increasing with Interest
upon Interest, came at length to the Sum of sixty or seventy thousand Dollars,
which the Republic of Genoua, attributing in a great measure to the ill
Conduct of Fieschi, and judging the greatest part of this debt to be feigned,
sent another Resident called Signior Spinola to succeed him in his Office, who
arriving at Smyrna in the month of May of this present year, on a stout Ship
hired of the Venetians, and under the notion of a Man of War accompanied with a
Merchant Ship, and a new Consul (the old one dying the year before) settled
there such Orders, as were judged necessary for the government of their
Affairs. But before these Genoueses arrived, a report had fore-ran them from
Ligorne and other parts, that their Ships brought great quantities of false
Gold and false Pieces of Eight: the which coming to the cars of the Turks,
Commands were provided against their arrival to search their Ships, and try
their Moneys; to which the Genoueses not condescending Arz or testimony was
made thereof by the Kadi unto the Grand Signiors Court. In the interim whilst
this Arz went up, and the answer expected, the Genouese Resident designing to
proceed forward on his Voyage to Constantinople, demanded the Kadi's Moraselau
or Ticket of License for the Man of War on which he came, to pass the Castle,
(for that Ship had entered within the Port.) The Kadi judging it necessary, that
both the Resident and Ship should attend the arrival of the answer from above,
refused to grant this License; whereupon the Resident all in a rage embarked
himself, and immediately set sail, and having a fair Breez out of the Port,
gently slided along by the side of the Castle without any stop or interruption.

This affront being put upon the Kadi, greatly displeased him; so that calling
the Lieutenant and Gunner of the Castle into question, and not admitting of
their Plea, that the Ship was a Man of War, and the person thereon a Resident,
both which were privileged, and both going up to the Grand Signiors Court,
were to answer there for what was laid against them; but this I say, not being
admitted for reason, the Kadi committed them both to Prison, from whence with
some charge afterward they released themselves.

The new Resident being arrived at Constantinople, the Creditors of Count
Fieschi demanded payment of the debts owing to them, which was given in, to
amount to sixty thousand Dollars, and so much was to be paid before Fieschi
should be permitted to depart, or at least that part thereof being satisfied in
hand, the new Resident Spinola should give security for payment of the
remainder: the which he refusing to do, as not owning the accounts which
Fieschi had given in, in regard he judged them to be composed of extravagant
Interests, and to arise on charges not allowable by that Republic, who after
the death of Giustiniano disowned Fieschi for their Minister; hereupon great
disturbances and commotions arose amongst the Creditors, some of which being in
great Power, as the Janisary-Aga and others, Sequestration was laid on their
Man of War; so that she was toaed away to the Arsenal, and there laid up, and
attached for payment of the debt: which arising on the account of the Public,
the Goods of the Commonwealth was justly esteemed liable to the Sequestration:
during which time the Pestilence, the Epidemical disease of that season at
Constantinople, affecting with its contagion the Ships company, about eighteen
or twenty of them dyed thereof, and all their affairs reduced to a strange
consternation.

In this interim many and various were the disputes and contests between the
two Residents; sometimes they proposed to refer their differences to the
decision of the English, French, and Venetian Ministers; sometimes again,
finding the distance so wide and spacious between them, they resolved to have
their matters determined by Turkish Sentence. At length the new Resident
perceiving no end of this business, and that the Ship lay engaged at a great
charge, and as it were captivated to the great dishonor of the Republic, came
to an agreement to pay thirty three thousand Dollars, one third whereof was to
be paid in hand, and the other two thirds by equal portions in the space of one
year; the first payment to be made after six months, and the other six months
after; to which not only the Resident, but their Merchants also entered
personally into obligation. In this manner the Ship being cleared, and taking
such lading as offered for Genoua at Constantinople, sailed for Smyrna; where
taking another Ship of the same Country into her company, departed with the
Dutch Convoy for Christendom. But having remained six months in Port, subjected
to much charge and trouble, and not finding a Freight equal to the time and
expense, was no great encouragement to the Genoueses to continue this Trade;
which by good experience appears in no manner agreeable to their Country, nor
yielding success answerable to the long expectation of ten years past.

In this Year it was, that the Grand Signior and Great Vizier at the
instigation of Chusaein Aga the chief Customer (whom we have before mentioned)
casting their eyes on Smyrna, and finding it a place of great Trade, and a
convenient Port, for which in ancient times it was always famous, and for the
same cause was frequented by Merchants both from the Eastern and Western parts
of the World; so that it was become the only great and considerable Mart or
Scale within the Precincts of the Turkish Empire: considering it (I say) in
this manner with a benign eye, as bringing great profit and advantage, they
began to think it worthy the Ornament of some public Edifices, founded with
that Magnificence as might endure long, and renew the ancient Honor and
Reputation of Smyrna: Hereupon they erected in the first place a Besasteen, A
Besasteen and new Custom-house, and a Royal Chan built at Smyrna.
which is in the nature of our Exchange, where several Shops are made, and
variety of Goods sold; and to make the better Front toward the Sea, it was
founded therein on vast Stones and Piles, fit to support a weighty Building.

The next Edifice erected was a Custom-house built into the Sea only on Piles
of Timber, with a handsome Front toward the Sea; and this the Great Vizier
judged to be a work not only necessary, but also agreeable to the Majesty of
his Master; for until this time the Customer lived in a hired House, not unlike
the others which Merchants inhabit. And now this House being completed, a
Hattesheriff or Royal Decree came down from the Court, commanding that all
Ships that came into that Port either to lade or unlade, should lay their sides
to that Custom-house Scale, and thereon discharge their Goods, and receive
others.

And now whereas the Merchants enjoyed at all times in former days the
convenience of having their Goods landed on, and laden from their own Keys or
Scales, they greatly resented this innovation; and as they unwillingly quit any
Privlledge, so they judged this not unworthy to be contended for with singular
constancy and resolution: the commodiousness of which was thought so
considerable, that it not only caused this place in former days to flourish,
and to be distinguished from all the Marts in the World; but also the enjoyment
thereof invited the Inhabitants from the more elevated parts of Smyrna (where
was health and pleasure) to the lower Bogs and Marshes, exchanging health and
cheerful air for profit and convenience of Commerce. Hereupon applications were
made by all the Consuls of the Frank Nations to their Ambassadors and
Ministers at the Grand Signiors Court. In the mean time Trade by common
agreement was interdicted, at least as to the lading or unlading of Ships,
which continued for several days, and touched somewhat grievously the English
and Dutch Nations: the first having two Ships, and the latter six
Merchant-ships in Port. The English Ambassador being then personally at
Adrianople, was the first who without the assistance of any other Minister,
moved in this affair, but found great opposition in it from the Turkish
Officers; who with some resentment of the present reluctance of the Merchants,
declared not without passion, August and September, when this privilege was
taken from the Merchants. And in this Year also the Great Chan next to the
Besasteen was in Building, and the first Foundation thereof laid, and the great
Aquaduct brought from the Plains of Bogiaw, and little Harchi-bonar.

Anno Christi 1676. Hegeira 1087.
THis Year began with joyful News to the whole Turkish Empire, all places and
Cities of less renown rejoicing to hear the intentions of the Sultan to refresh
and adorn again his Capital Throne of Constantinople with the Imperial
Presence; for that City (which is the most proper Situation of the World, to
be made the head of a great Empire) having now almost for sixteen years wanted
the Rays of Majesty, and the Countenance of the Sultan, became almost abandoned
and forsaken of its Inhabitants, so that the spacious Seraglios or Palaces of
the chief Ministers and Officers of the Empire began to decay and run to ruin,
and the Artisans and Shopkeepers to leave their dwellings, and to follow their
Trade at Adrianople, or in the Camp. But now the News of the designed The G.
Signior returns to Constantinople.
return of the Grand Signior to his ancient Seat, filled all places with joy
and triumph, especially at Constantinople, which was not more satisfied with
the consideration of the benefit and advantage it was likely to receive by the
Royal Presence, than that those suspicious and jealousies which formerly
possessed the mind of the Sultan with a prejudice against this place, did seem
now to vanish, and that he reassumed a confidence of his Royal City equal to
that love and esteem which his Ancestors had of it; so that the humor which
then possessed Constantinople appeared like that of London at our Kings
Restoration, all joy, even to transport, for this unexspected Return; the
people in the streets congratulating their mutual happiness, thanked God, that
they had lived to see that happy day and blessed hour.

The occasion of this unexspected and sudden resolution caused many roving
guesses and opinations of the reasons of it. Some said a Dream which the Grand
Signior had, and which gave great disturbance to his thoughts, until he
resolved for Constantinople. Others said, the revolt and troubles at Cairo, of
which we shall presently have occasion to discourse, and some added certain
Commotions at Bagdat, or Babylon; some reported, that Xeriff of Mecha wrote him
a Letter, that he could not acknowledge Conjectures concerning the reasons of
the Grand Signiors return to Constantinople.
him the Head and Protector of the Mussulmin Faith, so long as he had abandoned
his Imperial City, and lived in the mountains and unknown places. Others said,
that the Janisaries and Militia murmured, and that his Coming to Constantinople
was forced and not to be avoided; and that the Sultan being now out of love
with Adrianople, had cursed it, and sworn never more to set foot in it, having
ordered the Materials sent for the building of the Great Seraglio at
Adrianople, to be stopped on the way, and returned back again. At this rate all
the World talked and discoursed, joy and hopes made the people fancy every
thing according to their wishes. The Grand Signior being approached near to
Constantinople, fixed himself in his Camp in the Fields, near a small Seraglio
of his own, called Daout Basha, from whence the people for many days expected,
that he should, according to the Custom of his Ancestors, make a solemn Entry;
instead whereof he made some Sallies with a small Company through the Streets,
as it were incognito, taking his pastime on the Water, and on the sides of the
Bosphorus in his Galleys and Boats, but most commonly frequented his Palace of
Scutari on the Asian side, where with much delight and confidence he lodged and
reposed his Court, but made no solemn Entry through the City, nor frequented
his great Seraglio; where though he might perhaps dine, and pass certain hours,
yet he slept not one Night there; of which the people took especial notice, and
thereby received consirmation of the jealousy their Sovereign had of them, to
their extraordinary grief and dissatisfaction; however it was some contentment
to the people, and renown unto the City to have their Emperor so near, though
it was rumoured as if the Court toward the approach of Winter intended again
to return unto Adrianople. In the mean time the Grand Signior took his chief
delight and divertisement on the Water, passing in his Galleys and
Pleasure-Boats up the Bosphorus to the mouth of the Black Sea; and thence
returning, much frequented the Gardens, and Houses of Delight upon the Banks of
the River; and visiting all places, a Country House called Therapea, belonging
to the Dutch Resident, received the honor of his Presence, which he liked so
well, that he took it from the Proprietor, and conferred it without any
consideration of money on one of his Courtiers, giving out a Proclamation, That
no Christian Minister should possess any Seat or Habitation on the side of the
Bosphorus. A strange thing, and what is not to be paralleled in any part of the
World.

About the beginning of this Year the Captain Pasha died, and Zaid Ahmet
Pasha-ogli, then at the Camp, succeeded him; his Father was a famous Man, and
in the same Charge, but cut off by old Kuperlee. Soon after Ibrahim Pasha,
General of the Army at Kemenitz, likewise died, and his Office was conferred on
Ibrahim Pasha, that was Pasha of Candia, of whom we have had often occasion to
speak, being a great friend to the English Nation. The Great Vizier also was
not far remote from the Consines of Death, being now fallen, by reason of
immoderate drinking of Wine, and chiefly of hot Cinnamon Waters, into a formed
Dropsy and Jaundice.

In the preceding year we touched on the removal of the Tefterdar or Treasurer
from his Office to the Government of Grand Cairo, and the reasons for it, which
though it might be a preferment (being the richest and most important Charge of
the Empire) to which the esteem the Sultan had of his parts and abilities,
might probably advance him; yet the employing of him at a distance so remote,
was certainly an effect of some displeasure, whereby he or his Favorites
judged him a Person not sit to remain longer near the Royal Presence. Wherefore
having commenced his Journey (as before mentioned) he arrived at Grand Cairo,
where he had not long continued before he began, according to the natural
acuteness of his mind and hugstering manner, to pierce with a narrow inspection
into all Affairs of that Government, and particularly into the Revenue and
Treasure of the Country, contriving with himself by what means the disorders
might be corrected, and the Revenue and Tribute improved; for he had an
excellent Genius or Spirit in the matters of Money, nothing in advantage of
Interest could ever escape him; so that he began to lay a new foundation in all
proceedings; he would not be contented with the old Taxes and Impositions, and
where he found Lands improved, or the Customs augmented, he would put in for a
share of the Benefits, and would reform every thing wherein he judged his
Master to have been abused. But though he was acute and sharp-sighted in such
matters as these, yet he wanted experience in the Government of Egypt; for the
great Beghs of this Country being alarmed The People in Egypt rebel against
their new Pasha.
with these innovations, began to stand upon their Guard, and to enter into
private Consultations, in what manner to oppose themselves to this new way of
Government, which looked like slavery, and designs of bringing them into
servitude, and a subjection unknown to them and their Forefathers. For indeed
the Government of Egypt, if well considered, is rather Aristocratical than
Monarchical; for though they acknowledge the Sultan to be their Head, and
accept his Pasha for Ruler, and pay a yearly Tribute; yet the Beghs which are
great Lords in their respective Countries, carry the sway and Dominion in all
other matters, and will endure nothing which savours of oppression or
innovation; so that these persons grown jealous by the proceedings of the new
Pasha, flew into open Sedition, and immediately to Arms, with force of which
they assaulted the Pasha's Palace, took him and threw him into Prison. The News
whereof flying with all haste to the Ottoman Court, appeared at the first
apprehension or surprise as if all Egypt had revolted, and gave the World
occasion to discourse, That the Wars were to be carried Eastward, and that the
sudden resolution of removing the Court to Constantinople was in order to a
farther March into those parts But frequent Messages with time making the
business to be better understood, caused the Grand Signior to dispeed with all
haste another Pasha, with Commission to remove the former, and to continue all
the ancient Customs and Privileges from the beginning indulged to the Beghs of
Egypt: with which Message and gentle words of grace and favor from the Sultan,
all discontents being pacified, the former Pasha was released from his
Imprisonment, and suffered to depart, and thence proceeded to the Island of
Candia, where he entered on that Pashaluck, succeeding Ibrahim Pasha in Charge,
who (as before related) was sent to Kemenitz to be General of the Army, in
place of the Pasha lately deceased.

But here I must not forget a story which happened during the time of this
Summer, whilst the Grand Signior had his abode and enjoyed his Recreations in
the circumjacent parts of Constantinople, there was a certain Sultana which had
been a cast Wench of Sultan Ibrahim, who after his death, having been married
to some Pasha, obtained her release from the old Seraglio, and being also a
Widow by the death of this Husband, had liberty to take her habitation on the
Banks of the Bosphorus, or where she thought fit. This Lady was called Soltana
Sporcha, in Turkish The History of Soltana Sporcha.
Mordar: how she came to be so nominated I cannot tell, perhaps some Italian
Pages of the Court might in respect to her way of living impose this Name upon
her, for she was no other than a Bawd, or something worse, making it her
Profession to buy young Girls, and to educate them in singing, dancing, and in
all the ways which best accomplish Courtisans. Amongst this Train of Scholars,
she had one more brisk and aerie than the others which could sing, and dance,
and prate incomparably, and was so quick in her Reparties, that she greatly
delighted the Pasha's and Lords, whose pleasures she attended, bringing from
them considerable Gifts and Presents to the enriching of her self and Mistress;
and became so much the talk of the Court, that at length the report of her
arrived the ears of the Grand Signior, who being also desirous to enjoy some
divertisement by the pranks of this witty Girl, sent to the Sultana one of the
black Eunuchs for her: which Imperial Command she not daring to disobey,
consigned her with great submission into the hands of the Messenger; but with
this caution, that she humbly desired the Sultan not to make any attempt on her
Chastity, in regard she was both a Virgin and a Freewoman. The Grand Signior
having pleased himself with the wantonness of this Wench, began to take a fancy
to her, and resolved to take her into the Seraglio; but she showing a kind of
nicety and coiness, the Grand Signior, who perhaps was better accommodated,
sent her back again to her Mistress, reslecting (as was supposed) with some
disgust on the cautions which accompanied her. It happened not long after, that
this Girl exercising her Art in the presence of some great Persons, one Chesme
Aga, a Bosnian by Nation, Captain of the Great Viziers Guard, a stout and
valiant man, happening to be a Spectator one night, became unfortunately
enamoured of her, and from that time not being able to remove the impression
she had made in his heart, resolved, if possible, to make her his Wife, and to
that end made his affections known and his intentions of Marriage, both to her
and to her Mistress. The Girl was well enough pleased to become the Wife of so
honorable a Person; but the Sultana unwilling to lose the profit and benesit
she daily brought her in, refused the Match, declaring, That she was a Slave,
and not at her own disposal, and therefore in no capacity of bestowing her self
any way without her consent. This impediment giving a stop to the Marriage, put
the two Lovers on plots and contrivances in what manner to enjoy each other,
and Love being ingenious, quickly found out a means to bring them together; for
the Girl escaping from her Mistress, lodged her self in those Chambers which
her Lover had found for her. And being now missed, none but Chesme Aga was
charged with her, of whom she complained to the Grand Signior, and cited him
before his Master the Great Vizier to answer for her; but he denying to know
any thing of her, and no witness appearing against him, all farther proceedings
were superseded for the present: But Soltana Sporcha keeping watchful spies
upon all the motions of Chesme Aga, at length found him and his Mistress
together, and by the Authority of Officers brought them both before the Vizier:
to whom the Sultana sent a rude message, That Chesme Aga should be punished,
and that her Slave should be returned. The Vizier hereof acquainted the Grand
Signior, and gave him to understand the message which the Sultana had sent him,
desiring to know what punishment he was pleased should be inflicted on them. In
which interim Chesme Aga told the Vizier, That he expected no other than a
sentence of death from the Grand Signior, only he desired that his beloved
Mistress might be spared, for he was sure he should live in her. It was not
long before the fatal Decree came for putting Chesme Aga to death, and sending
the Woman to the Seraglio, which was immediately executed; which act might seem
to denote a natural cruelty in the Sultan, being in reality very severe, though
the whole course of his Reign has been more gentle and mild than of any of the
Ottoman Emperors; only this fact proceeded rather from disdain than thirst of
blood, being angry that this Girl should prefer the Love of one of his Vassals
before the Honors of the Seraglio, and that her Mistress the Soltana should
charm him with a lie of her being free, when she was no other than a slave, and
not long before bought for an inconsiderable price.

Not long after this, and toward the 11th or 12th of September, when the Sun
was come to the Equinoctial, the Grand Signior prepared to depart. The rumor
of which displeasing and making sad the peoples The Grand Signior returns again
to Adrianople.
hearts, as much as his presence before comforted them, it was given out, That
the Grand Signior intended to return with the Spring, and divide the
consolation, which his residence produced, between the two Regal Cities, and
for an evidence thereof, he ordered a Platform to be laid for erecting a new
Seraglio at Scutari, and the Vizier designed another at Bezick-rash, and the
Palaces of the Pasha's and great Men were all putting into a way of Reparation,
which for some time amused and contented the minds of the Commonalty.

About the beginning of October the Grand Signior set forward toward
Adrianople, being accompanied with the Mosayp, which is his Favorite, and Kara
Mustapha who was his Chimacam, taking his recreation by the way in Hunting; but
the Great Vizier Achmet Pasha continuing still sick of his Dropsy and
Jaundice, took his Journey by Water as far as Selebrea for his better ease, and
thence proceeding in a Horse-litter to Churlu, which is the halfway to
Adrianople, on the 23d of October expired his last; his Disease, though
heightened by Wine and hot Spirits, The Death of the Great Vizier Achmet.
yet was in some part hereditary, his Father dying of the Dropsy. His Body was
on the 25th brought back again in a Coach to Constantinople with a small
Attendance, and buried in the same Sepulcher with his Father. He His Character.
was a Person (for I have seen him often, and knew him well) of a middle
stature, of a black beard, and brown complexion, something shortsighted, which
caused him to knit his brows and pore very intently when any strange person
entered to his presence: he was inclining to be fat, and grew corpulent toward
his latter days. If we consider his age when he first took upon him this
important Charge, the Enemies his Father had created him, the contentions he
had with the Valede Sultana or the Queen Mother, and the Arts he had used to
reconcile the affections of these great Personages, and conserve himself in the
unalterable esteem of his Sovereign to the last hour of his death, there is
none but must judge him to have deserved the Character of a prudent and
politic Person. If we consider how few were put to death, and what
inconsiderable Mutinies or Rebellions happened in any part of the Empire during
his Government, it will afford us a clear evidence and proof of his gentleness
and moderation beyond the example of former times; for certainly he was not a
Person who delighted in blood, and in that respect of an humor far different
from the temper of his Father; He was generous, and free from Avarice, a rare
Virtue in a Turk! He was educated in the Law, and therefore greatly addicted to
all the Formalities of it, and in the Administration of that sort of Justice
very punctual and severe; He was very observant of the Capitulations between
our King and the Grand Signior, being ready to do Justice upon any corrupt
Minister, who pertinaciously violated and transgressed them, of which I could
give several instances, but these being improper for this place, are only in
general to be mentioned with due gratitude in honor to his Memory. As to his
behavior toward the neighboring Princes, there may, I believe, be fewer
examples of his breach of Faith, than what his Predecessors have given in a
shorter time of Rule. In his Wars abroad he was successful, having upon every
expedition enlarged the Bounds of the Empire; He overcame Newhawsel or Oywar,
and laid thereunto a considerable part of Hungary, which to this day continues
subject, and pays contribution to the Turk.

He concluded the War with Venice after twenty seven years continuance, by an
entire and total subjection of the Island of Candia, having subdued that
impregnable Fortress, which by the rest of the World was esteemed invincible.

He won Kemenitz, the Key of Poland, where the Turks had been frequently
baffled, and laid Ukrania to the Empire; reducing the Cosacks, those mortal
Enemies, to subjection, and to a desire of taking on them the Ottoman Yoke: and
finally, ho imposed a new Tribute on all Poland. After all which Glories he
dyed in the 47th year of his Age, and 15th year and 8th day of his Government;
a short time, if we consider it, for such great actions; howsoever, if we
measure his triumphs, rather than count his years, though he might seem to have
lived but little to his Prince and People, yet certainly to himself he could
not dye more seasonable, nor in a greater height and eminency of Glory.
Vtcunque Principi, and Reipublicae parum, sibi certe satis suaeque Gloriae
vixisse videbitur.

The Great Vizier having in this manner expired his last breath, the Seal was
immediately carried by his Brother to the Grand Signior, who upon Receipt
thereof, according to common expectation, conferred the same on Kara Mustapha
Pasha, who had for so many years formerly exercised the Office of Chimacam,
which is as much as Deputy to the Kara Mustapha made Vizier.
Great Vizier, of whom in other places we gave a Character of being a wise and
experienced Person, of a smooth behavior, and a great Courtier; agreeable to
which temper of mind, so soon as he attained this promotion, he sent an
obliging and courteous Message to the Servants of the deceased Vizier,
condoling with them the death of their Master, promising to take them and their
Concernments into his Care and Protection; according whereunto he advanced
Solomon Kahya (who was the late Vizier's Substitute, and for some years had
managed all Affairs) to the Office of Embrahore, which is chief Master of the
Grand Signiors Horse, and is a place not only of honor, but of great security.
He that was his own Kahya he made a Vizier of the Bench, and Chimacam in the
same manner as he was to Achmet Vizier; by which point of policy he seemed to
have strengthened himself against all Enemies, for having two Creatures of his
own so well disposed; one near the Person of his Prince, who would be able to
do him all good Offices; and the other (whenever the Wars or other occasions
should cause him to be absent from the Royal Presence) might supply his place
without attempting to supplant him. The Kapisler-Kahyasee, or Master of the
Ceremonies to the late Vizier, he made his own Kahya, and all the other Agas
which depended on that Court, he received into his own service; so that in
effect there seemed, by this great chance of Mortality, to be little other
alteration in the Court, than of the single person of the deceased Vizier; of
whose Memory, that the Grand Signior might evidence the love and esteem that he
retained, he did not intermeddle or appropriate unto himself any part of his
Estate, or disanulled his Testament; but resigned all into the hands of his
Relations, challenging no share or proportion thereof: And whereas the Vizier
left no Children, the Estate fell to his Brother and Sisters, who to evidence
their Devotion to Religion, and good will to the Public, and to please the
eyes of the envious World, conferred on Mecha the Rent of the new Custom house,
the Besasteen, and new Chan built at Smyrna, and finished in the year 1677.

At this first change there were rumors, that the new Vizier had begun his
Government in blood, having cut off several Heads lately in Authority; but all
was false, and only grounded on a displeasure which he was known to have
conceived against certain persons. Only one act he performed rather of justice
than severity, having cut off one of the Pay-masters of the Exchequer for false
Money. The occasion was this: Certain Muletiers having received money from the
Exchequer in Venetian Zechins, and finding several of them false, returned them
again, but could not prevail to have them changed; whereupon having made their
Memorial thereof, they carried them to the Vizier, and upon examination, the
Play Master declared, That he received them from the Great Ibrahim Han-ogli, who
being for that Cause sent for and accused, was put into a fear, which proved as
dangerous to him as a Disease, the apprehensions of Death being worse than the
reality; but the Great Tefterdar soon cleared him of this Accusation, having
attested, That to his knowledge the money received from him was good, and
disposed on other occasions; so that the whole blame lying now on the
Play Master, and upon farther search more of the same stamp being found in his
hands, he deservedly suffered the punishment of Death, the which had likewise
been inflicted on another Officer of the same rank, but not being found so
culpable as the other, he was permitted to redeem his life with forty Purses of
Money, or twenty thousand Dollars.

Thus far we have seen the gentle and smooth behavior of the present
Alterations with the new Vizier.
Vizier toward the Friends, Relations, and Servants of the deceased, and with
what Acts of Justice he began his Government. But, behold, on a sudden the face
of the whole Court was changed, every Officer thereof putting on a Countenance
of fierceness, pride, and arrogance, beyond the manner and custom lately
practiced. For the Great Vizier took on himself the State and Grandeur of the
Sultan, (the access being as difficult to him as to his Master) his Kahya that
of the Vizier, and so every inferior Officer advanced himself into a fancy of
possessing the next and immediate Degree above him. This haughty behavior had
a more particular influence on the Ministers and Representatives of Foreign
Princes, whose Interpreters were not admitted, as formerly, to private
Audiences or Conferences about their Affairs, but only at the Public Divan,
where their Arzes or Memorials were to be preferred in the same manner as was
practiced by the Subjects of the Country, and those of conquered Nations, who
petition for Justice. The which abasement was not only cast on the
Interpreters, but on the Persons of the Representatives themselves: an example
of which we have in the French Ambassador; who coming at the time appointed to
receive his Audience of the Vizier, was forced to expect a long time before he
could have admittance, and then entering into the Chamber of Audience, was
rudely crowded, and rushed upon by a Crew of unmannerly Chaouses, who no
otherwise regarded the Person of the Ambassador, than if he had been one of the
Grooms or Lacquies. Being come to the Seat of Audience, the Ambassador
observed, That the Stool for the Great Vizier was set upon the Soffra, and that
for Him below, or at the foot of it; the which being an unusual and unpractised
diminution of the ancient honor given formerly to Ambassadors, he ordered one
of his Servants, To set it again on the Soffra equal with that of the Vizier's;
the which being done, was again brought down by one of the Vizier's Pages, and
placed as before; whereupon, the Ambassador seizing the Stool with his own
hand, carried it on the Soffra, and sat upon it; which being reported to the
Vizier, then in his retiring Chamber, he sent twice to him to remove, letting
him know, That unless the Stool were returned into the Place appointed by him,
he would not appear in the Chamber of Audience. Whereunto his Excellency
returned this prudent Answer, That the Vizier might dispose of his Chair as he
pleased, but not of his Person. In which Interim the Chaous-bashee came in,
roaring out, Calder, Calder, which is, Take it away, Take it away, (meaning the
Stool) at which noise the Ambassador arising to see what the matter was, had
the Stool taken from under him; whereat being greatly enraged, he threw out of
the Room in a high passion, and causing the Presents which he brought to be
again returned with him, he mounted his Horse, and departed.

Afterward it was intimated unto the English Ambassador, That he might, if he
pleased, receive Audience of the Great Vizier; But his Excellency,
understanding in what manner the French Ambassador had been treated, excused
his Going, on pretense of an Indisposition of health. Howsoever, the Venetian
Bailo, and the Residents of Holland and Genoua were contented to be admitted
unto Audience on those terms which the Vizier was pleased to allow. And though
during the time that he was Chimacam, and bore other inferior Offices, and
Charges of Trust, his behavior was gentle, affable, and civil; yet I fear,
that now having changed his Office, he will have altered his humor, and that
his Greatness will have increased his Pride, Avarice, and Fierceness: thus, no
man knows what another will be, when he shall enter into power. Dic mihi si
fueris tu Leo, qualis eris.
And as Magistratus indicat Virum, so in the actions of his management the
temper and constitution of this great Person will be discovered. And thus
having given a short Account and Character of this present Vizier, his future
Acts and Monuments must be the Subject of other Pens.

FINIS.
THE TABLE TO THE Reign of Sultan Morat or Amurat IV.
A.
ABassa Pasha of Erzirum his Rebellion, page 2. he advances toward
Constantinople, 9. is reconciled to the Grand Signior, 21. and made Pasha of
Bosna, 22. made General in the War with Poland, 44. he is strangled by command
of the Grand Signior page 49 Algierines infest the Seas casting off their
reverence to the Sultan, 16. land at Scanderone and rob the warehouses, and
then set them on fire, 16, 17. infest the Gulf of Venice, 72. are blocked up by
the Venetian in Valona ibid. Ali Pasha slain in Mesopotamia by the Persian and
his Army routed page 10 Sultan Amurat advanced to the Throne at fourteen years
of age, 3. described, ibid. his lewd debaucht life, 27, 28. like to have been
killed by lightning, 31. which works some reformation in him for the present,
ibid. he sends an Ambassador into Persia, 32. A peace made with the Persians,
but quickly broken, 38. several acts of his tyranny, 43. he destroys taverns,
ibid. makes war on the Poles, 44. sues to them for peace, 49. more acts of his
cruelty, 51. forbids all houses of entertainment, 52. goes in person with his
Arniy into Persia, ibid. musters at Erzrum three hundred thousand sighting men,
57. his patience and labors, ibid. causes his two brothers Bajazet and Orchan
to be strangled, ibid. he returns from Persia to Constantinople, 58. his
aversion to Tabaco, 59. more instances of his cruelty, ibid. and 60. and 69,
70. He resolves again to march in person into Persia, page 68. he begins his
march in May 1638. 71. the History of his march, 77, 78. the whole Army arrives
before Babylon or Bagdat, 79. he takes it, 81. his braving Letter to the King
of Persia, 82. he returns to Constantinople, ibid. he dies of a Fever
contracted by a dsbauch, 89. his Character ibid. Asac besieged and taken by the
Moscovites and Cosacks page 65, 66
B.
BAbylon or Bagdat taken from the Turks by the Persians in 1626. 10. the Turks
laying siege to it to recover it are beaten off, ibid. likewise the second
time, 15. a third time, 29. the Grand Signior himself commanding the Army takes
it page 81 Balsora taken by the Persian page 10 Bechir Pasha of Babylon joins
with Abassa in his rebellion page 4 Bethlem Gabor, vid. Gabor. Biram Pasha made
Great Vizier, 63. is slain dt the Siege of Babylon page 8 Buda, the Garrison
there mutiny; but upon surrendering four of the Ringleaders to punishment, and
craving pardon, things are quieted and past by page 36
C.
CAffa taken by the Tartars front the Turks, but soon restored 19, 20 Candia
its General sights a Turkish Gally belonging to the Archipelago (mistaking it
for a Pirate) commanded by Dervis Bei, which had like to have broke the peace,
but the Venetian Ambassador at the Port makes up the business page 17, 18
Cantemir, a Tartar, makes a new Colony, 64. being driven out of it by the
Tartar Han, he is strangled at Constantinople page 65 Marin Capello takes the
Algierine Galleys in the Port of Valona page 73 Caramosauls what page 41. Count
Cesi French Ambassador at the Port page 51 Chusaein the Great Vizier advances
Sultan Amurat to the Throne, who soon deposes him from his Office, and
afterward causes him to be strangled, and why page 2, 3, 4 Constantinople, a
terrible Fire there in 1634. page 47 Corban what page 3 Cosacks their Boats
described, 6. in them entering the Bosphorus they make great spoil on the
Turkish Coasts, 7. they insest the Black Sea, 20. again more numerously, 26,
27. their Country described, 66. the ground of the war betwixt them and the
Poles ibid. and 67, 68 Cyrillus the Patriarch strangled at the false and
malicious suggestions of the Jesuits against him page 71
D.
DAmascus revolts to the Persian page 10
E.
ELia Pasha rebels in Anatolia, but being first beaten in the field, and then
besieged in Magnesia, surrenders himself upon fair promises, but at his arrival
at Constantinople is strangled page 35, 36 The Emperor sends an Envoye to the
Port, who disputes with the English Ambassador for precedence page 87 Erzirum
siding with the Rebel Abassa is besieged by the Turks who are beaten off, 18.
but is surrendered voluntarily upon Abassa's Reconciliation page 21
F.
FAcardin an Arabian Prince his History page 39 -- 42 French Ambassador
imprisoned, 36. his Interpreter impaled, page 37. another Interpreter of theirs
hanged, 51. their Ambassador Marcheville forcibly sent away page 50
G.
GAbor Prince of Transylvania makes war on the Emperor, 7. the reasons of it,
ibid. and 8. He obtains aid of the Turks, 8. a Truce made, ibid. The Turks not
keeping it, are in several places discomfited by the Emperor's Forces, 9. the
Truce ended, being aided by Duke John of Weymar and Count Mansfelt, as also by
Morteza Pasha of Buda, he sights Wallestein the Emperor's General, and routs
his Army, II. whereupon a peace is made betwixt the Emperor and Prince, 12. he
dies, 23. his Character, ibid. and 24. leaving no children his Widow for a
while keeps the Government, but is persuaded to resign it to Stephen Gabor, who
yet keeps it not, but resigns it to George Ragotski page 25 Germans continue
their Truce with the Turks page 39 Jembeg Gheray succeeds Mehmet in the Kingdom
of Tartary, 23. dispeeds sorty thousand Horse into Podolia and Russia to ravage
the Country, who are intercepted by the Poles and Cosacks in their return and
almost all cut off, ibid. he is treacherously slain, 65. Bechir Gheray his
brother ordained King in his stead ibid. Gregorians, a great slaughter made of
them by the Turk page 15 Emir Gumir betrays Revan to the Turks page 57
H.
HAlil Pasha made Great Vizier, 4. made General in the war with Persia, 15. is
recalled, ibid. is put out of his Office page 19
I.
JAmbolat Ogli strangled page 62 Janisaries unruly, 1, 4. they are curbed, 22.
they again grow more insolent, 33, 34. but are soon tamed by the Sultan's
severity page 35 Jews how treated in Turkey page 22 Illay near Babylon
garrisoned by the Turks, page 29. retaken by assault by the Persians page 30
L.
LUpulo Prince of Moldavia desires the Sultan to conser the Principality of
Valachia on his Son, etc. page 84
M.
MArquess of Marcheville, French Ambassador at the Port, for his complaints
against the Captain-Pasha is forcibly sent away page 51 Matthew Prince of
Valachia obtains a Victory over Lupulo Prince of Moldavia page 84 Medina taken
by the Persian page 10 Mehmet elected King of the Tartars by the people,
overcomes his elder Brother Gherey, whom the Grand Signior would have imposed
on them, 5. he defeats him a second time, though assisted by the Grand Signior
page 19 Mehmet, Pasha of Cairo, made Great Vizier page 34 The G. Mogul promises
to assist the Turk, if he will break with the Persian page 38 Moldavia,
troubles there page 36 Morat, vid. Amurat. Morteza Pasha of Buda joins with the
Prince of Transylvania against the Emperor, II. he with the Prince make peace
with the Emperor page 12, 13 Mosul taken by the Persian page 10 Sultan
Mustapha his incapacity for the Government, 1. is deposed, 2, 3. commanded to
be slain by Sultan Morat page 83
P.
PErsia, the King enters the Turks Dominions with a powerful Army, 9. his
success, 10. sends an Ambassador to the Port with proposals of peace, but
without effect, 15. sends another likewise without effect, 16. the Persians
receive a defeat by the Turk, 26. peace made with the Turk, but quickly broke,
38. The King again sends an Ambassador to the Port with proposals of peace,
63. who not succeeding in his errand, is sorced to accompany the Turkish Army
into Persia, page 70. After the loss of Babylon they send another Ambassador
to the Port, 83. who obtains a peace page 84 Poles make peace with the Turks,
29, 30. but the Turks soon break it, taking part with the Moscovites, 44. they
send an Ambassador to the Port, 45. give a great deseat to the Moscovites, who
profser an advantageous and honorable peace to the Poles, which is accepted,
48. They are sued unto for peace by the Grand Signior, and at last consent, 49.
the peace consirmed by the Turk page 61
R.
RAgotski elected Prince of Transylvania, 25. he refuses aid from the Turks,
31. he instates one Matthias in the Principality of Valachia, and ejects one
constituted by the Grand Signior, called Stridia Bei or Lord Oysters, 39.
Stephen Bethlem that had been his Competitor for the Principality, stirs up the
Turk against him, whom he defeats in several battles, 53, 55, 56. whereby he is
confirmed in the Principality, and obtains also from the Port a confirmation of
the same for his Son ibid. Revan betrayed by the Governor Emir Gumir to the
Turks, 57. recovered by the Persian page 59
S.
SElictar Aga who, 19. he is made Great Vizier, ibid. gains a Victory over the
Persians, 26. besieges Babylon, but is beaten off, 28, 29. he returns to
Constantinople, and is deprived of his Office page 32 Serches Pasha, vid.
Selictar Aga.
T.
TArtary, the King thereof treacherously slain page 65 Tauris taken by the
Turks from the Persian, 15. utterly destroyed by them page 58 Pirates of Tunis
infest the Seas, 16. See Algierines.
V.
VAlona, the Venetian Admiral takes fourteen Algierine Galleys in this Port,
page 73. which boldness the Venetians are glad to make amends for to the Port
page 86 Van besieged by the Persian page 62
THE TABLE TO THE Reigns of Sultan Ibrahim and Sultan Mabomet.
A.
ABermont, the Captain of the French Man of War, whereon Monsieur de la Hay
arrived at Constantinople, incurs great danger of his life, and wherefore Page
193 Achmet Great Vizier deprived of his Office and strangled 33 Aleppo, the
Merchants thereof more subject to troublesome Avania's than others, and an
instance given 116 Alexandria, a Plague there, 11. the Alexandrian Fleet
encountered by the Venetians, 101. taken by the Malteses in 1673. 304 Algierines
make complaints at the Port of the English Fleet commanded by the Earl of
Sandwich, but find no encouragement, 87. they make a peace with the English,
113. the Articles signed by the Grand Signior, 129. they are carried by the
Author to Algier, with a relation of two pleasant passages in his journey,
ibid. 130, 131. they except against an Article of the Peace, and send a Letter
to his Majesty, whereupon the War breaks out asresh, 133, 134. the inconstancy
of their Government 133 Colonel Anand, an Englishman, and one Stefano Cordili
made Plenipotentiaries to treat with the Great Vizier about the surrender of
Candia 273 Michael Apasi constituted Prince of Transylvania by the Turks, 80.
his Letter to the Earl of Winchelsea English Ambassador at the Port, 98. he is
beloved of his people 146 Asac besieged by the Turks in the year 1641. but not
taken, 6, 7. again besieged in 1642. and then taken, being abandoned by the
Inhabitants, 9. After it had been sacked by the Moscovite in 1674. the Turk
rebuilds it 313 Asan Pasha of Aleppo rebels and marches toward Constantinople,
56. he joins battle with the Great Vizier and discomfits him, 57. he is
treacherously strangled by Mortaza Pasha 58 Asan Aga the Mosayp or Favorite
his story 123 Austria spoiled by the Turks in 1663. 141
B.
BAkockza taken by Count Serini 147 Ballarino, Secretary to Signior Capello the
Venetian Bailo, supplies his Office, 50. his sorrowsul Letter to Senator Nicolo
Contarini, 102. his Character, 103. he is suspected by the Turks to use Sorcery
121 Balsora, its Pasha rebels in 1667. and is forced to slay into Persia 230
Baltagibashee, what 124 Cardinal Barbarini bestows a pension of eight hundred
Crowns a mon h upon Count Serini, 160. he supplies the (...) with four thousand
measures of corn in their Wars in Candia page 228 Barcan taken by Count Soise,
and burnt 166 Girolamo Bataglia and Francesco Bataglia Proveditors General both
killed at the Siege of Candia 249 Duke de Beaufort the Popes General at Sea
desires of the King of France, his natural Prince, leave to try his fortune by
Land at the Siege of Candia, 263. he is killed there 267 Beker Pasha of Rhodes
strangles the Pasha of Cyprus, 11. made Captain Pasha, 12. put to death by
order of the G. Signior 15 Belgrade, here the Great Vizier had his
Winter Quarters the sirst year of the Hungarian war in 1663. 145. resides there
the second winter, after the peace made 176 Signior Bembo obtains a Victory
over the Turks at Sea 54 Sir Tho. Bendish Ambassador at the Port, his
Expedient for obtaining redress of wrongs offered to the Merchants, 18. he
opposes the forcing of English Ships into the Turks service against Candia, but
without effect. 40 Berclay made Prince of Transylvania, 73. the Transylvanians
depose him 78 Berzenche taken by Count Serini 147 A Blazing-star seen in most
parts of the known world in 1664. and particularly in Turkey, with their
opinion what it portended 177 Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg assist Candia
with three thousand men 252
C.
CAiro, a Rebellion of the great Beghs there, 153. another 330 Caminiecz taken
by the Turks in eleven days, 300. blocked up the Poles, 311. but the Siege
raised by the Turks 313 Candia (the Isle) how it became the possession of
Venice, 23. what the occasion of the Turks making war against it, 13. the
beginning of the war, 20. The Turks Sea and Landforces at first employed in
it, what, 21. what the preparations of tho Venetians, 22. The Turks land in
this Isle, page 24. what supplies the Venetians had toward this war from
Christendom 25 Candia (the City) first besieged in 1647. by the Turks, who were
then forced to raise the Siege, 28. besieged a second time in 1650. and again
beaten off, 41. (...) a third time, when the Turks losing three thousand men at
one assault again drew off, 43. this war carried on fainlly by the Turks for
several years, 85. prosecuted asresh in 1666. 221. what aid the Venetians then
had from Christian Princes, 227. the Fortisications of the Town described, and
what Quarters were possessed by the Besiegers and Besieged, 332. the History of
the Siege continued (uninterruptedly) from 232 to 254. and from 262 to 277. its
Duke killed, 253. large succors sent thither from France, 263. the Garrison
makes a notable sally, but with bad success, 266. French Officers slain in this
sally, 267. the French depart, 268. a Council held to consider of the state of
the Town, 270. the result of the Council to enter into a Treaty with the
Vizier, 273. the conditions of peace, 274. the Town delivered to the Turks,
277. an account of the number of the slain on both sides, the batteries,
storms, sallies, etc. 276. what a sad spectacle of desolation at its surrender
278 Canea taken by the Turks, 25. they land here forty thousand fighting men 26
Antonio Capello, Commander of the Venetian Galleys 23 Gio. Capello made Doge
General of the Sea, 25. what his Armata ibid. Signior Capello Bailo at the Port
imprisoned, 45. his ill usage casts him into a deep melancholy, 48. his
Commission taken from him, 50. he dies at Constantinople, but his Corpse
conveyed to Venice 104 Casimir King of Poland resigns his Crown, and how
affairs then stood there 297 Chirfaleas, a courageous Captain, 145. is slain
near Serinswar 158 Chusaein Pasha, General of the Turks in Candia, 39. is made
Great Vizier, but to reside still in Candia, 42. is discharged from the Office
of Great Vizier, 47. is put to death by the Great Vizier Kuperlee page 58
Chusaein Pasha of Buda besieges Leventz, 162. is routed by Count Soise 164
Another Chusaein Pasha is made Governor of Caminiecz 300 Clissa taken by
Foscolo, the Venetian General, 28. the Turks endeavor to regain it, but are
beaten off, 40. it is described 196 Claudiopolis besieged by the Turks, but not
taken, 80. yields it self to Apasi Prince of Transylvania 148 Constantinople, a
great plague there in 1661. 8. an Insurrection there on the account of the
Grand Signior's Brothers 261 Count Coligni Commander of the French Troops in
Hungary joins Montecuculi, 162. his valor at the great battle with the Turks
on the Rab, 169. having received honors of the Emperor he returns homewards
with his Army 175 Corban, the manner of it among the Turks 144 Andrea Cornaro
General and Inquisitor in Candia, 23. is slain in the defense of Retimo 25
Another Andrea Cornaro Captain General of the Venetians, 223. being made
Proveditor General, he is slain at Candia with a Granado 263 Cosacks infest the
Black Seas, 40, 41. they infest the Tartars, 122. great numbers of them carried
into captivity by the Turks 315 Curdi or Cordiaei their Country described,
their Religion and Manners 92, 93
D.
DAlmatia one seat of the War betwixt the Turks and Venetians, 27. after Candia
was surrendered, Commissioners are sent hither by the Turk and Venetian for
determining the differences of the Consines, 288. all the particulars adjusted,
and the war between the Turk and Venetian ended 291 Clipped Dollars called in by
the Great Vizier, 115. his Stewards Treasurer put to death for disobeying this
command ibid. Dorosensko General of the Cosacks revolts to the Turks page 298
Dunelma or a Festival among the Turks how celebrated 144 The Dutch Resident
unjustly sentenced to make satisfaction for Goods belonging to Turks on board a
Dutch Vessel surprised by Venetian and Maliese Corsairs 127
E.
EGypt, the Government there at present rather Aristocratical than Monarchical
330 Elmas, a Village in the Upper Hungary, near which the German and Turkish
Ambassadors use to be exchanged 220 Embrahore, that Office what 333 English
Trade first introduced into Turkey, when, 65. what befell the Nation and Trade
in Turkey in the year 1662. 113. the Custom endeavored to be raised at Aleppo
and Scanderone in 1665. by the Customer, 197. the Scale also threatened to be
removed from Scanderone to Tripoli in Soria by the Lord Treasurer, but both
without effect, 199. An English Factor in Smyrna designing to cheat several
Principals in England of 215 fine cloths, and a considerable sum of money
turns Turk, but without succeeding in his knavery 311 Francesco Erizzo elected
by the Venetians Doge General of the Sea, at the beginning of the War in
Candia, 23. but hindered by death from executing that Office ibid.
F.
FEstivals how celebrated among the Turks 318 Sir John Finch English
Ambassador at the Port 311 Count Forgatz overthrows a party of Turks making
Incursions into Hungary, 39. being Governor of Newhausel at the Turks invading
Hungary in 1663. advising a sally is with his party routed 138 Leonardo Foscolo
his success against the Turks in Dalmatia, 27, 28. his success in Bosna, 39. he
is sent into Candia with the title of Generalissimo in the room of Mocenigo
page 43 Marquess Frangipani, with others offer themselves to the Turk in 1670.
279. they find not the protection desired, but are overtaken by the hand of
Justice 295, 296 French Ambassador at the Port imprisoned contrary to the Law
of Nations, 69. that King remits an hundred thousand Crowns to Venice to assist
them against the Turks, 227. three French Ships of War arrive in the
Hellespont, 256. an Ambassador from the Grand Signior to the French King, 257.
the King sends seven thousand men to the relief of Candia, commanded by the
Duke of Navaille, etc. 264. after having sussered great loss there (267) they
depart, 268. a French Ambassador accompanies the Turks late Envoye to France,
in his return to Constantinople with three Men of War, who bear themselves very
insolently at their arrival, 291. what success he had in his Embassy, 292. he
obtains some new privileges for his Nation, 306. and license to travel in the
Turks Dominions 307 Count Fuchier General of the Artillery of the Empire killed
at the great battle betwixt Montecuculi and the Turks on the Rab 168 La
Fueillade with two hundred French Gentlemen, Adventurers for honor, and four
hundred common Soldiers arrive at Candia, 250. having had above half of his
slain men in a desperate sally, he with the remainder return home 252
G.
GEnoese make peace with the Turk, 182. they settle a Trade in Turkey, 183.
they send a new Resident, who through the bad success of affairs falling into a
melancholy, kills himself, 294. their Trade turns to very small account 325,
326 Georgia, some troubles there 95 Captain Georgio a famous Pirate taken by
the Turks 244 Germans deluded by the Turks pretenses of peace, 118. their
preparations for war with the Turks in 1663. page 135. what confusion then in
their counsels, 141. they send Ministers to implore aid of Christian Princes,
151. their Forces in 1664. what, ibid. their great inclination to peace,
notwithstanding their good success, whence, 173. a peace concluded between them
and the Turks, ibid. they send an Ambassador to the Grand Signior, 180. what
his Presents were, 181. his Embassy ended with mutual contentment, 190. the
controversy between him and the Turkish Ambassador at the place of Exchange
220 Signior Giavarina sent to the Great Vizier at the Siege of Candia to make
proposals of peace, 235. he dies there of the Campdistemper 241 Grillo the
Venetian Bailo's Interpreter strangled 39 Proveditor Grimani made
Captain General in the room of Capello, 27. he suffered shipwreck and was
drowned at the Island of Psara 28 Fanir Gumir a Persian Traitor strangled 7
H.
HAmmerling slain before Quinque Ecclesiae 148 Count Harberstein slain before
Quinque Ecclesiae 148 Chevalier d'Harcourt his gallantry at the Siege of Candia
234 Sir Daniel Harvey, Ambassador from his Majesty to the Port, 257. has his
Audience of the Grand Signior at Salonica, 280. he dies at Constantinople (...)
Hasaki the Queen Mother takes on her the protection of her Sons 255 Monsieur la
Hay (the father) Ambassador at the Port imprisoned contrary to the Law of
Nations 69 Monsieur la Hay (the son) proposed, by the French King, to the
Grand Signior and Great Vizier to be sent Ambassador to the Port, in a Letter
to each of them, and the Vizier's Answer thereto, 107, 108, 109. he arrives as
Ambassador at the Port, but slightly treated at his first arrival, 191, 192.
his first Audience, 192. his second Audience 194 An Horses tail set forth at
the Great Vizier's gate is the signal of the Camps motion within a month page
118. Husaein Pasha of Silistria marries the Great Vizier's Sister 171 Hungary,
the war begins there betwixt the Emperor and Turk in 1663. 135. the Hungarians
unsatisfied with the peace made by the Emperor with the Turk, and why, 174.
but through the Emperors arguments brought to acquiesce in it, 175. what gave
occasion to the rebellion there, 296. they petition to the Turks for assistance
305
I.
JAnisaries, the formality of making them in these days 242 Janoua in
Transylvania taken by the Turks 73 Sultan Ibrahim succeeds his Brother Morat in
the Throne, 2. his luxurious and effeminate way of living, 4, 18, 29.
complemented by foreign Ministers, 4. seized with an Apoplexy, 6. has a Son
born, viz. Sultan Mahomet that now reigns, 8. a second and a third Son, 10. a
fourth and a fifth, 13. his lascivious fancy for a big woman, 19. he falls in
love with his Brothers widow, but is rejected by her, 30. he falls also in love
with the Mufti's daughter, who is taught by her father to reject his love, 31.
he takes her by force, but after a few days enjoyment returns her to her
father, 32. by the Mufti and his Accomplices he is deposed and afterward
strangled, 34. his description and character 35 Ibrahim Pasha of Cairo
imprisoned there by the Beghs, but soon obtains his liberty, 153. is deeply
fined by the Grand Signior, ibid. is made Pasha of Darbiquier, ibid. arrives at
Candia with eight hundred Spahees 245 Jerusalem, a great controversy betwixt
the Religious there of the Latin and Greek Churches about the holy Sepulcher,
315. the possession of it adjudged by the Great Vizier to the Greeks 316 Jews
strangely deluded by Sabatai Sevi the pretended Messiah in 1666. 202, 204, 206,
207. they flock from all parts to him, page 209. their ridiculous fancies
concerning Elias, 211, 212. they receive a new form of Worship from Sabatai
Sevi, 209. but are enjoined, upon his turning Turk, to return unto their old
method, by the Cochams of Constantinople 215 Ishmael Pasha of Buda, made
Chimacam of Constantinople, 118. killed at the great Battle upon the Rab 168
K.
KAnisia besieged by Count Serini, 150, the Siege raised 157 Kara Mustapha made
Great Vizier, 333. his kindness to Kuperlee his Predecessour's servants, 334.
his pride and insolence to foreign Ministers 335 Katirgi Ogle Pasha of Canea
his original and life 253 Kemenius made Prince of Transylvania, 78. he is
routed by Ali Pasha and slain 80 Kemenitz, see Caminiecz Kiosem, the
Queen Mother, her artifice to advance her Son Ibrahim to be Emperor, 1. she is
imprisoned by him, but by submission soon obtains her liberty, 30. she consents
to his being deposed, 33. she with the Great Vizier and twelve Pasha's govern
during Sultan Mahomet the 4th Minority 35 Komorra where situate 136 Kul-Ogli
the Grand Signior's Favorite, 167. he marries the Grand Signior's eldest
Daughter 321 Kuperlee (the father) Pasha of Damascus made Great Vizier, 51. his
disposition, 68. he gets his son joined with him in the Office, and procures
the succession therein for him, 82. his Rules given to the Grand Signior, 83.
he dies ibid. Kuperlee (the son) succeeds his father in the place of Great
Vizier, 83. endeavors to establish himself, 88. his cruelty to the Germans of
Newhausel, 138. his artifice to quiet the minds of his shattered Army after
their great defeat on the Rab by Montecuculi, 170. he sends for his Mother to
Belgrade, who was esteemed a cunning woman, 176. he offers to the son of the
Tartar Chan to depose his father, but the son accepts not the proffer, 178. he
returns to Adrianople to the Grand Signior, 180. he arrives with his Army in
the Isle of Candia, 227. sits down before the city of Candia, 232. his justice
on some disorderly soldiers at the surrender of Candia, 277. he drinks wine
excessively, 280. he is brought thereby into a Dropsy whereof he dies, 332.
his character ibid.
L.
LEmnos taken by the Venetians from the Turks, 52. retaken by the Turks 55
Count Leslie German Ambassador to the Turks, see Germans Levents, who so
called 110 Leventz, or Lewa, a town in Hungary taken by the Turks, 143. retaken
by the Germans under the command of Count Soise, 161. again besieged by the
Turks, but not taken 162 Lintz, the Emperor removes from Vienna hither at the
beginning of the Hungarian war in 1663. 141 Dukes of Lunenburg and Brunswick
assist Candia with three thousand men 252
M.
MAhomet IV. born, 8. succeeds his Father at seven years of age, 34. removes
his Court to Adrianople, 82. returns again to Constantinople, 88. his
extravagant hunting, ibid. and 194, 280. he concerns himself about affairs of
the Government, 90, 91. again removes his Court to Adrianople, with a
description of his Cavalcade, 119. his aversion to Constantinople, 155, 177. he
has a Son born, 155. he seeks to destroy his Brothers, 177. he passionately
loves his Queen, 184, 281. he returns with the Great Vizier to Constantinople,
186. he resides at Larissa during the Siege of Candia, 241, 254. his antipathy
to Tabaco, 255. a second attempt to destroy his Brothers, 261. the news of the
surrender of Candia brought to him at Negropont, and how he received it, 278.
he resides the winter following at Salonica, 280. then returns to Adrianople,
where he receives the Great Vizier with great respect at his return from
Candia, 284. a third attempt to destroy his Brothers, which takes effect on the
elder of the two, 294. he circumcises his eldest Son, and marries his eldest
Daughter to Kul-Ogli, 321. his Government commended, 317. he returns to
Constantinople, 328. the reasons of it, 329. he goes back to Adrianople 332
Mahomet Pasha made Great Vizier, 33. he with the Mufti and other Accomplices
conspire the death of Sultan Ibrahim, ib. he is deposed from his Office, and
afterward murdered 40 Mahomet Pasha of Aleppo marries the G. Signior's Sister
171 Mahomet Pasha of Romelia sent Ambassador to Vienna, 178. what his Presents
to the Emperor were, ibid. his sordid way of living at Vienna, 221. his
controversy with the German Ambassador at the place of Exchange 220 Malta,
the gallantry of the Knights of Malta at the Siege of Candia, 235. the Malteses
with six Galleys take the Fleet designed for Alexandria, which had on board the
Kuzlir Aga, with his slave and her son, and all his treasure 14 Marcello, a
General of the Venetians slain in a Sea Fight with a Cannon-bullet, but dies a
Conq erour (in 1656.) 52 Count de Mare killed at Candia 254 Vicenzo della Marra
Governor General of the Arms of Candia, killed there 28 Michael Korebut
Wisnowieski elected King of Poland, 297. he dies 310 Mocenigo General of the
Venetians gains a great victory at Sea over the Turks in 1651. 44. another in
1655. 49. in another his Ship blown up, and himself slain 54 Prince of Moldavia
revolts to the Poles 309 Francesco Molino Proveditor General to the Venetians,
23. made Doge General of the Sea, ib. dismissed from that charge 25 Alvise de
Molino sent Ambassador to the Port, but is transferred to the Vizier at
Candia, 255. after the Siege ended, he passes to the Court at Adrianople 287
Marquess S. Andrea Montbrun made Governor of Candia, page 247. his diligence
in his charge 249 Count Montecuculi Governor of Rab made a General at the
beginning of the war in Hungary in 1663. 135. puts a thousand men into
Newhausel, 139. joins with Count Serini, 158. clears Serinswar of Serini's
forces, ibid. repels the Great Vizier at Kemend endeavoring to pass the Rab,
166. gives a second great defeat to the Turks at Chiesfalo on this River,
killing seventeen thousand, 168. for which he is highly applauded and made
Lieutenant General of the whole Army, 169. reasons why his services were more
acceptable than those of Serini or Sois ibid. Moravia spoiled by the Turks in
1663. 141 Morlacks revolt from the Turks to the Venetians 29 Girolamo Morosini
Commander of the Venetian Galleasses, 22. braves the Turkish Fleet, 25. killed
by a Musket-bullet shot through his head 27 Francesco Morosini made
Captain General for the Venetians, 231. he obtains a victory over the Turks and
is Knighted, 243, 244. he refuses a Present from the Vizier at the surrender of
Candia, and why 277 Gioseppo Morosini Captain of the Venetian Galleasses 237
Mortaza Pasha treacherously strangles the Pasha of Aleppo, that formidable
Rebel, 58. for which piece of service, etc. being made Pasha of Babylon, and
removed from thence, he flees to the Curdi, whose Kings Daughter he had
married, who deliver him into the Turks hands, and they strike off his head 92,
94, 96 Mustapha Great Vizier strangled by command of the Queen Mother 12
Mustapha, Captain-Pasha, loses his head 4 Mustapha Pasha of Grand Cairo in
Egypt, ibid. made Pasha of Silistria 9 Mustapha Captain-Pasha made Chimacam of
Adrianople, 118. his affectation and popularity 179 A Mutafaraca what 178
N.
NAdasti with others offer themselves to the Turk in 1670. page 279. they find
not the protection desired, but are overtaken by the hand of Justice, 295, 296
Bernardo Nani made Proveditor General, and arrives at Candia with five hundred
Foot, 242. he is killed by a Musket Shot in the head 249 Count Nassaw killed in
the great Battle betwixt Montecuculi and the Turks on the Rab 168 Nathan, a
Jew, an Accomplice with Sabatai Sevi the pretended Messiah, gives out himself
to be Elias, 202. his Letters to Sabatai Sevi, and the Jews of Aleppo, 203. he
arrives near Smyrna 217 The Duke de Navaille Commander of the Succors from
France in Candia in 1669. 264. after having lost many of his men he departs
from thence, 268. for which he incurs the disfavour of his Prince at his return
home 269 Nehemiah Cohen a Rival of Sabatai Sevi in his Messiahship 213
Newhausel besieged by the Turks in 1663. 140. it bravely defends it self being
stormed, ibid. the Turks storm it a second time, and are repulsed, 142. it is
yielded upon conditions ibid. Nitra by the cowardice of the Commander betrayed
to the Turks, 144. taken again by the Christians under the command of Count
Soise 160 The Nogay Tartar desires Lands of the Grand Signior, for which they
are fallen upon by the Krim Tartar 195 Monsieur de Nointel Ambassador at the
Port from France 291 Novigrade surrendered to the Turks 145
O.
Opium its operation with the Turks, 130. more fully described 283 Oseck and
the Bridge adjoining to it of six or seven miles long taken by Serini and
burnt, 147. the Bridge is built again in forty days by the Turks 157
P.
PAdavini dies at Canea page 241 Count S. Paul together with la Fueillade, etc.
arrive at Candia, 250. their valor 251 Signior Pisani, Proveditor General of
the Kingdom, killed by a Granado at Candia 239 Poles fruitlesly complain at the
Port of the incursions of the Tartars, 4. kill ten thousand of them returning
from spoiling the countries of Moscovia, 12. upon another incursion, wherein
the Tartars carried away an hundred thousand captives, they again send an
Ambassador to the Port, who being disgusted with his ill treatment falls into
a Fever and dies, 229. the Turks deliberate a war against Poland, and the
causes of it, 296. the war breaks out in 1672. 299. the distracted condition of
the Poles at this time, ibid. they accept very dishonorable and
disadvantageous conditions of peace, ibid. refusing to pay their Tribute the
war breaks out afresh, 304, 308. they obtain a considerable victory over the
Turks 309 Possonium garrisoned 143 Psara, a great part of the Venetian Fleet
cast away there 28
Q.
QUinque Ecclesiae stormed by Count Serini, who put all the Inhabitants to the
sword for their treachery, and burnt the Town 148
R.
RAb (the Fortress) the Turks seek to take it by stratagem in 1642. 9. the
description of it 139 Rab (the River) the great defeat of the Turk by
Montecuculi here 168 Ragotski, Prince of Transylvania, raises troubles in
Hungary, 11. his ambitious spirit, 70. he invades Poland, ibid. is beaten by
Zerneski General of the Poles, 71. deposes himself, ibid. reassumes the
Principality, 72. beats the Pasha of Buda, ibid. is again deposed, 73. and
again assumes the Principality, ibid. joins battle again with the Pasha of
Buda, but is beaten and dies of his wounds, 74. his character ibid. Ramadam, a
Sangiack of Egypt, taken prisoner in a Sea-sight by the Venetians, and most of
his Fleet consisting of twenty three Ships taken or stranded 231 Redeius made
Prince of Transylvania in the stead of Ragotski, 72. forced by Ragotski to
relinquish his Power ibid. Count Remorantino killed at the first Siege of
Candia by the Turks 28 David Retani his diligence and courage in defending
Claudiopolis 81 Retimo taken by the Turks 25 Aug. Rostayne Adjutant of Marquess
Villa at Candia killed with a Cannon-bullet 247
S.
SAbatai Sevi the pretended Messiah of the Jews in the year 1666. 200. his
parentage and education, 201. his Declaration, 205. he arrives at
Constantinople, and is cast into a Dungeon, afterward imprisoned in the
Dardanelli, 208. while he remains there he institutes a new method of Worship
for the Jews, 209. he is accused to the Chimacam of Adrianople by Nehemiah
Cohen, a Rival of Sabatai in the Messiahship, 213. being threatened with death
he turns Turk, 214. his death in 1676. 219 Samozade, the Great Vizier's
Secretary, his ruin, 126. his vast Estate ibid. Schinta assaulted by the Great
Vizier, but he is beaten off 144 Sebenico besieged by forty thousand Turks, who
were forced to raise the Siege, 28. the City described 196 Seraglio at
Constantinople in a great part burnt 185 Count Nicholas Serini Commander of
Croatia besieges Canisia, but commanded by the Emperor to raise the Siege, 78.
he raises a Fort on the Turks Dominions, and calls it Serinswar, 79. he is made
General of an Army in Croatia in 1663. by the Emperor, 135. his just cruelty
to some Turkish prisoners, 139. his fortune and conduct, page 142. a not able
instance of his valor, 145. his incomparable diligence and success, 147, 148.
he escapes a great danger, 149. upon a disgust from Montecuculi he retires from
the wars, 158. reflections on his disgrace, 159. the Presents sent him, and
Honors done him by Christian Princes, 160. he is slain by a wild Boar, 176.
his character ibid. Count Peter Serini defeats the Turks in the Streights of
Morlac 149 Serini Prince of Croatia, Count Nadasti, and others offer themselves
to the Turks in 1670. 279. they find not the protection desired, but are
overtaken by the hand of Justice 295, 296 Serinswar taken by the Turks and
razed 159 Shart, what 130 Shecher Para, a Pander for Sultan Ibrahims lust 30
Sigeth besieged by Count Serini, but not taken 148 Smyrna, a Besasteen or
Exchange and a Custom-house built there by the Turks 327 Sobieski great Marshal
of Poland obtains a great victory over the Turks in 1673. 308 Solomon Pasha,
Kayah-begh of the Janisaries, banished into the Deserts of Arabia 84 Count
Soise's success in the Upper Hungary against the Turks, 160. he beats a Body of
fourteen thousand Turks, ibid. he routs Chusaein Pasha of Buda with twenty five
thousand Turks, 164. his Commission taken from him, but afterward he is made
Governor of the strong Fortress of Komorra 166 Soranco, the Venetian
Ambassador at the Port, imprisoned at the beginning of the war in Candia, 22.
he is sent home 42 Priest Sorich Captain of the Morlachs, his undaunted spirit,
but hard Fate 29 Baron Spaar sent General into Dalmatia, 121. arrives at Candia
254 Spalato in Dalmatia described 195, 196 General Sporch joins Montecuculi and
Scrini near Serinswar 158 Sultana Sporcha her History 331 Count Strozzi by his
smooth arguments is received into Possonium with his Regiment, 143. is sent
Ambassador to the French King to implore aid against the Turks, page 152. his
Speech to the French King, ibid. he is slain by a Musket-bullet near Serinis
Fort 158 Sweeds conquer Cracovia, 70. totally routed afterward by the Poles 71
T.
TArtars their kind of life, 122. join with the Turks in their war against
Hungary, 123. invade Poland in 1667. and carry away near an hundred thousand
captives, 228. their disposition 313 False Temins, the story of them 258
Tenedos taken by the Venetians, 52. quitted again by them 54 Transylvania
invaded by the Turks in 1661. 73. again in 1662. 98. a history of its misery,
100. the Turks make frequent incursions into it in 1665. yet the German
Ambassador then at the Port would not interpose in their behalf 189 Tripoli,
Peace made by the English with the Tripoleses in 1663. 131. they rebel against
their Pasha Osman, besiege him in his Castle, and procure him to be strangled,
assuming the form of Government of Algier 301 Tunis, Peace made by the English
with Tunis 131 Turks keep no Residents in foreign Courts, the reason thereof
and the consequence, 3. esteem ceremony to be submission, 5. the richness of
their Tents, 120. the little respect they bear to foreign Ministers, 128.
superstitious admirers of old Prophecies, 145. their usual complement to
foreign Ambassadors, 183, 191. difficult to bring a Turkish Minister to
punishment, 200. they fall to drinking wine excessively, 283. but it is soon
forbidden them by the Grand Signior's special command, which is recited 285
V.
THE Prince of Valachia, by the treachery of his servant is forced to flee his
country, and to retire into the Emperors Territories, page 172. another Prince
of Valachia is carried by his own Soldiers to the Poles in 1673. but makes his
escape from them 309 Vanni Effendi, a Shegh, a notable dispute between him and
the Mufti 154 Varadin besieged by the Turks, 74. the Inhabitants crave aid of
the Emperor, but obtain none, 75. the Fortress described, 76. it is surrendered
77 Monsieur de Ventelay, see la Hay. Vienna, what provision it made for it
self at the beginning of the war with the Turk in 1663. 136, 143. abandoned by
the Emperor who removes to Lintz 141 Marquess Villa received into the Service
of the Venetians as General of the Foot, and made Governor of Candia, 186,
222. his Speech to the Senate, 187. he surveys the Forts in Dalmatia in his
passage to Candia, 195. he lands at Candia, 223. he takes the sield, ibid. but
after an assault or two of the Turks retires again into the Town, 223, 224,
225. he is recalled by the Duke of Savoy his natural Prince, but by the
intercession of the Pope and State of Venice license for his continuance is
obtained, page 231. he is again recalled and departs, 247. his Speech to the
Senate at his return 248
W.
WAldeck General of the Lunenburg and Brunswick Forces in Candia slain there
252 Earl of Winchelsea sent Ambassador to the Port, 67. his Answer to the
CaptainPasha proposing to him to hire some English Ships to serve in the Wars
against Candia 185 Wisozki Ambassador from Poland to the Port, his insolent
behavior there 298
Y.
YAmboli, a famous Hunting of the Grand Signior there 171
Z.
ZEchelhyd revolts from the Emperor to Apafi Prince of Transylvaniae 146
The End of the TABLE.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for John Starkey Bookseller, at the Miter in
Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
DIVINITY.
1. ADiscourse of the Freedom of the will: By Peter Sterry sometime Fellow of
Emmanuel College in Cambridge, in solio.

2. The Jesuits Morals, collected by a Doctor of the College of Sorbon in
Paris, who has saithsully extracted them out of the Jesuits own Books, which
are printed by the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their
Society. Written in French, and exactly translated into English, in folio.

3. A Practical and Polemical Commentary or Exposition upon the third and
fourth Chapters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy. By Thomas Hall B.
D. in folio.

4. Tetrachordon: Expositions upon the four chief, places in Scripture, which
treat of Marriage, or nullities in Marriage. Wherein the Doctrine and
Discipline of Divorce is confirmed by explanation of Scripture, by testimony of
Ancient Fathers, of Civil Laws in the Primitive Church, of samousest Reformed
Divines. And lastly, by an intended Act of the Parliament, and Church of
England, in the last year of Edward the Sixth. The Author J. Milton, in quarto.

5. The Christians Consolations against the fears of Death; with Prayers and
Meditations fit to prepare all manner of persons for it. Written in French by
the late famous Mr. Drelincourt, Minister of the Protestant Church at Charenton
near Paris; and from the twelsth Edition of it much corrected and enlarged by
the Author. Now newly translated into English by Marius a'Assigny, in octavo.

6. The Living Temple, or the Notion improved; that A good man is the Temple of
God. By John How M. A. sometimes Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon. in octavo.

7. A Consutation of the Millenarian Opinion, plainly demonstrating that Christ
will not reign visibly and personally upon earth with the Saints for a 1000
years, either before the day of Judgment, in the day of Judgment, or after it.
By Too. Hall B. D.

PHYSIC.
8. The Royil Pharmacopacia, Galenical and Chemical, according to the Practice
of the most Eminent and Learned Physicians of France, and Published with their
several Approbations. By Mosis (...), the Kings Chief Operator in his Royal
Garden of Plants, faithfully Englished. Illustrated with several Copper Plates,
in solio.

9. Basilica Chymica and Praxis Chymiatrice, or Royal and Practical Chemistry;
augmented and enlarged, by John Hartman. To which is added his Treatise of
Signatares of internal things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and
lesser World. As also the Practice of Chemistry of John Hartman, M. D.
Augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions; all faithfully
Englished, by a lover of Chemistry.

10. The Complete (...), or a New Treatise of Chemistry, teaching by a short
and easy Method all its most necessary Preparations. Written in French by
Christopher Glaser, Apothecary in Ordinary to the French King, and the Duke of
Orleans. And from the fourth Edition Revised and Augmented by the Author. Now
faithfully Englished by a Fellow of the Royal Society. Illustrated with Copper
Plates, in octavo.

11. The Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced. Written in French by P.
Thybault, Chemist to the French King, and Englished by W. A. Doctor in Physic,
and Fellow of the Royal Society, in octavo.

12. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles
of the Art of Physic; with the insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing
Medicines, and the Excellency of such us are made by Chemical Operations. By
Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. in octavo.

13. Aurora Chymica, or a rational way of preparing Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals for a Physical Use; by which preparations they are made most
efficacious, safe and pleasant Medicines, for the preservation of the life of
man. By Edward Bolnest, Med. Reg. Ord. in octavo.

14. The Chirargions Store-bouse, furnished with forty three Tables cut in
Brass, in which are all sorts of Instruments both Ancient and Modern; useful to
the performance of all Manual Operations; with an exact description of every
Instrument, together with one hundred choice Observations of famous Cures
performed, with three Indexes; 1. of the Instruments. 2. Of Cures performed. 3.
Of things remarkable. Written in Latin by Johannes Scultitus a famous Physician
and (...) of Ulme in Sutvia: and faithfully Englished by E. B. Dr. of Physic;
in octavo.

15. Medicina Statica: or Rules of Health, in eight Sections of Aphorisms.
Originally Written by Sanctorius, Chief Professor of Physic at Padua, in
twelves.

LAW.
16. An Abridgment of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Alphabetically digested under several Titles. By Henry Rolls, Sergeant at Law,
published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges, in
solio.

17. The Reports of that famous Lawyer Henry Rolls Sergeant at Law, sometime
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, of diverse Cases in the Law adjudged in the
time of King James; approved by all the Judges, in solio.

18. The Reports of Sir George Crook Knight, in three Volumes, in English:
allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition, carefully corrected by the
Original, in solio.

19. Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records
to the fourth part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdictions of Courts. By Will. (...), Esquire in solio.

20. The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a
Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History of (...) the
Conqueror. By Silas Tailor, in quarto.

21. The Complete Solicitor, performing his Duty, and teaching his Client to
run through, and manage his own business, as well in his Majesty's superior
Courts at Westminister, as in the Mayors Court, Court of Hustings, and other
Inferior Courts in the City of London, and elsewhere. The fourth (...), in
octavo.

22. Action upon the Case of Slander, or a Methodical Collection of thousands
of Cases in the Law, of what words are Actionable, and what not. By William
Sheapherd Esquire in octavo.

23. An Exact Abridgment in English, of the Cases reported by Sir Francis Moor
Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of the Law therein by the Judges. By
Will. Hughes, in octavo.

24. The Touchstone of Wills, (...), and Administrations, being a Compendium of
Cases and Resolutions touching the same, carefully collected out of the
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws, as also out of the Customs, Common Laws,
and Statutes of this Kingdom. By G. Meritan, in twelves.

25. A Guide for Constables, Church wardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors
of the Highways, Treasurers of the County-Stock, Masters of the House of
Correction, Bailiffs of Mannours, Toll-takers in Fairs, etc. A Treatise briefly
showing the Extent and Latitude of the several Offices, with the Power of the
Officers therein, both by Common Law and Statute, according to the several
Additions and Alterations of the Law, till the 22 year of His Majesty's Reign.
The Fifth Edition Enlarged. Collected by Geo. Meriton Gent. in twelves.

HISTORY.
26. The Theater of the Empire of Great Britain, presenting an Exact Geography
of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland and the Isles adjoining, with
the Shires, Hundreds, Citys and the Shire-towns within the Kingdom of England
Divided and Described; as also a Prospect of the most famous Parts of the
World. By John Speed: with many Additions never before Extant, in solio.

27. The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of (...) Ambassadors into Moscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
Complete History of those Countries: whereunto are added, the Travels of
Mandelslo, from Persia into the EastIndies, begun in 1638. and finished in
1640. The whole Illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures. Written
originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Emballie. Englished by J. Davis:
The second Edition, in solio.

28. The Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel Citizen and Secretary of
Florence; containing the History of Florence, the Prince, the Original of the
Guelf and Ghibilin, the Life of Castruccio Castracani, the Murder of Vitelli,
etc. by Duke Valentino, the State of France, the State of Germany, the
Discourses on Titas Livius, the Art of War. the Marriage of (...): All from the
true Original newly and faithfully translated into English, in solio.

29. I Ragguagli di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus, in two
Centuries, with the Politic Touchstone. Written Originally in Italian by that
famous Roman, Trajano Bocalini. Englished by the Earl of (...), in solio.

30. The History of Barbados, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserret, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight:
in two Books, containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands:
Illustrated with diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable
Rarities therein described, in solio.

31. The History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age, but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian by Battisla Nani
Cavalier, and Procurator of St. Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood Knight. in
selio.

32. The History of the Tarkish Empire from the year 1623. to the year 1677.
Containing the Reigns of the three last Emperors, viz. Sultan Moral, or Amurat
IV. Sultan Ibrahim, and Sultan Mahomet IV. his Son, the XIII. Emperor now
Reigning. By Paul Rycaut Esquire late Consul of Smyrna, in folio.

33. The present State of the Ottoman Empire in three Books; containing the
Maxims of the Turkish (...), their Religion and Military Discipline:
Illustrated with diverse Figures. Written by Paul (...) Esquire late Secretary to
the English Ambassador there, now Consul of Smyrna. The fourth Edition, in
(...).

34. The present State of the Greek and Armenian Churches Anno (...) (...).
Written at the Command of His Majesly, by Paul (...) Esquire late Consul of Smyrna,
and Fellow of the Royal Society, in (...).

35. The Mevoirs of Philip de Comines Lord of Argenton; containing the History
of Lewis XI. and (...) VIII. Kings of France; with the most remarkable (...) in
their particular Reigns from the year 1464. to 1498. Revised and Corrected from
diverse Manuscripts, and ancient Impressions, by Denis Godesroy, Counselor and
Historiographer to the French King, and from his Edition lately Printed at
Paris, newly translated into English, in octavo.

36. A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles the Second, to the
Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, performed
by the Right Honorable the Earl of (...), in the year 1663, and 1664. Written
by an Attendant on the Embassies; in (...).

37. Il Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Pope's Nephews from the time
of Sixtus the Fourth, 1471. to the death of the late Pope Alexander the
Seventh, 1677. Written in Italian, and Englished by W. A. Fellow of the Royal
Society: The second Edition, in (...).

38. A Relation of the Siege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French
Forces, to its Surrender, the 27 of September 1669. Written in French by a
Gentleman who was a Voluntier in that Service, and faithfully Englished, in
octavo.

39. The Present State of Egypt, or a new Relation of a late Voyage into that
Kingdom, performed in the years 1672, and 1673. By F. (...) R. D. Wherein you
have an exact and true account of many rare and wonderful particulars of that
Ancient Kingdom. Englished by M. D. B. D. in octavo.

40. The History of the Government of Venice, wherein the Policies, Councils,
Magistrates, and Laws of that State are fully related; and the use of the
Balloting-Box exactly described. Written in the year 1675. by the Sicur Amelott
dela Houscaie, Secretary to the French Ambassador at Venice, in octavo.

41. An Historical and Geographical Description of the great Country and River
of the Amazones in America, with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of
French, in octavo.

42. The Secret History of the Court of the Emperor (...). Written by Procopins
of (...), faithfully Englished, in octavo.

43. The Novels of the famous Don Francisco de (...) Villegas, Knight of the
Order of St. James; whereunto is added, the Marriage of Bilphegor, an Italian
Novel: Translated from Machiavel: faithfully Englished, in octavo.

44. The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogul;
together with the most considerable passages for five years following, in that
Empire, with a new Map of it; to which is added, an account of the extent of
(...), the Circulation of the Gold and Silver of the World to discharge it
there; as also the (...), Forces, and (...) of the same, and the principal
cause of the decay of the States of Asia. By Monsieur F. (...), Physician of
the Faculty of (...). Englished out of French, by H. O. Secretary to the Royal
Society, in two Parts, in octavo.

45. The Amors of certain Great Men, and famous Philasophers. Written in
French, and Englished by J. D. in octavo.

46. (...), or Seeing and (...) are two things, a pleasant Spanish History;
faithfully translated, in (...).

47. The History of France, under the Ministry of Cardinal (...), viz. from the
death of King (...) XIII. to the year 1664. wherein all the Affairs of State to
that time are exactly related. By Benjamin (...), and faithfully Englished by
Christopher Wase, Gem. in octavo.

48. The History of the Twelve (...), Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin by C.
(...), newly translated into English, and illustrated with all the Casars Heads
in Copper Plates, in octavo.

49. The Annals of Love, containing select Histories of the Amors of diverse
Princes Courts, pleasantly related. Ry a person of Honor, in eight Parts, in
octavo.

50. A new Voyage into the Northern Countries, being a description of the
Manners, Customs, Superstition, Buildings, and Habits of the Norwigians,
Laplanders, Kilops, Borandians, Siberians, Samojedts, Zemblans, and Istanders,
in twelves.

51. The present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W. A. Fellow of the Royal
Society. The second Edition in twelves.

52. The present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy: The second
Edition enlarged, with the manner of Election of Popes, and a Character of
Spain. Written Originally in English; by J. Gailhard, Gent. in twelves.

53. The Policy and Government of the Venetians, both in Civil and Military
Affairs. Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay; and faithfully Englished, in
twelves.

54. The Voyage of Italy, or a complete Journey through Italy: in two Parts,
with the Character of the People, and the Description of the chief Towns,
Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statues, Antiquities; as also of
the Interest, Government, Riches, Forces, etc. of all the Princes, with
Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassels Gent. who traveled through
Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English Nobility, Opus Posthumum,
corrected and set forth by his old Friend and Fellow-Traveller S. W. Never
besore extant, in twelves.

55. A Relation of the French King's late Expedition into the Spanish
Netherlands, in the years 1667, and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing his
Title thereunto, and an account of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May
2. 1667. Englished by G. H. in twelves.

POETRY and PLAYS.
56. The Works of Sir William Davenant Knight, consisting of those which were
formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press. Now published out
of the Author's Original Copies, in folio.

57. Andronicus Commenius, a Tragedy. By John Wilson, in quarto.

58. Heratlius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy. By Lodowic Carlel Esquire in quarto.

59. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Montagut Esquire in octavo.

60. Aminta, The famous Italian Pastoral. Translated into English, in octavo.

61. Paradise Regained, a Poem in sour Books, to which is added Sampson
Agonistes. The Author, John Milton, in octavo.

MISCELLANIES.
62. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon
Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most ingenious Persons of that
Nation. Englished by G. Havers, in two Volumes, in solio.

63. A Treatise of the Sibyls, giving an account of the Names and Numbers of
them, of their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of their
Books. Written in French by David Blondel, Englished by J. Davis, in solio.

64. A Justification of the late War against the United Netherland, in two
Parts, illustrated with several Sculptures, by Henry Stubbs, in quarto.

65. Reliquiae Wottonianae, or a Collection of Lives, Letters, Poems, with
Characters of sundry personages. and other incomparable pieces of Language and
Art, also additional Letters to several persons not besore Printed. By Sir
Henry Wotton Knight, the third Edition, with large Additions, in octavo.

66. The Complete Gentleman: or Directions for the Education of Youth, as to
their Breeding at home and Traveling abroad. In two Treatises, by J. Gailhard
Gent. who has been Tutor abroad to several of the Nobility and Gentry, in
Octavo.

67. The Temperate Man, or the right Way of Preserving Lise and Health,
together with Soundness of the Senses, Judgment, and Memory, unto an extreme
Old Age. In three Treatises. The first written by the learned (...) Lessius.
The second by Lodowick Cornaro, a Noble Gentleman of Venice. The third by a
famous Italian: faithfully Englished, in twelves.

68. The Golden Calls, in which is handled the most rare and incomparable wonder
of Nature, in transmuting Metals, viz. how the entire substance of Lead was in
one moment transmuted into Gold Obrizon, with an exceeding small Particle of
the true Philosophers Stone, at the Hague in the year 1666. Written in Latin,
by John Frederick Helvetius, Doctor of Medicine at the Hagut; and faithfully
Englished, in twelves.

69. Accidence commenced Grammar, and supplied with sussicient Rules; or a new
and easy method for the learning of the Latin Tongue. The Author John Milton,
in twelves.

70. The Rules of Civility, or certain ways of Deportment observed in France
amongst all persons of Quality, upon several occasions; saithsully Englished,
in Twelves.

71. The Art of Complaisance, or the means to oblige in Conservation, in
twelves.

72. A Letter from a Gentleman of the Romish Religion, to his Brother, a person
of Quality of the same Religion, persuading him to go to Church, and take those
Oaths the Law directs, proving the lawfulness thereof by Arguments not
disagreeable to Doctrines of the Roman Church, in quarto.

73. A brief Account of Mr. Valentine Greatrakes, the famous Stroker, and
diverse of the strange Cures by him lately performed. Written by himself to the
Honorable Robert Boil, in quarto.

FINIS.

