HIS HIGHNESS Prince Rupert's LETTER TO THE Earl of Arlington, HIS MAJESTY'S
Principal Secretary of State. From on Board the SOVEREIGN Now under Sail, June
5. About Seven Leagues off Lastoff, at Nine in the Morning, the Wind at E. N. E.

Published by Authority.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1673.

His Highness Prince Rupert's Letter to the Earl of Arlington, His Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State, from on Board the Sovereign, now under Sail, June
5. about Seven Leagues off Lastoff, at Nine in the Morning, the Wind E. N. E.
IN my Last I gave an Account that the Enemy lay in the Schonevelt, and that we
were at an Ankor, seven Leagues from East Capel, which bore S. b. E. from us;
Now I have to tell you of a Second Engagement with them, which happened upon
June the fourth. The Enemy having had the opportunity by lying so near their
own Coast, to Refit and Furnish themselves with all things they wanted, and
knowing very well, that as the Wind has stood of late, we could not do the
like, were encouraged to come out upon us, as they did that day afternoon,
having the advantage of a strong Gale at N. E. which we quickly perceived, and
got under Sail, standing N. N. W. having our Larboard tacks on Board; and as
close haled upon the Wind as we could lie, stood to Receive them. About four in
the afternoon, Van Trump with the Amsterdam Squadron bore down, and began to
Engage with the Blew, according to their usual Custom, beginning to Fire at a
great distance; About five de Ruyter with his Squadron Engaged with me, and the
Zealand Squadron with the White; at his first coming de Ruyter made a show as
if he would have come very near me, but before he was within Musket shot, he
sprung his Luff, and closed his Wind as much as possibly he could, going off on
a sudden for good and all, which made us suppose, he had either some
Extraordinary Damage in his Ship, or that himself was hurt: Their whole Fleet
continued Pelting at us, at a great distance till dark night, we keeping our
Ground notwithstanding their Fireships. About Midnight part of the Dutch Fleet
Tacked, standing toward the E. Southerly, and quickly after the rest did the
like, as we guessed by an imperfect sight we had of them, and at some distance.

At Two in the Morning we Tacked also, and stood after them; At Six, seeing no
likelihood of reaching them, before they would get within their Sands, we
thought it to no purpose to pursue them any farther; so we Tacked again, and
stood for our own Coast. All we can say more of the Enemy, is, That they went
off in great disorder, leaving us ignorant of what loss they have sustained. On
our side we lost never a Ship, and very few men; of our Commanders, Captain
White of the Warspite, and Captain Sadlington of the Crown, were killed; of the
Foot officers, Captain Henshaw, and Lieutenant Fitzgerald were killed, and
Lieutenant Tufton was wounded.

FINIS.

