A LETTER SENT To the Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons. Concerning Sir Tho: Fairfax's gallant Proceedings IN Cornwall,
Since his advance from Torrington and Launceston to Bodman, Where they have
taken diverse Prisoners, AND PRINCE CHARLES driven into Pend^nnis-Castle.

APpointed by the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire to be forthwith printed and
published.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. March 7. 1645.

TO The Honorable W. Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
IN my last I acquainted you with the Armies coming to Launceston, and of the
taking 300 horse near Stratton. By reason of the long marches the Foot had
taken, and many straglers behind, the General and the Army rested at
Launceston two days; and on Saturday last, the Army advanced five or six miles
toward Bodman. And this day the Horse and Foot had a General Rendezvous upon
the Downs within eight Miles of Bodman; the Forlorn Hope being sent out, they
met with the Enemies Scouts, there being eight of them together, which our men
took (not one escaping) they all confess they had no intelligence of our
coming; that they belonged to a Guard of 300 Horse that was kept on a Pass
within three miles of Bodman; and within two miles where they were taken, the
Army advancing near to that place, we discovered a Body of the Enemies Horse,
at about two miles distance, who made a stand, and faced us for a while; but
before ever we came near them, retreated to Bodman: A^ we were upon the Moo^s,
intelligence came, That the two Companies of Dragoons that were sent toward
Camelford the other and had possessed an House, the better to gain intelligence.
If the Enemy intended to break through Eastward, were in some haz^rd by a great
Body of the Enemies Horse that were got between them, and the Rendezvous, and
forced them into a Close for their security; whereupon a thousand Horse were
sent to relieve them, but before they came, the Dragoons themselves had beaten
off the Enemy, and made good their retreat to a Church, without the loss of a
man. Sir James Smith with his Brigade, was the man that had a Design to have
surprised them; but now we are in a manner gotten between him and Bodman; for
the Army quarters in the field, and all the Villages hereabouts, that he can
hardly make his retreat, unless he took the opportunity before our Horse came
up. At our coming into Cornwall, especially at Launceston, we found the people
possessed with an opinion, That there would be no mercy shown unto the Cornish;
but after a days being at Launceston, the Town seeing the carriage of the
Soldier so fair, and not one House plundered (not so much as the Governors
own house) and the Country being possessed with the like opinion of the civil
carriage of this Army, came into the Market, and brought in provisions for
supply of our Forces; but in regard Gorings Forces had plundered the Country of
all their Horse, people were glad to bring it in on their backs. And Friday
being the day for the Posse of the whole Country to appear at Bodman; all the
North part of Cornwall refused to appear, they positively affirming, They found
us Friends, and not Enemies; and those that were on the Westside of Bodman,
likewise refused to come in, saying, They had not greater Enemies then Gorings
Horse that were among them. A Gentleman whom I spoke withal this day, who was
at their meeting said. The Horse only appeared, the Posse Foot wholly refused
to come in; and indeed, there cannot be a greater advantage to us, then to
drive Gorings Horse before us; for there carriages are so barbarous, that they
make every man's hand against them where they come: The Army had been this night
at Bodman, but in regard the Enemy is numerous in Horse, and that we marched
much upon the Downs, and was like to be late before we could get in, it was
held fit to quarter in the Fields and Villages here abouts, and the next day to
march in a close Body, Horse and Foot; though it be the slower way, yet it is
the more secure: The Prisoners that were taken this day, told me, they were
glad with all their hearts they were taken upon so fair quarter, for they knew
they should be all taken at last (they said) and that they give themselves
already for lost: And indeed, God has stricken their hearts with a terror.
Some Gentlemen of quality have sent privately for protections, whose not
appearing against us, though not for us, keeps all that part of the Country
in, where they are, And just now we have intelligence, that the Lord Mo^un is
unwilling to obey the L. Hoptons Commands, and rather stands upon his Guard
against his Forces, then to assist him with any: as far as I can conceive in my
poor judgment, we shall drive the Enemy to a corner; and it may please God to
bring their Horse to accept of conditions, as well as formerly they did bring
our Foot; for unless this very night they do break through, which they can
hardly do, considering how our Forces are laid, we have them then before us to
the Lands end.

St. Blessenden, March 1. 1645. Your most humble Servant, I. R.
THe Messenger staying till the next morning, I thought fit to give you this
further account of the Enemies motion and our proceedings: This morning by
break of the day, the Army was drawn to a Rendezvous upon the Heath within two
miles of Bodman, a party being sent out to discover if the Enemy were in the
Town, brought Intelligence they quit the Town last night about ten of the
clock, Horse and Foot, the Lord Hopton bringing up the Rear himself: The most
of the Foot they had were Welchmen, having Leeks in their Hats, and drunk, and
went out disorderly: They marched toward Truro with a good part of their horse;
the rest of their Horse we this morning received Intelligence marched toward
Ware-Bridge, as if they intended to go Eastward; whereupon Lieut. General
Cromwell who went the night before to Relieve our Dragoons, was sent unto by the
General to desire him to secure the passage at Ware-Bridge, by placing some
Dragoons there; who being there with One thousand Horse, and Four hundred
Dragoons, will give a seasonable interruption to the Enemies advance that way.
We find the Towns-people in Bodman no ways fearful of our coming, rather
desiring it: They say they have had no Market these two Market days, by reason
that Gorings Horse robbed the Market people, and take away their Horses. There
were two Regiments of Foot and two of Horse sent this morning from their
Rendezvous about nine of the clock, to assist those forces at Ware-Bridge,
where by we might the better drive the Enemy before us into a narrow compass
of Land. At this place where we are, we may see the Sea on both hands; if the
Enemy had had any gallantry left in them, they would have showed it upon our
approach to Bodman, their only strength consisting in Horse, where they had
room enough upon the Downs to play their Game, but they never appeared but
once, and that at two miles distance, and retreated. I have spoken with some of
the Inhabitants of this Town, who were at the grand Posse at Bodman on Friday
last, and they affirm, That of the whole County of Cornwall, there did not
appear Eighty men; but Gorings Horse, and the Horse of the County, all appeared
in a great body, Those Foot that were in Bodman, were some of the Runawayes
from Torrington, and some Welchmen that were left at Launceston, and fled
hither, and some others of the Country, in all to the number of Four hundred
at the most, which is the only body of Infantry they have left that we can yet
hear of: the same Intelligencer confirmed, That the Lord Mahone is either
restrained or wounded by the Lord Hopton; yet the certainty thereof, more then
the public report of the Country, we cannot yet hear. I doubt it falls out
ill we have not a Squadron of Ships toward Falmouth, where no doubt they may
have rich booty, and intercept persons of great quality. Several Letters have
been sent unto Plymouth, to the Commander in chief upon these Coasts; we hope
that they will yet come seasonable: The Prince is at Pendennis, and I believe
within two days will be in France if the wind hold. The head Quarter was this
night at Bodman; three Regiments marched to Listithiel to secure the passage
that way: the Forlorn hope of Horse that went thither, made the Enemy quit
their Guard at Listithiel; and receiving Information that four Wain-load of
Ammunition was in the way to go from Listithiel to Foy, six of the Troopers
rode after it, and made the Convoy desert their charge, and brought back the
four load of Ammunition this night to Bodman, there being ten Oxen to every
draught: Likewise a party being sent out another way, overtook forty two
Musketeers, who had their Matches lighted, and Muskets laden, four Troopers
rode up unto them, and made them all lay down their Arms, and brought them back
Prisonets to the head Quarter. Another party was sent toward Truro, to
discover whether the Enemies Horse remained in a body, and at Castle-Dennis
discovered a body of about a thousand Horse an hour before night, which we
conceive only staid till the darkness of the night to draw off, after the
rest further West; they are so Alarmed by our parties, that they are forced to
keep in bodies, and can hardly go to Quarter, which will quickly make them
weary and over-watcht, and altogether unfit to break through, if they had any
such intention, which I believe now they have not: That we keep strong Guards
at Listhiel, War-Bridge, and the Fords upon both Rivers. Sir John Greenviles
Lieutenant Colonel, and diverse others are taken Prisoners.

Bodman, March 2. ten at night.


THe Messenger staying till Tuesday morning, March 3. I can only add, That
our Intelligence is, the Enemy bends West, only a party of Horse to face us:
This day some Quarters remove toward St. Cullam, the way to Truro. The
Messenger takes pains for so long a journey.



FINIS.

