THE HISTORY OF THE Turkish Empire, From the YEAR 1623, to the YEAR 1677.

CONTAINING THE REIGNS Of the Three last EMPERORS, VIZ. SULTAN MORAT, OR AMURAT
IV. SULTAN IBRAHIM, AND Sultan MAHOMET IV, his Son, The Thirteenth EMPEROR, now
Reigning.

By Sir PAUL RYCAUT, Late CONSUL of Smyrna.

LONDON, Printed by J.D. for Tho. Basset, R. Clavell, J. Robinson, and A.
Churchill, MDCLXXXVII.

The Epistle Dedicatory to the KING.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty:
I Cannot, without some despondency of Mind, and awful fear of the Greatness of
Your Majesty, make an Offering at Your Sacred Feet of so small an Esteem and
inconsiderable Value, as these following Histories. For having traveled long
in remote Countries, and resided no less than eighteen Years in Turkey, the
World may reasonably expect some rich Returns unto Your Majesty in Persian
Silks, and Tyrian Purples, or in the finest Carpets, and other Gayeties, in
which the softness and luxury of the Lesser Asia did anciently abound: and may
now judge me a Bankrupt, or ill Husband of my Talent, when they see me at Home
trembling in Your Royal Presence, with a Gift no more worthy than a few Sheets
of Paper; which being a Sacrifice inferior and beneath the acceptance of so
Great a Monarch, I might reasonably fear, that they would take fire at the heat
of Your just displeasure, were they not with all humility and reverence
consecrated to the Royal Clemency. For in this glorious Title and Attribute,
Your Majesty (as is notorious to the World) exceeding all the most Serene and
most Clement Emperors that ever were, expects not from me, either Gold or
Jewels, but rather a true Account of my Time, how I have spent it in the
Service of God, and of your Majesty: and how I have administered that Public
Trust and Interest which was committed to my Management. Accept therefore,
GREAT SIR, these following Discourses, to discharge part of the Account of my
Time, with other Treatises which have been the Employment to fill up my vacant
Intervals: the remaining account of my Hours are not to be justified by my own
Report, but by the Testimony of others, whose Wisdom and Goodness will be as
ready to own my Industry and Faithfulness in their Concernments, as they will
be to excuse and pardon my Infirmities.

Ever since the time of Your Majesty's happy Restoration, my Lot has fallen
to live and act within the Dominions of the Turk, and there to move in a
Public Capacity; which though it was in an Administration of one of the lowest
Note and Degree, yet the great Influence which the flourishing Estate of that
Trade has on the common Good of England, nourished in me a secret Pride and
Satisfaction in that Employment, which called and raised up all my Endeavors
to acquit my self therein with Prudence, Faithfulness, and Industry; there
being the same Regularity required in the Stars of the lower, as in those of
higher Magnitude.

This has been the first, and indeed the only Affair I ever managed for the
Public: for before Your Majesty's blessed Return, the Character noted on my
Family of being Loyal, as it made them at first active and zealous in the
Service of Your Glorious Father, so afterward it famed them for their
Sufferings, and rendered them and me incapable of Office. But Your Majesty
returning like the Sun, to animate and cherish all living Creatures, with an
equality proportioned to their several Capacities, has been pleased also to
bestow a Ray of Your benign Influence on my self; whereby having received
Comfort and Refreshment, I do with all sense of my Duty, and with entire
Devotion, pray unto the King of Kings for the Happiness, long Life, and
immortal Glory of Your Majesty, and with all reverence and humble submission,
devote and consecrate my self, for ever to remain,

Your Majesty's most Humble, most Dutiful, and most Obedient Servant, PAUL
RYCAUT.

portrait of Murad IV MORAT AVT AMVRATHES IV TVRCARVM IMPERATOR VNDE CIMVS 1623


My Brothers folly, and my want of years
Let loose the reigns of Rule to Mutiniers;
But as with time my strength, and wit improve,
I all reform with fear, and not by love.
By mighty force I Babylon subdue,
From whence a peace with Persia does ensue,
And when against Christian foes, I do design
To turn my arms, dye with excess of wine.
THE REIGN OF Sultan MORAT, OR AMURAT IV. The Eleventh EMPEROR; AND Twenty
first MONARCH OF THE TURKS.
THE weak Understanding of Sultan Mustapha, and his inability for Rule, caused
the Affairs of State, both at Home and Abroad, to move disorderly and
irregular. Where Violence and Injustice prevail, there is so little distance
between the most eminent Height of Grandeur, and the lowest Abyss of Misery,
that a Prince may in a moment step from one unto the other. The Janisaries and
Military Officers commanded more now than the Civil, all things being guided by
the Air and Fancy of the Soldiery, who placed and displaced with that wind of
Favor and Displeasure, which is agreeable to the Humor of a Multitude, and
the Licentiousness of Arms. For at the same time there were three Emperors,
seven Great Viziers, two Captain-Pasha's, five Aga's of the Janisaries, three
Treasurers, six Pasha's of Cairo; and in proportion, the Changes and
Alterations were as many in all the Provinces of the Empire. All this Confusion
evidently proceeding from the weak and almost senseless Understanding of
Mustapha; the Ministers and People concurred, as it were, in an universal
Consent to dethrone him a second time, and exalt into his Place Sultan Morat
Brother to Osman, who was murdered the Year before. The Principal Actors in
this Contrivance, were Kiosem the Mother of Morat, and the Mufti. But in the
execution hereof, three Difficulties occurred: The first was Chusaein Pasha the
Great Vizier; who by reason of the Inabilities of Mustapha, being become
absolute Lord and Sovereign of all, would be unwilling to assent unto that
Proposition, which might degrade him of his Dignity, and divest him of his
Power. A second Obstastacle was the Fancy and Humor of the Soldiery, who
having with much Zeal and Passion exalted Mustapha to the Throne, it might be
doubted, that in maintenance of the same Humor, they would with equal
obstinacy persevere in their Election. A third was the Poverty or low Ebb of
the Exchequer, which at that time was in no capacity to supply that Donative to
the Soldiery, which was usual and customary at the Inauguration of every
Sultan. To forward and hasten this Change, and ripen this Plot, the News of the
Rebellion of Abassa did much contribute; who with a Body of fifteen thousand
Horse, roved over all the Plains of Kara-hisar, calling himself Avenger of
Sultan Osman's Murder, and Enemy of the Janisaries; by whose Mutiny and
Conspiracy he was put to Death: in satisfaction for which, he not only killed
all Janisaries which fell into his hands; but their Wives, Children, and those
allied to them, he destroyed with implacable Malice and bloody Rage. Upon this
Advice, the Janisaries at Constantinople being moved with equal Fury and desire
of Revenge, applied themselves to their Aga, proposing a speedy Union with the
Spahees, for suppressing this Rebellion before Time gave it greater growth, and
made the Humor more stubborn and difficult to be purged. At the same time also
came Letters from Cicala Pasha, (who was dispatched into Asia with a strong
Party, to give a stop to the farther Progress and Advance of Abassa) advising
that upon his near approach to the Enemy, so general a Fear possessed his
Soldiery, that most of them disbanded and forsook their Colors; and that at
present he had no more than five hundred Janisaries, and two hundred Spahees
under his Command, which he found to be an unequal Match to contend with the
increasing Power of Abassa. This Intelligence served happily the occasion of
the Mufti, Vizier, and Aga, to give a turn to the desired Change, and supplied
them with an Answer to the Janisaries, that they were ready to yield compliance
unto their Address, but that the Incapacity of their Sovereign obstructed their
Proceedings, and that the Defect in the Principal Wheel disordered all the
Motions of good Government. At which Reply the Janisaries becoming more
unquiet, assembled themselves in a tumultuous manner at the Mosch of Sultan
Solomon; where making an Ayack in Turkish signifies a Foot.
Ayack Divan, (so called, because they sit not down, but stand on their Legs,
to denote the present haste and urgency of their Affair) it was enacted, by an
unanimous consent of the Civil and Military Power, That young Morat, or Amurat,
should be promoted to the Throne, and that Mustapha should be deposed: And
because the Exchequer was at its lowest Ebb, and wholly exhausted by
miscarriage of the Officers, the Soldiers were contented to dispense with
their Donative; which they relinquished in consideration of the Public Good,
reserving still their Title and Claim thereunto at times of a more happy
Inauguration. With this News the Vizier immediately mounted on Horseback to
signify this Universal Decree to Mustapha; but he found him so stupid, as if he
had been insensible of the Message; and his Mother wanting Power to resist this
strong Convulsion, gave way to Necessity, and seemed to embrace what she could
not oppose.

Thus Mustapha falling from the Heaven of his Throne to the Abyss of his
Prison, seemed to return unto his Center; for being only by the Wildfire of
Fortune carried as far aloft, as the force of popular Powder could reach, he
afterward by the mere weight of his earthly Temper returned with the like
quickness of Motion to the place from whence he ascended.

Hereupon Sultan Amurat, a Youth of about fourteen years of Age, was brought
forth to the People, and placed in the Throne with all the Acclamations and
Rejoycings of the People. And being taught by his Mother in a feigned manner to
refuse acceptance of the Empire, he pretended that the Exchequer was exhausted,
and that therefore he was not able to demonstrate the Affection and Esteem he
had for them; and that since they had killed their former Sultans, he was
fearful lest the tenderness of his Age should betray him to the like Violence:
but the Soldiery having not the patience to hearken to his Excuses, Amurat
installed.
immediately carried him to the Divan, where having clothed him in White, they
seated him on a Safraw, erected with four Pillars, studded with precious
Stones; the Covering of which was of Crimson-Velvet, richly embroidered with
Gold and Oriental-Pearl. And being so seated, the Mufti with all reverence
approached, and kissed his Hand; and then turning to the People, he demanded of
them, If they were contented with that Prince whom they now beheld in the Seat
of the Ottoman Kings? To which they having given assent by their loud
Acclamations; Morat, with a becoming gravity, encharged the Mufti to take care
that Justice and the Law be executed, and so retired to his Lodgings with
general satisfaction. The next morning he was carried by Water to the Mosch of
Jub in the Suburbs of Constantinople, where according to the Solemnity of the
Ottoman Empire, having performed his Which is a dispensing of Mutton to the
Poor.
Corban, or Sacrifice, and having his Cemiter grit to his Side by the
Emirsheriff, he mounted on Horseback, and with a magnificent Train entered by
the Gate of Adrianople. In the mean time Mustapha, who was more worthy to bear
a Fool's Cap than an Imperial Diadem, was conducted to Prison, and more
narrowly guarded than formerly; howsoever no Man offered to take away his Life,
the Persons of Fools and Idiots being sacred in esteem of the Turks, and the
least Injury offered to them accounted Irreligious and Unlucky.

Morat was of a lively Countenance, full-fac'd, dark Hair, of a black and
lively Eye, ruddy and sanguine Complexion, and in every degree of a promising
and hopeful Aspect: but his exterior appearance did not correspond with the
internal Cruelty of his violent Spirit, having some similitude with the Swan,
which has white Feathers and black Flesh.

The Great Vizier who assisted at this Solemnity, was (as we have said)
Chusaein Pasha, a Person of Self-interest, who had wasted and consumed the
Treasury, and converted a great part thereof to his own Benefit; he was a
Tyrant, hated of all Men, and supported himself by no other Art than bribing of
the Soldiery: And to his other Crimes he added, that of having unjustly
persecuted Halil Pasha, and deprived him of his Office, his Power not reaching
to the taking away his Life; which being reserved for better Times, he was
again recalled from his Retirement, and by special Command of the Sultan, was
unwillingly restored to the Office of Vizier, being best pleased with a quiet
and pacifick Life, to which his melancholy Temper had naturally disposed him.
In the mean time Chusaein Pasha being terrified by the sensible touches of his
own Conscience, took his flight by way of the Black Sea; and being out of the
reach of Justice, a Fine was set of Five thousand Zechins, and of Lands to the
Revenue of an hundred thousand Aspers a Year, to be given unto him who should
bring his Head. Many of those who had sold him their Friendship and Favor,
being affrighted with this Sentence, voluntarily disgorged the Rewards they had
received; and amongst the rest, the last Aga of the Janisaries, who had been
his Kahya or Steward for the space of three months, restored 8 hundred thousand
Dollars as an Atonement for his Sin, and a Ransom for purchasing his own Life
and Office. At length, by force of the foregoing Reward, Chusaein Pasha was
betrayed and taken alive; and being brought to Constantinople, was immediately
strangled before the Gate of the Divan.

Many were the Difficulties which this young Sultan was to encounter; the
greatest of which was the Insolence of the Janisaries, who feeling themselves
empty of Money, began to repent of the prodigal and easy remission of their
Donative, and in a tumultuous manner to redemand it again. There was no
Argument or Debate to be used against Men of the Sword, who hearkened to no
other Reason than their own Wants, and to satisfy them, there was no other
Remedy than Compliance; wherefore all Officers and Persons not employed in
Military Affairs were forced to contribute toward a large Tax, and a shameful
Demand was made for the Loan of Thirty thousand Zechins from the four Christian
Ambassadors resident at the Port, that they also as Friends might yield an
assisting hand toward the present Urgency of Affairs: so little consideration
and shame have Turks to lay open the Nakedness and distress of their Country
even to Strangers and Enemies of it. And indeed such was the Insolence and
uncontrollable Power of the Soldiery, that their Desires and Commands were
Laws, and their Determinations Rules for their Sultan and his Subjects.

This Humor of Usurpation and unlimited Power, wearied all the Officers of the
Empire, and inclined them secretly to approve the Cause of Abassa Pasha of
Erzirum, who declared and styled himself Enemy to the Janisaries; and of Bechir
Pasha of Babylon, who was joined with him. The Vizier also finding his Power
abridged by the Arbitrary Will of the Soldiery, moved slowly and coldly into
Asia, where all the Force he could make, consisted of no more than fifty
thousand new and unexperienced Men, such as were incapable to contend with a
more numerous Army of veterane Soldiers; to which also the Beglerbei of
Anatolia joined himself, as did all other the chief Timar-Spahees, who
conspired together to confound and destroy the Pride and Government of the
Janisaries. The Vizier also was of the same Party, and coldly at first answered
the Request of the Janisaries, when they earnestly pressed him to lead them
against Abassa their common and mortal Enemy: At length, being fortified with
the Force of the Timar-Spahees, he told them plainly, That if they would go and
fight, he would be a Spectator of the Success, but would not engage himself in
a Quarrel wherein the Blood of Musselmen might be spilt on one side and the
other: by which means the Rebels in Asia took Head, increased in Force, and
every day rendered them in a more formidable and dangerous posture.

But this was not all the Trouble which ensued; for the Tartars having refused
that King whom the Grand Signior had appointed them to receive, declared for
Mehmet his Brother: who was seconded by the Votes of the Generality, and
maintained by the strongest Nerve of that Nation. The Vizier was unwilling to
engage in this Quarrel, alleging, That a Civil War was the worst of Evils, and
that it was better to connive at a present Inconvenience, than in this
distracted Time of Affairs, to pollute the Empire with the Blood of Tartars,
who were their Brethren, and of the same Religion and Alliance with them.
Howsoever the Divan was of another Opinion, and resolved to dispeed the
Captain-Pasha with a Force sufficient to re-instate Gherey (for so the Elder
Brother was called) in the Government of that Kingdom. But yet the Instructions
given, rather directed him to act with Dexterity than with Force, supposing
that the Authority of the Turks abetted with the presence of a considerable
Force, would create an inclination in the Tartars to Obedience, so soon as they
discovered them to appear on their Coast. The Captain-Pasha being arrived at
The chief City of the Krim Tartar.
Caffa, declared, That he was sent by the Grand Signior, not to exclude either
one or other of the Pretenders, but only to be Witness of a free and fair
Election; that so all Civil Discord ceasing, that Party might be chosen who was
most pleasing to the generality of the People. To which end two Standards were
erected, one for Gherey the Name of the Family.
Gherey the Elder Brother desired by the Turks, and the other for Mehmet
beloved of the Tartars. The People in multitudes ran to the Standard of Mehmet,
and but few to that of Gherey; which demonstrated at how mean a rate the
Tartars esteemed the Protection and Favor of the Port. The Captain-Pasha vexed
hereat, denied to give his Assent to the Confirmation, on pretense, that he was
first to demand the Grand Signior's Pleasure; but at length was persuaded by
Gherey to land a Force of about eight thousand Men to own and maintain his
Cause, on hopes, that rather than engage against the Turks, the People would
condescend to Terms in his Admission and Favor. The Tartars not being in the
least dismayed hereat, arrayed themselves in a warlike Posture, and feigning
Fear and Flight, allured the Turks to a pursuit of them, until they had brought
them to a place where thirty thousand Horse lay in ambush; which on a sudden
arising and encompassing them round, had entirely destroyed them, had not Salil
the Brother of Mehmet given a stop to the slaughter, on hopes, that such a
testimony of Friendship would reconcile the Spirits of the Turks, at least
might render his Brother's preferment more tolerable and grateful to the Turks.
In this conflict, Ibrahim and Chusaein who were Viziers of the Bench, the kahya
and a Capigibashe of the Seraglio were slain, whose Bodies were afterward
transported to Constantinople, six hundred Janisaries and as many Seamen were
killed, and fifteen hundred Prisoners were taken, whose Liberty was procured at
a mean Ransom, for the sake of that Faith and Religion which they jointly
professed; they also took thirty Pieces of Cannon, and might also have become
Masters of the whole Fleet consisting of thirty six Galleys, had they been
desirous to have prosecuted their Victory to the utmost advantage: and moreover
in that conjuncture of Affairs, when a general consternation had overspread the
principal parts of the Ottoman Dominions, when the Councils were feeble and
faint, and that a languishing Pulse beat in all the Government, had the Tartar
with an Army of fifty thousand Horse then ready to march, made up to the Walls
of Adrianople, it might have proved such an opportunity for dividing and
destroying this Empire, as has not offered at any time since that Occasion.
But the two Brothers, Mehmet and Salil, stiling their War forced and defensive,
used that moderation in their Victory, which might not provoke a desire of
Revenge in the Turks. The Captain-Pasha being thus permitted to depart from
Caffa with his Fleet, sailed to Varna, a Port in the Black Sea, about two
hundred miles distant from Constantinople; where the News of this Defeat being
arrived, put all the City into confusion, and raised the Viziers at midnight to
consult of those Remedies and Expedients which were agreeable to the present
emergency of Affairs. The Great Vizier Ali was of opinion, that the Grand
Signor ought to condescend to Terms of Accommodation, tho to the disadvantage
and disreputation of his Power; and that accordingly a Letter should be wrote
to Mehmet the Tartar, beginning with the usual Complements of Friendship and
Salutation; and afterward declaring, That it was never the intention of the
Port to engage in a War against him, the late conflict having only proceeded
from a mistake and misinterpretation of Orders; and that there was no other
design, than to compose the Civil Differences amongst themselves, by advancing
that Prince to the Kingly Dignity who was most pleasing and grateful to the
People. This Advice was approved by the rest of the Council, and a Messenger
dispatched with the Letter, accompanied with a Cemiter and Vest of Sables,
which are the Signals of the Sultan's Favor. In the mean time the People
murmured at the pusillanimity of the Government, saying, That they had sent an
Ambassador to thank the Tartar for not seizing their whole Fleet, and
acknowledge their Obligation to him for the Blows and Wounds he had given their
Army. The Tartars also gloried in this submission, and took the boldness to
vaunt of their Lineage and Descent to be more Ancient and Noble than that of the
Ottoman Family; and that in this time of decay and degenerate procedure of that
Monarchy, it appertained to the Greatness of the Tartars to stir up the Fire
and snuff the Lamp, that the Splendour of that Empire might become more bright
and shining than in former Ages. And so little respect did they now maintain
for the Port, that they surprised two Ambassadors sent from the Moscovite in
their way to Constantinople, robbed and killed them, as also the Turkish Chiaus
that was with them, lest his Testimony should be brought in for an evidence
against them.

During these Troubles, the Cossacks taking advantage of the Captain-Pasha's
absence in Tartary, entered the Bosphorus with about an hunand fitty Sail of
Saicks and Boats; The form of the Cossacks Boats.
these Boats and Vessels which the Cossacks use, are built long and light, with
ten Oars of a side, and two Men to an Oar; the Head and Stern are not unlike,
so that they hang the Rudder sometimes at one end, and sometimes at the other,
being not obliged to turn their Vessel, but without loss of time to proceed
with that end which happens to be foremost. Each Boat carries fifty select Men
armed with Firearms and Cemiter, in the management of which they are very
expert; and are a People sober, enduring Labor and hard Diet; and so speedy in
their Incursions, that they forestal the Advices, and commonly strike before
they threaten. With these Boats and People (as we have said) they entered the
Bosphorus, where they burnt several Villages and Houses of Pleasure; on the
Grecian side they burnt Boyucderi and Yenichioi, on the Asian side Stenia. The
appearance of this Enemy so near the Imperial City, caused a general
Consternation, not unlike that at London, when the Dutch entered the River of
Chatham. To oppose this Force, there was not one Gally in readiness, so that
Saicks, Chimbers, and small Boats were armed, to the number of four or five
hundred, and manned with such people as the present haste and expedition
offered; the great Chain was then brought forth to cross the BOsphorus, which
the Grecian Emperors used at the Seige of Constantinople: and Ten thousand Men
were issued from the City to defend the Shore from depredation and farther
mischief. The Turkish Fleet faced the Cossacks to give them a stop, whilst they
hovered about the middle of the Chanel in form of a Half Moon, and so continued
the whole day until Sunset; when with the night they returned into the Sea,
carrying with them, besides their Booty, Glory sufficient to have entered the
Chanel, and without blows or opposition, to have braved the Capital Seat of the
Ottoman Monarchy, and the most formidable City of the whole Word. Not many days
after they returned again with a greater Force than before, which put the City
into the like consternation; and having hovered about three or four days at the
Mouth of the Black Sea, they burnt the Pharos or Lantern with certain Villages
thereabouts, and being laden with Spoils and Glory, they again returned into
their own Country. Thus we may observe, how bold Enemies are made with the
weakness of a State: a Horse is soon sensible of his Rider, when backed by a
faint Hand, and an unaccustomed Lightness, but a stiff Rein and a close Knee
makes him obedient to his Ruler. All people having discovered the imbecility
of the Government, made head against it: and the young Sultan had those for his
Enemies in the time of his Nonage, which in his strong and fiercer years became
the most submissive and Fawning Slaves in the World.

And though at this time the Turkish Ministers were corrupt and rebellious, and
the Soldiery mutinous; yet Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, Bethlem Gabor
desires assistance against the Emperor.
a Christian, was observant to the Port, demanding License to wage War against
the Emperor, which was easily granted, and upon payment of the usual Tribute of
Ten thousand Hungars, the Ambassador, with thirteen of his Followers, received
Coftans or Vests of Honor, and a promise of Succor and Protection, as the
Condition of his Affairs should require. Thus we see, that whilst the Turks
themselves endeavored to rent in pieces their own Monarchy, to which one would
have thought, that the Christians had most reason to contribute; yet such was
the unhappy Fate of Christendom, that Gabor was the only Person at that time to
court the Turks; and that for no other Reason, than that he might be supported
and abetted in a War against the Emperor and other Christian Princes of Germany.

The Army of Bethlem Gabor consisted of above Thirty thousand Men, with which
he marched over all Hungary, having taken most Towns of consideration, unless
Presburg, alias Possonium, Rab, and Komorra. But if we penetrate into the depth
and foundation of this War, we shall find that it had a deeper Interest than
that of Gabor, and had its Original from the Discord and Civil War of Germany.
For the House of Austria being at that time in a condition to render it self
formidable, and in a posture to create a jealousy in all the Princes subjected
to it, did under color of subduing the Palatine of the Rhyne, oppress also the
Liberty of the Empire, and of the several States which composed it. For after
the Emperor, against the Constitutions of the Golden Seal, and the Sense of the
Electoral College, had divested the Palatine and his Children of their Estates
and Dignity, not so much by Force of Arms, as by Deceit and Breach of Promise;
instead of disbanding the Army, which was to have been performed according to
Agreement, new Troops were added; and though the Protestant League was
dissolved, yet the Catholic Combination, with all its Adherents, remained
armed and immovable to compel the Protestants to a restitution of the
Ecclesiastical Revenue, notwithstanding the Articles of Peace to the contrary:
so that the Princes and Towns of the Lower Saxony entering into a new League,
raised an Army under the Command of Christian of Brunswick Bishop of
Alberstadt. Bethlem Gabor having his Interest adjoined to this Party,
entertained the same Desires and Intentions, to suppress the Greatness of the
Emperor; and having the just complaint to allege of wanting his annual Pension
of Fifty thousand Crowns, as was agreed by the Treaty of Niclasbourg, he
resolved to force it by Arms, and take part with the Princes of the Protestant
Religion which he professed: but because his Srength and Power was not
sufficient, without the assistance of the Turks, he not only obtained their
permission and approbation of this War, as we have said before, but by payment
of Fifty thousand Dollars presented to the first Vizier, and of Forty thousand
by way of annual Tribute, he procured an Auxiliary Force of Fifty thousand
Turks and Tartars; with part of which, commanded by Budiani, he made an
Irruption into the Lower Austria; and with the other, Bethlem himself, about
the beginning of October, entered into Moravia, defeated the Regiment of
Tiffenbach, retook the Town of Turnova, and routed the Count of Montenegro
General for his Imperial Majesty before the Town of Ghoding on the Frontier of
Moravia, which he afterward beleagured and held besieged until the 20th of
November, when Stanislaus Turzow a Hungarian Palatine became Mediator of the
Peace, and at length obtained a Truce: the principal Articles of which were as
follows.

1. That on both parts Arms be laid down for ten months, and all Acts of
Hostility cease; that on neither side any attempt should be made either by
force or fraud to take any Castles, Forts, Cities, or places of Defense during
this time; and that both Germans, Hungarians, and Turks should be alike
comprehended. 2. That if the Emperor were desirous to treat and conclude a
final Peace with the Grand Signior, he should use Bethlem Gabor as Mediator,
and do nothing therein without his privity. 3. That all Places and Forts taken
by the Prince of Transylvania in his late Expedition, and that all Cities and
Castles now in possession of either, should so remain without any alteration.
4. That all Passages should be open for free Trade of Merchants, and all other
the Subjects and Friends of either side.
A Truce being thus concluded, the Turks in their return made great havoc,
carrying with them great numbers of poor Christians into Slavery, which Gabor
out of compassion seemed willing to redeem with a low price at his own charge;
which the Turks refusing, carried those miserable Wretches into Captivity. The
Count Esterhasi Governor of Newhausel for the Emperor, being highly incensed
at this treacherous Action, contrary to the Truce so lately concluded, having
drawn out a sufficient Force from the neighboring Garrisons, fell on the Rear
of the Turks in their March toward Buda, and charged them so home on the Banks
of the River Niter, that he killed five hundred of them on the place, took all
their Baggage, with diverse Prisoners, and gave liberty to many Christian
Slaves. The next day but one after he charged another Party of them, as they
attempted to pass a Bridge, which the night before he had caused to be broken
down; of which having killed a great number, the rest saved themselves by
swimming: howsoever many Christians procured their liberty thereby, and a
considerable Booty was made of Horses, Camels, Wagons, and all Provisions. The
other Troops consisting of greater numbers, were worse treated than the former;
for Esterhasi having received a Recruit of Horse from Reiffemberg Governor of
Komorra, and Breuner of Jarvarin or Rab, he proceeded boldly to meet the Turks,
and joining Battle with them, he slew twelve hundred on the place, gave liberty
to fourteen hundred Christians, took diverse of their principal Commanders, with
all their Bag and Baggage, besides a considerable quantity of Gold and Silver,
in Plate and Money. Nor were Reiffemberg and Breuner less successful over those
who passed through their Quarters to join with the Garrisons of Alba Regalis and
Canisia, having killed seven hundred of them, and taken all their Baggage.
Moreover Count Serini in his Jouney toward Vienna, defeated six hundred of
them, and presented their Colors to the Emperor: and Esterhasi in like manner
after his several Exploits, offered thirty Cornets at his Feet, with six
Prisoners of Quality, one o f which was Kins man of Bethlem Gabor.

These Rebuffs cooled the courage of the Turks a little, and altered the
resolution of the Council for carrying forward the War on the side of Germany,
as was intended, had the Success answered expectation: For these Misfortunes
abroad, and intestine Troubles at home, with Pestilence and Famine, which at
the same time greatly afflicted the parts of Constatinople (whereby an hundred
thousand People died) abated the Mettle of the Turks, and caused them to take
new Measures in all their Determinations: and for that reason Ambassadors were
sent both to Vienna and into Poland to renew the Articles of Peace, and so to
confirm the League, that whilst the Sultan was employed in his Wars with Persia
and the Eastern Countries, nothing should intervene from the Western Parts to
trouble or obstruct his Progress, or recall him from his Enterprise. For now the
Rebellion of Abassa, joined with Bechir Pasha of Bagdat, growing daily more
considerable, and his strength increasing to that condition, that he was able
to keep the Field in despite of the Grand Signiors Forces, he adventured to
quarter within five days March of Constantinople: and at the same time Letters
coming from Hafish Pasha General of the Army in the Province of Bagdat, that
the King of Persia was entered into the Dominions of the Turk with a powerful
Army, a general Consternation seized the whole Turkish Court, the wisest and
stoutest having occasion to call up for all their Wisdom and Courage to assist
at a Time when the Government was assailed on all sides, both at home and
abroad. Various were the Counsels and Proposals in what manner to proceed in
Times of such emergency. First it was resolved to proclaim a War both against
the King of Persia, and the Rebels in Asia, and that whosoever took of the
Grand Signior Pay, from one Asper a day to higher value, should be in readiness
to serve in the War, upon penalty of losing his Estate, of being accounted a
Rebel, and his Wife and Children sold for Slaves. But the more sober and
moderate sort judged it policy to take off Abassa, by sending him a general
Pardon, with a concession of all his Demands, upon condition, that he should
turn his Arms upon the King of Persia, who was the common Enemy of their
Country and Religion: but the Janisaries would by no means assent to this
Agreement, with a Person to whom they bore a more inveterate hatred, than to
the Persian himself, as he did also to the Janisaries. For that he might better
justify his pretense of Revenge, he declared, That being one day in a Mosch at
his Prayers, the murdered Osman appeared to him, and taking him by the hand,
said, My faithful Mussulman, since thou art the most generous of all my Slaves,
I command thee to revenge my Death, with the Blood of sixty thousand Janisaries
and Spahees; good Forture shall accompany thy Arms, and Victory shall crown thy
Labors. During these Intrigues and Difficulties of Reconciliation, Abassa,
spoiled the Lesser Asia, and the Persian King conquered the City and Province
of Bagdan, or Babylon, took Kur Asan Pasha, an old Soldier, Prisoner,
possessed himself of Mosul and Leska on the Persian Sea; and meeting no
considerable opposition, he divided his Army into four parts. The first was
dispatched into Mesopotamia, commanded by the King himself. The second made
Incursions into Palestine. The third infested the Coast of the Black Sea: and
the fourth marched toward Mecha, with hope and design of sharing all the parts
of the Eastern Empire.

Ali Pasha, who opposed the King in Mesopotamia, was slain, and his Army wholly
defeated, so that the Province became a Prey to the Enemy: the success in
Palestine was equally fortunate by the revolt of Damascus, a place of great
Riches and Importance; the Coast of the Black Sea was greviously infested, and
a Port taken near to Trapezond; and little opposition being made at Balsora,
the Town was taken by that Army in their March toward Mecha and the parts of
the Red Sea, where they rendered themselves Masters of Medina, the City of
their Prophet Mahomet.

To repair these losses, and to encounter numbers so strong and valiant in all
parts, the Vizier was dispeeded with a powerful FOrce to the Town of Bagdat;
but by reason of Mutinies and Tumults amongst the Soldiery, Matters found not
the success expected: and the Garrison making valiant and vigorous Sallies
against the imbecility of the Turkish Soldiery, which were always most
obstinate and stout to oppose their own Commanders, obtained an advantage in
every Attempt; by which discouragement many forsaking their Colors, The Siege
raised at Bagdat, and the Turks overthrown.
the Siege was raised with dishonor, and the Interest of the Turk impaired,
and almost irreparably lost in those Provinces. This News arrived at
Constantinople, that the Camp was risen and fled by Night, that they were
forced to burn their Tents and Provisions, and to break their great Artillery
and cast them into the Euphrates: that the Miseries in the Army had been such
by Famine and Pestilence, and want of all Provisions and Ammunition, that the
like was never known: that the Vizier had beheaded three of his Pasha's, that
so he might cast the whole blame upon them; and that now retreating with his
Army into the Turkish Dominions, the Persians pursued them in the Rear, and for
ten days did execution on them making the best use they could of their Victory;
which Relation filled the Hearts of all People with sadness, and disordered the
Counsels with confusion. The Cause of which will Success, according to custom,
being imputed to the General, he was deprived of his Office, and sacrificed to
the Fury of the Janisaries.

These Troubles were increased at Constantinople, by the Addresses which the
Prince of Transylvania made unto the Port by his Kapi-Kahya or Agent,
representing to the Grand Signior, That he wanting Heirs Male to succeed him in
his Principality; the States at a Diet had, with common consent, elected his
Lady for his Successor; and therefore desired confirmation from the Port. In
excuse of her Sex, he alleged the urgent Necessity of the present Times, which
persuaded rather to admit of the Government of a Woman, than that his
Principality should, for want of an Heir, fall into the Hands of the powerful
Family of Austria. To make good this Demand, Duke John of Weymar, and Count
Mansfelt, Duke of Weymar and Count Mansfelt join with the Prince of
Transylvania.
arrived in Silistria, to whom the Prince of Transylvania joined his Troops:
and Morteza Pasha of Buda wrote to the Port, that he was marching toward Vatz
to meet the Prince, and confer with him concerning these Designs. The Emperor's
Resident at Constantinople greatly exclaimed against these Proceedings; which
something troubled the Counsels of the Turks, who in that Conjuncture were
unwilling to give beginnings to a new War; so that besides fair Words, they
promised to write such Letters to the Pasha of Buda, as should give a stop to
the Investiture of the Princes. But, to say truly, the Instructions given were
in such ambiguous terms, that they in effect left the whole Matter to the
Discretion of Morteza to act, as he judged most agreeable to the State of
Affairs on the Frontiers, and security of the present Peace.

Thus did the Turkish Court seek to ward off the blow of a War with Germany,
and yet secretly nourished and encouraged it, by giving Orders to the Pasha of
Buda to take up his Winter Quarters with the Prince of Transylvania, and to
follow his Directions; but yet so to govern Matters with Caution, as not to
engage too far on uncertain Grounds or doubtful Hazard, but to embrace
Propositions of Peace, if offered with Honor and Security. In prosecution of
these Rules, Morteza observing, that Weymar and Mansfelt having united their
Forces with Gabor, had formed a considerable Army, and were able to fight with
Wallestein General of the Imperialists; joined also his Forces to theirs,
judging it a prudent and politic Design to wage a War at the Blood and Expense
of others. With these Encouragements, and with the favor of a good
Opportunity, The Emperor's Army defeated.
the Confederates fell upon the Army of Wallestein near the River Gran; who not
being able to withstand their Force and Fury, was put to flight, and pursued in
the Rear with great slaughter; and endeavoring to pass the River on two
Bridges of Boats, were closely followed by the Prince's Forces, who gaining the
Pass, put the whole Army into great amazement, and resolved to pursue them to
the Gates of Presburg, or Vienna.

Notwithstanding this Success, the Prince of Transylvania observing the
backwardness of his Allies to contribute the Succors of Men and Money which
they had promised; and fearing that the unfortunate Estate of the Turkish
Affairs should cause the Sultan to disown the War, dispeeded a Messenger to the
Emperor in the Winter-season, to excuse the Constraint upon him of taking up
Arms, and to offer Terms of Accommodation and Peace. But the Emperor refused
all Treaties, until such time as Gabor had separated himself from his Allies,
and from association with the Turk: Upon which Answer, Gabor retired to
Cassovia, and Morteza to Pesth. This Compliance gave beginning to a Treaty at
Komara, where the Commissioners on part of the Emperor, of the Grand Signior,
and Prince of Transylvania, assembled. All Parties seemed inclinable to War,
and yet with occult Intentions to make Peace, being necessitated thereunto by
the urgency of their distinct Interests. The Emperor was urged by his Wars with
the Protestants of Germany, and apprehension of Forces from England in favor
of the Elector Palatine, then King of Bohemia. The Grand Signior was encumbred
by the unfortunate condition of his Wars in Asia: And Bethlem Gabor, jealous of
being disowned by the Port, deserted by his Allies, and exposed to fight and
contend singly with the Emperor. In short, Gabor concluded a Peace with the
Emperor apart, Peace concluded between the Emperor and Gabor.
which gave some Jealousies and displeasure to the Grand Signior: Howsoever he
dissembled his Discontent, and willingly interessed Gabor with Morteza as
Commissioner for him; who being variously disposed, yet moved with the
considerations of their common Advantage, worked all Differences into a
Composition of Peace; the Articles of which being brought to Constantinople by
an Internuncio from the Emperor, and delivered in presence of the two
Ambassadors of Gabor, they were accepted by the Chimacam, and ratified by the
Grand Signior.

Articles of Peace concluded between the Emperor of Germany Ferdinand the
Second, and Bethlem Gabor, in the Month of December 1626.

I. THE Prince of Transylvania does promise, by the Faith of a Christian, never
to move Arms, or use any Hostility against the Majesty of the Emperor, or the
House of Austria, or their Successors, much less to enter into their Dominions
with an Army; nor to aid his Enemies, or keep a Correspondence with them: Not
to plot any Innovation in the Kingdom of Hungary, or other Christian Countries:
Nor to stir up or provoke the Turks, Tartars, or others, to invade them: Not to
entertain or assist in any evil Counsel against his Majesty, nor to give ear to
the Request and Desires of his Enemies; but rather to reveal all their
Conspiracies and Wickednesses, which shall be made known unto him; and by all
means to demonstrate and show a sincere mind truly desirous of Peace, and
sollicitous of the Common Good. II. That the Prince shall instantly depart with
his whole Army, out of the Territories and Cities of the Emperor; and that he
shall restore as well all Goods belonging to the Imperial Treasure, as those of
his faithful Subjects. III. That he shall remove from him the Rebel Mansfelt,
and all other his Followers and Adherents, desirous to invade the Dominions of
the Emperor: And that he shall not aid any Stranger whatsoever, who at his
Instance has entered into the Territories of his Mejesty with Count Mansfelt;
to whom Letters of Public Safety shall be given, that they may return by
twenty or thirty in a Troop, conditionally, that in no place of their Retreat
they shall join with the Enemies of the Emperor. IV. That seeing it is fit, for
Establishment of the Peace, that the Inhabitants of Countries and Cities
belonging to the Prince, by consent of the Emperor, should remain, during his
Life, in Obedience and Fidelity to him; and that those Inhabitants should do
Homage to the Emperor, (saving their corporal Oath to the Prince) to keep
inviolate these Articles, That they should have leave, by Letters of full
Authority and Power, granted them by the Prince in their first Assemblies and
Conventions, to make such Oath of Homage. V. That at the same time of
performing the Homage and Oath, besides the Oath before the last War, they
shall take a new Oath according to the Agreement between the Prince and the
Commissioners of the Emperor. VI. The Prince shall procure, that all Places
upon the Confines, which were taken by the Turks in the last War, be restored;
and that all Captives, taken Prisoners, shall be set at liberty: And that the
Prince shall procure the freedom of all such the Emperor's Subjects as shall be
in the Turkish Captivity. VII. That all the Subjects of the Emperor, lately
incited and drawn to the Service of the Prince, shall be free from their Oath:
and if the Prince has any of their Writings Obligatory in his Hands, that he
shall restore them: And that these Conditions being confirmed, all other things
formerly treated, shall remain in their former State and Vigor. VIII. That if
any other Difficulties arise, they shall be accommodated with Fidelity and
Quietness by Commissioners on both Parts: And that all those who in the last
Commotions have served the Prince, shall be absolved according to the Treaty
and Agreement at Vienna. IX. That all the Inhabitants of Cities and Countries,
which have served the Prince, shall be absolved; only those excepted, who have
voluntarily taken up Arms against the Emperor; for whom the Prince only shall
intercede, excusing always private Men, who have done private Wrongs; for they
shall, according to Law and Custom, seek their Restitution by Civil Action. X.
That all other Articles of Peace concluded at Nichilsburg and Vienna, shall
remain in their former Vigor and Force: And that all Goods of the Emperor's
Clergy, possessed by the Prince from the Year 1619, to this present Day, shall
be restored; except the Abbeys of Replana belonging to the Seminaries of
Strigonium, for which the Prince shall pay yearly to the Emperor five hundred
Florens.
These Articles being thus agreed, and signed, and approved by the Sultan, in
the Month of September following 1627, the Articles between the Emperor and the
Grand Signior were also agreed at Komara; the which are as follow, translated
out of the Turkish, word for word.

THAT seeing the Peace established formerly at Zitwar, Vienna, Komara, and
Chiarman, has remained in the same State, and in the same Articles, without
any alteration, it shall not be violated by any new occasion of Contention.
That the Differences of Vatz, whereof is made mention at the present, shall
rest in the same State that the Commissioners on both sides shall agree. That
the new Forts built upon the Confines of Croatia, contrary to the Peace, shall
be demolished. To which purpose our said Deputy Mehmet, and our Vizier Mortesa
Pasha, shall meet upon the Frontiers of Buda with your Deputies, at the Time
appointed by the Treaty; and thereupon the places on both sides shall cause to
be demolished the Forts built contrary to the Peace: Wherein if they find any
Impediment, they shall choose able and valiant Men to perform and execute the
said Service. That after the Approbation of this happy Peace, your great
Ambassador shall come to Komara, and ours shall repair with our Imperial
Letters to Strigonium: and there one of them advising the other, yours shall
set forward to our happy Port, and ours shall advance to you. For so it is
agreed by our Imperial Order, both carrying with them the new Imperial
Capitulations. That all Complaints of Villages subject to both parts, shall be
laid aside, and no Violences, Taxes, or Contribution, contrary to our former
Convention, shall be exacted. And all Forts built in the common Confines, shall
be raised. And reciprocally it shall be made known, according to the ancient
Treaty, what great Men do dwell amongst our Tributaries. And for the execution
of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Articles of the Peace of Zitwa, the Tenth of
Vienna, and the Fourth of Komara and Chiarman (for such was then the Agreement)
two Capigi-Pasha's of our high Port shall be deputed and dispatched, the one to
this side, and the other to that side of the Danube. And upon your part you
shall send two such qualified Persons to the same places: who being met
together with the Deputies of Mortesa Pasha, and the Palatine of Hungary, shall
rectify all Disorders, and see that good Justice be done on both Parties; for
so it is our most High Pleasure. That the Slaves which have been taken during
this our Treaty, shall be freed and set at liberty without any Ransom: And
those who were taken before the said Treaty, shall be exchanged and Redeemed,
according to their Qualities and Estates, by the interposition of Mortesa
Pasha, and the Palatine of Hungary deputed for that purpose. For the Good of
poor People on both sides, the Commissioners have thought fit to conclude this
renewed Peace for Twenty five Years, from 1627. Whereunto we have given our
Imperial Assent. That all Merchants, and other our Subjects on both parts,
shall have safe passage and conduct through both our Dominions: And we have
given command to our Pasha's, Beglerbeghs, Generals, Beghs, and Captains, upon
our Confines, to apprehend, bring into Justice, and punish all such as shall
any way disturb or molest them contrary to the Peace. As likewise the Palatine
of Hungary, and other your Ministers shall do on your part, if they find any
such Offenders. That our Beglerbeghs, Sanzacks, Captains, and Governors; and
your Generals, Commanders, and Captains, shall upon occasion employ all such
Persons as are lovers of the Peace and Common Good. That there shall be no
Damage or Hurt done to any of our Subjects in any of your Kingdoms or
Dominions, neither by Sea nor Land; as there shall none be done to yours in our
Dominions. That all bypast Wrongs, Enmities, and Unkindness, on both parts,
shall be forgotten and laid asleep: and that this happy Peace shall be
sincerely and firmly continued and kept inviolate. Upon Condition that the
Emperor perform and observe all the aforesaid Articles, and that there follow
no Action from any Ministers, contrary to the said Peace: We promise and swear,
by God our Creator, who made the whole World of Nothing; and by the Honor
which we bear to our most high Prophet Mahomet Mustapha, That there shall not
be done, during the whole Term of the said Peace, the least Hurt or Damage to
the Subjects, Countries, Kingdoms, Castles, or Forts of the said Emperor, by
any of our Ministers or Armies, nor to any Christian Slaves subject to our
happy Port.
By these Articles we may observe, that both Parties were desirous of a present
Peace, rather than one which was durable; for things are so slubber'd over to
serve the present Occasion, that they leave all Disputes undecided, till Time
should happen more proper to interpret them with the Sword, than with the Pen:
like Sores obducted by an unskilful Surgeon, which festering within, must be
again opened before they are cured: howsoever they served the turn of Gabor,
whose Interest it was to maintain an ill Correspondence between the two
Emperors.

Peace being thus concluded between Ferdinand the Second and Sultan Morat, gave
some reputation to the Affairs of the Turks: so that notwithstanding the late
success of the Persian in their War, by raising the Siege of Bagdat, and
overthrow of the Turkish Army; yet that King finding himself now engaged alone,
and singly to contend with the Ottoman Power, feared the Puissance of that
Empire, lest being roused and heated with the sensible Pinches of the late
Disgrace, they should call up and invigorate all their Forces to a Revenge,
which might at length tend to a ruin and destruction of Persia, unless Fortune,
which attended the first auspicious beginnings with Success, did also continue
constant, and still accompany their Arms, which could hardly be expected.

Wherefore on these Considerations becoming more faint in prosecution of the
War, the Persian dispatched an Ambassador to Constantinople, furnished with
various Proposals and Projects for a Peace; but still Mattters driving so as to
reserve the City and Province of Bagdat, or Babylon, in the hands of the
Persian, the Treaty became ineffectual, in regard the Vizier (who was then
called Halil Pasha) judged it a high and an irrecoverable disreputation to the
Empire, to be dismembered of so principal a part of it. Wherefore the Ambassador
being dispatched away with some neglect, the Turks armed with that diligence
and heat, that they entered Persia with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand
Men; with which appearance the people being dismayed, suffered Tauris to be
taken without much opposition. From hence marching to Bagdat, they found the
City well provided and defended with a numerous Garrison, from whence many
Sallies were made with variety of Fortune, till at length the Turkish Soldiers
being wearied and tired with incessant labor and watchings, many of them fled
from their Colors: and with such diminutions, the Army being much abated in
its Numbers, the Vizier withdrew them from the Persian Dominions. Another
Expedition into Persia.


Some Months after the Turkish Army being reinforced, the Vizier entering again
into Persia, overthrew the Trucmen who opposed him in his March, and destroyed
the Gregorians, who were Friends to the Persian, with a very great slaughter;
took Moroc their General, and cut off his Head: And adding to these Victories,
the report of having taken some few inconsiderable Towns, his Expedition ended
without other Advantages, or Progress of their Arms. This ill Success much
troubled the Councils at Constantinople; for they considered that they had now
waged an expensive, laborious War, for the space of three Years, without any
Effect agreeable to the Blood and Charge which maintained it, but rather to the
Loss and Damage of the Empire. The Soldiers abhorred the length and
tediousness of the Way, and the misery of the March, being to pass over vast
Countries and Deserts, where there was nothing besides Rocks, Sands, and
Barrenness. Many Horses, Camels, and other Beasts of Burden, perished for want
of Nourishment; and where Provisions were to be had, the Price was so
excessive, that the Timariots and other Soldiers had not a Purse to defray
their Charges. The Enemy likewise was very strong, for the Sofi was at the Head
of forty thousand brave Horse, which daily infested the Ottoman Camp, beat
their Convoys, and cut off their Provisions, and so obstructed them that they
could not advance.

The Vizier Halil, Proposition made by the Persian for a Peace.
then General, being discouraged by these Disasters, was inclinable to accept
of the Proposition made by the Persian, viz. That Babylon should remain to his
eldest Son in Fee, and to his Heirs and Successors, acknowledging to the Grand
Signior a Tribute as great as the yearly Revenue which proceeded from it, at
the time when it was in the Hands of the Sultan. But this middle Way seemed an
Expedient dishonorable to the Greatness of this Empire, and that which argued
pusillanimity and want of courage in the Government, and therefore was rejected
by the Council of State, as well as by the Military Men. Howsoever the Persians
taking their Measures by the disposition they discovered in the Vizier
thereunto, adventured to dispatch an Ambassador to Constantinople with tender
of the same Project; but as he was coldly and faintly received, so he was in a
few days dispatched with few words, and little respect, as if he had been sent
as a Spy to discover the State and Condition of the City, Rejected by the Turk.
and the Inclination of the Prince, rather than to obtain any Benefit by the
Treaty. For now Amurat growing into Years, increased in Spirit, and discovered
a Martial Courage; he began to leave his Delights, and Walks in Gardens, and
the society with his Mother and Women, and to assume thoughts of War and
Government: such as entertained him in softness and luxurious Pastimes, were
reproved by the Ministers about him, and by them persuaded to buckle on his
Armor, and to delight in Martial Exercises: So that now new Measures were
taken in all Affairs: And in the first place, Halil the Great Vizier was
recalled from being General in Persia, and the Pasha of Darbiquier put into his
Place; and though he was Brother-in-Law to the Grand Signior, yet being
esteemed at Court as a Person who had amassed great Riches in his Employment,
he was forced to disgorge five hundred thousand Crowns as an ease of his
Burden, and an Atonement to pacify the Sultan for the Fault of his Misfortunes
and ill Success.

In these Times of Licentiousness and Revolt, the Pirates of Algier and Tunis,
began also to cast off their Respect and Reverence to the Ottoman Empire; The
Pirates of Tunis and Algier trouble the Seas.
for being become Rich by the Prizes they had taken on Christian Vessels, they
resolved to set up for themselves, and to esteem the Peace which Christian
Princes had made with the Grand Signior, not to concern them; but as if their
Governments had been independent, demanded a particular Treaty, and distinct
Articles with themselves: So that now daring to do any thing, six Vessels of
Tunis chased some Christian Ships into Rhodes, and there attaqued them,
notwithstanding that the Castle shot at them. They afterward took a Dutch
Ship, which had laden at Alexandria: and entering the Port of Salines in Cyprus,
they engaged with two Venetians; the lesser Ship made a good resistance, but
having no help, she was thrice fired, and at last burnt: the other being a Ship
of eight hundred Tuns, was cowardly set on fire by the Mariners, and abandoned,
escaping ashore with their Boats. Then they sailed for Scanderone, where
finding a Dutch Ship and a Polaca, they took both, and then landed. The Aga of
the Scale, with all the Inhabitants, fled; so that finding no opposition, they
ransacked and robbed all the Warehouses, and afterward set them on fire: The
greatest Loss fell upon the English and Dutch, the first lost about ten
thousand Dollars, and the latter about thirty thousand.

Of these Losses, and breach of Peace, the Christian Ambassadors much lamented;
and complained, that if some Remedy were not applied thereto, all Trade must be
given over, no Security being to be expected in the Articles and Faith of the
Grand Signior: To which, though the Vizier and Great Men did seem to yield a
favorable Ear, and promise Redress: Yet being corrupted with some share of the
Spoils, and sweetened with part of the Robbery, they began to reject the
Memorials of the Ambassadors, and to allow the Pleas of the Pirates, as grounded
on some solid Foundation of Reason and Religion: suffering them to publish
Discourses, that the Turks were obliged to maintain a perpetual War with the
Christians, as Enemies to their Law and Alchoran; and though Policy may suggest
some Conveniences by Peace with them, yet those Considerations are Matters of
Sin rather than of Reason.

To make all this good, the Divan of Tunis sent two Deputies to remonstrate the
great Benefit and Advantage the Port received by the Depredations and hostile
Acts which they committed on the Christians: And to inculcate this Argument the
better, they declared, That they had lately taken two Galleys of Malta, out of
the Spoils of which, they presented unto the Sultan two Stirrups of Gold, with
diverse Slaves; two of which were Cavaliers, one of the Roman, and the other of
the French Nation: those which were Youths, and comely in shape and feature,
were entered into the Service of the Seraglio; and the more strong and
robustous, were committed to the Service of the Galleys; so that the Turks were
inwardly pleased with these Piracies, howsoever gave good words to the
Christian Ambassadors, promised much, and effected nothing.

At that time Trade flourished greatly in those Parts, and had done much more,
had it not been interrupted by the Piracies of Barbary; and the Trade was
especially so great with Venice, that a Turkish Merchant called Rodul Aga,
whose whole Negotiation and Dealing was for that place, died worth a Million of
Soltanees; of which, for want of Children, the Grand Signior became the sole
Heir.

But one Accident happened about this Time on the Seas, worthy to be recounted:
The Seas (as we have said) swarming then with Pirates, the General of Candia,
with three Galleys, coasting on the Seas for defense and protection of
Merchant-Ships, arrived in the Port of Andro; from whence espying a Gally
plying close under the Shore, and believing her to be a Corsaire, or Pirat,
made up to her; and because it was a about the glimpse of the Evening, so that
she could not be well known or distinguished, the General rashly charged her;
and meeting a stout resistance, many were killed before it was known that the
Gally belonged to the Archipelago, A Fight at Sea by mistake.
commanded by Dervis Bei, one of the Grand Signior's Captains: but so soon as
the Mistake was discovered, the Candiot General demanded of the Turk a thousand
Excuses, returned him his Gally and Slaves again, and whatsoever was taken from
him, bestowing with them an infinity of Complements, supposing that thereby the
Spirit of the Turk being somewhat appeased and mollified, he would represent
this Encounter with the more favorable Terms and Advantage at the Port.
Notwithstanding which Offices of Kindness, Dervis Bei, without farther loss of
time passed up to Constantinople, bringing his Gally in without Lantern, shot
thorough, ill treated, and shattered, feigning himself also to be wounded;
related, that he had lost forty four Levents, and seventy seven Slaves which
were killed; and that all the Haratch or Tribute-Mony, which was collected for
the Grand Signior's Service from the several Islands, was robbed and embezled
by these Candiots. His Complaints were aggravated by many Circumstances, and
being assisted with the Clamours of other Beys or Captains of Galleys; the
Noise and Dispute was exceeding high in the Divan, urging, that the Venetians
were obliged to make good a Loss, which they had caused rather out of Malice
than Mistake.

At that time Georgio Giustiniano resided at Constantinople for the most Serene
Republic; who to oppose the high Clamours of these Complainants, showed
Courage, and accompanied his Answers with Prudence and Resolution, which are
often very convincing in the Turkish Court. They alleged, that the Peace was
broken. He answered, That it would not be the first time; and that they ought
not to yield entire Credit to the Relation of Persons passionate and partial in
their own Cause: that such Accidents as these, were as ordinary and common in
the World as Cold and Heat, as fair and foul Weather; and that so soon as the
Error was discovered, and the Gally known not to belong to Barbary, but to the
Grand Signior, it was punctually and entirely, restored, with all the Excuses
imaginable.

In short, this Business which had so bad an Aspect at the first, by the
dexterity of this Minister, and giving something to Dervis Bei, whereby to stop
his Mouth, the Complaint ceased, and all farther Proceedings were superseded.

The Wars in Persia being unsuccessful, it was proposed in Council, that a
Peace should be made, if possible, with Abassa Pasha; that his Demands,
Proposals of Accommodation with Abassa.
whatsoever they were, should be granted, and promises given him of Honors and
Preferment: But the inveterate Enmity and Hate which the Janisaries bore him,
and the difficulty there was to persuade Abassa, that the Overtures made him
were free and candid, and not mixed with Treachery and Design, were
Obstructions not to be obviated or overcome. Wherefore Abassa keeping mutual
Intelligence with the Persians, and receiving assistance and succors from
them, was become very formidable and strong, and the Town of Erzirum well
fortified with Works and a numerous Garrison. Howsoever the Janisaries, his
mortal Enemies, pressing the Vizier to proceed against him, at length obliged
him to besiege the Place; which having done, and closely begirt it, Erzirum
besieged.
the most forward and brave amongst the Janisaries, were the first to scale the
Walls, but were repulsed by the valor of stout and resolute Soldiers; for
they knowing that there was no other safety but in their Arms, and no other
Mercy than an ignominious Death, being the just Reward of their Rebellion,
refused to give or receive Quarter: Wherefore they made frequent Sallies on the
Enemy, and as many Janisaries of them as they took Prisoners, they immediately
hanged about the Walls, as a spectacle of Horror to their Associates. This
Resolution and Cruelty, deterred the Turks from their frequent Assaults and
Storms made upon the Town; and the many Batteries and Fortifications, rendered
the Place almost impregnable; so that there seemed no other hopes to remain,
but to overcome them by a long Siege and Famine: But Abassa had so well
provided against this Danger, with such plenty of Provisions, that the Turkish
Army began to be more straightened for want of Sustenance than the Besieged: so
that becoming weary and discouraged amidst so many Difficulties, they raised
the Siege with such disorder and haste, The Siege raised.
that they left several Pieces of Cannon behind them; and retiring with some
confusion, were charged in the Rear, so that many Janisaries fell a Sacrifice
to the hate and revenge of the Enemy.

The News of this Success coming to Constantinople, was ill received; but the
Disaster thereof, according to the usual Custom, was attributed to the Vizier
who was General; for which Cause he was deprived of his Office, and the
Selictar Aga (who carries the Sword before the Grand Signior) was put into his
place, a Person of a fierce, bloody, and cruel Disposition.

To these, New Troubles from Tattary.
new troubles were added out of Tartary. For Mahomet the King of that Country,
exalted to the Princely Dignity (as we have already declared) by the Favor and
Election of that People, though contrary to the sense and pleasure of the Port,
was now fallen from the good esteem which they conceived for him, because he
gave some hindrance to their usual Incursions on the Polonians and Cossacks,
out of memory and gratitude to the assistance they had contributed toward his
Election; for which reason being, as it were, famished for want of their usual
Depredations, they refused to obey his Commands; and then openly threw off
their Obedience to him as their Prince. The Turks, who always envied this
Dignity to Mahomet, rejoiced to see this Discord between him and his People,
and therefore thought it time to make use of this occasion to re-instate Gherey
the elder Brother into the possession of his Kingdom; whom the Turks, for his
better security, having placed at Rhodes, the usual Retirement of the Tartarian
Princes, dispatched a Squadron of Galleys to fetch him from thence to
Constantinople; where being arrived, he was received with a magnificent and
Princely Entertainment by the Sultan: that so the Fame thereof forerunning his
arrival in Tartary, the people might be better prepared to concur with the Port
in their acceptance of him for their King. He was afterward conducted to
Caffa, the Grand Signior's Town in Tartary, with a strong Fleet of fifty
Galleys, where at his first landing he was received by Cant-Emir, a rich and
powerful Tartar, and Chief of the Turkish Faction, and by many others with
great honor and solemnity, with whom also a considerable Party most willingly
engaged. But the Cossacks of Poland and Circassians, Friends to Mahomet the
Brother, joining their Troops to his Forces, became too Strong for the Turks;
for giving them Battle near the Enclosures of the Danube, at a place called
Bandet, they defeated them, and killed three or four thousand of their Men,
putting all to Fire and Sword round about; and entering on the Seas with their
Fleet of Boats, took five of the Turkish Galleys: with which ill Success, the
Tartars, which took part with Cant-Emir, being discouraged, abandoned their
Colors and fled; so that Cant-Emir was forced to take Sanctuary in Caffa,
which being a Town belonging to the Grand Signior, it was hoped, that the
reverence they owed to that Name, would cause them to refrain all Violence
thereunto. But the Tartars, provoked by this late effusion of Blood, lost all
respect to that Government; so that besieging the Town, they assaulted and took
it, and therein the Son of Cant-Emir whom they cut in pieces, the Father
escaping in a disguise from the City.

The News hereof arriving at Constantinople was greatly displeasing, and caused
many serious Debates and Consultations thereupon; the wisest and most sober of
the Council was for dissembling the Matter, and with their usual dexterity to
suffer what they could not remedy: for that it was by no means advisable in the
present conjuncture of Affairs, to proceed unto an open Rupture with the
Tartars, fearing lest the Christians, Persians, and other Enemies should make a
benefit of this Occasion, and joining with a Nation so strong in Horse, should
dangerously press upon the Empire, and force them to the ultimate extremity of
Affairs. Wherefore an Envoy Extraordinary was sent to the Tartars, who covering
the inward sentiments of Regret and Anger, which the Sultan conceived for the
late Disgrace, seemed to wonder at the Cause and Reason of the last Engagement,
as if it had been acted without the knowledge or order of the Grand Signior; and
thus with gentle Terms insinuating, that the Surrender of Caffa would be very
acceptable to the Port, and that which would atone for all miscarriages, and be
such an offering of Pacification, as would reconcile all past Differences, and
restore a perfect Correspondence between the Sultan and them: the Tartars
readily assented to the Demand, upon condition, that the Turks should impose no
other King upon them than him, whom by general consent they had elected for
their Prince.

Though Differences were thus concluded with the Tartars, yet the Cossacks
continued still their Enmities, entering the Black Sea with eighty Saicks, which
they so infested, that the Turks could for that Year avail themselves little of
their Navigation in those Seas: so that the Turks, to curb these Insolences,
gave Orders to build two Forts at the Mouth of the Black Sea: the Polish
Ambassador made Complaint hereof, and protested against it, as an Act contrary
to the Capitulations of Peace; but the Turks esteem little of the Air of
Bravadoes, whilst they are not accompanied with something else more solid than
their own Levity.

But the grand Concernments which busied the Thoughts of the Turks, was the
Rebellion of Abassa, and the War in Persia, the management of which was the
charge and care of the Selictar Aga lately made Vizier, called Serches Pasha.
His Headquarters were at the beginning of this Year taken up at Iconium,
called by the Turks Conie; and Abassa was encamped at Kaisaria, against whom
the Vizier marched; and being nearly approached, the Janisaries earnestly
urged, that Battle might be given the Enemy; but the Vizier having received
Instructions not to engage, if possible, but rather to enter into a Treaty, and
to propose Terms of Accommodation, delayed the Time, and with various Excuses,
eluded the present premures of the Janisaries; at which they became so angry,
that they flew into an open Mutiny, The Janisaries mutiny.
cutting the Cords of his Tents, stoning him, and wounding him in the Head: by
which open Violence, the Vizier being compelled to make known his Orders, he
assembled the chief Commanders of the Spahees and Janisaries, giving them to
understand, that the Grand Signior's Pleasure was, to make up the Difference
with Abassa, as the only means to conclude an intestine and unnatural War, and
to be able to withstand the Persians, and regain the Country and Reputation
which the Turks had lost. This Proposition seemed plausible to the Commanders
at the General Assembly, and more especially, because it was the Pleasure and
Injunction of the Grand Signior; but more difficult it was to incline the rough
and obstinate minds of the Janisaries to a resolutian so different to their
Natures, and so contrary to that Revenge which they had deeply rooted in their
Hearts, and sworn to execute: howsoever the persuasions which the Officers used
to their inferior Soldiers, putting them in memory of the Blood of their
Companions, and how destructive the continuance of such a War must necessarily
prove for the future by those large effusions of Blood which they must expect
farther to make, were so prevalent upon them, that at length they condescended
to a Treaty, They consent to treat with Abassa.
and to receive Abassa for a Friend and a Fellow-Souldier. Abassa at first
suspecting some Treachery, refused to give a private meeting to the Vizier; but
the Vizier giving his Brother the Beglerbegh of Caramania, and the Pasha of
Anatolia for Hostages, the Day and Place for a Conference was appointed; where
both Parties meeting, Articles were agreed, That Abassa should still continue
to be Pasha of Erzirum, his Son Pasha of Bosra, his Cahya, or Lieutenant, to be
Pasha of Marasch, (all which were Places on the Confines of Persia) a general
Act of Pardon and Amnestie was to be given to Abassa and his whole Army, and
the Articles sworn unto in the most solemn manner by the Vizier, and confirmed
in the public Camp of the Janisaries, who also promised to maintain this Word
and Promise of the Vizier; to all which the Grand Signior gave his Hand, and
affixed his Royal Signature. Abassa reconciled to the Grand Signior.


A Reconciliation being in this manner, completed, the City of Erzirum
resigned it self to the Obedience of the Grand Signior, and the Army of Abassa
was employed on the Confines of Persia, and converted against the Enemy. The
Vizier also was appointed to proceed on the same Enterprise; but his Army was
so ill provided of all Necessaries, that he made his Excuse, and refused to
march forward: But on the contrary, he returned to Constantinople in company
with Abassa; where, with many demonstrations of Friendship and Respect, he was
conducted to the presence of the Grand Signior to receive Honor, and the
Reward of his Penitence, and return to Obedience. The approach of these two
great Personages near to Constantinople, made much noise and rumor in the City;
some blamed the weakness of the Government for accepting an Enemy unto Favor,
and that the crowning of his Rebellion with Rewards, was to encourage others in
the like Practices.

The Vizier was also murmured against for leaving the Army and the War, The
Vizier and Abassa make their Entry into Constantinople.
contrary to the Royal Command, by such as were emulous of his Greatness: But
as Envy is converted into Veneration, and ceases as Smoke does, when it is
blown up by the Flame of Success and Glory; so those who were emulous of these
Persons, submitted to all obsequious Offices toward them; and dissembling
their Malice, went to meet them as far as Scutari, that they might add to their
Train and Equipage, and help at the Solemnity of their Entrance. All People now
cast their Eyes on the Vizier and Abassa, as the two great Men of this Age; the
first was esteemed for his dexterous and successful management in bringing over
Abassa to his Submission and Obedience; for though he was not famed much for
his great Feats of Arms, yet this Reconciliation of Abassa was accounted a
Masterpiece of Policy, and better Service than a Victory. Abassa also drew the
Eyes of the People, who crowded to see so great a Captain, that could contend
with the Port, and put all Asia into Disturbance, and in conclusion could make
the same Arms serve his Master, which had lately before given a check and stop
to all the Ottoman Force. The Vizier was the first introduced to the Royal
Presence, where being graciously received, he was presented with a Vest of
Sables and a Cemiter set with Jewels. Abassa was afterward admitted, and
having performed his Obeisance by touching the Ground with his Forehead after
their fashion; he declared, That he never was other than a faithful Vassal to
the Sultan, and that he had taken up Arms for his sake, that he might subjugate
the insolence of the Janisaries, and with their Blood revenge the Death, and
sacrifice to the Ghost of his murdered Brother Osman, that they might learn to
reverence their Princes for the future, and learn to know how sacred the Blood
is of their Sovereign. The Grand Signior seemed kindly to accept this Apology,
and as a Token thereof, bestowed three Vests upon him; which was a treble
Honor of that kind, and made him Pasha of Bosna; on which employment he
immediately entered: And though when such offices are bestowed, it is commonly
the custom for that Person, who is invested in the Employment given, to kiss
the Sleeve of the Grand Signior publicly by way of Thanks: Yet, lest such
Demonstration of Honor should ill affect the Eyes of the Janisaries, and cause
murmuring and repinings amongst the most envious of the Soldiery, his last
Audience was designed privately, and his Dispatch procured in more secret and
familiar manner, and therefore more obliging than was usual.

To yield some assistance to the present growing Charges of the Empire, the
Vizier imposed a heavy Tax on the Christians and Jews; on the first it was
levied with all severity; The Jews at Constantinople how treated
but the Jews found more favor by their Arts, and secret management of
Affairs, for they are a People of some Authority and Power in Turkey: they are
cursed by particular Persons, but caressed by the generality: they are Slaves
in all Countries, and yet acquire somewhat of Mastership and Propriety: they
are Vagabonds, and yet every Country is their own: they cannot buy lands, and
yet daily increase their Fortunes: they multiply in abundance, because they all
marry, and are not destroyed by Wars: they are great Confidents of the Turks,
and Enemies to the Christians. In short, Covetousness in Constantinople is like
a public Courtisan, to whom the Jews are the Panders and Ruffians.

The Grand Signior passing one day through the Streets, unhappily met with the
Ambassador of the Prince of Transylvania; who because he did not immediately
descend from his Horse in token of Reverence, he caused him and his whole
Family to be imprisoned; but being afterward excused by the Chimacam, to have
only been a matter of inadvertency, his Omission was pardoned, and so released
from his Restraint.

The Soldiery having for a long time been governed by a loose and gentle hand,
continued their licentious way of living, committing many outrages on the
Merchants and Inhabitants of Constantinople; against which many Decrees having
been published, and Proclamations made, without any effect or notice of the
Soldiery, the Vizier was unwilling to dally longer; and therefore taking a
Spahee and a Janisary, hanged them up, and cut off their Heads: and with such
course and method of Severity, he so abated the haughty Stomachs of the
Soldiers already mortified by the assumption of Abassa into favor, that they
began to yield unto Command, and to behold their Rulers with an eye of Respect,
as those which were seated in some degree above themselves; for till now there
was scarce a common Janisary, but who thought himself to be the Creator or
Elector of his General, and therefore to be little inferior to him in Power and
Dignity.

And as this Vizier was severe toward the Soldiery, so he demeaned himself
with equal rigor toward the Pasha's and Grandees of the Court; which though
it was an Humor in the Vizier at that conjuncture, laudable and necessary, yet
it procured him such enmity, as removed him at a distance, and caused him to be
sent into Persia to command the Army, and by that means to expose him to the
hazard and difficulties of doubtful Success in a dangerous War.

The Vizier being departed, the Grand Signior appeared in public on
Horseback, together with his Brother by his side, an unusual sight amongst the
Turks: But the Queen Mother, who in absence of the Vizier ruled much, commanded
that it should be so. The Grand Signior had this Year a Son born, which caused
great rejoicing at Constantinople, because there were few Males at that time
surviving of the Ottoman Line; but scarce was the Festival ended before the
Child died.

But let us now for a while withdraw our Discourse from the Wars of Persia, and
look to the Actions in Poland and Transylvania. Mehmet the late King of
Tartary, who was so displeasing to the Port (as we have already related) was
now dead; to whom succeeded a Kinsman of his called Jembeg Gheray, universally
pleasing and acceptable to that People.

This new King, to demonstrate his Prowess, and to act something acceptable to
the Port, dispatched forty thousand Horse into Podolia and Russia to sack and
ravage the Country; which dividing themselves into several Parties, made their
Incursions as far as Socal. But in the mean time the Polonians and Cossacks
having formed a strong Body of Horse under the Command of Stephen Chmieleskie,
met them at their return near to Burstinow, The Tartars overthrown by the
Polanders.
where they gave them a total overthrow. And in like manner Stanislaus
Lubomiskie, encountered another Party, and overthrew them, leaving thirty
thousand slain on the plaee, and taking two thousand Prisoners, amongst which
was the younger Brother of the Tartar King.

This Defeat, as it was the greatest that ever was given to the Tartars, so it
is probable, that had it been well prosecuted at that time by the Polonians,
they might have entered the Chersonesus Tauricus, and without much opposition
have put an end to that Kingdom: But Sigismond King of Poland had other Designs
in hand; such mixed Monarchies as that, being better able to defend their own
Dominions, than to acquire or conquer others.

To this News ill received at Constantinople, supervened the unexpected Death
of Bethlem Gabor; The Death of Bethlem Gabor.
unexpected, I say, because that though he had been long laboring under the
Diseases of Dropsy and Asthma, yet the greatness of his Soul, and activeness of
his Spirit, mastered for a long time his Indisposition, so that he seldom or
never omitted his Counsels and Business; and to the very time of his Death, was
meditating and contriving Designs, whereby to preserve his Dominions, and
enlarge them. And indeed the Government of Transylvania required no less than
such a stirring Spirit: for being seated between two such powerful Monarchs, as
the Emperor and the Turk, there was need of dexterity and courage to steer
between the Rocks of such opposite Interests: Sometimes it was necessary to
join with one, and anon with the other. So Sigismond Battori Prince of
Transylvania, uniting his Forces with the Emperor's, in several Conflicts
overthrew the Turk, and kept the Scale in an equal Balance. Gabor on the
contrary inclined to the Turks, and supported his Interest with the Ottoman
Power, following such Maxims as had been more ruinous to Christendom, had he
transferred them to a Son to imitate and pursue; but dying without Issue, the
Government devolved to his Princess, by Vote of the States of the Country, and
by Confirmation of the Turk, as we have already intimated.

Gabor knew so well how to deal and treat with the Turks, that he gained an
abatement of ten thousand Dollars of the annual Tribute; he managed his Affairs
so subtly with the Emperor, that he was always invited to a Peace, and
accordingly made his Advantage by the Treaty.

The other Princes of Christendom in like manner courted him, and particularly
the Cardinal Richelieu employed one Bornemis, a Gentleman of Transylvania, a
Lover of the French Interest, to be always about him; by whose means, and with
the assistance of twenty thousand Crowns of yearly Pension, he obliged him to
make War on the Emperor, at such Seasons as it should be intimated unto him to
be most conducing to the advantage of France.

At length, as we have said, giving way to mortality, he died on the 15th of
November, after he had reigned eighteen Years: he was a Prince of great
Abilities, but exercised them ill to the damage of Christendom; howsoever he
was a Soldier of extraordinary Courage and Conduct, having begun to manage his
Sword at seventeen Years of Age; and as it is said, had been engaged in forty
two several Fights. His Widow Katherine, Sister of the Elector of Brandenburgh,
rendered an account to the Port of this Accident, and the Grand Signior
immediately returned Answer by Sulficar Aga, condoling the Misfortune, and
encouraging her to a dependence on the Port: which she accepting with due
Resentment, promised Obedience to the Grand Signior, and begged his Protection.
But the weather was too boisterous and rude for a Vessel to be navigated well
under the Pilotage of a Woman; for the situation of the Country, between two
mighty and potent Monarchs, required more than a Feminine Mind and Courage to
free and defend it from the Plots, Snares, and Violence with which it was, as
with a toil, encompassed by those two great Nimrods of the East and West. And
though the Sultan undertook to defend his Female Ally, yet the diversion of the
Ottoman Arms in Persia, the intestine Distractions, and the Minority of the
Emperor were such burdens on the Foundation of Empire, and obstructions to
great and Heroic Achievements in behalf of the distressed Princess, that all
the Promises made to her were unavailable and ineffectual. For Stephen Bethlem,
The Widow of (...) Gabor persuaded to quit her Government.
a Kinsman of the deceased Prince, a Man conspicuous in his own Person and
Estate, as well as for the several Governments divided amongst his Sons, and
the interest he had gained in his Country, procured means to convoke the States
at Claudiopolis; and insinuating the foregoing Inconveniences of a Female
Government, so prevailed with the Assembly, that they persuaded the Princess to
yield up her Sovereignty to Stephen Gabor, as one better capacitated for Rule
and Sovereignty than her self. Stephen having thus obtained his intent, entered
into a serious Consultation with his Friends and Relations, whether he should
labor to confirm the Government to himself, and entail it to the Family, or
renounce it to some other. The first seemed a Matter very dubious and
difficult; for that Bethlem Gabor his Predecessor, had disobliged the principal
Boyards or Barons of the Country, and thereby derived an envy and hatred to all
his Family: His long and violent Government annexed to the Interest of the
Turk, had not only rendered his Memory odious to his own People, but likewise to
the House of Austria, which would be ready to continue the like prejudice and
aversion to any of the same Family, as it did to the last thereof.

For which Reasons, after due and mature consideration, it was resolved to
offer the Government to George Ragotskie, a Person rich in Money, and of great
Interest, by reason of the Jurisdiction and Castles which he possessed in
Hungary, belonging to his own paternal Inheritance; and in pursuance thereof,
they sent Stephen the second Son, and Solomon a Kinsman of that Family, for
Ambassadors to Ragotski, representing to him, that they had preferred his Merit
before the Interest of their own Family; The Principality offered to Ragotski.
and therefore desired him, that he would be pleased to take upon himself the
Regency of the Principality.

The offer of Government was a savoury Bait to the Palate of Rogotski; which he
embraced with singular affectation and contentment, and was easily persuaded on
this occasion, to take a Journey to Waradin, one of the principal Fortresses
and Places of consideration in that whole Province, and was there received by
Stephen the Ambassador, Governor of the Citadel, with firing all the Cannon,
and with the common Joy and Festivity of the whole City. But in the midst of
this Mirth, an unexpected Messenger arrived with News, that the States had with
common consent elected another Prince, which was Stephen Bethlem, Father of the
Ambassador, and Author of this Counsel.

Ragotski was strangely surprised with this Intelligence, and the Ambassadors
were put to the blush to see their Negotiations under such a shameful defeat:
Howsoever resolving to continue constant to their first Election, and to
renounce the Interest of their own Family, they still maintained the same
obsequious Offices of Honor and Reverence toward Ragotski as formerly.

And notwithstanding the Orders received from the States to abstain from any
other demonstrations of Honor to Ragotski, than what were ordinary toward a
private Person of his Quality and Riches; and that he should retire from the
Confines of Transylvania to the Precincts of his own Castles: yet they still
persisted to execute their first Commission, and so to attract People to his
Party; that the number thereof daily increasing, it was at length agreed, that
the first Election not being fair, the Point in Controversy should be
determined at Sazburg, a City of Saxony.

The States General being assembled, Ragotski accompanied his Pretensions with
a large effusion of Gold, the most powerful and most convincing Argument
imaginable: to which he added, That he had no design to affect the
Principality, had not the same been first offered to him from Stephen Gabor the
Father by the Hand of his Son: That it was very improper for that Person to
offer a Dignity to another, which he affected for himself: that it was in the
power of the Transylvanians, not to have offered him the Principality; but
having once chosen him to it, they could not, without his disparagement and
prejudice, retract from their Election.

In short, these Considerations, assisted by the Interest of the Princess
Dowager, so far prevailed, that Stephen Bethlem was put aside, and Ragotski,
Ragotski chosen Prince.
who attended the success of this Matter at Waradin, was with common consent
elected Prince; from whence being with great Acclamations, and a general
concourse of the People, conducted to Alba Julia; he there took the usual Oath
with much Solemnity and Magnificence: and with Princely Magnificence,
entertained and treated the two Ambassadors, Stephen and Solomon, and dispensed
freely his Money unto diverse, who before being Enemies, were now reconciled, and
become his Friends and Admirers. Liberality in a Prince, is the most
resplendent Gemm in all his Crown, and is a Light so forcible, that it dazles
Envy it self, and puts out all the Eyes of Suspicion and Jealousy.

By this time the Great Vizier was far advanced with his Army into Persia,
having been encouraged to proceed by the feigned Flight, or rather Retreat of
the Enemy, who burned, destroyed, and laid waste all round them, as they
retired; which put the Turks to such inextricable Difficulties, that in two
months March, they had all the Inconveniences and Miseries to contend with,
which commonly attend Armies in strange Countries; the Plains through which
they traveled were abandoned by the Inhabitants, and void of Provisions; the
Mountains were covered with Snow and comfortless: and what was worst, the
Persians kept all the narrow Passages so strongly guarded, that the Vizier was
now more in danger of Famine than of the Sword: but being a Person of great
Sense and Experience in Military Affairs, he prudently disingaged himself from
the intricacy of these Dangers; and encamping his Army in the Plain of Amedan,
he so provoked the hot Spirits of the Persians, that they resolve to assault
him on that side of his Camp, which they judged to be the most weakly defended:
of which having some advertisement, he secretly laid an Ambuscado in the way;
which so happily succeeded, that he killed eight thousand Persians on the
place: A Victory gained by the Turks over the Persians
but howsoever the Victory cost so dear, and was so bloody, by the loss of the
stoutest Janisaries, and the bravest of the Soldiery, that the News thereof
made little noise or rejoicing at Constantinople.

With this Intelligence the Vizier demanded new Recruits; for that besides the
abatement of his Numbers by the last Engagement, the Multitudes of the Enemy
increased, and his own Soldiers fled from their Colors; of which many being
observed to enter Constantinople, notwithstanding the severe Decrees of Martial
Law published against them, put the Grand Signior into a high Cholor and
Indignation. The difficulty of sending Men into Persia.
And being desirous to reinforce the Vizier's Army with all the Recruits that
he was able, Proclamations were made, that all the Militia at Constantinople
should immediately pass over unto Scutari under their respective Commanders;
and that whosover received one Asper of Pay from the Grand Signior in quality
of a Soldier, should immediately pass the Chanel into Asia, and follow their
Leaders to the War. But so great was the abhorrency which the Soldiers had to
this March into Persia, calling it the Sepulcher and Cemetery of the Turks,
that few or none would obey, every one flying, hiding, and shifting for himself
as well as he could: During which Fears and Troubles, the Ways from Persia were
so obstructed by the Curdes, that in the space of three or four Months, no News
arrived at Constantinople from the Army; which caused as great apprehensions
and affrightments there, as if the Empire had been reduced to the utmost
extremity. Nor did the Sultan want Jealousses and Fears of receiving Affronts
from the Emperor, and King of Poland; the first of which had a fair opportunity
presented of regaining all Transylvania, especially at a time when that Country
was divided by two several Factions: but more pressing and troublesome were the
Cossacks, The Cossacks trouble the Turks.
who daily infested the Black sea; and to the great reproach of the Imperial
City, perpetually disturbed it with Alarms, passing up almost in sight of
constantinople. Of which Complaints being made to the Polonian Ambassador, he
answered with some indignation, That the Cossacks had reason for what they
acted; for that since the Tartars had, by Orders from the Grand Signior, made
their late irruption into that Country, as they could well prove from the
Commission taken amongst the Baggage of the Prince of Tartary in the last
Defeat, the Cossacks might with all justice assume to themselves a method of
Revenge.

But the Grand Signior not being able to support this Affront, or to see
himself braved on the very Banks of his Imperial Seat, and his Villages and
Towns round about burnt and pillaged by a crew of Free-booters and Pirates, cast
all the blame on the Chimacham; to whom, in his rage, he gave such a blow with
his Fist on the Face, that Blood issued from his Nose; and had not the
Queen Mother interceded for him, he had been delivered into the Hand of the
Executioner to take away his Life. Nor was the Captain-Pasha in less danger at
his return; because, that upon his assurance, that the Cossaks would not for
that Year make any attempt in the Chanel of Constantinople, the Grand Signior
had assented, that the Fleet of Galleys should that Summer make a Voyage into
the Archipelago: Which Mistake having been the cause of all this Affront, the
Captain-Pasha was to share in the blame, and had likewise in the punishment,
had not good Friends interposed between him and Danger.

Nor were the Cossacks satisfied with their late Plunder, but speedily made
another return with two hundred Boats; and though the whole Fleet of Galleys
were then in Port, yet they had the boldness to proceed as far as Pompey's
Pillar, and thereby to hinder all Provisions from passing to Constantinople by
way of the Black-Sea. And what gave greater fear than all this, was the News
which came at the same time, that the Poles were on the Frontiers with thirty
thousand Horse; to whom immediately a Chaous, or Envoy was dispatched with
Propositions very advantageous to the Crown of Poland, conditionally, that the
continual Irruptions made by the Cossacks should be stopped, and they
restrained within the due Terms of Peace and Moderation.

The Chaous found a civil Reception from the Poles, and promises of Compliance,
in regard that the King had some Intentions of making War upon the Muscovite.

But whilst these things were in agitation, and that the Chaous was ready to
return, behold, on a sudden News came, that ten thousand Tartars were broken
into Podolia; which put all things back again, and so changed the style of
Affairs, that instead of Articles of Peace, the Chaous was again returned with
the Menaces of War, and with Reproaches for the last perfidious Action.

Notwithstanding all these Troubles abroad, the puissance of the Ottoman Empire
might have been able to have struggled with greater Difficulties, had not its
own Intestine Distractions rendered all things dangerous, and of a malevolent
Aspect.

The Government was at that time chiefly in the hands of the four
Brothers-in-Law, The Disorders in the Ottoman State.
who had married four Sisters of the Grand Signior's; and for that reason were
powerful, and employed in the principal Offices of State, and commonly drew
contrary to the Opinions of the Mufti and Chimacham; which two last were not
well accorded between themselves, for that the latter encroached on the Office
of the Mufti, to the great scandal and discontent of all the Religious and
Literate Men in the whole City; howsoever they both joined in consultation by
what means they might best secure themselves and the Government from the Lusts
and evil Designs of this quadruple Fraternity; but their Wisdom and Interests
were too weak to contrive Remedies against such high Oppressions; for besides
the Violences daily practiced by the Brothers, the extravagant Humors in the
Sultan himself, added to the Disorders of State, and increased the Discontent
and Dissatisfactions of the People: For though Morat was naturally endowed with
a good Wit and Parts, was stout, and of a good Courage: yet as his perpetual
Debauchery in Wine rendered him in appearance but of a weak Understanding, mixed
with much Levity, so it caused his Accessions of the Falling Sickness (to which
he was subject) to return often, whereby the strength of his Brain was daily
^^akened and impaired. He was negligent also in the performance of those
Ceremonies which his Ancestors were accustomed to observe; nor did he live with
that gravity and regular Course which is agreeable to the Grandeur of so great
a Prince: for sometimes he would go out of his Seraglio with no other
Attendance than of three or four Men, which were for the most part Buffoons,
players upon the Gittern, and Eunuchs; and with no better an Equipage would he
sometimes be seen on Horseback, or in his Boat rowed on the Bosphorus with six
Oars only: by which Actions, and other sallies of Youth, he created such a
contempt toward his Person, that evil Men grew factious and weary, and entered
into Conspiracies against his Life, whilst the good Men feared and presaged the
ruin and downfall of the Empire: for neither Justice, nor Order, nor Obedience,
prevailed; no Offices were conferred for Merit, but by Money, or some other
unlawful Means; there remained no Counselors of true Faith and Integrity, nor
Soldiers almost, either of experience for Sea or Land-adventures. The People,
being burdened by double Taxes and Imposts, were mutinous, and ready to take
the least Fire of Rebellion; the Soldiery were disorderly for want of
Discipline and their constant Pay: the Pasha's of remote Provinces grew
insolent, taking upon themselves rather an absolute than a depending
Sovereignty.

In short, all things looked with that black appearance, that nothing seemed to
keep the Frame of Empire together, but only the expectation of good Success to
the Army in Persia; the which, as it depended on uncertain Events, so the
Ottoman Monarchy was then shaking, and stood tottering on its deepest
Foundation.

Wherefore all People being intent to hear of good News from Persia, were much
pleased to understand, that the Vizier having, by advantage in the last
Engagement, laden his Army with Plunder and Spoils, The Vizier prepares to
besiege Bagdat.
was now preparing to besiege Bagdat; for whose good Success, Prayers were
daily made in the Moschs; and the Schoolmasters surrounded the Streets with
their young Scholars, singing out Prayers with the Amen at every Period,
according to the Custom of that Country.

The Vizier marched toward Bagdat, and began to besiege it about the 10th of
September: In order whereunto, he amassed great abundance of all sorts of
Provisions, and made his Magazine of them at Mosul, two thousand Camels, each
laden with two Sacks of Cotton, every Sack being of about ten foot long, were
carried to the Siege, for shelter of the Soldiery, and to fill the Ditches.

The Vizier having passed part of his Army over the River Tigris, the rest with
the Cannon remaining on the hither side, he dispatched Nasuf Pasha of Aleppo,
with six thousand Spahees, to take a view of the Place, and to discover the
Avenues unto it. In his way thither, he met with eight thousand Persian Horse
sent to reinforce the Garrison, which he valiantly engaged; but being
dangerously wounded, was forced to retreat, with the loss of almost half of his
Men, part killed, and part taken: those which were carried Prisoners to Bagdat,
were treated with all civility by the Governor, who gave them a view of the
Garrison, which consisted of twenty thousand effective Men; showed them their
Stores and Provisions, and that there was scarce an unuseful Mouth in all the
City to devour them.

Notwithstanding this Disaster at the beginning, The Siege
the Vizier nothing dismayed, proceeded on his Design, spending the whole Month
of September in making his Approaches. In the Mouth of October, he mounted
eighteen Pieces of great Cannon, which for the space of twenty five days
bettered continually the Curtain between the two Bastions, on which were four
Pieces of Cannon not perceived by the Turks; there was also a deep and large
Ditch not discovered by them, for that it was planked over with Boards, and
covered with a green Turf, so that it appeared like plain and firm Ground: the
Breach being made, and seemingly undefended, the Turks resolved to make an
Assault; wherefore the Vizier, on the 20th of November, commanded, the Spahees,
under the Conduct of the Beglerbei of Anatolia, accompanied with Pasha's,
Sangiacks, and other Persons of Note; as also with Janisaries, to the number of
thirty thousand, to enter the Breach: which being performed, and great numbers
crowding on the Turf, the weight of them pressed down the Planks; and therewith
the whole Engine giving way, five or six thousand were in a moment taken, as it
were, in a Pit-fall, and swallowed up without any possibility of Succor to be
yielded from their Companions. After which on an instant there appeared fifteen
thousand Men on the Breach and on the Bastions; which with their Cannon, and
continual Vollies of Musket shot, so galled the Spahees, that they broke their
main Body, and killed the Beglerbei of Anatolia, with other Peasons of Note and
Quality, and made the whole Army to retreat.

Two days after this Disgrace, The Siege raised.
the Vizier raised the Siege, and marched toward Mosul; and the Persians
encouraged with this Success, pursued the Turks with eight thousand Horse,
assailed the Rear-guard of the Enemy; and though the Conduct and Care thereof
was committed to the charge of the Pasha's of Aleppo and Damascus, yet the
Persians killed three thousand Turks, and had defeated the whole Rear of the
Army, had not the Spahees turned their Horses, and withstood the shock with
great Valor.

Notwithstanding this dishonorable Retreat, the Vizier lost not his Courage,
or hopes of taking the Town; in order unto which, he appointed all things
necessary to renew the Siege again in the Months of September and October
following, for that the foregoing Months are either too rainy, or too hot in
those Countries, to undertake a Design or Enterprise of that Nature: He
fortified all the small Places in those parts round, and quartered his
Soldiers in them; so that having all conveniences of living, they might be
induced to continue, and not abandon their Colors: especially he took care to
fortify Illay, a place of about two days journey from Bagdat, reinforcing the
Garrison with six thousand Men, under the command of three Beglerbegs, in regard
that it was a very considerable Pass, and the principal Magazine and Granary of
Corn and other Provision.

At the same time he sent Letters to Constantinople, representing the state of
his Affairs to be in a hopeful condition; and desiring Recruits both of Men and
Money, gave great assurances of conquering the City at the next Attempt. The
Poles and Turks make Peace


In this perrilous Condition of the Ottoman State, one would have imagined that
Christian Princes would have seen their own Interest, and made use of their
advantage; but God not having as yet fixed a Period to the Bounds of this
Empire, was pleased, by his secret Providence, to divert both the Emperor and
King of Poland from making War with the Turk, inclining them to employ their
Arms on their Christian Neighbors. For though the Chaous (as we have said
before) was returned from Poland with disdain, and an angry Message, yet the
Chimacam, when he made Moses Vayvod of Moldavia, encharged him to perform all
Offices of Mediation between the Grand Signior and the Poles, persuading them
to restrain the Incursions of the Cossacks, and to send an Ambassador to the
Port. In which affair Moses so well performed his Negotiation, that applying
Lenitives to the Anger of the Poles, he reduced them to Articles of Peace, and
to promises of restraining the Cossacks, on condition, that the Turks
reciprocally forbid and withhold the Tartars from joining or affording
assistance to his Enemies the Muscovites.

These Conditions being agreed, the Ambassador was sent from Poland to
Constantinople, where he was received with as much Joy, as he was expected with
Impatience. The Cossacks and Tartars compared.
The Cossacks and Tartars were two sorts of people which lived equally on
Spoils and Booty; the first as offenfive to the Turk, as the latter to the
Pole; and therefore as it was an equal Benefit, so it was an Agreement of even
Terms, to counterchange the Caution given reciprocally for one and the other.

But the Engagement for such wild People, was more easily given than performed;
which because it was a Point agreeable to both Parties, it was expressed with
the most clear Words and strict Terms possible.

The Poles were weary and grieved to see their Provinces depopulated by the
Tartars, who yearly carried away some thousands of Souls. The Turks on the
other side were not less infested with the Cossacks, who captivated their
People, burnt their Towns and Villages, and kept them in continual Alarms.

But because these People are hardly restrained from their Robberies and
Pillaging, the Poles, as a Remedy, resolved to carry the Cossacks to the War
against the Muscovite; and better to secure the Tartar, the Polish Ambassador
was obliged to pay them twenty thousand Florins yearly, and six thousand pair
of Boots, according to the ancient Articles of Peace. On which Considerations
the Tartars were engaged never to enter Poland in a hostile manner, but to
serve that King in his Wars against all Nations whatsoever, the Turks only
excepted.

In this manner were the Turks this Year freed from all apprehensions of Alarm
from the Cossacks, and of War with Poland. And the Emperor was so busied
concerning the surprise of Mantoua, and engaged in the Quarrel about that
Duchy, and with some ambitious thoughts relating to Italy, Troubles in Hungary.
that the Turks hoped to have prosecuted their Wars in Persia without fear of
Diversion from the Western Parts. But yet the Affairs toward the parts of
Germany were not so well secured, but that the turbulent Spirit of Ragotski
administered subject for Dissension; for being lately seated (as we have said)
in his Principality, he was doubtful whether it were most for his Interest to
incline unto the Emperor, or to the Turk; and whist both Parties courted his
Friendship, and cheapned his acknowledgments, (for of necessity he must be a
Vassal to one or the other) the Heyducks who were Tenants to the Lands of
Gabor, refused to return to the Obedience of the Emperor, demanding protection
from the Grand Signior. The jealousy of those ill Consequences which this
Commotion might produce, alarmed all the Country: and the Emperor and Ragotski
being hereby raised to a mutual Defiance, advanced their Troops one against the
other upon the Frontiers: But all Hungary trembling with fear of those
Calamities which ensue from War, several of those concerned, interposed so far
toward an Accommodation, that Deputies were appointed to meet at Cassovia to
treat of Peace. But in the mean time the Palatine of Hungary passing eight
thousand Men over the River Tibiscus, to make seizure of a certain Fort built
by George Basta, so alarmed and awakened Ragotski, that he dispatched a
Gentleman to him to demand the Cause of this Motion; and not receiving an
answer agreeable to his expectation, he advanced upon him with an Army of ten
thousand Men, and engaging him with great resolution, killed four thousand on
the place, and so caused him to retire: from these beginnings all the mischiefs
of a bloody War had certainly ensued, had not Ragotski refused to receive
Succors from the Turk; but he depending on his own strength (having fifteen
thousand Men in Arms for defense of his Hereditary Lands in Hungary contemned
all external Assistances, as savouring too much of vassalage and dependence:
howsoever the Pasha's of the Frontiers assembled their Forces, and yet acted
with such caution, as not to proceed to an open Rupture; for the Wars in Persia
being unsuccessful and pressing, required moderation and Lenitives on this
side, that so the differences now on the Frontiers might be transferred to an
opportunity more seasonable for dispute.

In the month of September Sultan Morat being at his small Seraglio called
Daout Pasha, and sleeping there one night in his Bed, The G. Signior afrighted
with Lightning.
he was on a sudden awakned by a terrible Lightning; which entering his Chamber,
surrounded his Bed, leaving several Marks on his Sheets and Quilts; and whilst
he sought some place to hide himself in, it passed under his Arm, and burnt
part of his Shirt; the afrightment of which so astonished him, that he remained
for some time in a swound, which for ever after did much impair the strength of
his Brain: He now began to be sensible that there were other Thunderbolts than
those that proceeded from his own Throne; and, like Tiberius, learned to
tremble at the Voice of God, whilst he heard him speak in the Clouds: Nec Deum
unquam nisi iratum pertinuit, and turbatiori Coelo fulminantem. And so affected
was the Sultan with this Accident, that afterward he dismissed diverse of his
Buffoons from the Court; and particularly a Mute, whose ridiculous Gestures
were his common Divertisement, and for some time caused him to abstain from
Wine; and as a farther token of his Conversion and Thankfulness to god for this
eseape, he ordered five thousand Dollars to be given in Alms to the Poor, and
Korban to be made of three hundred Sheep; and the Friday following, he solemnly
went to the Mosch, to render Thanks unto God for having so prodigiously
preserved him from the Executioner of his Vengeance.

During all this time the Great Vizier wanting Succors and Supplies of Men and
Money, had great difficulty to contain his People in their due Obedience, or
within the Bounds of their Quarters; for they were apt to leave their Colors,
and would really have disbanded, had not their Spirits been daily held up with
the hopes and amusements of Pay and Recruits.

The four Brethren-in-Law, which greatly apprehended lest their Power and
Authority should be abated by the return of the Vizier, exercised all the
diligence they were able to make new Levie^, the reinforcement of which might
instill new Courage into the Soldiery, and be a means to continue the Vizier in
those parts; but the Mufti obstructed all Levies on the side of Greece, and the
Frontiers of Christendom, alleging, That the best Soldiers being sent from
those parts, would hazard the Empire, by exposing and laying it open to the
Incursions of the Christians: by which contrary Opinions and Delays, the Vizier
wanting the Assistance expected, the Persians recovered all the little
Fortresses which they had lost the Year before, with the considerable place of
Illay; Illay retaken from the Turks.
which being taken by Assault, and by an absolute force of Sword and Arms, the
greatest part of the Garrision consisting of eight thousand Men, commanded by
the three Pasha's beforementioned, where cut off; which was an important loss
to the Turks; not only for the slaughter of so many brave Soldiers, but also
for the quantities of Provisions, being the Granary and Magazine for the whole
Army. Therein were likewise taken forty Fieldpieces carrying eight pounds
Bullet; with a great Chain of Iron, which usually encompasses the Treasury
which is carried into the Field. With this ill success the Vizier retreated
from Mosul as far as Mirdin, from whence he redoubled his Instances for
Supplies for Men and Money.

At length it was agreed, that an Army of thirty thousand Tartars should be
sent thither; but Ragotskie advising, that he was upon the point of breaking
with the Emperor, it was ordered, that their number should be reduced to ten
thousand: the which taking their Journey into Persia, by the way of Circassia,
were there encountered by Han Gherey, the Prince of Tartary, (whom we formerly
mentioned to have been deposed by that People) and by him obstructed in their
passage, the Vanguard of their Army being cut off by him; so that they were
forced again to retreat and to embark their Men and Horse at Caffa, to be
transported by Sea to Trapezond; which as it was a matter of great trouble, so
it was a course unpractised by the Tartars. The Grand Signior being unable to
render a more considerable Succor than this unto his Army, which was now
reduced to the weak number of two thousand Janisaries, and three thousand
Spahees, he resolved to condescend to Terms and Articles, as the only means to
save his Honor, and the remainder of his Forces.

In order unto which, he released a Persian Lord from his Imprisonment in the
Seven Towers, and qualified him with the Title of Ambassador, bestowing upon
him an Equipage of Men and Horse agreeable to his Character, with four thosand
Dollars to defray his Expense. And that the King of Persia might be assured of
the Sultan's real Intentions and desires of Peace, he recalled his Army in the
Spring, whereby all Acts of Hostility ceased: And thus the Vizier being
returned to Constantinople, that Pride and Rigor which he exercised toward
all in the time of his prosperity, laid him low by Misfortunes tunes in the
esteem of his Enemies; who gladly embracing the opportunity to disgrace him,
with all the terms of Obloquy and Detraction, The Vizier deprived of his Office.
deprived him at length of his Office. One of the four Brothers-in-law married
to one of the Grand Signior's Sisters, and Prime of the Cabal, being
constituted Vizier in his stead. Nor did the late Vizier easily escape with his
Life, until he had repreived it with an Atonement of an hundred thousand
Zechius of Gold, and some choice Horse, which he presented to the Sultan; the
like Example other Pasha's his Compainions followed in proportion to their
Estates and Employments; by which Presents the empty Treasury was in a manner
recruited, and the present Necessities of the Sultan relieved.

But this new Vizier enjoyed not long either his Honors, or his Life; for the
first Act he performed, was to mitigate the Valede Sultana, or Queen Mother, to
obtain a Hattesheriff, or Writing, under the Grand Signior's Hand for cutting
off the Head of Casref Pasha, the Spaheeler Agasi; or General of the Spahees,
which being executed by Mortesa the Commander in Chief in Persia, his Head was
brought and thrown at the Gates of the Divan.

The Spahees astonished at this Spectacle, and enraged to see that Head on the
Ground which they so much esteemed and loved, forgot all the Terms of Duty and
Obedience to their Superiors; and without regard to the Place wherein they
were, even within the Walls of the Grand Signior's Court, Mutiny of the Spahees
joined with the Janisaries.
they threw Stones at the Vizier, and beat him from his Horse; which though the
Grand Signior, and all the Viziers highly resented, as the most scandalous
Indignity that could be offered to the Majesty of a Supreme Ruler, and to all
Government, yet their Counsels rather sought Remedies to suppress the Mutiny,
than to make Proposals of executing Justice on the Offenders; for the Spahees
seconded by the Janisaries, (who were glad of any cause to make a Commotion)
assembled in the Hippodromo, from whence they sent an Arz to the Sultan,
requiring the Heads of the Great Vizer, and of diverse others, as well within as
without the Seraglio. The Grand Signior denying positively to assent hereunto,
the Soldiery as plainly threatened to depose him, and place his Brother in the
Throne; at which barbarous Resolution the Grand Signior being affrighted, his
youthful constancy was so shaken, that he wrote to his Mother to desire her
excuse, in case he assented to the death of her Son-in-law the Great Vizier;
for that the Storm of the Military Fury was so great, that he could not
endeavor to protect him without the loss of his Life and Crown: wherefore the
Vizier being turned out of the Gates of the Seraglio, he was immediately
butchered in the presence of the Sultan.

Nor did the impetuous Rage of the Soldiery end here, but they proceeded
farther to demand the Head of the Janisar-Aga, or General of the Janisaries,
who was reputed the chief Instrument of the Death of Casref, because he was a
principal Favorite to the Grand Signior; but he wisely taking diverse off with
Money and Presents, sowed division between the Janisaries and Spahees; so that
some Difficulty arising hereupon, the determination of his Death was deferred
for a while; howsoever they proceeded to demand, that the Mufti should be
discharged of his Office, and that the Tefterd^^, or Treasurer, should be
delivered into their hands.

To the first the Grand Signior assented; but being willing to save the other,
he pretended, that he was escaped and fled; but when he was found, he should
run the same Fate with the Vizier. But the military Sedition not being appeased
with this Answer, they roved through the whole City, and Galata, and other
parts of the Suburbs: the Spahees persisting to require the Head of the
Janisar-Age, and not finding him in his House, they plundered it, and departed;
and meeting with a Youth, a Favorite of the Grand Signior's, they killed him;
and so returning with the like Fury to the Seraglio, they required admission to
the New Vizier and Mufti. Regep Pasha, another of the Brothers-in-law, was then
made Vizier, who with the new Mufit trembling at these Tumults, were careful to
treat the Soldiery with all lenity and condescension imaginable, desiring them
to declare their Grievances, and whatsoever might give them Satisfaction should
be granted. The seditious Soldiers replied, That they were resolved to see the
Grand Signior's Brother, for that when the present Sultan did not govern well,
they might know from whence to produce another of better Abilities, and more
agreeable to the Designs of the Empire.

That necessity which caused the late easiness of condescension to former
demands, made way also for compliance with this; so that the young Prince being
brought forth, they obliged the Sultan not to attempt any thing against his
Life, and caused the Vizier and Mufti to become Caution and Security for it.

Nor did these Concessions contribute toward a Pacification; but rather their
Insolence increased thereby, renewing their Exclamations at the Gates of the
Seraglio for the Heads of the Janisar-Aga and the Testerdar; not would they be
satisfied with answer, that these Men were not found in the Seraglio, but still
persisted in their rude Outcries and Menaces, losing all respect and reverence
to the Sultan and the Superiors; so that the Grand Signior resolved once to
sally out upon them with his own Guard; but trying their Temper and Resolution,
he discovered most of them to be poisoned with the like Spirit of Sedition, and
combining with the others as Associates in the Treason.

The Viziers, and other principal Officers, perceiving the Mutiny to increase
daily, and not knowing to what degree it might arise, made it their business to
search out for those proscribed by the Soldiery: at length the Aga was happily
discovered by a certain Person, to whom a Reward was given of a thousand
Zechins, with the Office of Zorbasi or Captain; and the Aga confessing that he
had counseled the Death of Casref, he was immediately strangled, and his Body
hanged upon a Tree to public view. The like Fate befell the Teftardar, who
being also taken, was killed and hanged up together with the Body of the Aga.

All which Persons thus inhumanely murdered by the Soldiery, were the Enemies
of the present Great Vizier Regep; for which cause the Grand Signior suspecting
that he secretly contrived and nourished these Rebellions, never after looked
on him with a gracious eye. Of which the Vizier being sensible, combined with
the Soldiery; and judging it almost impossible to set himself right in the
Affection of his Master, he courted the Favor of the Militia, as the only
means to protect his Life, and maintain his Power. But as the revenge of
Princes is not like a Thunderbolt, which wounds on a sudden, but rather like a
Mine which requires time to form, and is then sprang, when it may do the best
execution: so in the same manner, the Grand Signior dissembled his hate toward
the Vizier, The Vizier srangled by Order of the Grand Signier.
until one Night being present with him in the Seraglio to see certain
Fireworks, he called him aside, and whispered to him, that he should go into
his private Lodgings; where being entered, the Door was shut upon him, and he
strangled by certain Eunuchs, who were appointed to attend him for that
purpose. But little benefit or riches did the Grand Signior. reap by his death;
for the Vizier having for some time expected this Blow, had concealed his
Treasure, and conveyed it away for the use of his Posterity.

The like hatred did the Sultan conceive against the Soldiery, resolving in
his mind to execute his Revenge, especially on the Janisaries, as the most
turbulent Fomenters of Rebellion and Treason, and to vent his Anger, either by
the Cord or Sword, or some other more expedite way, as opportunity presented:
and to prevent or oppose the like Seditions for the future, he fortified the
Seraglio, and brought Arms in thither by night, choosing into his Guard select
Men of Courage and Faithfulness: and being sensible, that the being of his
Brother attempered his Sovereignty, and drew away the Hearts and Eyes of his
Soldiers and People from fixing entirely on his own Person; he therefore
intended to cut him off; but the Caution and Security given by himself, and
chief Ministers, to preserve his Life, diverted him from this Resolution.

In place of the deceased Vizier, Mehmet late Pasha of Cairo was constituted,
and the Seal consigned to him; with whom the Grand Signior consulting to him;
which whom the Grand Signior consulting of the present Emergency of Affairs,
often uttered his displeasure against the late Seditions, and signified his
Intention to redress them for the future; in order unto which, he caused the
Heads of the most mutinous Spahees to be cut off, and on various Pretenses
separated the Soldiery each from other into diverse Parts; some numbers of
Janisaries he commanded to march to the Confines of Persia, and caused many
others of them to be killed by Night; and by various other Means greatly
weakened the Chambers, both by diminishing the Numbers, and taking off such who
were the Men of best Courage and Conduct: many Bodies were found swimming in
the Bosphorus, and known to be Spahees; great part of the Lands the Pay of the
Spahees was abated; and diverse Offices of Profit and Honor were taken from the
Militia, that so Men might be made sensible of the Indignation of their Prince,
and that there is no Sport or Jesting with the Anger of a provoked King, who
knows no other mean of his Passion, than the total evaporation of his Choler
and Vengeance.

To maintain and make good these several Acts of Just Punishment, young Morat
growing in Courage with his Years, mounted on Horseback, well Armed, and like
a Soldier, attended with a select Party of Cavalry, passed through the most
public Streets of the City in a huffing manner, and casting a stern Eye upon
the Soldiery and People as he went, and making a hundred Passes through the
midst of them, struck them with an awe of his Majesty, and admiration of his
Warlike and Martial appearance; with which Severity and Gallantry the Soldiery
being affrighted, began to consider, that they were not longer to be governed
by a Woman, or a Child, but by the most brave Prince that ever swayed the
Ottoman Scepter; and thereupon for the future resolved upon an impartial
Submission and Obedience unto him. To encourage them in which, and to reconcile
their Spirits and Affections to him, Morat oftentimes assembled his Soldiery
at Ackmeidan, where he exercised with them, shooting with the Bow at Marks and
at Rovers, rewarding those who shot best, with adding an Asper a day to their
Pay; besides which, he distributed six thousand Hungars amongst them, to
demonstrate that wise Princes are used to mix Lenitives with their Rigor.

These Mutinies and Seditions in the Captial City, encouraged Rebellious
Spirits in diverse other places: so that a certain Bold and Audacious Fellow,
drawing a number of Miscreants after him, possessed himself of the City of
Prusa: another of the same Temper, called Elia Pasha, made himself Master of
Magnesia, Rebellion in Anatolla.
where he committed all the Outrages which Enemies inflict on a Conquered
People; and being about twenty four miles distant from Smyrna, so afrighted the
People of that Place, who were Merchants, and such as lived by Trade, that they
fled with their Wealth, and such Things as were portable, lest they should be
exposed to the Robbery and Spoil of Thieves and Rebels. But the Beglerbey of
Anatolia suffered not Elia to reign long in his lust, but giving him Battle in
those Plains, wholly defeated him, and sent twenty of the Heads of the chief
Commanders to the Sultan for a Present; and pursuing Elia and the rest of his
Army to Magnesia, besieged him in that City. The Grand Signior being advised
hereof, and fearing lest the Siege should take up too much time, and move other
ill Humors in that Country, dispatched Orders to offer Terms and Conditions of
Accommodation with Elia, which were secretly treated, and great Promises made
him of Favor and Rewards from the Grand Signior. The easy Fool accepted the
Conditions, and embraced the Promises; and leaving his City of Magnesia,
proceeded confidently to Constantinople to receive the gracious Rewards of the
Sultan for his past Services. At his Entry into the Seraglio in place of the
Kapislar-Kahyasee, or Master of the Ceremonies, he was received by Officers
with a Cord in their Hands, who bestowed on him the gracious Reward of his
Masters ultimate Favor.

These Rebellions were no sooner suppressed in Asia, but that other Mutinies of
the Janisaries, Mutinies at Buda.
for want of Pay, began at Buda in Hungary, where they threw Stones at their
Age, and pursued him to the very Palace of the Pasha, electing another into his
place. They also cut in pieces the Governor of Pest, and bestowed his Office
upon his Lieutenant.

To remedy these Disorders, and extinguish the Mutiny, the Grand Signior sent
Commissioners to examine the Matter, and to render him an account of the
Grieveances and Demands of the Soldiers: but they fearing to be surprised with
some severe Acts of Justice, prevented or forestalled the Inquiries of the
Commissioners, by acknowledging their Fault, and demanding Pardon, with
surrender of four of the Ringleaders to Punishment; declaring, That by their
seducement and evil persuasions, they were debauched into that disorderly
course of Proceedings: the Sultan accepted the Sumission, and all things were
quieted in Hungary.

Howsoever new Troubles arose in Moldavia: Troubles in Moldavia.
for that People being oppressed overmuch by their Prince Alexander, made an
Insurrection against him, and drove him out of the Country, who for refuge fled
to Constantinople. And the People desirous that one Bernoschi, a Polonian by
Nation, might be put into his Place: To obtain his Confirmation, he came to the
Port, and offered himself before the Grand Signior; but Morat suspecting, that
to obtain the Principality for himself, he had secretly instigated and
nourished the late popular Commotions, caused his Head to be cut off in the
Public Divan.

Amurat had now born to him a seventh Daughter, by his Slave called the Shining
Star; and though he was much troubled that she had not brought him forth a Son
and Heir, yet so much was she beloved by him, that he resolved to create her
Queen, had not his Mother declared against it, as a thing not usual for any
Woman to be honored with that Title before she had supplied the Inheritance by
the Birth of a Male Child.

And that he might now totally extinguish the Fire of Sedition amongst the
Soldiery, he caused Ferdum Efendi and Saluc Age, two prime Chiefs of the
Spahees, with eight principal Janisaries, to be put to Death; after which
severity, fearing another Insurrection, he passed the Water, and retired to his
Seraglio at Scutari, where he fortified himself.

It happened about that time, that a Turkish Woman, a Slave, was found aboard a
French Ship, ready to sail from Constantinople; which the Turks highly
resented, and aggravated the Crime so much against the French Ambassador, that
they imprisoned his Son then embarked, and would have confiscated the Vessel
and her Lading. In those days the Christian Ambassadors resident at that Court,
kept better Union and Correspondence among themselves than they do at present;
so that all of them, as concerned, joined together to represent before the
chief Ministers, that such a Fault merited not so grand a Forfeiture, for that
it was most probable to have been committed without the privacy either of the
Ambassador, or Commander of the Ship. The Ambassadors then resident were Sir
Peter Wych for England, the Sieur Marcheville for France, and Pietro Foscarini
for Venice; at whose warm and urgent Instances the Turks condescended to
release the Vessel, and the Goods laden upon her, with free liberty to depart.
Howsoever it being represented to the Grand Signior by the Captain-Pasha (who
is Admiral of the Seas) that one Baldasar, an Armenian by Nation, but Dragoman
or Interpreter to the French Ambassador, was a principal Instrument to move the
Ambassadors to unite in this Pretense; and being observed to manage the
Interest of his Master with warm and earnest Solicitations, the surly Sultan
grew so angry, that one of his own Slaves should presume to manage a Dispute
with him, The French Interpreter impaled.
in Fury and Rage, commanded that he should be immediately empaled; and that he
might be assured that his Sentence took effect, he would see him with his own
Eyes on the Stake before he would pass the Water to his Seraglio at Scutari.
The resolution was so sudden, and the Execution so speedy, that there was
neither Ear lent to hear, nor Time given to mediate in his behalf; and the Act
being performed, complaints would not serve to redress a tyrannous Action now
past Remedy, and not to be recalled: Wherefore as the Ambassadors were forced
to acquiesce, and patiently endure the Affront; so if they would have resented
it, they could scarce have found one amongst their Interpreters of so bold a
Spirit, who durst have opened his Mouth after so terrifying an Example. The
truth is, the Dragomen, or Interpreters to Ambassadors at Constantinople, are
required to be Men of Learning, Courage, and Courtship; their studies ought to
endue them perfectly with the Turkish, Greek, and Arabic Languages, with some
knowledge also of the Persian, and with good Elocution, and readiness of Tongue:
their constancy and presence of Mind is always necessary at their appearance
before those Grandees or Great Men, who are ever proud, haughty, and arrogant
in all their Expressions and ways of Treaty, the which they commonly manage
toward Christian Ministers with the same respect which we use toward our
Servants, or our Slaves. And therefore by reason of this and other Presidents
of like nature, Dragomen have been always timorous in representing the true
sense of the Ambassadors and Consuls; at least have so minced and tempered
their words, that they have lost much of that Vigor and Accent which is
necessary to inculcate perfectly a Business into the Understanding of a Turk,
especially if you intend to incline him to Reason and Justice. Wherefore it
would be an excellent Qualification for an Ambassador himself to understand
and speak the Turkish Language, or at least to have a young Man by his side of
the English Nation, educated in the Turkish Court, who should be ready to
explicate those Matters which are too thorny and prickly for Subjects of that
Country to handle.

Had all the foregoing Troubles, Mutinies, and Misfortunes encountered the
Spirit of an easy and a gentle Sultan, certainly the Fate of this Amurat had
been the same with that of Osman, who retiring within his Seraglio, could never
have appeased the Seditious Humor with all the Concessions he could give an
unreasonable multitude: but being a resolved and busling Prince, he at first
gave some few steps backwards, as if he would yield somewhat to the impetuosity
of that Torrent which he could not resist; yet it was only like a Ram, who
retires, that he may butt with the greater force. Howsoever the Politicians and
sober Men attributed the true cause of all these Commotions in the Soldiery,
to have no other Foundation than the ill success and miseries which attended
the War in Persia; for the way being long, and the Countries hot, barren, and
for the most part void of all comfort, the Soldiers abhorred the Fatigues and
March thither; and hated to consider, that they should be made a Sacrifice to
the lust of voluptuous Ministers, who, to gain Estates and Riches out of those
Moneys which were designed to carry on the War, did not care, whilst they lived
at Ease and in Delights, what Labors, Wants, and Dangers attended the Militia.

These Considerations made likewise some impression in the Sultan, who
therefore inclined to hearken unto those Propositions of Peace which were
brought him by an Ambassador from Persia; and being accompanied with very great
Presents, The Peace made with Persia, and speedily broken.
the Peace was clapped up and concluded on a sudden. But as Things quick in their
Birth and Production, are not long-lived, nor long durable; so this Peace was
broken the same Year with an inconstancy equal to that inconsideration with
which it was agreed and signed. For no sooner was the News hereof flown into
the Eastern World, than the Great Mogol dispatched his Ambassador with Letters
to the Grand Signior, persuading him to make War again with the Persian,
promising to assist him therein, by stopping up the Passage of Nachivan, which
is a City in the Lesser Armenia, built upon the River Aranes, and is the common
Road into the Indies. The which Motion, as it was pleasing to Morat, so being
accompanied with Indian Curiosities and Presents of an inestimable Value, the
Ambassador was graciously received, and treated with such Feasts and
Entertainments as are not usually known amongst the Turks; and returned again
with Letters, giving hopes, that he would speedily take an occasion to break
with the Persian. But those who had experienced the Difficulties of a War with
Persia, and observed, that in the present Conjuncture of Affairs it might be
more easily and with advantage waged on the side of Hungary, Persuasions for a
War against the Emperor.
endeavored, with many pregnant Arguments, to persuade the Grand Signior
thereunto, giving him to understand, that Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden,
being victorious over the Emperor in Germany, had taken many Towns and Cities
of great strength; and having overthrown him in diverse Battles; had slain or
taken his best Captains and most Martial Men of Valor; and that other
Christians, who were desirous to abate the pride of the Austrian Family, were
ready to embrace the same Conjuncture, whereby they might entirely shake off
the Yoke and Servitude to the Imperial Tyranny.

These Advantages being well represented, took place easily in the mind of
Morat, so that he dispatched express Orders to the Pasha of Buda to assemble
his Forces, and put all things in a readiness on the Frontiers: in compliance
with which, though the Pasha set forth his Tents, and made great appearance of
a March, yet some secret Designs caused him to move slowly, and to affect a
Peace rather than a War; so that receiving an Ambassador from the Emperor at
Pest, he readily Admitted him, and gave him safe Conduct and Convoy unto
Constantinople: at which time Advices coming, that the Great Gustavus Adolphus
was slain, and that the Affairs of the Swedes went backwards and unsuccesfully
in Germany, altered all the Measures of the Ottoman Counsels; and though
Ragotski endeavored all he was able to foment the Differences, and encourage
the Turks to a War, having besides other specious Pretenses, an Army of thirty
thousand Men in a readiness to join with the Turks against the Emperor;
howsoever the Turks looking on the Condition of the Swedes as desperate, and
the Proffers of Ragotski to be uncertain, and of no true Foundation, A Peace
made between the Emperor and Grand Signior.
and the State of Affairs amongst themselves to be turbulent and unsettled, gave
a kind Reception to the Emperor's Ambassador, and signed the Agreement for
continuance of the Truce.

By this, and other Actions of like Nature, Ragotski lost much of his Esteem
with the Emperor and the Grand Signior; the first always looked on him as an
Ambitious Prince, exciting the Turk against him, and ready on the least
Occasion to enter his Country with Fire and Sword: The other looked on him as a
False Friends, who never made Proffers, but those which squared with his own
Designs and Interest; and particularly he had disgusted the Port, by presuming
to instate one Matthias in the Principality of Walachia, and to eject another
constituted there by Authority of the Grand Signior, called Stridia Bei, or
Lord Oysters, because his Father was a Fisherman, and gained a good Estate by
the Trade of Oysters; howsoever it being the Grand Signior'd Pleasure to ordain
such a Person to that Office, it was a Presumption, and a bold Piece of
Usurpation in Ragotski, to dispose of that Government, by virtue of his own
single Power: Howsoever the Grand Signior, to avoid Contention with the
resolved Spirit of Ragotski, confirmed Matthias upon Condition of a double
Tribute paid for the Investment to the Principality.

But besides these Reasons for a Peace with the Emperor, the Designs the Grand
Signior entertained of making War upon Poland, with the Assistance of the Musco
(...) and Tartars, and of dispossessing Emir Facardin (...) his Government,
were strong Inducements (...) ^ake fair Weather on all other sides of the N^,
abouring Princes. The Envy which the Riches and Greatness of Emir Facardian
(who was a Prince inhabiting in the Parts of Arabia, to whom a large Tract of
Land, with several Fortresses did belong) had contracted to him from the
Pasha's of Damascus, Tripoli, and Gaza, caused them to accuse him before the
Grand Signior of Rebellion, and other enormous Crimes: The Plea against him was
managed especially by the Pasha of Tripoli, who alleged, That he was an Enemy
to the Mohammedan Law, destroyed the Moschs, kept correspondence with the
Malteses and the Corsairs of Ligorn, permitting them freely to take Water in
his Country; that he openly favored the Christians, suffering them freely to
build Churches in his Country. That he continually fortified his Castles, and
encroached on the Lands and Territories of the Emirs his Neighbors. In short,
his Riches were so great, that every one feared and envied him, and therefore
represented his Case in that Manner, Preparations of War made against Emir
Facardin.
that the Grand Signior resolving to destroy him, sent great Forces into those
Countries, under the Command of the Pasha of Tripoli, to whom he commanded the
Pasha's of Damascus, Gaza, Aleppo, and Cairo to join their Forces: and for
better expedition, the Captain-Pasha was appointed to equip his Fleet, to
transport Men and Ammunition into those parts.

The Captain-Pasha in his Passage by Sea, A Fight of the whole Turkish Fleet
against two English Ships.
encountered two English Ships lading Corn in the Gulf of Vola, called the
William and Ralph, and Hector: this being a prohibited Commodity, not to be
transported under penalty of forfeiting Ships, Goods, and Liberty of the Men,
moved the Pasha, with the sight of such a Booty, to command his Galleys to
seize the Vessels; which being only two, it was imagined that they would
immediately yield and surrender without contest. But these bold Brittons
knowing the Consequences of such a Surrender, resolved not tamely to yield
themselves, at least to sell their Liberties, Lives, Ships and Goods to the
Turks at the dearest Rate they were able: wherefore cutting their Cables, put
themselves under Sail, and got into the main Sea, fighting with the whole Fleet
above three hours; sometimes they were boarded by one Gally, sometimes by two
at once; but plying their Quarter Deck Guns with small Shot, and defending
themselves manfully with their half-Pikes, they often cleared their Decks, and
put off the Enemy with great slaughter: the Captain-Pasha being ashamed to see
such Resistance made by two such Vessels against his whole Force, resolved to
enter his Men at the Gun-room Port of one of the Ships, and running the Prow of
the Gally into the Stern-port, the valiant Crew of the Gun-room clapped an Iron
Spike into the Trunnel-hole of the Prow, whereby the Gally being wedged fast to
the Timbers of the Ship, they brought their Stern-chase laden with cross Bars,
pieces of Iron, and Parteridge-shot to bear upon them; which raking them fore
and aft, The Capt. Pasha slain.
killed the Captain-Pasha himself, with near three hundred out of the Bastard
Gally. At length having spent all their shot, they charged their Guns with
pieces of Eight, and being overpowered by numbers of their Enemies, and not
able farther to resist, they set fire to their Ships, which blowing up,
destroyed two or three of the Galleys which laid by their sides, together with
those Men which were then fighting aboard at handy-blows on the Deck with the
Defendants; so that none of the English were taken, unless three or four fished
out of the Water.

An end being in this manner put to the Fight, the Turks gained the Victory,
with the loss of twelve hundred Slaves killed and wounded, besides Turks, and
were forced into Port, where they remained a full Month to repair their
Galleys; the which Fight affected all Turks with an astonishment of the English
Bravery, or Obstinacy, (as they call it) and is a Matter remembered and talked
of to this Day, especially by the Son of the Captain-Pasha who was slain,
called Omem, Pasha Ogli, who is Pasha of Rhodes at present, (as I remember) and
commands three or four Galleys; for which reason he is so inveterate Enemy to
the English, that to satisfy his Revenge, he buys what English Slaves he can
get into his Galleys, and sells none out under a double Price or Ransom.

The News of this Fight coming to Constantinople, provoked the Grand Signior to
the height of Indignation; howsoever the Officers either being ashamed of their
Loss, or entertaining some secret admiration of the English Bravery, suffered
the Matter to be compounded for the Sum of forty thousand Dollars, of which the
English paid only their share with the French and Venetians, whom (for I know
not what Reason) the Turks equally concerned in the Occasion.

Whilst the Turks were appointing a new Captain-Pasha, and again refitting
their Fleet, the Pasha of Damascus dispatched a Summons to Facardin to
surrender Seida up to him, with other Castles and Places of Strength. The Old
Man resided then a Barut, where pretending to be retired from all Business,
answered, that he had resigned the whole Government into the Hands of his Son
Ali, as he had already testified by Public Acts: that he was but a Subject,
and a Soldier under his Son, and therefore to him they ought to make their
Applications. Facardin had at that time an Army of twenty five thousand Men,
the which he divided into two Bodies, commanded by his two Sons. Ali his eldest
he ordered with twelve thousand Men (a thousand of which were Maronites, and
two thousand Druzes) to march to Saphet for hindering the conjunction of the
Emirs of Feruc and Therabith, and the Pasha's of Gaza and Damascus, whose
Forces being joined together, did not compose a greater Number than that of
Facardin.

Ali entercountring with them, and being a brisk and hot-metled Prince, engaged
and charged them so whom, that he defeated them, and killed eight thousand of
their Men; but such a Victory as this not costing him less than seven thousand
of his Men, was in effect his own Overthrow; for being the next day charged
again by the Enemy, both sides fought with that obstinacy, The Son of Facardin
overthrown
that (as is reproted) there remained not above an hundred forty six of all the
Soldiers which followed Ali; and he himself having his Horse mortally wounded
under him, and being out of Breath, Weary, and Faint, yielded himself to a
common Soldier, who promised him Quarter; but afterward having him in his
power, he strangled him with his Match, and cut off his Head and his little
Finger on which he wore his Seal-Ring, And is strangled.
and so presented both to the Pasha. But this proud Conqueror refused to
accept this Present without Ceremony, until first the head had been perfumed
with Sweet Waters, the Beard combed out, and covered with a rich Turbant, and
having kept this Trophy for some days by him, he sent it afterward to
Constantinople.

But before the News of this Defeat reached the Ears of old Facardin, the
Captain-Pasha with his Fleet of Galleys arrived at the Port of Tripoli; to whom
Facardin being desirous to show all Friendship, and profess Loyalty to the
Grand Signior, he caused his Army to retire into the Parts of Mount Libanus,
whilst he himself, with about three thousand Men, between Domestic Servants
and his Guards, went to Seida, from whence he sent two A sort of Vessel or Ship
so called by the Turks.
Caramosauis laden with Provisions and Refreshment to the Captain-Pasha for a
Present, assuring him, that he was an humble Vassal to the Grand Signior, and
was ready to obey all his Commands; and because the Sultan may probably have
received sinister Reports relating to the Arms he had taken up, he assured him,
that they were no otherwise designed, than to suppress the Robberies of the
Arabs, and the Incursions of their Kings; and that he was ready to conduct his
Army to any Place, where his Master the Grand Signior should think fit to
employ them. But these fair words could not divert the Captain-Pasha from his
Resolution to enter the Port of Seida, nor from his Instructions of demanding,
and upon refusal of forcing possession of the Castle; which as it was the most
considerable Fortress, and the most pleasant Seat of all his Dominions, so he
could not, without much regret and sorrow, hearken to such a Proposition:
wherefore that the Pasha might not persist in this Demand, he secretly
proffered him an hundred thousand Zechins as a Bribe to himself, and his Son
Mansour to be carried for a Hostage and Earnest of his Faithfulness to the
Grand Signior. The Captain-Pasha liked well the hundred thousand Zechins and
the Hostages, but still required the Surrender of the Castle with them; on
which whilst Facardin deliberated, News came of the Death of his Son Ali, and
the Destruction of his Army, with which, losing all Courage, he yielded his
Castle of Seida to the Captain-Pasha, retiring himself to his City of Barut:
nor could he rest quietly at that Place; for being pursued, he was forced to
quit it, and retire with his Maronites and Druzes into the Mountains, lest
being enclosed within the Walls of a City, he should fall alive into the Hands
of his Enemies.

And now all good Fortune forsaking unhappy Facardin, the Maronites and Druzes
his Subjects revolt to the Pasha of Damascus, his Palaces of Gardens of
Pleasure were all ruined, his Friends forsook him, his two remaining Sons were
lost, one carried to Constantinople for a Hostage, and the other slain in
Fight; his Towns of Gazir, Saphet, St. John d' Acria, and others were
surrendered to the Pasha of Damascus: only some few strong Places in the
Mountains remained to him, where living in League with Reba a King of the
Arabs, he committed all the Spoils he was able on the Lands belonging to the
Pasha of Damascus. But being hunted from one Mountain to another, and from one
Cave to another, he was at length forced to surrender upon Conditions, that he
should have liberty to proceed unto the Grand Signior with his own Equipage of
three hundred Men, and Trumpets sounding, and that he might carry with him all
his Treasure consisting of a Million of Zechins all in Gold, together with
other Riches, which were carried by fourteen Camels; and that he should not be
conducted as a Prisoner in Triumph, but that he should with freedom approach
the Presence of the Sultan, like other Pasha's, who are in Grace and Favor.

These Proposals being granted, Facardin with his two young Sons began his
Journey to Constantinople, and being about two days journey from thence, he
dispatched eight Chests of Gold before him, to prepare and make his way to the
Grand Signior; who being pleased with the Gold, and greatly rejoiced to receive
the Submission and Homage of one who had so long stood out in Rebellion, he
went out in a Disguise and Habit of a Pasha to see and discourse with that
Person, of whom there had been so general a Rumor: and having accordingly
encountered with the Emir, he sat down in his Tent with him, desiring him to
relate the Story of his Life, with the several Particulars of his late
Misfortunes. Emir Facardin well knew the Person of the Grand Signior; but
feigning as if he was unacquainted with whom he discoursed, and that he took
him for some Pasha, began to recount the Course of his Life, the Reasons why
his Enemies falsely suggested evil Reports of him to the Grand Signior; how he
was forced, for defense of his Life, to take up Arms, and what ill Success
accompanied his Affairs; all which he represented with such Quickness and
Eloquence, that the Grand Signior pitying his Misfortunes, promised to be his
Advocate, and mediate with the Grand Signior in his behalf.

The day following Facardin made his Entry in a Triumphant manner, and received
a most favorable Audience from the Grand Signior; and all the Pasha's and
great Men in conformity to their Master, and in hopes of sharing some part of
his Gold, showed him a like kind favorable Countenance and Aspect.

But finding afterward that Facardin increased daily in the esteem of the
Grand Signior, and that the old Rebel was become a new Favorite, and that he
was likely to overtop and out them, they generally conspired together, taking
the Mufti on their side, to accuse him of many Crimes, and more particularly
that he was a Christian, and an Apostate from the Mohammedan Faith. This Point
of Religion so sensibly touched the Grand Signior, that he resolved to condemn
him in a manner Solemn and Extraordinary; for mounting one Day on his Throne,
he commanded Facardin to be brought in, and placed on a low Chair; where
ordering his Crimes whereof he was accused to be recited, he passed a formal
Sentence of Death upon him: but Facardin arising to justify himself, was not
permitted to speak, only he obtained a quarter of an hours reprieve to make his
Prayers, and afterward was strangled by the hands of two Mutes.

Morat growing now into Years, took into his own Hands the Reins of Government,
resolving to rule Singly and Absolutely, and to make himself rather Feared than
Beloved: He degraded four Viziers at once, and banished them into Cyprus,
confiscating their Estates, for no other Reason, than because they had denied
him the use of their Mules and Camels on occasion of his Service.

He became extremely severe against the Soldiery, crushing them with all
imaginable Rigor on the least appearance of Reluctance to his Commands;
declaring, Morat exercises several Acts of Tyranny.
That he expected Blind and Silent Obedience from all, but especially from his
Soldiery.

He imposed a great Tax upon Copper; and because he had several Warthouses
filled with that Metal, which had for many Years lain by, he forced the People
to buy it at his own Rates. At which Aggrievance the Commonalty growing
desperate, began to Mutiny and Rebel; but Morat put a speedy stop thereunto, by
cutting off the Heads of fifty of the most Seditious, and so passed to Prusa,
with the Attendance of six Galleys.

He caused a Kadi to be hanged, to the great Displeasure and universal
Resentment of the Ulemah, who are Students in the Law; who to make known their
Aggrievance, and Consult a a Remedy, assembled in great Numbers at the House of
the Mufti.

The Queen Mother being acquainted with this Meeting, and fearing the ill
Consequences thereof, gave immediate Advice to the Sultan; who with like
Expedition dispatched a Boat to bring over the Mufti and his Son to Prusa; who
were no sooner arrived, than they were strangled, not being permitted to speak
for themselves, or to allege any Plea or Excuse for their Lives. This Act of
Cruelty, beyond the Example of former Ages, and never practiced by the most
tyrannical of his Predecessors, struck a Terror on the whole Empire; for Men
observing the unjust Rigor which was executed on the Head and Chief of their
Law, the Oracle and Mo^th which resolved their difficult Problems, and whom the
World so reverenced and honored, that few Examples have been of Capital
Punishment executed on his reverend Head, feared, that Innocence was not
sufficient to secure their own less considerable Estates from his Fury and
Violence.

There is a particular Death allotted for Mufties which is, by braying them in
a Mortar, which is kept in the seven Towers at Constantinople, and there showed
to Strangers; which Instrument has been seldom made use of.

Morat being greatly addicted to Wine, Morat destroys the Taverns.
was sensible of the ill Effects of it in himself, and that the heat of
debauchery inclined him to Violence and Cruelty, and from hence collecting how
dangerous this Humor of Drunkenness was in his People, especially in his
Soldiery, for that much of the late Seditions might be attributed thereunto,
he published a most severe Edict against Wine, commanding all Taverns to be
demolished, the Butts to be broken, and the Wine spilt. It was the common
Custom of the Grand Signior to walk the Streets in disguise; when meeting with
any drunken Person, he would imprison him, and almost drub him to Death. It was
his fortune to meet a Deaf Man one day in the Streets; who not hearing the
Noise of the People, nor the Rumor of his Approach, did not so readily shift
out of the way, as was consistent with the fear and dread of so awful an
Emperor, for which default he was strangled immediately, and his Body thrown
into the Streets.

All People feared and trembled at these Practices, and were as careful to look
out abroad for the Grand Signior, lest they should be surprised with the
bluster of his presence, as Mariners are of being taken unprovided by some
sudden Gust or Hurricane; for there was scarce a Day, that one Innocent or
other was not sacrificed to his Fury and tyrannical Fancy.

One Thomas Zanetti, a Venetian Merchant, who had built a lofty Jardac, or a
high Room of Prospective on the top of his House, was accused to the Grand
Signior to have designed that Place for no other end, than that he might with a
long Glass oversee the Chambers of the Ladies, and the Gardens, Hangs a
Venetian Merchant.
and Walks of the Seraglio: For which Reason, without farther inquiry, he was
hanged in his Shirt on the top of his Jardac, with a red Streamer in his Hand,
that so the Grand Signior might be sure that the Sentence was executed. The
Estate of Zanetti, whether belonging to himself or Principals, was confiscated;
but in regard the Goods, for security, were privately conveyed to the
Warehouses of several Frank Merchants, strict search was made for them; but in
regard the Marks and Numbers were altered, they could not be distinguished:
wherefore the Graud Signior concluding, that all the Frank Merchants had
combined together to deceive him, he Imprisoned every Man of them; nor would he
release them, until they had paid forty thousand Dollars for their Ransom and
Liberty.

After which, upon pretense of a Plot, or Agreement of the Franks to defend
themselves from the leviation of this Tax, the Turks searched their Houses for
Arms; in taking of which they were so rigorous, that they spared not so much as
a Birding-piece; nor yet the Sword of Sir Peter Wych, then Ambassador for
England, though he alleged, that it was the very Sword with which his Majesty
and conferred the Honor of Knighthood upon him.

But from these Transactions at Home, let us pass to the Wars in Poland and
Persia. That Invincible Princes, Vladislaus King of Poland, had gained such
good Success against the Czar of Muscovy, that the Czar was forced to demand
Assistance from the Turks. The Grand Signior, though he had lately made a Peace
with Poland, and sworn to maintain the Articles of Chocin, concluded by his
Predecessor Sultan Osman; yet the continual Depredations which the Cossacks
made, did always administer reasonable Pretenses for a War: To which Abassa,
one of his chief Counselors, a valiant and presumptuous Captain, did much
incite him; for promising to himself the Conduct of that Army designed against
Poland, did much flatter the Sultan and himself with the Fancy of mighty
Success.

The War being thus resolved upon, The Turks make War on the Poles.
the Turk, who commonly strikes before he Quarrels, gave Orders to Abassa to
make Levies of Men in Moldavia and Valachia; and to put the Tartars in Arms,
and the Militia of Buda, and of the Parts along the Danube into a warlike
Posture, and with all Expedition to enter Poland.

Abassa who had with wonderful diligence put his Troops in readiness, ordered
the Tartars, with a Body of fifteen thousand Men to enter Poland; which they
performed with such celerity, that passing the River of Tire above Chocin and
Rinczug, they in a few hours laid waste for the space of ten Leagues round
Kemenitz, and so retired with their Booty into Moldavia: howsoever their haste
was not attended with such good speed, but that they were overtaken on the 4th
of July by Stanislaus Konispolzki, General of the Polish Army, with no greater
Force than two thousand five hundred Horse; howsoever surprising them whilst
they were feeding their Horses, he put them into such Confusion and Disorder,
that he easily recovered all their Booty, and took five of their chief Men
Prisoners; of which the Son-in-Law of the Cantemir was one. But this was a
faint Refreshment in respect to that terrible Storm of sixty thousand Men,
composed of Turks, Tartars, Moldavians and Valachians; which under the Command
of Abassa had already passed the Danube.

Konispolzki the Polish General, having not sufficient Force to oppose them in
open Field, nor time to assemble a greater Army, gathered what Supplies he
could from the Cossacks and Lords of that Country, and therewith encamped
himself upon a Hill between the River Tyr and the Town of Chocin, that he might
be the better able to succor Kemenitz, which the Enemy designed to assault.

Abassa who contemned this weak Force of the Poles, resolved, without farther
consideration, A Fight between the Turks and the Poles.
to attack them in their own Camp, and force them to fight; of which the Poles
being well advised, placed several Pieces of Artillery, and lined all the
Hedges and Ditches with Musketeers, where the Turks were necessarily to pass,
drawing out their whole Army into Batalia; the Turks who hastened the nearest
way to charge the Enemy, fell into the Ambush, where having lost about five
hundred Men, they began to make a stand, and to consider of some more
advantageous way to their Design. Wherefore Abassa taking another Course, which
he judged to be free from all concealed Dangers, ordered the Tartars to charge
the Right Wing, and the Moldavians and Valachians the left of the Enemy, and he
with his Turks would fight the main Body. The Tartars with great Resolution
performed their part, and had wholly defeated that Wing, had not Wisnovitzki,
with some Troops and a Train of small Artillery, come in seasonably to their
Succor: The Moldavians and Valachians fought to faintly against the Enemy,
whom they considered to be Christians, Brothers, and Neighbors, that they soon
turned their Backs and fled, but were not far pursued by the Poles.

Abassa receiving this Repulse, sounded a Retreat, and immediately repassed the
River Tyr, and marched with all the haste he was able, stopping no where, until
he arrived at Rinzur, about thirty English miles from the place of the Fight;
and arriving at length on the Banks of the Danube, he gave License to his
Soldiers to disperse into their Winter Quarters; in the mean time Abassa
dispatched Advice to the Grand Signior of the Particulars of the Fight, and of
his great Victory, by an entire defeat of the Polish Army. The Grand Signior
believed the Report, which none durst to contradict, and which was confirmed by
the Rumor of an Ambassador coming from Poland. An Ambassador sent to the G.
Signior srom Poland.
For the Poles being at that time engaged in a War with Muscovy, and
apprehensive of another with Sweden, judged it not seasonable to provoke the
Turk, but rather, by way of Accommodation, dispatched an Ambassador with a
Train of three hundred Men, to make Complaints against the late Acts of
Hostility committed by Abassa, as if he had moved his Arms without the Orders
or Knowledge of the Sultan.

About that time that the Ambassador approached near to Constantinople, the
Grand Signior had another Son born, but of a weakly and sickly Temperament,
howsoever great Joy was expressed, and all the City was enlightened with
Torches, Bonefires, and Fireworks; and that the Grand-Signior might evidence
his Greatness and Magnificence to the Ambassador, he took this Occasion of the
Birth of a Son, to make a solemn Entrance into the City, and to make the
greater Show, he armed all the Citizens and Inhabitans.

Before the Grand Signior would grant Audience to the Ambassador, he ordered
that Abassa should treat with him, and understand his Business and Desires.
Abassa carried himself high in the Negotiation, he pretended the Damages and
Charges of the War, the Demolishment of certain Palancas, which were the Places
of Refuge for the Cossacks; and the Tribute of ten Years past, with Security of
payment for the Time to come. The Ambassador positively refused to hearken unto
any Terms about Tribute; and that for other Matters, the Presents which he had
brought to the Grand Signior, would reasonably answer.

His Presents were,

A Coach lined with Velvet, with six very fine Horses. A Basin, and
Candlesticks of Silver richly gilt. Four Clocks, ten Vests of Sables, six
Quivers of Arrows, with some Hunting-Dogs.
Being at length admitted to Audience, and thereunto conducted by the Aga of
the Spahees, and the Chaous Bashee: The Grand Signior asked the Ambassador,
which was not usual, For what Reason he was come thither?

To which he answered; That he was come to bring his Majesty Advice of the
Coronation of his King; and to establish a Peace, is his Majesty should judge
fit to accept thereof.

To which the Sultan replied; That all Christian Kings ought either to receive
the Ottoman Laws, or pay him Tribute, or try the sharpness of his Sword. And
taking a Cemiter in his hand which hung by him, he drew it half out, and said;
With this I will subdue my Enemies; and though take another in Poland.

To which the Ambassador returning a modest Answer, was dismissed of the Royal
Presence.

And now the Grand Signior, to put a good face on the Business, and to make the
World believe, that he designed what he spoke, he proclaimed a War with Poland,
and ordered his Tents to be carried abroad, supposing hereby to draw the Poles
to his own Terms of Agreement. And in pursuance hereof he mounted on Horseback,
and rode in state through the City, his upper Vest was made after the Hungarian
Fashion lined with Sables; in his right hand he carried a Quiver of Arrows, in
his left two drawn Swords, on his Turbant he wore a large Plume of Feathers,
encompassed with a Circle of Diamonds; and in this manner entering his Tents, he
proceeded to Adrianople. But before his departure, the Count Puchen, Ambassador
from the Emperor, arrived with other sumptuous Presents, offering Incense and
Gifts of Peace at the Throne of this Greatness.

But before we relate the Transactions at Adrianople, and the Success of
Affairs at that Place, let us recount several dismal Accidents at
Constantinople.

The Grand Signior returning by Sea from a place called Stravosta in the Bay of
Ismit, anciently the Bay of Nicomedia, where he had for some time held his
Court and great Divan, he was followed by several Vessels appointed to
transport the People; The several Mischiefs by Water and Fire.
in one whereof were ninety five Persons embarked, all of them Pasha's, Aga's,
and chief Officers of the Court; the Vessel was over-set by a sudden gust of
Wind, and all the People drowned excepting three Seamen which saved themselves
by swimming. More considerable were the Mischiefs by Fire; For on occasion of
some Fireworks made in one of the Grand Siguior's Chiosks, or Houses of
Pleasure, the Fire took so fiercely on the Tavan, A terrible Fire at
Constantinople.
or wooden Works of the Sieling, that it endangered the whole Palace, and had
consumed all, but that many Hands and active Men gave a stop to the farther
Progress.

This Fire was but a fore-ruuner of a greater, which began the 16th of
September in that part of the City of Constantinople, which is called Aiacab,
being between the Wall and the Port, where live Taverners, Butchers,
Fishmongers, and others who sell Provisions. The Fire took first in one of
those Houses which had been a Tavern, and are Buildings only made of Dealboards
and Timber; which combustible Matter the Houses round, and was so quick in its
Motion, as if it had taken by a Train, or that some wicked People with
Fireballs had employed themselves in the Mischief; the Fire took its Course
against the Wind, burning on one side and the other to the Historical Pillar,
and to the Moschs of Sultan Mahomet, and Sultan Selim; so that in a short time
one third of the City was reduced to Ashes.

It is difficult to express the lamentable Destruction was made hereby, what
Riches, what Palaces, and Movables were consumed in it, there being twenty
thousand Houses reported to be burnt; which Misery is best represented by the
remembrance of our calamitous Incendiation at London; the greatest difference
between one and the other was, that that at Constantinople was more quick in
its Motion; for it burnt a larger compass of Ground in one third of the Time,
than ours did at London; for that City for the most part consisting of slight
Buildings of Wood, met not the resistance which ours sometimes did against the
Walls of Brick and Stones.

The Fire being extinguished, and Men having time to lament and think, bagan to
impute the Cause and Fault to those whom they most suspected; sometimes they
accused the Persians for having fired the City, for which Crime one of them the
next Year suffered Death. Some attributed the Cause of all to the Janisaries;
and that they, out of hatred to the Inhabitants, or for the sake of Plunder, if
they did not begin, yet at least increased the Fire; which they the more
suspected, because the Janisaries refused not only to work themselves,
alleging, that they expected Orders from their Aga, but likewise hindered and
discouraged others. Howsoever the Grand Signior not wanting on his own part to
contribute all Assistance possible, sent four thousand Men out of his Seraglio
to work about the Fire, not excusing the very Officers of his Royal Chamber
from contributing their Authority and personal Aid; some of which ventured far
into the Fire, to demonstrate their Courage, Activeness, and Obedience to the
Commands of their Emperor: but all this was too little against an obstinate and
an invincible Enemy, for the Fire flamed, and proceeded, until it wanted
Nourishment and Food to consume.

In fine, twenty thousand Houses were burnt, two hundred Moschs, and the
Library of the Mufti, which for the Number of the Arabic and Persian Books,
was curious, and of high esteem. The Albengs, or Habitation of the Janisaries
containing three hundred Chambers, of which each Chamber was capable to receive
four hundred Men, were all burnt and reduced to Ashes.

The which fatal and miserable Spectacle, did a little touch the Heart of
Sultan Morat; so that he gave out considerable Sums to comfort the Distressed,
who had most suffered by this Calamity, and to raise from its Ashes his
consumed and languishing Constantinople; which being revived and flourishing,
was again miserably consumed by Flames, in the Month of April 1660. But such is
the beneficial and commodious situation of that Place, and the Riches thereof
by Trade, and the Presence of the Ottoman Court, that the Inhabitants again
rebuilt it in fewer Years than could be imagined.

But now to return to the Grand Signior at Adrianople, we find him resolutely
designed to make a War upon Poland, to whcih he was induced by the Persuasions
of Abassa, Reasons for a War with Poland.
and the present conjuncture of Advantage to join with the Moscovite, it
seeming great Policy not to suffer the Countries of Moscovy to be overrun; or
the Poles, who is a warlike and dangerous Nation, to grow Puissant and Powerful
by his Success and Conquest over his Neighbors: Wherefore Preparations were
made on all sides for the War; great Quantities of Provisions and Ammunition
were sent into Moldavia by way of the Black Sea and the Danube.

The Tartar Han sent word that all his Forces were in readiness, and expected
nothing but their Orders to march. The Beglerbey of Greece made his Rendezvous
at Philippolis with an Army of thirty thousand Men, where he attended to join
with the Forces of Bosna, Silistria, and other parts of Europe. Moldavia and
Walachia made an appearance of Levying Men, and joining with the Turk; but
their Hearts were toward the Poles, with whom they kept a sceret
correspondence, and would be ready to adhere on the least on the least
Opportunity.

In short, the Army of the Turks was so great, and all his Affairs in that
readiness, that he scorned to incline an Ear to Propositions of Peace; in which
Opinion Abassa humoured and persuaded him, that the Poles were so fearful of
his Forces, that they had already yielded to Terms of compounding for a yearly
Tribute. All which proved false; for in the mean time Vladislaus King of
Poland, remitting nothing of the Heat and Vigor of his War against the
Moscovites, he was so succesful therein, that he foced an Army of eighty
thousand Men, which he had besieged in their Camp, The Victory which the Poles
obtained over the Moscovites.
to lay down their Arms, and surrender themselves; which was an Action scarce
to be credited, at least to be paralleled in any History; and with this
Conquest he might have proceeded to the Capital City of Mosco, and concluded
the War and that Empire: But God's Provdence, which governs all things, altered
this Counsel, and diverted those victorious Arms to the Siege of Bial; which
Town being well fortified and garisoned, withstood many Assaults of the Enemy,
and blunted the Spirits and Swords of the Conqueror; for losing much time in
this Siege, other Towns made use of the Opportunity to provide and fortify
themselves; whilst the Poles growing weary, and wanting Pay, raised diverse
Mutinies and Seditions in the Camp. These Difficulties and Inconveniences
inclined the King Vladislaus to bend a favorable Ear to the many Supplications
and Instances which the Moscovites made for Peace: So that the
Plenipotentiaries being assembled, it was agreed, that the Duchy of Smolesco
and Czernieschou, which two hundred Years past had been taken from Poland and
Lituania, They make a Peace.
with many other Towns and Countries, to the extent of two hundred Leagues,
should be restored to the Kingdom of Poland.

The News of this sudden Peace coming unexpectedly to Sultan Morat, caused his
Bravadoes against Poland to cease, and to turn the style of his Fury and
Indignation against the Moscovites, whom he vilified with all imaginable Terms
of Persidiousness and Cowardice, and abused and imprisoned their Ambassadors.
He considered that he had provoked an Enemy who was Victorious, Valiant, and
Powerful, and one who at any time was able to contend with his united Force,
much more whilst it was separated and disjoined by his War in Persia: wherefore
in all haste he dispatched an Ambassador into Poland, The Turk sends an
Ambassador into Poland to desire a Peace.
called Shahin Aga, desiring to renew the ancient League and Articles of Peace.
This Ambassador found the King at the Diet in Wasaw, where he publicly
endeavored to excuse his Master for the late Acts of Hostility; assuring them,
that they were not performed according to his Master's Desires, and Original
Intentions, but as they were moved and guided by the evil Suggestions and
Artifices of Abassa, who being solely culpable of this Fault, by giving ill
Counsels to his Master, he assured them, in the Name of the Sultan, that he
should receive such Punishment as they should think fit to inflict upon him.
Hereupon the King Vladislaus gave this Answer, That since the Grand Signior
could so easily infringe the Articles of that Peace which had been solemnly and
sacredly established, it was now his Part, and the Wisdom of that grave
Assembly, to contrive such Conditions and Bonds wherewith to oblige his Master,
as could not easily and at his Pleasure be broken or avoided. And at the same
time the Polish Ambassador being returned from Constantinople, and discoursing
in the Diet of the Pride and Perfidiousness of the Turks, and the Scorn
wherewith they received Christian Ambassadors, so incensed the Spirit of the
whole Assembly, that with a genersl Consent they approved the words of the
King, adding, That they would, no longer be subject to the Insults and
Falsities of that Tyrant, whom they would make to know, that they wore as well
Offensive as Defensive Arms; and were not of that abject Spirit, or mean
Condition, to permit the Sultan to violate the most Sacred Articles of Peace,
and then at his pleasure to salve them with a fawning Acknowledgment, or a
flattering Speech. In this manner the Turkish Ambassador was returned, whilst
the King Vladislaus went into Podolia to take a view of his Armies; which he
found to consist of eighty thousand fighting Men, all well accoutred, of good
Courage, and ready to follow their King to the Walls of Constaninople.

The fear of the Motion of this great Army, in a Conjuncture when the Wars
broken out again in Persia were not prosperous, affected the Mind of Morat
which much terror; so that he became very sollicitous to find out, and make
some substantial Proposition in order to an Accommodation. One of the Viziers
called Morteza, was very active in this Business, plying continually the
General Konispolzki with Letters, Offers, and Expedients for a Peace: To
facilitate which, and show that the Grand Signior did heartily relent, Abassa
strangled.
Abassa was strangled by two Kapugees, and given for a Sacrifice to appease the
Anger of his Enemies; a Person who was a stout Soldier, and one who had
performed great and signal Services in the War of Persia.

But the Poles not being pacified with this single Act of Penitence, but
thirsting farther after the Blood of the Turks, desired to Spoil and Pillage
their Richer Provinces. Howsoever at length the Council of Poland entering into
more serious Debates, considered, that the Troops lately come from Muscovy,
were but in a bad condition; that the part of their Army, which consisted of
Volunteers, would not endure a long and tediuos War; and that the Expense and
Charge of this great Army was immense and almost insupportable: for which
Reasons it was resolved, that a Peace should be made, which was soon afterward
concluded, and agreed on these following Articles.

That the Vaywods of Moldavia and Walachia, Articles of Peace agreed between
the Poles and the Turks.
should be confirmed by the Grand Signior, with the Consent and Recommendation
of the King of Poland.

That Cantemir and his Tartars should abandon the Country of Buckzac; and in
case of refusal, that then the Turk and Tartar Cham should join their Forces to
expel them from thence.

That the Poles shall suppress all Acts of Hostility of the Cossacks in the
Black Sea.

That the Turks renounce for ever all Demands, or future pretense of Tribute
from Poland: and that they shall build no new Forts on the Frontiers.

That the Navigation on the River Nieper shall remain free and undisturbed to
the Poles. That all other Articles shall remain as formerly in their ture Force
and Virtue.

In this Year happened out great Differences between the French Ambassador and
the Turkish Officers. A Difference between the French Ambassador and the
Captain Pasha.
The first Disgust had its Original from the Year 1631, when the Marquess of
Marcheville going Ambassador to Constantinople, was in his Voyage met off of
Scio by the Captain-Pasha and his Fleet of Galleys, who immediately sent off a
Boat to advise him, that he should strike his Flag, and make ready the Presents
which were due to the Grand Signior's Admiral. Marcheville duly considering,
that this Submission would blemish the Honor of his Master, and the Dignity of
his Character, refused Compliance either in one or the other; howsoever that he
might testify the Friendship and good Correspondence which he came to confirm
between the two Kings, he stood off at some distance, and fired five Guns to
salute the Grand Signior's Standard: But the Captain-Pasha not contenting
himself herewith, required the Ambassador to come aboard and speak with him;
which after diverse Messages from one Vessel to another, the Ambassador was
counseled to perform, not knowing how far otherwise he might engage the Honor
of his Master. Marcheville being arrived at Constantinople, did greatly
complain of the Affront and Violence he received from the Captain-Pasha; which
though the Grand Signior and other Ministers seemed not to approve, yet the
Ambassador received little other satisfaction than fair Words and promises,
that his Honor should be again repaired.

At the Arrival of the Sieur Marcheville, the Count Cesi, who was the former
Ambassador, was to return into France; but the Debts which he had contracted by
a certain way of living, were so great, that the Creditors would not suffer him
to depart without payment; for Default of which, he endured many Affronts
offered to his own Person, and was detained at Constantinople until this Year
1634; during which time the Marquis, Marcheville managed all the Affairs of the
Embassy; who keeping still in mind the Affront offered him before Scio, watched
all Opportunities to disparage the Actions and Person of the Captain-Pasha; who
at length returning from the Black Sea, where he had some Success against the
Cossacks, was graciously received by the Grand Signior; and being advertised,
how, during his absence, the French Ambassador had endeavored to blast his
Reputation by many Instances of Diminution, which he often inculcated by his
Druggerman, took Advantage of the Grand Signior's good Humor, to vent before
him the resentment which he conceived thereof: The Grand Signior, to gratify
the Pasha, promised to hang the Druggerman; which the Pasha acknowledged as a
singular Favor, and returned from the Presence of the Sultan full of Joy and
Contentment. But better to cover his Malice, and to ensnare the Poor Wretch, he
sent a Messenger to the Ambassador, assuring him that he desired his
Friendship; and that there might be a right understanding between them, he
persuaded him to send his Druggerman to him, that by his Mouth he might signify
the esteem he had for the Ambassador, from whose Spirits he was willing to take
off all Jealousies and Umbrages of Discontent.

The Ambassador not suspecting the perfidiousness of the Pasha, The French
Druggerman hanged
sent his Druggerman to him; hwo being come within his Power, was immediately
hanged by the Grand Signior's express Command, and ordered that he should
remain on the Gallows with his Velvet Cap on his Head, which in this Sultan's
Reign all Druggermen wore to distinguish them from others.

The Ambassador complained greatly of this Affront, and Violation of Articles,
to the Chimacam and other Officers, but could receive no other Answer or
Satisfaction, than that the Grand Signior might execute Justice as he pleased
on his Subjects, without asking leave, or concerning the King of France or his
Ambassador in the Matter.

But Marcheville not resting satisfied with this Reply, still prosecuted his
Pique and Animosity to such a height, that the Captain-Pasha farther incensed
thereat, obtained Authority form the Grand Signior to dispatch him away: so
that sending one day for Marcheville, and first reproaching his Contrivances
and Designs against him, told him plainly, that it was the Grand Signior's
Pleasure that he should depart at that instant; to which he constrained the
Ambassador so precipitately, that he would not give him time to advertise his
Servants, The Sieur Marcheville forcibly sent away.
or make up his Baggage, but forced him aboard a French Ship then in Port,
which he immediately compelled to sail; and the Wind being contrary, caused the
Vessel to be toaed abroad by two Galleys into the open Sea of the Propontis.

After the injurious departure of this Ambassador, the Count Cesi, who had been
detained at Constantinople, for the Reasons before denoted, took again upon him
the Function of Ambassador. To execute which, in better advantage of Trade and
Commerce, he was advised to a compliance with the Captain-Pasha, and to use
such Means as might mitigate that Acrimony of Spirit which this Pasha nourished
against the French Nation.

These Disputes between the French and the Turkish Officers, revived certain
Disgusts and Aversion against all the Frank Nations, which favored the Latin
Rites; so that in despite to them, the Grand Signior restored again Cyrillus
the Patriarch to the Patriarchal Jurisdiction, who had long been persecuted by
the Jesuits, and by their Means been deposed, promising that for the future he
should continue undisturbed, in opposition to all those of the Roman Religion.

The Peace (as we have said) being concluded with Poland, the Grand Signior was
more at Ieisure to attend the Wars in Persia; with the Labors and Toils of
which the Janisaries being wearied, began new Troubles and Seditions in the
Camp; the which Disorder Morat attributing to the negligence or cowardice of
the Officers, as wanting Courage to suppress them, summoned the Janisar-Aga to
appear before him, Acts of Cruelty.
and without long Process or Excuse cut off his Head, and confiscated his
Estate to the Exchequer, which amounted to a Million and seventy thousand
Dollars: another Janisary also, more rich than seditious, was in like manner
sacrificed, and an hundred and sixty thousand Dollars of his Estate added to
the Treasury of the Sultan. The Pasha also of Damascus, with several other
Officers of the Army enriched with Spoils of the People, fell a Sacrifice to
Morat's Avarice and Cruelty; to whom Riches and Blood were so pleasing, that
none acquired a higher degree of Grace in his Favor, than those who could give
him notice of opulent Men, who having found Riches, he undertook to find them
Guilty, and to prove their Wealth so corrupted by extortion and violence, that
nothing could hallow or purify it but his Coffers.

The next News from Persia brought advice, that that King at the Head of a
powerful Army was encamped in the Country about Van, with which the Turks not
having sufficient Force to fight, the Vizier wrote to the Grand Signior, that
his Presence was necessary to increase the Army, and encourage the Soldiery;
whereupon he resolved to leave Adrianople, and transfer his Court to his
Seraglio at Scutari, The G. Signior returns to Scutari.
that so remaining on the Banks of Asia, he might be nearer to his Business,
both to receive Intelligence, and administer Supplies; and because Seditions
and Discontents in the People do always obstruct the Motion of Publick-Affairs,
he not only ruined the Taverns and Tabacco-shops, but forbid Coffeehouses, and
other idle Places of Concourse; nay to Barbers Shops no more than one was
suffered to enter at a time; for those being places of resort, Treason was
frequently vented there, Men of that Profession being notorious through the
World for their Talk and Intemperance of Language: And farther, to restrain
Meetings and secret Conventions, strict Orders were given, that after an hour
and half in the Night, all Fires and Candles in the City should be
extinguished, which was the general Discontent of all People.

But what showed much of the fierce Spirit of the Sultan, was a certain Fury
which he conceived on this occasion. On a certain day, riding on his Horse,
thirty Indian Pilgrims met him in the way to demand his Charity, and being in a
different habit to what the Turks wear, and not accustomary in that Country,
the Grand Signior's Horse started at the sight of them; and being spurred for
bogling in that manner, the Horse capred and reared an end, so that he threw
his Rider; at which the Grand Signior being highly enraged, drew out his
Cemiter, and with his own hand killed his Horse, and instead of Alms, prepared
a place of Entertainment in the Galleys for those unhappy Indians.

The Grand Signior being returned to his Palace at Scutari, which is seated on
the Asian side opposite to Constantinople, The G. Signior resolves to go to
Persia in Person.
applied his whole Mind entirely to the Affairs in Persia; and being resolved
to march thither in Person, he put abroad the Horse-tail, which is a signal of
departure, he visited the Sepulchers of his Ancestors, made his Corban, which
is a distribution of Flesh to the Poor, for a Blessing on his Enterprise. The
Officers of the Army contended to out-vy each the other in their Presents to
the Grand Signior, some furnished him with Royal Tents, others with curious and
light Arms; and others with Horses and Furnitures of value. Great Sums of Money
were extracted out of the Exchequer for Military Preparations and Paiments of
the Soldiery. The Charge of Affairs, in absence of the Grand Signior, was
committed to the Bostangi-bashee, who was made Chimacam of Constantinople; and
so with a fierce Spirit, and aspect full of Indignation and Anger, he mounted
his Horse at the Head of an Army of an hundred thousand; he departed from
Constantinople about the end of April.

But before we recount the particulars of what succeeded in Persia, it is
requisite to cast our Thoughts back to the Troubles of Transylvania, occasioned
by the competition of Stephen Bethlem and George Ragotski, for that
Principality.

Bethlem (as we have said before) being grieved and discontented at his hard
Fortune in being put by the Government, Bethlem renews his Complaints to the
Grand Signior.
and resenting the Punishment which Ragotski inflicted on his Son for the Crime
of Manslaughter, he went to Buda, and there renewing his old Complaints to the
Pasha, he was, with Recommendations from him, accompanied to the Port; where
being introduced to the Presence of the chief Ministers, he at large declared
the Merits and good Services of his Family toward the Sultan: His Reasons to
be re-instated.
That for this Reason only, in dishonor and despite to the Ottoman Empire, he
was excluded from the Government, and therefore challenged its Assistance to
re-establish him therein; in consideration of which, he promised the same
Faithfulness and Devotion to the Sultan, which was professed and maintained by
his Ancestors, and was natural to the Family of Gabor. That as to Ragotski it
was apparent, that he entertained different Principles; that he was a Person of
elated Thoughts, and a Turbulent Spirit, and was ever united in Combination
with the Emperor, Germans, and other Enemies to the Ottoman State.

The Turks moved with these Reasons, resolved to favor Stephen, and to
discountenance Ragotski; and though the Conjuncture of Affairs was such, as
that any other Engagement in War, besides that of Persia, did not square with
the present Designs; yet at all times it was judged convenient to sow the Tares
of Discord, and promote Differences amongst Christians, which have ever
produced Advantages to the Mohammedan Cause. And likewise the Pasha of Buda was
commanded to enter Transylvania with a Force sufficient to contend with
Ragotski; and lest the Emperor should be alarmed with this Commotion, a Chiaus
was dispatched to give him a perfect understanding of the Reasons, why an Army
marched into Transylvania; The Turks send an Army into Transylvania.
the Design of which was not intended in the least manner to impeach the
Articles of Peace between him and the Grand Signior, but only to displace a Man
of a furious and turbulent Spirit, and to ordain another in his stead of a more
lober and quiet Temper, by whose Moderation and Prudence, the Peace between the
two Empires may be improved and continued.

Ragotski startled at this Design intended against him, Ragotski implores Aid
from the Emperor.
assembled the States of his Country, to determine and consult concerning a
Remedy, and immediately dispatched a Messenger to the Emperor, to desire and
implore his Imperial Succor and Protection: and though Ragotski was sensible
of the disparity of his Strength, in comparison of that of the Turks; yet
neither did his Counsels nor Behavior betray Fear or want of Constancy.

The Hungarians seconded those Instances which Ragotski had made at the
Imperial Court, and the Party which he had made at Vienna brought the matter to
a debate in Council, which was argued on both sides with solid and convincing
Reasons. Those who spoke in disfavour of Ragotski, alleged, That all
Assistance contributed to him would be a just Cause and Pretense to the Grand
Signior to make War with the Emperor. That Ragotski himself was of an unquiet
Temper, It is debated in Council.
not unlike to Gabor his Predecessor, who had often bid Defiance to the
Emperor, and overrunning all Hungary and Austria, had often erected his
Standard in the sight of Vienna. To protect and cherish a Person of this
Disposition, was no other than to nourish a Serpent or Viper in their Bosom;
who being elevated at the expense of the Empire in successes against the Turk,
would convert that Power which he had gained to the damage of the House of
Austria, combining with the Faction of other Princes to procure its
destruction. Let us therefore, said they, stand at a gaze, and as Men on the
Shore, or in a good Port, behold the agitation of Ships in the Ocean; perhaps
the change of a Prince in Transylvania may turn to our Benefit, and one may
succeed into the place, of such a mild Temper and serene Disposition, as may
better agree with the Maxims of this Court, and may cultivate that Peace which
can only render these Countries happy.

Howsoever there were other Opinions to the contrary, amongst which it is said,
that D. Annibal Gonzaga, a Person acquainted with the State of Transylvania,
and of the Turks, and Director of the Imperial Army, delivered himself in this
manner.

May it please Your Sacred Imperial Majesty.
IF Ragotski had been the Lawful Son and Hereditary Successor of Gabor, who was
an Enemy to your Majesty, we might then apprehend the evil Consequences of a
Son, that traces the same Path and Footsteps of his Father. But here is another
Person, another Prince, in Emulation different, and by Enmity hating the House
of Gabor; wherefore I cannot imagine how this Prince can possibly entertain
Maxims of like Nature with the other. For my part I believe, that it behooves
your Majesty to maintain a good Correspondence with the Princes of
Transylvania, by a close Union against the Turk; your adjoining Countries being
like contiguous Buildings, which are strengthened by a mutual Support: Let us
therefore support it; for if it depends not on us, it will be overrun, and
remain oppressed without us. To aggravate the Faults of Gabor to the
disparagement of Ragotski, is no Logical Consequence, unless you will argue,
That the Faults of the Guilty are to be punished on the Innocent. Let us
therefore consider, which agrees best with the Security of the Empire; that
Transylvania should remain in the Hands of Ragotski, or of the Turk; or that we
had better strike against the Rock of Jealousy, which we conceive against this
Transylvanian, or on that ruinous Rock of the Turkish Power. The Ottoman
Councils commonly look asquint, they cast their Eye on the Prince, when their
sight aims at the Principality; and threaten the Person, when they design to
vent their Fury to the subjection of his Country. The true Intent of the Turk
is to reduce Transylvania to the same Condition with Moldavia and Walachia, and
to incorporate this, with infinite other Provinces, into the gross Body of his
Empire. It is notorious to all the World, that the Emperors, your Predecessors,
have lost a large Tract of Land by the Turks; and your Losses will every day be
greater, as their Conquests increase: And when their Dominions in Europe are so
enlarged, that they are able to quarter their Asiatick Cavalry in these
Countries, your Dangers must necessarily be inevitable and full of Terror. For
I compute, that when the Turk designs to make War upon us, he marches with an
hundred thousand Men, and perhaps ten thousand Camels, besides other Beasts of
Burden: so numerous a Body as this cannot be maintained until the Grass be
fully grown, which is not until the middle or end of June; and from that time
they have more than a month or six weeks March before they arrive upon our
Confines; the which consumption of Time, prolongs their Enterprises, and
protracts the time of our Damages. But if once they become Masters of
Transylvania, and that that Country be laid to Moldavia, Walachia, and other
parts of Hungary, they may then commodiously winter amongst us, and begin their
Wars and Attempts upon us early in the Year, and pursue them until the last
season of the Autumn: and in this manner, whilst we are debating and taking our
Measures in our Diet, they will fatten themselves, and satiate their Appetites
with our Spoils. It is good therefore for us to defend Austria in Transylvania,
keeping the Fever as far from the Heart as we are able. Let us suppose, that
Ragotski is the most ungrateful Man in the World; and that after we have
supported and succored him, that he will reverse his Arms upon us: Howsoever
he is not so strong and considerable as to do us much hurt, and therefore it
were better to have him our Neighbor and our Enemy, than the Turk, though our
Friend; the first can only administer some little cause of Jealousy, but the
other may destroy and supplant us; the first is but like a putrid Fever, which
is cured with every small Evacuation; but the latter is a Pestilence, which
dilates and diffuses it self, and is deadly and irrecoverable. Let not the
Scruple neither of breaking with the Turk trouble us; for we may administer
Assistance underhand, and without noise effect our Business, without arriving
at the extremity of a Rupture. It is folly and weakness in us to be charmed by
the Flatteries of the Turks, and the fair words of this Chaous; or to imagine,
that when they have overrun all Transylvania, they will stop in the midst of
their Career, before they arrive at the Gates of Vienna; no, their Intentions
are to lull us asleep, and to destroy our Neighbor first, and then us; they
cannot devour us both at once, but husband their Diet, and reserve us for
another Meal. The Turk is like a Serpent, who lies quiet and coiled up all the
Winter; not because he wants either a Sting or Poison, but being benumbed with
cold, wants warmth and heat to give it Motion and Operation. This is my Sense
and Opinion, which I most humbly tender before the greater Wisdom of Your
Sacred Majesty.

Notwithstanding these convining Arguments, The Emperor refuses Succor to
Ragotski.
the Result of the Council determined otherwise, and Ragotski was left to shift
for himself, and to stand upon his own Legs; which was a pernicious Resolution,
and that which was afterward the cause of the subjection of Transylvania to
the Turk, and the Original of many Mischiefs to the Empire; but thus was the
Fortune of the Turks, more favorable to them than ^o the Christian State.

Ragotski being thus abandoned by the Imperialists, and exposed to the Mercy of
an insatiable Enemy, though his Courage was good and resolute, yet he began to
despond of his Force, unable to deal with such an unequal Match as that of the
Turks; And his Subjects being fearful of the Event, persuaded him to give way,
and resign his Rule to the hands of Gabor his Competitor; Ragotski, that he
might not seem to neglect the Counsel of his Subjects and Friends, and to gain
Time, pretended to hearken to their Advice; Ragotski obtains Succors underhand.
and accordingly entered into a Treaty with Gabor. During which Debate he
secretly obtained some Forces from Poland, by connivance of that Government:
and the Hungarians being his Friends, privately favored him, knowing that the
Conquest of Transylvania would be a step to their Destruction; and being at
length well fortified and recruited, he began to declare openly, that he found
no security to himself in this Surrender, for that a Place was denied him,
wherein he put his chief hopes of Defense; and therefore that he was resolved
to support and maintain his State and Cause in the best manner that he was
able. The Turks enter Transylvania.


Hereupon the Turks entered Transylvania with an Army of twenty five thousand
Men under the Command of the Pasha of Buda: Ragotski, to obstruct their March,
dispatched his General Cornis with seven thousand Men, to prepossess an
advantageous Ground, with Order to entertain, but not fight the Enemy, until he
could come up to him with the gross of his Army.

The Turks perceiving their advantage in number, resolved to engage the Enemy
before they were reinforced with new Succors; to perform which they made a
Detachment of twelve thousand Horse, and two thousand Janisaries, and some
Field Pieces, commanded by the Pasha himself and Stephen Gabor. Cornis not
being able to disingage himself, or avoid fighting, made a Virtue of Necessity,
and put his Forces into form of Battle; and exhorting his Men to follow his
Example, assured them, that Victory was sooner acquired by Valor than Numbers,
and that Fortune was always more favorable to the Valiant and Brave, than to
the Cowardly and pusillanimous.

Cornis unsheathing his Sword, They sight with Cornis.
sought in the Head of his Men, and led them through the thickest of his
Enemies, the first rank of which not being able to sustain the furious Charge
of the Christians, gave way; and being disordered, the first Squadrons ran foul
of the secood, and at length all of them betook themselves to a shameful
flight. Are overthrown.
The Transylvanians took all their Canon and Baggage, with ten Ensigns, and
killed three thousand Turks. The Pasha of Agria was wounded, and Olac Bei of
Temiswar was taken Prisoner; and the whole Army had that day been defeated, had
not the Janisaries, who fortified themselves in a thick Wood, given a stop to a
farther pursuit. Ragotski likewise in diverse succeeding Skirmishes overthrew
the Turks, killing many Pasha's and Soldiers of Quality, and at length
remained sole Master of the Field.

The Turks retired to Lippa, and Stephen to Temiswar, whilst Ragotski made his
Incursions into the Country of the Turks, burning and spoiling two thousand
Villages; Peace is made.
with which being terrified and beaten into terms of Reason, they agreed to
suffer Ragotski to enjoy his Government, conditionally, that the Goods and
Estate of Gabor in Transylvania should be restored unto him: and thus Ragotski
established himself in the Government, and obtained a Confirmation thereof from
Constantinople to his Son, accompanied with Presents and Ornaments of a Prince.
And this Example shows us in what manner we are to deal with Turks; Resolution
and Rigor are better Arms against them than Complements; and with an Enemy it
is more advantageous to make Peace with Weapons in our Hands, than to
condescend to the hard Terms which a Tyrant pleases to impose on an easy and
unprovided People.

So soon as this News arrived the Ears of the proud Sultan, he was so incensed,
that in a fury he would have desisted from his present War in Persia, to vent
his Revenge upon Transylvania; but the cooler and more moderate Counsels of
wiser Friends, advised him to defer the execution of his Anger, until he could
discharge it more to the purpose, and in a Conjuncture when it would fall more
easy on himself, and more heavy on his Enemy: Howsoever in the mean time
Ragotski made such use of this remote Diversion of the Ottoman Arms, by
advantaging himself of an Alliance with the Cossacks, and by the ill
Correspondence and Diffidence which at that time intervened between the Tartars
and the Port, that he not only avoided the Revenge threatened by Morat, but
obtained an establishment of the Inheritance to his Son.

By this time Sultan Morat was arrived at Erzrum, Morat at Erzrum.
which is a City belonging to the Turks on the Confines of Persia; where the
first Act which he performed of Justice, was to cut off the Head of the Pasha
for his Oppression and Extortions inflicted on his People.

Entering into Armenia, he was grieved to see the upper and lower Provinces so
miserably destroyed and wasted by the War; to recover which, he commanded the
People, under pain of Death, to return again to their Ancient Habitations
within the space of twenty days; but they being settled in other Cities, where
perhaps they had purchased Houses and Lands, could not possibly comply with the
Severity of this Decree; and therefore were constrained to buy a Dispensation
and release from the Penalty for a Sum of Money.

About the beginning of July, in the parts of Erzrum, Morat made a general
Review and Muster of his whole Army; with which those he brought from
Constantinople joined to Recruits by the way, and those Forces which had waged
War in Persia, amounted to near the number of three hundred thousand fighting
Men, but such as were admirably well disciplined, not only by the Severity of
their Sovereign, but by the example he showed them of Frugality and Patience:
for he often marched afoot in the midst of the Heats; The Grand Signior's
Patience and Labors.
he was very temperate in his Diet, though he was naturally of a gluttonous and
luxurious Palate: for several Months he made use of no other Pillow for his
Head than his Saddle, no other Blanket or Quilt than the Covering or Foot-cloth
of his Horse.

Being arrived near to the City of Revan, he bestowed that Largess on the
Soldiery of a Dollar a Man, which is accustomary to be given at all times,
when the Grand Signior marches in Person, and then made known to them his
Intentions of besieging that Place; and in case he took it not in the space of
ten days, that then he would leave it begirt with forty thousand Men; and
dividing his Army into three Bodies, he would enter the Bowels of Persia by
diverse ways. The Tents of the Grand Signior, and of all the Camp, were pitched,
Batteries raised, the Trenches opened, and all Matters laid in the formal
manner of a Siege. The Garrison within, Revan betrayed and surrendered by Emir
Gumir.
commanded by Emir Gumir, consisted of fifteen thousand Men, fitted and
provided with all sorts of Ammunition, and wanted neither Courage nor
Provisions; howsoever at the end of nine days, the City was furrendred to the
Sultan, upon Terms of Quarter to the whole Garrison, both for Life and Freedom
of Estate: And because this Governor Emir Gumir, a principal Nobleman of
Persia, had by corruption thus voluntarily delivered up the City, he acquired a
place of high Grace and esteem in the Favor of the Grand Signior; to which his
courtly manner of indulging his Humor, and complying with him in his Wine and
Feasts, (to which the joy of this present Success privileged him to return)
gave him daily a new Title to receive extraordinary Honors from him.

The News of this prosperous Success was posted to Constantinople, as the first
Essay of the good Effects of the Sultan's Presence, and was there celebrated
with Feasts, Rejoicing and a Festival kept for it at Constantinople.
Joy, and Lights, according to the Turkish Fashion, called Danalma; to perform
which, the Turks obliged likewise the Christian Ambassadors, saying, That if
they were Friends, they ought to evidence their Satisfaction, by demonstrations
of Joy in the prosperity of their Ally.

The Festival was kept for the space of four days; during which two Brothers of
the Sultan, viz. Bajazet and Orchan were strangled; the latter of which, as is
said, was so brave, and of that Courage, that he killed four of his
Executioners before he submitted his Neck to the fatal Cord.

The Turks entering farther into Persia, inconsiderately fell into an Ambush,
where twelve thousand of their Men were defeated; howsoever the remainder of
the Army not being discouraged with this Encounter, proceeded on their March,
making most miserable Havoc and Destruction of all before them, The Turks
enter farther into Persia.
carrying that Dread and Terror to the Countries round, that all People fled,
leaving their Houses and Things not portable, to the possession of the Enemy.
Howsoever the Turks found greater Difficulties than they expected; for meeting
frequently Parties of the Persian Cavalry, which were practiced to manage their
Horse and Sword, were often defeated, at least endured and sustained the shock
of Bloody Skirmishes; and then the Persians retiring into the Mountains known
to them, but unknown to the Turks, which served them better than fortified
Places, returned again when any Advantage or Booty appeared, which perpetually
vexed and wearied the Enemy; and burning all Things which might afford them
relief, rendered that fruitful Country more Desolate and barren than the Deserts
of Lybia, or the Sands of Arabia.

In this manner the Turkish Army being destitute of all sorts of Provisions and
Refreshments, were forced to retire to the Country of Tauris; which being
harassed and impoverished like other Provinces, caused a miserable Famine in
the Camp, whereby Multitudes of Horses and Camels perished for want of
Nutriment; at which the Grand Signior being highly incensed against the
Inhabitants of Tauris, Tauris destroyed.
committed their City to the Will and Mercy of the Soldiery, who having
pillaged and sacked it, lest it a miserable spectacle of Fire and Sword.

The King of Persia seeing in what manner the Troops of his Enemy were wearied
and consumed, took hold of this Opportunity as seasonable to propose certain
Articles of Peace by an Ambassador, to which Morat seemed to incline a flexible
Ear; but lodging his Soldiers in their Winter Quarters in the parts of
Damascus and Aleppo, he took his way toward Constantinople, with intention to
ease the Hardships and Labors of the Summers War, by a voluptuous Ease and
Winters pastime in the delights and softness of the Seraglio.

The 16th day of December he arrived at Constantinople, having passed from
Ismit through the Gulf of Nicomedia with the attendance of fourteen Galleys:
he made his Entry by the Jews Gate, and not by that of Adrianople, as was
accustomary; he was mounted on one of the best of his Horses, and clothed with
a Coat of Mail, a Casket on his Head, with three Feathers adorned with Pearls
and precious Stones; his Sword was girt to his side with his Bow and Quiver,
his Beard was in a rough and neglected manner, which made him appear more
Fierce and Martial; the Chimacam came after him, accompanied with the Traitor
who surrendered Revan. Festival for return of the G. Signior.
This Festival for his return was celebrated for the space of a whole week,
during which time the Shops were shut, the Doors and Outsides adorned with
green Boughs and Paintings, and by Night the Streets with Torches were made as
clear as the day: howsoever the People secretly murmured, that the War was not
prosecuted, and the Advantages taken, when Fortune began to smile and favor
their Enterprises; and that now desisting in the middle way, the Work was again
to be begun, and all the foregoing Blood and Treasure was spent and consumed to
no purpose. These Murmurings of the People were not without some Ground and
Cause; for after the departure of the Grand Signior, the Persians put
themselves again into the Field, and recovered the Country which they had lost;
and having offered a Sum of Money to Mortesa Pasha to surrender Revan; which he
refusing to accept on Principles of Fidelity and Honor, they prepared to lay
close Siege to the Place: the Janisaries were also displeased to see themselves
neglected, and cast out of the Guard, and their Places supplied by the
Bostangees; nor less disgusted were the Lawyers to see several of their Judges
and Kadies handged, and their Heads cut off, upon pretense of Sedition and
Faction. His ill Humor more inceased to the height of Tyranny, by reason of
certain twinges which he suffered of the Gout, which is not usual in Persons of
his Age, not surpassing twenty six years; and because his Physician, a Jew,
forbid him wholly to drink Wine, as poison to his Disease and Complexion, he
was so enraged, that he drove him from his Presence with Indignation; and
immediately conceived such Anger and Prejudice against the whole Nation, that
he caused their Houses to be searched, and their Jewels taken from them. But
what was most strange, was his horrid aversion to Tobacco, His aversion to
Tobacco.
the taking of which, by any Person whatsoever, he forbid upon pain of Death;
which Sentence he so rigorously executed, that he caused the Legs and Arms of
two Men, one that sold Tobacco, and the other that took it, to be sawed off,
and in that manner exposed to the view of the People: he also caused two
others, a Man and a Woman, to be impaled alive, for the same Offense, with a
Roll of Tabaco about their Necks.

As the Gout caused him to be froward and ill-natured, so more especially when
ill news came from Persia, he was observed to be more raving and tyrannical
than ever. His Army in Persia wanting Provisions, disbanded; Mortesa Pasha
Godvernour of Revan being killed, the Soldiers rebel, Revan regained by the
Persian.
open the Gates, and yield themselves to the persian, for which Offense the
Janisaries fearing the Justice of their Master the Grand Signior, two thousand
of them took up Arms in Service of the Enemy: the sense hereof vexing Morat to
the Soul, he caused the Register of the Janisaries to be hanged, and another of
their principal Officers to be beheaded, The Grand Signior's Severity and
Cruelty.
and strowed the Streets of Constantinople with dead Bodies, some for one
cause, and some for another, which struch the whole City with a general Dread
and Consternation.

He often walked in the night, punishing Quarrels and Disorders of the Streets,
and meeting two Women wandering in the dark, he caused them to be cut in pieces.

He put hi Cook to Death for not dressing his Meat well, or not seasoning his
Sauces according to his Palate.

In his Seraglio sporting with his Arms, he wounded himself with a Dart in the
thigh; and by accident wounded the Son of Mehmet the late Vizier with a
Carbine-shot, of which in a short time after he died.

The Persians having taken Revan (as we have said) instituted Chambers of
Janisaries in that place after the Turkish fashion, paying them in the same
form as at Constantinople; and to allure the Spahees to enter into his Service,
he offered to all that came in twelve Aspers a day of constant Pay; and
declared, That their Faith and Law had no difference from the Mohammedan.

The Grand Signior receiving these Advices with extreme indignation, proclaimed
his Intentions to return again into Persia; and though the Design pleased not
the Militia, who wre weary of the War, yet his Power was too great to be
resisted, and his Humors too violent to be diverted by sober Counsels; for
having subjected and absolutely subdued the Insolence of the Soldiers, and
suppressed the Arrogance of the Lawyers and Churchmen, he ordered every thing
according to his Arbitrary and Uncontrollable Pleasure; which being rendered
Extravagant and Unsupportable, by reason that in his Cups, and at the time of
his Debauchery, he would often take his Counsels and determine his Resolutions,
were notwithstanding with more patience endured, upon hopes that they would not
be lasting, and that Excesses would accelerate his Death, and the end of their
Oppressions.

The Pasha's of greatest Note and Riches he put to Death, and confiscated their
Estates to his Exchequer; and whereas Avarice and Cruelty were equally
predominant in his Nature, there was scarce a day wherein he made not some
demonstration of those Dispositions.

The English Ambassador making some instances for the releasement of English
Slaves from Captivity, was forced to purchase their Liberty by giving two
Russians, or other Slaves in the place of one Englishman.

He took a singular delight to sit in a Chiosk by the Seaside, and from thence
to shoot at the People with his Bow and Arrows, as they rowed near the Banks of
the Seraglio; which caused the Boat-men afterward to keep themselves at a
distance from the Walls of the Seraglio. And as he likewise took pleasure to go
from one Garden to another on the Bosphorus, so if he observed any so bold, as
to put forth his Head to see him pass, he commonly made him pay the price of
his Curiosity by a shot from his Carbine.

In all his Gardens and places of Pleasure, his chief Recreation was Drinking,
in which his principal or almost sole Companions were Emir Gumir the Persian
who betrayed Revan, and a Venetian of the Family of Bianchi, who having been
taken by the Turks, when he was young, was placed in the Seraglio, and educated
in all the Learning and Customs of it, and becoming as well a Proficient in
Drinking, as in other Vices, he was made a Favorite and Companion to Morat.
And thus did they follow this trade of Drunkenness so constantly, that the
Health of the Grand Signior began to impair; and at length he became so
sensible of his Extravagancies, that he incharged the Chimacam not to obey him
after Dinner: and when in the heat of his Wine he took a humor to ride through
the Streets, the Janisaires and Officers would sometimes run before to advise
the People to withdraw, and sometimes drive them away with Stones, that so they
might escape the hazard of this capricious Tyrant.

As it cannot be expressed in what Dread and Fear the People stood of him, so
neither in what Veneration he was with his Servants, who observed the looks and
every cast of his Eyes; had learned his Nods, and the meaning of every Motion
and Gesture of his Body. It happened once, that a Paper falling casually from
his Hand out of a Window, the Pages ran in all haste down the Stairs, striving
who should be the first to take it up; but one more desirous than the others to
evidence the Zeal of his Service, took the nearest way and leaped out of the
Window; and though with the fall he broke the Bone of his Thigh, yet being the
first that took up the Paper, he came halting to present it with his own Hand:
this bold readiness in his Service so pleased the Grand Signior, that being
cured, he was afterward preferred to one of the most considerable Offices of
the Empire. Thus was Morat revered in his Seraglio, as he was feared aboard,
his Servants having the same awe of him, as Bagotes the Eunuch had of Alexander
the Great, who holding the Pot of Incense and Perfumes whilst his Master slept,
suffered his Hands to burn to the Bone, rather than to awaken him by moving out
of his place. Q. Curtius.

But it is time now to leave off farther Discourse of the Extravagancies of
Morat, and to return to the Wars in Persia; howsoever before the departure of
the Grand Signior, it will be requisite to recount somewhat of the State of
Affairs in Europe.

On the Frontiers of Hungary and Poland, Disturbances in Poland and Hungary.
there wanted not Exercises and Skirmishes to employ and practice the
Soldiery, and keep them in Breath.

The Poles heightened with their good Successes, would not longer endure the
Incursions of the Tartars, complaining against the Turk, that he had given
Orders, and secretly abetted them in their Robberies and Invasions, against the
Articles of the last Peace; and therefore to avenge themselves, the Poles
appeared on the Frontiers with forty or fifty thousand Horse: but the Grand
Signior not willing in this Conjuncture to break with the Poles, absolutely
disowned any such Order or Permission given to the Tartars; and being willing
to continue the League, that he might oblige the King of Poland, gave liberty
to all the People of that Nation, The Turks confirm the Peace with Poland.
and to the Russians, who had been taken since the Last Treaty, positively
prohibiting all People from buying, or keeping any of the Subjects of that
Country for Slaves, during the continuance of this Peace.

In Hungary, though the Ambassador had but lately brought a Confirmation of the
Peace from Constantinople; yet the Turks pretending that the Articles were not
complied with, continued to trouble and disturb those Frontiers; for four
thousand of them being gotten into a Body, burnt certain Villages, made diverse
Slaves, and battered the Castle of Raab; but being repulsed by that Garrison,
and by that of Komorra, they again made Head, and encamped within three Leagues
of Presbourg: The which gave great trouble to the Emperor, both because he had
lately declared a War against France, and because he apprehended, that those
Commotions of the Turks were designed to no other end, Send Forces against
Ragotski.
than to engage him to renounce all assistance and succor to be given unto
Ragotski.

We have already recounted in what manner the Turks had espoused the Quarrel of
Stephen Gabor, and resolved to establish him in the Principality of
Transylvania, with the Ruin of Ragotski; which now being designed to be done by
open Force, several Troops were sent to the Frontiers of Transylvania; which so
alarmed the Hungarians, that they put themselves on their Guard, and obliged
the Estates of Austria and Hungary to contribute toward the Succor of the
Transylvanian Prince.

The Emperor remained long in suspense what course to steer, until at length
the Persuasions of the Confederate Princes, the shame of abandoning a Friend
and an Ally for a Prey to the Turks, and the fear of displeasing his Hereditary
Dominions in Hungary, who considered Transylvania as the Bulwark of their
Country, induced him to promise secretly, and underhand, Assistance to Ragotski.

As to the Turks themselves, the Effects did not correspond with their Menaces:
for though they had gathered an Army of twenty thousand Men at Buda, they not
only were disappointed of their Design upon Newhausel, but were openly
repulsed, and shamefully expelled the Frontiers by the palatine of Hungary: And
Ragotski being recruited by Succors from the Emperor, and by an Alliance with
Poland, defied the Forces of the Turk, and contemned the Reports of sixty
thousand Men preparing to march against him.

For indeed the Grand Signior had too great an Encumbrance on his Shoulders by
the War in Persia, to attend unto a perfect and studied Revenge against
Ragotski; for Revan being recovered by the Persian, (as we have already
declared) was a Matter of high Moment; and what distracted all his Counsels,
and weakened his Hopes.

When News came first of the Siege of Revan, Orders were given to the Vizier to
Besiege Bagdat, as a means to cause a diversion of Arms; Mutiny in the Turkish
Army.
but the Soldiery entertaining an aversion to this Enterprise, unanimously
refused to March, or to proceed farther than Erzrum. Jambolat Ogli, who
commanded the Army before the the Arrival of the Vizier, had strangled a Pasha,
and taken his Estate to supply the Wants of the Army; and had likewise put to
Death several Spahees and Janisaries for Mutiny, and because they had declared
an unwillingness to this War. The Soldiery prepared to address themselves to
the Vizier for Justice against these violent Proceedings: but he not willing to
hear them, endeavored to divert their Complaints, which caused a greater
Commotion and Storm than before. And though Jambolat pleaded hid Orders and
positive Commission from the Grand Signior for what he had acted; yet that
Allegation not being accepted by the Multitude as a justifiable Plea, the
Vizier was forced to condescend to their Desire, and strangle Jambolat, as he
had done the others, being the only Means to quiet and compose this Trouble of
his Army.

But as after some great Storm, there is always remaining for a while a
swelling and fluctuation in the Waters, so there still remained on the Spirits
of the Soldiery, Discontents and unquietness of Mind: Wherefore the Vizier
fearing lest the Enemy taking advantage of the present Seditions, should charge
them at a time of Disorder, he retired at a distance from them into the Plains
of Erzrum: But he was not able to continue long in those Parts for want of
Fuel, and of Wood and Planks to secure them against the Rains and Snow; for it
being Winter, which is rigorous and cold in that Country, their Tents were not
sufficient proof to defend them against the Extremity of the Weather.

Whilst the Turkish Army remained at this Place, advice came, Van besieged by
the Persians.
that the Persians had Besieged Van, which is a strong Fortress situate on an
inaccessible Rock, on the Frontiers of the Province of Diarbequir. And though
the Persians were not able to take this Place, neither by Storm nor Famine, yet
during this Siege, they made use of their time to ruin all the Country of
Diarbequir, which they left so desolate, that the Turkish Army could not
quarter there, nor extract the least Provision or Subsistence from thence.

To all these Misfortunes a greater was added by the Treachery of a certain
Curd, one who pretending to be ill-satisfied with the Persian Party,
voluntarily offered himself to the Service of the Turks; and having done them
some little Services, by being their Guide through certain difficult Passages,
he gained a confidence so far with them, as that designing to surprise a
quarter of the Enemy, they committed themselves to his Guidance and Conduct;
who having brought them into a narrow Passage, Fifteen thousand Turks killed in
an Ambush.
where an Ambush of the Enemy lay, he then turned his Coat, and fought against
the Turks, of whom 15000 were killed and taken in this Snare.

In short, all Matters of this War proceeded cross and unfortunate for the
Turks; for besides their unlucky Fights with the Enemy, their own Seditions in
the Camp were greater Mischiefs; Mutiny of the Soldiers.
for now enduring no longer these pungent Miseries, under the pretense of
wanting Pay, they cut in pieces the Treasurer of the Army, two Aga's of the
Spahees, and the Chaousbashee of the Janisaries.

This News arriving at Constantinople, when Morat was afflicted with a grievous
accession of the Gout, served to redouble his Pains; in which raving against
the Conduct of his Officers, he immediately deprived the Vizier of his Charge,
and ordained Biram Pasha, late Chimacam, to succeed him in his Employment.

The new Vizier immediately set forth the Horses Tail, A new Vizier sent to the
Army.
which is a signal of departure, with sound of Drums and Trumpets, making
Corban, which is a distribution of Mutton to the Poor, in diverse Places: His
Retinue was speedily equipped with such sumptuous Magnificence, that it looked
rather like the Train of an Ambassador, which intended to make Peace, than to
the Troops of a General, whose Business was nothing but Blood and Destruction.
And indeed Matters seemed to be inclining that way, the Persians having far
advanced in this Negotiation; for they wisely pondering the immense Force of
the Ottoman Empire, with which they were now contending, judged it the most
politic course to make Peace, under the auspicious Planet of their good
Fortune; for not knowing how long that might remain constant, they might, so
soon as the Wheel turns on the other side, be forced to accept Terms of less
Advantage than at present they might promise to themselves under their happy
Stars.

Wherefore a Proposition being made of sending an Ambassador to the Grand
Signior, A Persian Ambassador sent to the G. Signior.
he accepted of it; and accordingly arrived at Constantinople in the Month of
August, when the Vizier was scarce in the middle of his Journey. The Grand
Signior entertaining some real Inclinations to Peace, laid aside something of
his usual Grandeur and State, giving the Ambassador Audience in a few days
after his arrival; and as nothing mollisies the hard Mettle of a Turk's Spirit,
like a gentle Shower of Gold, and the emulgent softness of Rich Presents; so
Morat understanding of Gifts with which he came accompanied, afforded to the
Ambassador an easy Ear and a pleasing Countenance.

The Presents for the Grand Signior, besides those for the Court, were ^^ese
that follow.

Eight Indian Horses of great Price. Forty Dromedaries. An hundred and fifty
Meticals of Musk. As much Ambergriese made up in several Bags; all sealed up
with the King's own Seal. Thirty bundles of the best black Sables. Eight large
Carpets mixed with Gold and Silver; with diverse others of Silk, very rare and
precious. Many Pieces of the finest Linen to make Turbants. A great number of
the rarest Girdles. Porceline to a great value. Diverse Pieces of Satin and
Velvet, with Golden Flowers. Fifty Pieces of Silken Stuffs. Eight Bows of
excellent Work.
These Presents so well disposed and prepared the Mind of the Grand Signior
toward an Accommodation, that he bestowed a kind Aspect and gentle Words on
the Ambassador, so that all the World expected that a Peace would have ensued.

And indeed one might well have believed his Reality in this Intention, since
the ardent Passion he had to be revenged of Ragotski, availed more with him
than all other Considerations in the World. His Honor also called him to give
a stop to the Progress of the Moscovites, who had taken Asac; and the Tartars
and Cossacks gave some ground of Jealousy, that before long they designed some
Action on the Turkish Territories: the Reasons whereof we shall discourse in
this following Year.

We have already related, some Years past, on what Terms the Tartars stood with
the Turk, how they refused to accept that King which the Port recommended to
them, though the eldest and first of the true Line: how they fought and
overthrew the Forces which the Grand Signior sent to compel them to the
Election he desired; and this last Year, upon pretense of a War with Cantemir,
Troubles in the lesser Tartary.
they refused to send their Army against the Persian, as had always been
accustomary to do against the Enemies of the Sultan, whenever required.

The Pasha, Muftee, and Kadi of Caffa (which is the Grand Signior's Town in
Tartary) urged the Tartar Han to prepare and forward his Forces, according to
the Duty and Obligation which was incumbent on him; and enlivening their
Arguments with Reproaches of Cowardice and Ingratitude; so far provoked the
Han, that he caused them all three to be strangled.

Notwithstanding this high Provocation, the Grand Signior dissembled the
Injury, lest a due Resentment should raise them into an open Rebellion: and
dissembling an approbation of the Fact, as done with Reason and Justice, sent
to the Tartar Han a Sword and a Vest, as Signals of his Favor: And farther
suspecting, lest in prosecution of so sensible a Blow, the Tartar joining in
League with the Cossacks and Moscovites, should make himself Master of Caffa,
he prudently touched the Wound with a gentle Hand, offering to ordain such a
Pasha, as should be warranted with his Assent and Approbation.

The Tartar being overcome by such Lenitives as these, protested that he never
entertained other Thoughts, than to maintain his Faith and Allegiance
inviolable toward the Grand Signior; and that the Alliance he had made with
the Nogay Tartars, and the Forces now raised, were maintained with no other
Design, than to suppress the Rebellion and Insolence of Cantemir.

This Cantemir being a Person of a bold Spirit, and daring in all his Actions,
did oftentimes, by virtue of his own Authority, lead a strong Party to the
Field, being followed by the bravest and stoutest Soldiers of Tartary; for
which Reason being hated by the Tartar Han, Cantemir makes a new Colony.
and his Life often attempted, and his own Spirit not supporting a Subjection
to any other, he passed the Niester, and retired with his own Troops, and such
others as would follow him, into the Country of Budziak, near to Beliegrod and
Kilia, confining on the Frontiers of Moldavia; where he intended to plant and
form a new Colony and Government.

In a short time, diverse chief Captains being desirous to follow the Ensigns of
so famous a General, came in to him; and multitudes of People forsaking the
Sands and barren Rocks of Tartary, came crowding into this Country; that the
Plains of Budziak not being capable to contain them, they passed into Moldavia;
where incroaching on the Lands of the proper Inhabitants, gave a Jealousy as
if they intended to take possession of the whole Province.

The Poles being jealous of these ill Neighbors, which lay at the Gate of
their Country, ready to enter on all occasions, had made Provision in their
last Articles of Peace with the Grand Signior, that he should force them to
return, and urged that point by the Ambassador with all earnestness.

The Tartar Han also finding his Countries depopulated and weakened by so large
an Evacuation, made also his Complaints and Addresses to the Port. But the
Grand Signior looking on this Colony, as an increase of his Dominions, and to
be composed of such People whom Necessity must render obedient; and that they
could easily, at his Command, make Irruptions into Poland, Hungary, and
Transylvania, seemed deaf to all Applications in this Business; and as if they
were a People in whom he had no part, showed no concernment for them, though
secretly he promised them his Protection.

Hereupon Vladislaus King of Poland, being wearied with Delays, resolved by
force of Arms, to drive out this detestible Neighborhood: But the Tartar Han,
whom this Business more nearly concerned, being more speedy in execution than
the Poles, having raised an Army of thirty thousand Men, encountered Cantemir
with twenty thousand, He is overthrown by the Tartar Han.
and charged him so furiously, that he killed seven thousand of them on the
Place, and put the rest to flight, pursuing them through the Plains of Dobruc
on the other side of the Danube.

The Grand Signior, who had all this Time remained a Spectator of this Success,
began now to take the part of Cantemir, and severely to reprove the Proceedings
of the Tartar Han, for having disturbed Cantemir, whilst he was preparing to
serve him in the Wars of Persia. But the Tartar, having shaken off much of his
Respect and Reverence toward the Grand Signior, despised the Menaces which he
vented against him, and proceeded in his own Business, compelling his People to
return again to their Country, and to their Ancient Habitations. Morat being
forced to suffer what he could not remedy, summoned Cantemir, with all
diligence, to render himself at Constantinople; where being arrived, he was at
first regarded with a favorable Eye; but his Son soon after having in a
private Quarrel killed a Tartar near the Walls of the Seraglio, was for that
Fact justly strangled by Order of the Grand Signior; the day following,
Cantemir was also imprisoned, Cantemir put to death.
and in a short time underwent the like Fate with that of his Son.

During these Troubles, a Nephew of Cantemir feigning himself to be disgusted
with his Uncle, revolted to the Party of the Tartar Han, with no other than a
treacherous Design to take away the Lives of the two Brothers; the which he
compassed at a time of their hunting, when being far remote from their
Attendance, following their Game in untroden Paths, he set upon them with an
hundred Villains, The King of Tartary killed.
and perfidioufly took away their Lives. The News hereof was highly applauded
at Constantinople, and the Traitor extolled as a Person of mighty Courage and
wonderful Ingenuity; so that now different Counsels, and new Measures, were
taken concerning the Affairs in Tartary.

Bechir Gherry, Bechir Gherey ordained K. of Tartary.
Brother to those Princes of Tartary which were killed, was then at Jamboli, a
City in Thrace, retired thither under the Protection of the Grand Signior, for
fear and jealousy of Treachery from his elder. Brother. Morat caused him to be
brought to Constantinople, where he was sumptuously received, and conducted to
Audience by the Chimacam, who gave him the upper-hand, which is the Left
amongst Men of the Sword, as the Right is amongst Men of Learning or of the
Pen; for as the right Hand governs the latter, so the first is appendent to the
left Side.

The Bodies of the two dead Brothers were brought to Constantinople, where
fetulent or stinking, they were exposed to the sight of Morat; who to gratify
his own Humor of Revenge, caused them to be thrown into the Sea.

This good News from Tartary, Asac besieged.
was attempered with a worse from Asac, which the Moscovites and Cossacks had
besieged. This Town is situated at the Mouth of the River Tanais, upon the
declining of a Hill; it is in form foursquare, and may be about twelve hundred
Paces in Compass. Before it fell into the Hands of the Turks, it was a famous
Scale for all sorts of Merchandise, especially for Butter, Cheese, salt Fish,
Leather, Slaves, and other Commodities brought hither by Turks, Tartars, and
Moscovites. The Venetians when they addicted themselves more to Traffic and
Commerce than they do at present, took this Scale for their Way into Persia.
The Town was fortified with ancient Walls, flanked with capacious Towers, and
with a Castle which being in the middle, and on the side of the Water, divides
the Town, as it were, into two equal parts. The Garrison consisted not of above
three or four hundred Men; for being a place remote from powerful Enemies, it
fell not under any great jealousy, now was it deemed worthy of the Charge of
numerous Defendats.

The City being in this weak Condition, the Cossacks soon made themselves
Masters of it; Is taken by the Cossaks.
which after they had sacked and pillaged to the utmost, they considered it as
a place worthy of better Fortifications; and therefore applying themselves to
raise new Works, and repair the Old, they soon made it a Fortress of Strength
and Consideration. This happening at a time when the Turks were diverted by the
Persian War, the Cossacks enjoyed this new Conquest for the space of four Years
without molestation, until that in the Year 1641, it was recovered with much
Blood and Slaughter by the Arms of Sultan Ibrahim, as we shall hereafter
recount in the sequel of this History.

And now because the taking of this Place was the Original from whence the
Divisions and Civil Wars between the Poles and Cossacks derived their
beginning, and was the Occasion that the Cossacks revolted from their just
Obedience, to the Protection of the Turks; the Relation will not only be
curious, but a digression necessary to the clearer Light of the present History.

Vladislaus the Fourth King of Poland being wearied with constant Complaints of
the Robberies and Incursions made by the Cossacks upon the Turks, The Cause of
the Civil War between the Poles and Cossacks.
contrary to Articles and Treaties of Peace, was at length persuaded by his
Barons and Counselors, that the only Means to suppress the Violence of this
unruly People, was to disarm them; and taking away their Weapons of War, to
supply them, in lieu thereof, with the Shovel and Mattock, with Ploughts and
Pruning Hooks: by which industrious Diverversion, from a wicked Life of Blood
and Robbery, to honest Husbandry and lawful Arts of living, they might with
time be rendered useful to their own Prince, and capable of Faith and just
Communication with their Neghbours. It is not one Age past since these people
were called Cossacks, The Cossaks Country described.
derived, as is supposed, from Cosai, a word in their Language which signifies
a Goat, perhaps because of their Agility of Body, or because their Garments are
chiefly made of Goats Skins.

Pellibus and laxis arcent mala frigora bracchis,
Oraque sunt longis horrida tecta comis.
The Country inhabited by them, was at first on the Banks of the River
Boristhenes, about fifteen Leagues in length to the entrance into the Euxine
Sea, where it is reported, that Ovid was banished; and some say, that from him
a Village thereabouts called Ovidoua derives its denomination; and hereunto we
may afford the greater belief from one of his Elegies, in his Book De
Tristibus, which seems to describe this Country, and the fierceness of the
Inhabitants. Eleg. 8: lib. 5.

Quam legis a Scythica tibi venit Epistola terra,
Latus ubi aequoreis jungitur Ister aquis.
Mista sit hac quamvis inter Graecosque Getasque
A male placatis plus trahit ora Getis;
Sarmaticae major Geticaeque frequentia gentis,
Per medias in aquis itque reitque vias.
In quibus est nemo, qui non Coryton, and arcum,
Telaque vipereo lurida fell gerat.
Vox fera, trux vultus, verissima mortis imago,
Non coma, non ulla barba resecta manu.
At present the name of Cossacks, and their Country also, is of a far greater
extent than it was formerly; for they call now all such in Poland Cossacks,
that are light Horse armed with Bow and Arrow and Firearms: and their Country
since the late Commotions is measured from the farthest parts of the Palatinate
of Chiovia, for the space of and hundred and twenty Leagues on one side, and
the other of the Boristhenes, which comprehends likewise all the Country of
Vkrania. This Country was always inhabited by the most Warlike People of
Russia; for that being subject to the frequent Incursions of the Tartars,
necessary Defense, and constant practice in Arms, endued them with a Bold and
Martial Spirit.

Vkrania is a Country so fertile, that it may compare with the most fruitful
Soil in the World, producing such quantities of Corn, with little labor, that
the Husbandmen being made negligent by their abundance, produced with little
Toil, have leisure to apply themselves to Violence and Rapine. They have no
Wine, but use themselves much to Strong Water. Their Houses are not built of
Wood or Stone, but of Osiers, interwoven and daubed over with Earth and Lime;
so that they use no Nails or Iron: they have no Merchants unless in Kiow; nor
do they serve themselves of Physicians or Apothecaries. Their learned Language,
or the Tongue wherein they write, is the Sclavonian, anciently called the
Illyrian: so that in all things this People is rude and barbarous; and though
their manner of Government and Policy is not refined or methodically disposed,
yet nevertheless it is solid and of deep Foundation, appropriated to the nature
and disposition of that People.

This honest Design of King Vladislaus, to reduce this People to a just and an
industrious course of living, not agreeing with their Temper and Customs, they
rather resolved to leave their Country, and betake themselves to various
Fortunes; some of them passed into Moscovia to plant a Colony in those
uninhabited Parts: a Body of them, to the number of six thousand, joining
together, resolved to pass into Persia to offer their service unto that King;
and being on their Journey, as far as the Tanais, they encountered with a Party
of Moscovite Cossacks, who inhabited certain Islands of that River; with whom
entertaining Discourse, they understood that Asac might easily be surprised by
them, if they could agree to unite Forces, which together might compose a Body
of ten thousand Men: The Importance of the Place being well considered, it was
resolved, that the March into Persia should be shortened, and this City be
ordained for the ultimate End of their Travels and Place of Repose. According
to this counsel Asac being assaulted and taken, (as we have already intimated)
the Cossacks fortified it in the best manner that they were able, making an
Arsenal for their Boats and Saicks, whereby afterward they did much more
infest the Turks than before.

The other Cossacks who continued in their Country, being much persecuted by
the Polish Nobility, chose Kilminieschi for their General, (the Son of a Noble
Family in Lituania, but banished and degraded of his Honor for his Criminal
Offenses) and rebelled against the Government. At first not being able to
resist the Force of Poland, they retired within the Woods; but joining
afterward with other Cossacks, they issued forth at the beginning of the
Spring, beat the Poles, and carried away a considerable Booty. Afterward
joining with the Tartars, they made their Incursions as far as Zamosca, within
twenty Leagues of Warsaw; and so Matters continued with various Successes not
appertaining to this History. Only thus far it is pertinent to the Matter
discussed for us to have shown, That the Counsels of Poland were in a great
Error, when they resolved to change the Life, and alter the Humor of this
Warlike People, which being protected in their Privileges, and encouraged in
their Wars, would at all Times, as occasion served, have been ready to have
ejected great numbers of good Soldiers into the Ottoman Territories, and might
still have been conserved to balance the Power of the Tartars, which now daily
infest and ruin the Borders of Poland.

These People were like Ill Humors, which being vomited out into the Dominions
of the Turk, eased and made healthy the Body Politic of Poland; but being
conserved within the Stomach, caused Syncopes, Convulsions, and such
Commotions, as have of late Years shaken the whole Body of the Polish Kingdom:
and at length withdrawing themselves entirely from all Obedience, together with
that large Province of Vkrania, as they have weakened that Government; so now of
late years seeking protection from the Turk, have added to his Kingdom, and
enfeebled that of Poland.

When the News arrived first at Constantinople that Asac was besieged, the
Captain-Pasha going then to instate Bechir into his Kingdom of Tartary,
received Orders to relieve Asac, and if possible, to raise the Siege; but the
Succors coming too late, and the Town being taken, the loss thereof was not
esteemed important enough to divert either Thoughts or Forces from the Persian
War.

For now Morat resolving to presecute the War in Persia, Preparations for the
War in Persia.
which could not be successful without the united Power of his whole Empire,
conducted by his own Person, he resolved to make a second Journey into those
Parts, and with his own Hand to knock at the Gates of Babylon. To prepare and
dispose all matters in order hereunto, he in the first place countermanded his
Decree, which prohibited a farther increase of the number of Janisaries; for
now being desirous to augment his Army beyond the account of ancient Registers,
he opened the Janisaries Door, (as they call it) and enrolled six thousand more
into that Order.

To conserve still the Order of this Militia, he appointed Officers strictly
and severely to take the Decimation of the Christian Children in Europe, and
lest (as was usual) they should be corrupted by the Parents, who often give
Presents, whereby to blind the Eyes of the Ministers, that so they may oversee
their Children, or in lieu of the comliest and most fit for Service, accept of
the Sickly and Impotent, or such as are unworthy of the Bread and Education
given them by the Sultan, he most severely injoined this Service, and under a
thousand Menaces encharged the care hereof to be executed without Favor or
Partiality to any. He carefully reviewed the Books of the Timjar-Spahees,
countting the number exactly that every Country yields, and comparing them with
those mustered in the Field, he confiscated the Lands of those that wanted,
being forfeited for nonappearance: he would admit of no Excuse or Delay to the
Matter in hand. The Superintendant of the Ordnance but making a Scruple about
the Proportion of some Guns, as too weighty and unwieldy for so long a March,
lost his Life, for doubting or making a difficulty in what the Grand Signior
proposed or designed.

And that no Commotions at home might divert or call him back before his
Business was perfected, he encharged his Pasha's of the Frontiers to live
quietly with their Neighbors, and to be sure to give no occasions of
Complaint, or Cause for War during his absence; recommending to the prudence of
the Pasha of Silistria the care of composing certain Differences between the
Princes of Moldavia and Walachia.

Having secured Matters as well as he could at home, he ordered the Horse-tail
to be set forth at the gate of the Divan, and all Pasha's and Officers of the
Army did the like at their own Doors. His Troops began now to grow numerous;
the Spahees and Timariots appointed for the Guard of the Grand Signior's Tents,
together with other Cavalry, which hold their Lands under Service, amounted
unto two hundred thousand. From the hundred seventy two Chambers of Janisaries
he drew forth thirty thousand. From the Topgees or Gunners, whereof there are
no more than twelve hundred in their Chambers at Constantinople, yet make up
twelve thousand in other parts, he drew out three thousand for the present
Service. The Shepherds and Plough-men of Bulgaria made up twenty thousand;
which with Water-bearers, Smiths, Bakers, Butchers, and all other Tradesmen
which followed the Camp, were in vast Numbers: so that the whole Army, with the
Attendants belonging thereunto, were at a moderate calculation computed to
amount unto near five hundred thousand Men; whereof three hundred thousand were
fighting Men.

The Pestilence, which is the Epidemical Disease of Turkey, and which abates
the Numbers and Pride of that People, raged this Year greatly in
Constantinople, and in the parts of Romagnia; it entered into the Seraglio, and
amongst others, took away the only Son of the Grand Signior of two or three
Years old. This caused Morat to pass most part of the Summer at a Palace on the
Bosphorus, where he recreated himself with his drunken Companion the Persian
Traitor; and hereby he contradicted the Proverb, That Princes love the Treason,
but not the Traitor; for Morat it seems loved them both, entertaining this
Fellow in his Bosom: His Clothes, his Garb, his Horses, and Equipage, might
rival with that of the Sultan's; He took place of the Chimacam in all Public
Appearances; and what was most strange, he preceded the Mufti; which was a new
Form never before practiced, and would have afforded matter of Wonder and
Discourse, but that the World considered this Novelty, as a Method agreeable to
the extravagant Humor of the Sultan.

Amongst his Pastimes, nothing was more pleasing than some Divertisement acted
with Blood; he shot the Son of a Pasha with his Gun, for daring to approach
near the Walls of his Seraglio, supposing that he came with curiosity to
discover his Pleasures, The extravagant Pleasures and Cruelties of Morat.
and manner of voluptuous Recreations: For the same Reason he would have sunk a
Boat laden with Women, as it glided slowly by the Banks of the Garden. He would
himself behold two Thieves impailed, which were condemned to die for robbing
something out of his Seraglio. He commanded the Head of the Treasurer of Cyprus
to be cut off in his presence; as also the Master of his Music, for daring to
sing a certain Air which seemed Persian, and to praise the Valor of that
Nation. The Pasha of Temiswar he put to Death at a full Divan, for fighting
unfortunately against Ragotski.

To these severe Acts of Cruelty, which he called Justice, he added one not
unpleasant; A certain Greek called Stridia Bei, or Lord Oysters, who had been
Prince of Walachia, and one whom we have before mentioned, having, by his
oppression and harassing that People, amassed a considerable Sum of Money,
essayed a second time, by force thereof, to obtain the Principality; and making
his Offer and Request before the Grand Signior, he was heard with some railery:
At length the Grand Signior told him, That he was too proud and aspiring, and
therefore ordered the tips of his Nose and Ears to be cut off, telling him,
that that was to clip the Wings of his Ambition.

But that before his departure for Persia, he might consummate his Acts of
Tyranny, he practiced one upon his Brother, a Youth of Twenty two Years of Age,
of great Hopes, and good Endowments. He was conducted to the presence of his
Brother, at the Biram, to pay his Respects, as is usual at that Festival; and
having performed the Ceremony, he enlarged himself in high Praises and
Admiration of the Grand Signior's Generosity and Bravery; who for recovery of
Bagdat, was contented to expose his Person to the Inconveniences of a long
Journey, and the Dangers of a hazardous War, and that therein he equalled, if
not surpassed, the Glory of his Ancestors: Which courtly and rational manner of
Discourse did not please Morat, but rather administered Subject of Jealousy,
fearing that he knew too much; and that as he could Speak well, so he might Act
accordingly; wherefore the same Day he caused him to be strangled, to the great
Sorrow of the People, and detestation of his Abominable Tyranny: But to amuse
the Minds of the Multitude, and cease their Murmurings, he caused it to be
divulged abroad; that fourteen of his Women in the Seraglio were with Child:
which was all false, there remaining none of the Ottoman Race besides his
Brother Sultan Ibrahim, who was Weak, as well in Body as Understanding, and
whose Imperfections secured and compounded for his Life: And to suppress the
Discourse about his Brother's Murder, he changed it into a talk about his
Preparations for War, and his departure for Persia. Wherefore the Forerunners
and Harbingers of the Army being sent away with Laborers to repair Bridges,
and to level the Ways for the more easy passage of the Cannon. Morat passed
over to his Tents at Scutari, clothed in a Coat of Mail, and with a Headpiece
set with Precious Stones, and his Sargouch or Feathers clasped to it with
Buckles of Diamonds.

As he landed at Scutari, he was received by three Squadrons of Soldiers, each
Squadron consisting of four thousand Men well Armed, and richly Attired; the
Garments of one Squadron of which were provided at the Expense of the Grand
Signior, and of the other two at the Charge of his Favorite, and of the
Captain-Pasha: the latter of which presented to the Grand Signior thirty Purses
of Money, for bestowing on him the Honor to command that Gally which
transported him to the Asian Coast. The Ambassador sent from Persia was
detained at Constantinople until this time, and after the Turkish Fashion not
permitted to depart at his own liberty; but being now ordered to follow the
Camp, his Port and Quarters were assigned, that so he might be a Spectator of
that Tragedy which was now to be acted. All things were now disposed in good
Posture, with much Solemnity, in order to a March; the Conacks, or days
Journies, with their Places of Quarters, were laid out in an hundred and twenty
days of March from Scutary to Babylon, and seventy days of Otorack or Repose.
The Journies with the gross Body of such an Army could not be long; and the
joining with other Forces in the way, required leisure and time.

In short, the Horse, after the Turkish manner, having eaten their Grass and
been soiled, this powerful Army decamped from Scutari about the end of May. The
March of the Turkish Army.
The first day of Otorack or Repose was appointed at Ismit, where the Grand
Signior made a review of his Army; such as were Aged, and unable to endure the
Fatigues of a long March, he dismissed, giving them half Pay for their Lives,
with the Name of Otoracks, which is the same with Milites Emeriti among the
Romans: with exact Order therefore and severe Discipline, to which their fierce
Monarch had reduced them, marched this numerous Army; no Villages were abused,
nor Country People plundered, and all things were purchased with ready Money: And
the Grand Signior himself being rendered more gentle and tractable in the Field
than in his Seraglio, heard all Complaints, and distributed Justice with an
equal and impartial Hand.

In the mean time, at Coustantinople, due care was taken to keep things Quiet
and in Order; the Bostangibashee, like Lord High Chamberlain, had the Charge
committed to him of the Seraglio, and the Movables of it; he frequently made
his Rounds both by Sea and Land, punished those whom he found in Taverns; nor
would he suffer any Candles to be lighted after two hours in the Night. The
Chimacam, and the Captain-Pasha, likewise executed their Offices with all care
and severity in their respective Stations.

At this time, to the great dissatisfaction of the Greek Nation, Cyril the
Patriarch, Cyrillus the Patriarch strangled.
who had been in England, and greatly affected with the Discipline of our
Church, was deposed, imprisoned in the Seven Towers, and strangled: in his
place one Carfila was ordained Patriarch, and his Commission or Baratz obtained
from the Grand Signior at the expense of fifty thousand Crowns, one Moity
whereof was paid from Rome, the whole Design against Cyrillus being managed by
the Jesuits and other Religious living at Galata, who accused him before the
Turks, of keeping a secret Correspondence with the Moscovites and Cossacks; for
which losing his Life Carfila, a pretended Friend to the Roman Faction, was
instituted Patriarch.

The Grand Signior marching with his potent and numerous Army, all the World
remained at a gaze what the Issue should be of this mighty Enterprise; yet most
were of Opinion, that the Honor and Riches of the Ottoman Empire being now at
Stake, the War could not otherwise conclude than with the Conquest of Babylon.
All that could be feared, was some diversion by the Christian Princes; who
taking hold of the present Conjuncture, should enter the Frontiers with a
powerful Army, and thereby force the Sultan to return. But as to Poland, the
Jealousy soon vanished. When the News came of a Civil War between the Poles and
the Cossacks, and that ten thousand of the latter were slain in a Battle, this
Intelligence came most seasonable and grateful to the Port, expecting now a
Message from the Cossacks, desiring Succor in their Extremity; for such
Accidente as these have nourished the Turkish Interest, which has grown out of
the Civil Discords of Christian Princes.

By this means, as the Apprehensions of War by Land ceased, so there appeared
some Clouds of Storm at Sea; which doubtless might have produced a War with
Venice, and the Turks been at leisure to attend it; for sixteen Galleys
belonging to Algier, Tunis, and Biserta, The Pirates of Algier and Tunis infest
the Gulf of Venice.
well armed with Slaves and Soldiers, and provided sufficiently with Cannon,
Powder, and Bullet, Commanded by Ali Picenin, united together and formed a
small Fleet, with design to rove over the Adriatic Sea, and infest the Coast
of Italy. Their Intentions were to plunder the Riches of Loretto; but being
hindered by contrary Winds, from entering so high into the Gulf, they made a
descent in Puglia, and sacked all the Country of Nicotra, carrying away a great
Booty, with Slaves, and amongst them several Nuns which they prostituted to
their Lust; thence they passed over to the side of Dalmatia, and in sight of
Cataro took a Vessel, and made Prize of all Ships which they met in those Seas;
the Rumor of which made great noise over all Italy, the People exclaiming
against their Princes for suffering their Lives and Estates to remain subject
to the petty Force of a few Pirates. For the Vessels of Malta and Florence were
disjoined, and roving after purchase in the Archipelago, took little notice of
what was acted in the Gulf. The Spaniards, after their fashion, were slow in
Arming, and spent the Summer in Preparations, till the Pirates, laden with
Booty, were departed toward the Winter; so that none remained to take care of
Italy, and the Venetian Gulf, but Venice only, to whom the Dominion of those
Seas are rightly appropriated.

To suppress therefore the Insolence of these Pirates, the Republic set forth a
Fleet consisting of twenty eight Galleys and two Galleasses, under the Command
of Marin Capello, with Instructions to sink, burn, and destroy those Pirates,
either in the open Seas, or in Harbor of the Turks; for that by the Articles
of Peace, between the Grand Signior and the Venetians, it was agreed, That no
Port or Harbor of his should be privileged to afford entertainment or
protection to any Free-booter or Pirat of that nature.

It happened about that time, that the Malteses and Florentines crusing in the
Archipelago, had done great Mischief to the Turks in those Seas; to revenge
which, and to prevent farther damage, the Captain-Pasha sent Orders to these
Vessels of Barbary immediately to come to his Assistance; to which they were
now more easily persuaded; for being already laden with Booty and Spoils, they
contented themselves with a change of their Station. But to give a farewell to
those Parts, they first resolved to spoil, and plunder Lissa, alias Lesina, an
Island belonging to the Republic; but being overtaken by the Venetian Fleet in
their Voyage thither, near to Valona, a Port and Harbor belonging to the
Turks, they put themselves under the Defense of the Town and Castle, which
received them willingly to their Protection, notwithstanding all Articles and
Agreements to the contrary. The Venetian Fleet saluted the Castle without a
Shot, Capello blocks up the Pirates in Valona.
desiring, that according to the Capitulations of Peace, the Pirates might be
rejected, and commanded to abandon their Port: in answer hereunto the Turks
replied with a Shot, making known their Intentions to defend their Friends:
wherefore the Venetians retiring at some distance came to an Anchor, designing
to block up the Port. Many days had not passed before the Pirates endeavored,
by help of their Oars, and a gentle Gale, to make their escape; and being, with
the gray of the Morning, advanced without the Port, they were espied by the
watchful Venetians, who dividing their Fleet into two Squadrons, charged them
with high Courage; the Fight continued for the space of two hours, during all
which time the Castle of Valona fired at the Venetians, and shot down a Mast of
one of the Galleases, a Splinter of which wounded Lorenzo Marcello the
Commander; at length five of the Galleys of the Pirates being disabled, any many
of their People killed, they began to fly, and retire again under the
Protection of the Town; as also did the Venetians to their Place of Anchorage.

A distinct Advice of all Particulars being dispatched to Venice, the Senate
wrote to Capello, That since the respect which the Republic owes to the
Ottoman Court was not unknown to him, he should by no means make any attempt
against those Pirates upon the Land, but meeting them fairly at Sea, he ought
then to make use of all the valor and force he was able.

In the mean time the Duke of Medina las Torres, Vice-King of Naples,
dispatched an Express to Capello, with Letters applauding the generosity of the
Design, wherein he was now engaged for the Glory of his Republic, and the
Common Good of all Christendom, proffering to supply him with Refreshments and
Ammunition, and what else might supply his Occasions; expecting, that by such
Encouragement as this, he might be induced to Assault the Enemies in Valona,
without respect to the Grand Signior, or any Inconveniences which might arise
thereby. On the contrary the Governor of the Castle, and Kadi of the Town
wrote a Letter to Capello, putting him in mind, that he was within the Grand
Signior's Dominions, and that he should be careful how he offered any Violence
to those Places, which would certainly prove a Violation of the Peace, and be
the Original of an inevitable War.

Capello had now lain a whole Month before the Port, having all the time
injoied fair Weather, and a smooth Sea, against the hope and desire of the
Turks, who expected that by means of some Storm, the Enemy would be forced to
remove their Quarters to some secure Harbor, and thereby afford them an
opportunity to escape. He assaults them in the Port.
But Capello growing weary of such tedious Attendance, resolved to expect no
longer, nor yet to lose the present Advantage of rendering himself Master of the
Vessels of the Enemy: wherefore dividing his Fleet into several Squadrons, he
advanced near the Port, firing several Shot at the Tents of the Pirates, of
which one from a Galeass struck a Mosch; and arming with store of Men the
Galeots and Brigantines, they entered the Port, and to the astonishment and
vexation of the Turks, possessed all the sixteen Vessels, and brought them to
their Admiral: which though they had disfurnished of all their chief Booty, yet
their Cannon and Arms remained, of which there were twelve Pieces of great
Brass Guns, besides others of Iron, with diverse Falcons and lesser Arms.

The Intelligence hereof being carried to Venice, Orders were given, that all
the Vessels should be sunk in the Port of Corfu, excepting only the Admiral of
Algier, which was to be brought to the Arsenal of Venice, there to remain as a
Trophy of Victory, and for a perpetual Memory of this Glorious Achievement.
Howsoever this Exploit was variously interpreted at Venice, and approved, or
disproved, according to the diversity of Humors. The younger Men applauded it
as an Action of great Gallantry, excusing his Transgression of the Senats
Orders by a transport of Passion and Zeal toward his Country, and desire of
Glory. But the Senators, and Men of mature Judgments, highly resented this
Breach of their Orders, which as they are strictly Enjoined, so they expected
that they should be punctually Obeyed. That this action was a sufficient and
Just Cause alone to kindle a War, and that it was a matter intolerable, that a
single Citizen should of his own Head and Humor, presume to act such things, as
must necessarily involve the Public in a War, contrary to their Pleasure, and
in opposition to their express Commands. For which Crime and other subsequent
Defaults, Capello was afterward forced to justify himself, as will be
signified in the sequel of this History.

The Particulars of this Advice, were by an express Messenger dispatched to
Luigi Contarini the Bailo or Ambassador for the Venetians at Constantinople, a
Person of great Reputation and Esteem, having been conversant in the principal
Courts of Christendom, and employed for the space of seven years at Munster,
where he was Assistant with the Nuntio Chigi, afterward Alexander the 7th, in
the general Peace of Europe.

The Turks also receiving this News aggravated to them with all the foul
Circumstances imaginable, the Chimacam immediately summoned the Bailo to
Audience, and with an Angry Countenance began to exclaim: That taking advantage
of the Grand Signior's absence in remote Parts, the Venetians had, in a
perfididious and hostile manner, assaulted and destroyed the Fleet of Barbary,
which were his Subjects, and such as he had called to his assistance against
the Corsares of Malta and Ligorn. That being accidentally compelled by storm to
enter into the Port of Valonia, they were forcibly taken thence, and violence
offered to the Grand Signior's Port and Castle, by way of a manifest and open
Breach. If this presumption were grounded on the long distance of the Grand
Signior from these parts, the Venetians would do well to consider, how that
they provoke an angry Prince, and one who esteems neither Expense, Hazards, nor
Labors to complete his Revenge. If this were a design to divert the Grand
Signior's Arms from Persia, they would do well to consider, that the Sultan was
not so far advanced, but that he could turn a Current, if he pleased,
sufficient to drown, and in an instant to overwhelm the Dominions of Venice; or
could at least collect Forces from nearer parts able to revenge his Quarrel,
and vindicate his Honor from the Disdain and Scorn of such petty Neighbors.

Hereunto the Bailo or Ambassador made this Reply: That this Piratical People
was the same which the Year before had landed in Candia, and made spoil of the
Estates of the Inhabitants, and carried many of them into slavery; and not
contented with this Booty, they entered the Gulf, and penetrated into the very
Bowels of Italy, with design to Sack and Plunder the Island of Lissa, which was
under the Dominion of the Republic. That the Venetian General friendly saluted
the Castle of Valona, which was returned with several Shots from thence; that
had it been his intention to have attempted the Port in the beginning, he would
not have lain thirty seven days in expectation of the forthcoming of those
Pirates, it being only respect to the Grand Signior, which obliged him to that
attendance. At length being wearied, and provoked by the insolenee of that
People, he forcibly entered the Port, knowing, that by Capitulations with the
Grand Signior, it was agreed, That all Ports should be forbidden, and that to
these Pirates, unless they first gave Security and Caution not to injure and
make Prize of the Subjects of the Republic.

The Chimacam replied hereunto, That there were ten thousand Soldiers and
Slaves belonging to those Galleys, which had taken their Refuge in Valona; and
therefore he required the Venetians to permit them free passage into their own
Country, and to restore their Galleys, unless they intended to come to an open
Rupture with the Grand Signior.

The Chimacam also pressed more urgently for restitution of the Galleys, in
regard, that having advised the Grand Signior of this Disaster, he had at the
same time given him hopes, and almost assurance to believe, that by his
Negotiations he should recover them out of their Hands: But the Senate was of a
different Opinion; and therefore gave express Orders to their Officers of the
Marine Affairs, immediately to sink all those Vessels; that so the expectation
of the Turks being disappointed by an impossibility of recovery, might not, by
the rude Instances and Threats of Morat, oblige them to a dishonorable and an
undecent Restitution.

The News of this Misfortune made greater noise and disturbance in the Divan of
Algier than at Constantinople, The Algerines angry at this News.
that rude Rabble raved, and railed, and threatened, laying the blame sometimes
on one, then on another, being ready to come to blows amongst themselves; but
that being obliged, by order of their Divan, to keep their Thumbs within their
Girdles, they durst only express their Anger by Punches and Thrusts of their
Elbows. At length coming to cooler Terms, they charged all the Fault on their
Admiral Ali, and resolved to make Applications to the Grand Signior for
Redress, and Reparations on the Estates af the Venetians in his Dominions.

The News also hereof overtaking Morat in his March into Persia, The G.
Signior's Anger against the Ventians.
angered him to the Heart, and transported him to that heat of Indignation, that
he immediately ordered, that the Venetian Bailo, with all his Nation in the
Ottoman Dominions, should without exception, be cut to pieces; but the Great
Vizier, and his Favorite, suffering him for some time to vent the impetuosity
of his Fume and Rage without contradiction, gave a stop for thirteen days to
the dispatch of these fatal Orders; until taking him in a more gentle mood,
they persuaded him to change this Sentence of Death, to the imprisonment only
of the Bailo; and such care was taken, lest the News of a War with Venice
should fly into Persia, and thereby prejudice the Terms of Peace, that this
Accident was kept as a Secret, and communicated to none, but such as were
nearly concerned in the Government.

The Command for the Bailo's Imprisonment being arrived at Constantinople, he
was summoned to Audience by the Chimacam; and though at that time he was
exceedingly afflicted with the Gout, yet the Turkish Obedience to Imperial
Commands admitting of no Excuse, he was forced to an attendance; and being
brought in his Sedan, he was carried to the Chamber of Audience, where he
expected some time until the Chimacam came to him: in the interim being
entertained by some Aga's, whom the Chimacam had employed to sound him touching
the restitution of the Vessels; who finding by his Discourse that they were
sunk, without possibility of recovery, and that there could be no compensation
made for them, they returned with this Answer to the Chimacam: of which being
now informed, he came in, and having no farther to expostulate on this Matter,
produced the Grand Signior's Command for his Imprisonment, and kissing it
first, caused it to be road. The Bailo replied, That he was ready to submit,
The Venetians Bailo imprisonec.
being not only willing to suffer Imprisonment, but also Martyrdom, accompanied
with the severest Pains, for the sake of his Prince and his Country.

To soften and mitigate Matters, the other Christian Ambassadors then resident
at the Port, had made Arz to the Grand Signior, wherein, with all reverence and
respect, they offered themselves for Mediators in this Difference, engaging
themselves, but not the Parole of their Princes, for the Person of the Bailo,
that he should not fly from the Port, nor yet refuse any reasonable Terms by
way of Accommodation. This Mediation of the Ambassadors, seconded with some
Presents from the Bailo to the Turkish Ministers, so facilitated Matters, that
the Bailo at first was conducted to the The Chimicam's Steward.
Kahya's Chamber, and afterward was confined to his own House in Galata,
guarded by four Chiaouses, with free Liberty to all Visitants whatsoever.

There was now no other Rumor or Discourse in Constantinople, but of a War
with Venice, so soon as that with Persia was concluded: And in the mean time
the Grand Signior gave Orders, that ten Galleys should be built in his own
Arsenal at his Charge, and presented to the Barbarouses, with condition that
they should stay until the Spring, and accompany his Fleet to Sea. But Ali
Picenin the Admiral suspecting that this was only a Snare to engage him and his
Men for ever in the Grand Signior's Service, refused the Obligation, and set
two Galleys on the Stocks for his own Account.

Advice of the Bailo's Confinement being come to Venice, with a Report of the
Passion and Rage of the Sultan, they expected nothing more than a War with the
Turk, which they communicated to all Christian Princes, requesting their
Succors and Assistance against the common Enemy. These Addresses produced
rather Compassion of their Case, than substantial Contributions: Pope Urban
himself giving them great Assurances of some help from the Ecclesiastical
Revenues, besides Processions, Masses, and Benedictions for their good Success,
in as great a Number as they could desire: Notwithstanding which due Care wast
taken to make ready and provide against all Encounters. Letters were wrote to
the Captain General in the Levant, to make due Preparations against the Enemy:
Sixteen Galleys were armed out of Candia, to which were joined other Galleasses
under the Command of Antonio Pisani and Sebastiano Veniero: Soldiers were
levied in every Place, and all Garrisons provided with Ammunition and Victuals,
and reinforced with Numbers of an Auxiliary Militia. Howsoever it was not the
Business nor Advantage of the Venetians, to make a War with the Turks, but
rather, whilst they feared the worst, and made Provisions against the utmost
Extremities, they endeavored to enter into Treaties of Peace, and to qualify
the hot Spirit of the Grand Signior with the gentle Lenitives of fair Words,
and proffers of making Atonement with the Sacrifice of Gold and other Presents:
In order unto which they wrote a Letter to the Grand Signior to this Effect.

That being provoked by the Insolence and frequent Robberies of the Pirates of
Barbary, who did not esteem Faith or Obedience to his Majesty, nor the Commands
which he had often fent to restrain them, they were induced, out of natural
Defense of themselves, to chastise and correct them; but as this was acted
without intention to disoblige his Majesty, so they were ready to maintain and
cultivate that ancient Friendship and Correspondence which was ingrafted on the
firm Root of his Glorious Progenitors.

Morat, though he received this Letter in an huff, and gave an Answer to it
with Disdain, which breathed nothing but Threats of Revenge, and total
Destruction; yet he sent it by an Express of his own to Venice, couching
something within the Terror of his Words, as if there was place left for an
Accommodation, if the Venetians knew what Salve was to be applied to obduct the
Skin of this bleeding Wound. The Venetians quickly apprehended, that Gold was
the only Remedy, of which they were ready to contribute freely; since they
could make no better a Purchase with their Money than Peace, not could make a
better Bargain than with such a Sum as would serve only to make the first
Preparations of War, to evade all Hazards, Troubles, and Calamities by a happy
and safe Conclusion of Peace. The which notwithstanding took no Effect, until
the Return of Morat from Persia; and therefore we shall defer Discourse thereof
to its proper place.

Amurat marched now at the Head of a formidable Army, Morat marches to Persia.
clothed in the Habit of a Janisary, to render himself acceptable to the
Militia, whom having subdued by Rigor and severe Discipline, he would now
oblige by Courtesy and fairer Treatment: With Courage and great Patience he
marched through sandy Deserts and unfrequented Places; and being the first who
offered to expose himself to Dangers and Sufferings, the Soldiery followed
willingly his Example, esteeming no Attempts either hazardous or tedious, in
which they saw themselves preceded by their Valiant General. In this March he
was overtaken by one who rode hard to demand Mostaluck, which is the Reward of
good News for the Birth of a Son, of which one of his Sultana's was delivered
at Ismit: the Messenger was secured until the News was confirmed; which being
afterward turned to the Birth of a Daughter, the poor Man suffered Death,
being cruelly impaled for his unadvised haste and excess of officious Respect
toward his Ptince.

The Great Vizier met his Master at Iconium with a moderate Equipage, to give
more Room for the Quarters of the Army, and rendering himself more gracious in
his Eyes by a Present of fifty thousand Dollars, he was again remunerated with
a Cemiter and a Vest of Sables, which are the usual Signals of the Sultan's
Favor.

All Asia was now in Arms, and the Princes and great Men came in to perform
their Duty, accompanied with their Forces and Attendance: Only Complaints were
made of a certain Shegh, A Shegh rebels.
Santone or Preacher belonging to the Mountains of Anatolia, who had refused to
do Homage; or serve in the War: He was one, who by a feigned Sanctity had
acquired a great Reputation amongst his People; and having declared himself to
be the Mehedy, or the Mediator, which, according to the Mohammedan Doctrine, is
to fore-run Antichrist, for reducing all the World to one Unity of Faith: He
had persuaded his People, that he, and they under him, were by Privilege of
his Office, exempted from all Taxes, Contributions, or Impositions by any
Secular Power whatsoever. The Grand Signior who could not understand or believe
this Doctrine, presently detached a strong Body with some Cannon under Command
of the Captain-Pasha (who, as we have said, was to accompany the Grand Signior
in the War) to confute the Principies of this Rebel, and to reduce him to
Obedience. These Forces being entered on his Dominions, Proclamation was made to
the People, that they should deliver up their Impostor into the hands of
Justice; which if they refused to do, then Fire and Sword was to be their
Portion, He is overcome and punished.
and Destruction to extend even unto their Children of seven years of Age. This
terrible Denunciation of the Sultan's Sentence struck all the People with cold
Fear and Amazement; howsoever the Shegh availing himself on certain Prophecies,
which he interpreted in his own Favor, adventured to stand a shock with the
Grand Signior's Forces; but being overcome by them the Shegh was taken alive
and carried to the Grand signior; who having given a stop to his March at
Iconium, until the end of this Business, he condemned him to be flead alive;
and in this Guise being a horrid Spectacle to all Beholders, he was carried
upon an Ass to the Wheel, on which he seemed to endure the Remainder of his
Punishment without any sensible Touches or Pangs in the Torments.

This Success being attained, Morat proceeded in his March, and passing through
Alexandretta or Scanderone, he was there saluted by the Guns of all the English
and Dutch Ships then in Port, and presented by the Merchants and Consuls,
especially by the Venetian called Marco Foscolo, whose Presents were computed
to amount unto the Value of ten thousand Dollars. Thence he proceeded to
Antioch, where he refreshed his Army for a few days, observing the Antiquities
of that Place. At Aleppo he was met by the Pasha of Grand Cairo, who brought
with him a rich Tribute, accompanied with an Army of twenty four thousand
Soldiers, all choice Men well armed and well clothed; at the same Place also
the Forces of Palestine joined with him, so that his Army was now increased to
a vast Number. Proceeding forward new Sangiacks came in daily belonging to the
Countries through which they marched, and a strong Party of Tartars despairing
of being able to act any considerable Matter against Asac, offered themselves
to the Service of the Grand Signior.

The King of Persia entered the Field at the Head of an hundred and twenty
thousand Horse; The Persian Army dares not give Battle to the Turk.
but being inferior in Force, made only use of them to reinforce his Garrison
of Bagdat with an Addition of thirty thousand Men; which now being well
provided, he judged that the Force within, and the Strength of the Place would
be able to endure a long Siege, and with time weaken, if not destroy the vast
numbers of the Turks, of which there were former Examples: With the rest of his
Forces he returned to encounter the Great Mogul, who (as we have said) promised
Morat to assist him in this War, and attack the Persian on the other side of
his Dominions, which served for an advantageous Diversion to the Turk. This was
the Reason that no memorable Battles succeeded in the Field, there being none
of greater Note than a Fight which Quinan Pasha had with two thousand Persians
belonging to Revan, with whom accidentally encountering, he killed fifteen
hundred of them on the Place, and took the rest Prisoners, which being five
hundred in number were brought before Morat, and all barbarously put to death
by him.

During the time of this March, Morat often exercised himself in Feats of Arms,
to show his strength of Body and dexterity of Hand; amongst other things
wonderful to the Soldiers, he pierced a Suit of Arms of Musket-Proof, with a
Dart, called by them a Gerit, thrown from his Hand; for evidence of which, the
Armor is placed on one of the Gates of Aleppo, with an Inscription under it.

About the Beginning of the Month of August the Turkish Army passed the River
Euphrates, The Turks pass the River Euphrates.
by means of a Bridge, which was not so well built, but that it sunk under the
weight of Horses, Camels, and Baggage, by which Disaster many perished in the
Water, which great Rains had swelled above the Bounds of its Banks. As this
numerous Army proceeded, so all Petty Princes applied themselves to perform
their Homage; amongst which one Tarpos a King of the Arabs came with his Wife,
Mother, and Son to prostrate himself before the Sultan: He was entertained in
the Tent of the Favorite, who being always in company with ^^^at was never
suffered to separate from him, and his Tent, more for Ostentation, than to
serve his occasion. Tarpos being admitted to Audience, was received with
Respect and a favorable Countenance, and presented with a Vest of Cloth of
Gold lined with Sables, and a small Purse of Gold: In recompense whereof the
Arab Prince returned certain choice Horses and two Leopards. In like manner the
Georgians and Mengrelians, who are Tributaries to Turk and Persian, and
commonly incline to the strongest side, whose Nations we have described in the
present State of the Ottoman Empire, would not be wanting at this time to bring
their Tribute of eighty thousand yards of Linen-cloth, which they pay every
three year, with some Children of both Sexes chosen out of the comeliest and
most healthful amongst them.

At Mosul the Army lay encamped for some time, The Turkish Army at Mosul.
where was a general Rendezvous and Confluence of People from all Parts, and
every thing ordered and modelized for a War. Severe Discipline was kept amongst
all, Offenders were Impaled, Flead alive, their Bowels ripped out, and thrown
into the public Ways: Nor did Takers of Tobacco escape with less Punishment
than the rest. In the mean time Wine was forbid to his whole Camp, unless to
himself and his Favorite, being a Royal drink; and when the chief Physician
commended the admirable virtue of Opium, advising Morat to use it in the place
of Wine, he enjoined him to make his Words good by his own Example, and thereby
forced him to take so much, that he was overcome, and died by swallowing too
great a quantity.

From Mosul the Army marched in due order to Babylon, where the Great Vizier
arrived with thirty thousand Men about the 19th of October: But by reason of
the great weight of Artillery, and the many Impediments which attend such vast
numbers, the Grand Signior came not thither till the 5th of November, and on
the 9th the whole Turkish Army presented it self before the Walls of Babylon.

Babylon the ancientest City of the World, The Description of Babylon, or
Bagdat.
reported to be built by Nimrod on the Banks of the River Euphrates, and
afterward beautified and enlarged by Semiramis the Wife of Ninus, is recorded
in History for the vastness thereof to be one of the seven Miracles of the
World. Afterward the furious Inundations of the River, and the Iron Teeth of
devouring Time, and the subjection thereof to the Macedonian Empire, did much
eclipse the Glory of that City, and caused Seleucus Nicanor, one of Alexander's
Captains, to build a new one where the Tigris and Euphrates meet, forty Miles
more Northwards than the old Babylon, which he therefore called Seleucia after
his own Name. In the Year of our Lord 753, Abugiafer Almansor, an Arab King,
enlarged this City to the Eastern side of the Tigris, as being less subject to
the Inundations of the River, giving it the Name of Badgat, or the place of
Gardens; but his Son Almolied being more pleased with the Western side,
encouraged People to build the stateliest Palaces and best Fabrics near the
place where he delighted to keep his Court, so that the River Tigris divided
the City. The which with the Country thereabouts was subdued by Solomon the
Magnificent; and afterward in the Year 1625; it was recovered by Abas King of
Persia, until at length in this of 1638. it was vanquished by the mighty Force
and Prowess of this Magnanimous Sultan, as we shall now understand.

The numerous Troops of the Ottoman Army covering all the Plains, Bagdat
besieged.
a General Council of War was called of the Chief Commanders of the Janisaries
and Spahees, especially of such who had been practiced in the Sieges of the
strong Fortresses in Hungary. After some Debate and long Consideration, it was
agreed, That the City should be battered in three Places. One Battery of twelve
Pieces of Cannon commanded by the Great Vizier was to be erected against the
Bright Gate; the second against the Dark Gate of ten Pieces of Cannon, under
the Command of the Captain-Pasha: and a third of eight Pieces directed against
the Gate of Persia, under the Government of Chusaein Pasha Beglerbei of
Anatolia. The Grand Signior in the mean time habited like an ordinary Soldier,
that he might be the less exposed to Danger, visited all Posts and Places,
encouraging them with his Words and Presence, protesting that he would not
change his Clothes for ever in any place but within the Walls of Bagdat. In the
space of three days the Trenches were opened, the Batteries raised, and the
Cannon planted; and Morat having made Korban, gave fire to the first Cannot
with his own Hand, as he had brought the first Basket of Earth to raise the
Works. The Defendants within consisted of eighty thousand fighting Men, with
which they made frequent Sallies of four and five thousand Men at a time, who
being retired, were again seconded by another of the like Number, which put the
Turkish Camp into much Confusion, and into danger of having their Trenches
levelled, and their Cannon spiked; but the Turks valiantly fighting, the
Slaughter proved bloody on both sides; and being guided rather by the Bravery
of their Courage, than by Art or Experience in in War, they carried their Works
forward to the very Brink of the Ditch, having an Italian and a Candiot for
their chief Engineers; who though they were not Persons of that Ability, as our
modern Times have produced, yet they were such, as for want of better, served
the present occasions, where force and Numbers, with small Additions of Art,
were the most available. For in this Siege the Sword was more exercised than
the Spade or Mattock, and there was more need of Arms than Works; for the
constant Sallies kept the Turks always watchful and employed, and perpetually
disturbed them, until at length they were forced with great Labor to raise a
high Circumvallation, with a very deep Ditch, defended by several Redoubts;
whereby the Besieged being kept in, their Numbers decreased by former Sallies,
and their Courages abated by despair of Relief, they began to grow cold in the
Acts of Bravery, and to reserve their Men for the ultimate and last Efforts of
Defense. In the mean time the Turks plied their Batteries so hotly, that in a
few days the Walls were laid open almost fifty paces wide. In this Condition
the Defendants having no other Refuge than some small Retrenchments, which they
had made during the Siege, were exposed to the open Force of the Enemy. For now
the Turks having filled up the first and second Ditches with Sacks of Wool,
Faggots, and other Rubbish, crowded in vast Numbers to enter the Breach, which
the Persians defended as stoutly with Stones, Bullets, Artificial Fires, and
all Instruments of Death, which fell like Showers of Hail on the Heads of the
Enemy. The Great Vizier signalizing himself above all by his undaunted Courage,
commanding with his Hand and Voice, was unhappily shot by a Musket-bullet, and
fell on the heaps of the dead, amongst whom there is no distinction between the
common Soldier and the bravest Captain. This Fight within the Breach continued
for five days, where both sides fighting like Men in despair, the dead Bodies
lay in heaps, and Blood was stagnated like a Pool to wade thorough. At length
the Numbers of the Turks prevailing, commanded now by Mustapha the
Captain-Pasha, entered the Town by force of Arms on the twenty second of
December about the time of Sunset, when the Royal Standard of the Turks was
planted in this City. Howsoever twenty four thousand of the Persians remaining
still alive, and united in a Body, capitulated for Quarter, otherwise
threatening not to die unrevenged: Pardon, and Quarter for their Lives was
readily granted, on Confidence of which the Persians threw down their Arms, and
submitted to the Public Faith, or the Sultan's Clemency. Bagdat taken.
But the Grand Signior afterward considering, that the granting Quarter at
Revan had been the cause of the Loss of the City, he repented him of his
Promise, and gave Order to the Janisaries most inhumanely to open a Torrent a
Blood, and make a barbarous Massacre of those who had newly thrown down their
Arms at his Feet, not sparing either Woman or Child, either Sex or Age; the
which Slaughter, like a Work of Darkness, was acted in the Night by the light
of Torches and Lanthorns, and appeared a horrid Spectacle to all, especially to
the Persian Ambassador, who being conducted like a Prisoner in the Camp, was a
sad Spectator of his Countries Destruction on the horrid Theater of its Capital
City.

So soon as Bagdat was taken, Morat dispatched away Posts immediately with the
News into all Parts, and wrote a Letter with his own Hand to the Chimacam,
ordering a Dunalma or Feast of Thanksgiving, and rejoicing for the space of
twenty Days; during which time no Business was to be acted, the Houses were to
be adorned both without and within with the best Furniture, and every House was
to set forth Lights, Torches, and Fireworks agreeable to the Condition and
Ability of the Person. The People exclaimed hereat as too great an Expense, and
the Vacation from Business seemed too long for those who lived by their daily
Labor. The chief Ministers and Grandees evidenced external actions of Joy, but
inwardly feared and trembled, suspecting that the fierce and cruel Humor of
their Sultan would be elated, and rendered more tyrannical and untractable by
Success and a favorable Fortune. The Christian Princes received this
Intelligence like bad News, and as an Alarm to awaken then from the easiness of
Peace, to expectations of War: For War with Persia was like an Ulcer in the
Bowels of the Turkish Empire, which gangreen'd and consumed the Strength and
Marrow of their Power; which now being cured, and the Body Politic rendered
healthy by such a seasonable Success, would convert it self to Enterprises
pernicious and dangerous to the neighboring States.

After the Conquest of this City, Morat gave out, That he resolved to procced
with his Army into Persia, and to enter the Walls of Spahan; but having some
indispositions of Health upon him, and recalled by the charming Letters of a
Favorite Mistress, whom he had left at Diarbechir, he inclined to return again
to Constantinople. Wherefore mustering first his Army, he found that it was
abated near an hundred thousand Men, two thirds whereof being killed in the
War, the rest perished by the Pestilence, and other Diseases and Maladies
incident to Camps; a great part of the Slaughter fell on the most veterane
Soldiers of the Janisaries and Spahees, of which many of the Chief being
slain, their Lands and Revenues returned to the Grand Signior, and gave him
both Opportunity and Ability to reward many with such Offices and Gifts as came
by the Death and Fall of other Commanders. Thus the Captain-Pasha, whose Valor
had rendered him Famous, was made Great Vizier in the place of him that was
slain, and the Persian Favorite was constituted Captain-Pasha; and though many
repined at this Advancement, as conferred on a Stranger, and a Person without
Merit, yet the Grand Signior considered him as one whose Experience in that
Country, and the Information he had given him of the Situation and Strength of
Babylon, had made abundant Compensation for the Favor and Honor he had
bestowed upon him.

The Grand Signior having left a Garrison of thirty thousand Men in Bagdat,
dispatched the Great Vizier with a considerable Army to penetrate far into the
Country of Persia. And having now released the Persian Ambassador, giving him
liberty to return to his Master, wrote by him this braving Letter.

I That am Lord of Lords, and Conqueror in the parts of Arabia, Persia, and
Greece: King that Commands with eminent Rule in the World, exalted by Divine
Assistance to the Empire of the Universe; the most Invincible Possessor of the
White and Black Seas, and of all the Cities and Fortresses which encompass
them. Lord of the Divine and Prophetic Temple, that is, of Mecha and Medina,
as also of Jerusalem, Aleppo, Damascus, and of all those Holy and Venerable
Countries, of Grand Cairo, Salutiferous Babylon, and of Van, of Ethiopia,
Balsora, and the Lesser Asia; of all the Countries of the Curds, Georgians, and
Tartars; of Moldavia, Walachia, and universally of all the Provinces and
Regions of Greece and Anatolia. And in sum, Supreme Lord of the Seven
Climates, the Victorious and Triumphant King in the Service of God Sultan
Amurat Han, to the Valiant Sof^, to whom may God give Peace, if he deserve it.
This Imperial Letter worthy of Obedience being come to thee, Be it known unto
thee, That the Ambassador which Thou did send to my happy Port with desires
of Peace, I have detained until this time in which I have subdued Bagdat, by
means of the keen Edge of my Invincible Semiter. If Thou desire Peace,
surrender those Provinces which belong to the Dominions of my Victorious
Predecessors, into the Hands of my Beglerbeys, who are now Marching at the Head
of my Victorious and Inexpugnable Army: Otherwise expect me next Spring with my
Troops more numerous than the Sands of the Sea, within the Bowels of thy
Dominions; where I will appear on Horseback to unkennel Thee from the Caverns
wherein thou now lurkest, not daring to manage those Arms, which are unworthily
girt to thy Side. That afterward shall succeed, which was determined from all
Eternity. Peace be to him who directs his ways aright.


This Letter being dispatched, the Grand Signior recalled the forty thousand
Men which he had lent, from the Service of the Great Mogul, which he quartered
about Bagdat to hinder the Attempts of the Persians, in case they should design
to pursue him in the Rear, and disturb his return into Europe. By reason of the
Rigor and Extremity of the Winter, and a certain Defluxion which falling on
his Nerves, made him something Paralytical, The Grand Signior returns to
Constantinople.
the Grand Signior departed not from Bagdat until the 15th of April, and then
for recovery of his Health, and to soil the Horses by the way with convenience
of Grass, short Days Journeys were appointed.

The Grand Signior's Indisposition increasing, with some cold and shivering
Fits, gave the first Symptoms of a Fever; but afterward it plainly appearing
to be a paralytical Distemper, suspected by the Physicians to end in an
Apoplexy, it was rumoured abroad, that Morat was dead; but it was whispered
with such Caution, as if they had feared lest the Grand Signior would have
overheard them, and risen from his Grave to punish their secret and inward
Joy. Being somewhat recovered from the last Accession of his Palsy, the Humor
fell into his Legs, and swelled so much, that he could scarce sit upon his
Horse; howsoever he hastened as fast as he could to Constantinople to disprove
and confute the falsity of that Report concerning his Death.

In the mean time it is not to be expressed with what Fear and Terror the
Chimacam and other great Ministers of State expected the return of their
formidable Prince, not knowing where the Thunderbolt of his cruel Disposition
would strike, until at length it fell on the Head of the poor Sultan Mustapha,
whose weakness, as it rendered him unable for Government and Command, so it made
him stupid and insensible of Death.

At length on the 10th of June the Grand Signior arrived at Constantinople: The
Grand Signior's Entry into Constantinople.
The Favorite Soltana, which had accompanied him to the War, passed by Water
from Ismit attended with six Galleys, and took her Lodging the first Night of
her arrival at a small Chiosk or House of Pleasure under the Wall, so as to
make a magnificent Entry the Day following. Her Coach was covered with Cloth of
Gold, and the Spokes of the Wheels were gilded, and the Wheels shod with
Silver; she was followed by twelve Coaches, and the Mufti, Pasha's, Kadees, and
other Officers went before to conduct her to the Seraglio. The Grand Signior,
who arrived the same Day, attended with fifty six Galleys, made not his solemn
Entry until two Days after, being performed with all the Ceremony, State, and
Magnificence which could be contrived. The Grand Signior in his own Person
appeared in the Persian Habit, with a Leopard's Skin thrown over his Shoulders,
after the manner of a Kausee (as they call them) or a brave huffing Champion,
having his Stirrup attended with twenty two of the chiefest Nobles, whom he had
reserved at Bagdat, purposely to lead in Triumph when he made this Entry. The
Treasure brought to Constantinople, was landed at the Seraglio out of ten
Galleys, and calculated to amount to a greater Sum than that which was carried
from thence; for besides the Riches taken in the Plunder of Babylon, seizure
was mad in diverse places of the Estates of Pasha's and other Great Men, which
by Death, or for Crimes, escheated to the Grand Signior.

After the Grand Signior's Departure out of Persia, little of Action succeeded,
as if by mutual Agreement, a Truce or Cessation of Arms had been contrived. The
Persians desired a Peace, because they were enfeebled and tired with the War:
The Turks had regained their Honor by the Conquest of Badgat; and being
unwilling to lose it by change of unconstant Fortune, and longer consume their
Riches and Men in a tedious and remote March, were attending to receive
Propositions of Peace first offered by the Persian. To effect which the Great
Vizier, who was left at Badgat to command the Army, intimated to the Governors
of the Frontiers, that a proffer of Peace should be accepted; An Ambassador
sent from Persia to the Grand Signior.
which being made known to the King of Persia, he immediately dispatched an
Ambassador to the Grand Signior to propose Terms of Accommodation. The
Ambassador being arrived at Constantinople, was grateful and acceptable to
all, and his Day of Audience appointed after the usual manner on the Pay-day of
the Janisaries, when the Floor of the Divan is covered with Sacks of Money;
before the Door of the Chamber of Audience stood the Persian Captives all
clothed in rich Vests. The Ambassador being conducted to the Royal Presence
with the usual Ceremonies (of which we have given an Account in another place)
was received by the Sultan sitting upon a Saffaw covered with Crimson Velvet,
embroidered with Pearl; his Turbant was encompassed with a Chain of Diamonds,
clothed with a rich Vest lined with Sables; he cast no Pleasantness of Aspect
on the Ambassador, but beholding him with a fierce and scornful Look, received
the Letter in a kind of careless Disdain, behaving himself in every Motion, as
if he neither esteemed the King, nor his Ambassador; or as if the Persian had
been wholly conquered by him, had sent to beg Peace, and Pardon for his Life:
The Ambassador was soon dismissed from his Presence; and matters being
referred to the Negotiation of the Chimacam, no other difficulty arose besides
the Dispute concerning Revan, A Peace concluded.
which at length was agreed by another Ambassador sent to the Vizier on the
Frontiers to remain unto the Persian, as Bagdat was confirmed to the Turk: And
so Peace was without long Debate clapped up; the Grand Signior, by reason of his
Indisposition which increased upon him, being not inclinable to trouble his
Head with the Burden of Business.

Peace being thus concluded with Persia, there appeared a perfect Sunshine and
fair Weather in the Ottoman Court, neither Dissensions at home, nor Wars abroad
troubling the Quiet and Repose of the Sultan: Until some Differences happening
between the Princes of Moldavia and Walachia exhaled the first Cloud of
Disturbance. At that time Lupulo was Prince of Moldavia, a Person of evil
Principles, covetous, and unjust. Matthew was Prince of Walachia, a good Man,
zealous for the Christian Religion, and one who administered equal Justice to
his People. Lupulo not, contenting himself with his own, but desirous also of
his Neighbors Possession, Troubles in Moldavia and Walachia.
made instances to the Port to have the Principality of Moldavia conferred upon
his Son, alleging that thereby he should be better enabled to balance the
Power of Ragotski in Transylvania, and on all occasions be rendered more
serviceable to the Grand Signior's Designs and Interest: And seconding this
Proposition with a Present of fifty thousand Dollars to the Chimacam, and
promise to increase the annual Tribute, he obtained the Chimacam's Friendship,
at whose Instance the Grand Signior was persuaded to write unto Matthew to
surrender up his Province into the hands of the Son of Lupulo; declaring, That
it having been accustomary to change the Princes of those Countries every three
years, he ought after an Enjoyment of above seven years to content himself with
a quiet and voluntary Resignation, unless he would desire to draw upon himself
a Ruin by the Anger and Displeasure of the Sultan. Matthew having no Posterity,
resolved not to surrender his Government but with his Life; and having a
particular Animosity against Lupulo, could by no means incline his Mind to make
his Enemy happy with the Spoils of his Estate. Wherefore having obtained
Assistance from Ragotski, he resolved to withstand the Forces of young Lupulo,
and engage with him: And being ready to mount on Horseback, and begin the
Battle, he first dispatched an humble Message to the Grand Signior, acquainting
him, That he was ready at his Command to resign his Principality into the Hands
of the meanest Greek his Majesty would appoint; who being the Source of all
Equity and Justice, he hoped that he would not oblige him to such Terms as
would raise his Mortal Enemy upon his Ruin; a Man so intent to his own
Interests, and so unconscionable to compass them, that all late Revolutions,
Wars, and Commotions have been raised either by him, or by his Instruments.

This Letter being received and read by the Grand Signior, was seconded in a
few hours after, with News of the total Defeat of young Lupulo; which put the
Grand Signior so much into choler, that he immediately committed the Chimacam
to the seven Towers, for being the Projector and Author of this Counsel. It was
supposed however, that Morat's Anger would not proceed to that degree, as to
extend to his Life; but being informed, that he was rich, and that he was
possessed of two Millions of Dollars, which lay by him in ready Money, it was
concluded, that so vast a Wealth could not in a short time be honestly gained;
which appearing as an undeniable Evidence and Testimony of his Violence and
Oppression, the Grand Signior made no Difficulty to pass the Sentence of Death
against him, The Chimacam put to Death.
nor to condemn the Money to his own Exchequer: His Office was given to Sinan
Pasha, and the Principality confirmed unto Matthew.

During all this Time, the Quarrel which the Turks conceived against the
Venetians, for violating their Port of Valona, was not yet composed; but now
having time to peruse and consider old Accounts, the Venetian Bailo was called
by the Chimacam to Audience, and to a Conference with him concerning this
Matter. In the first place therefore the Bailo alleged, That the Pirates of
Barbary had for the space of twenty Years roved in the Venetian Gulf, and made
Prize in that time of so many Ships and Goods belonging to Merchants, that the
Republic had been prejudiced by them in several Millions; which also did in
some manner prejudice the Customs of the Grand Signior, to whom the Venetian
Merchants pay for the most part yearly the Sum of an hundred thousand Dollars
in Custom for their Goods, besides the benefit which the Ottoman Dominions
receive by so profitable a Commerce.

Hereunto the Chimacam replied: That the damages which the Turks received by
the Corsairs or Free-booters at Sea under the Colors of Malta, Leghorn,
Majorca, and other places, were greater and more dishonorable to the Majesty
of the Ottoman Grandeur, than the depredations of the other side were to
Venice: And therefore it would be necessary for the good of the World, that
such Violences were prevented in all places: and that Men of such wicked
Profession should be esteemed for universal Enemies, and to have no other
Quarter, nor Articles granted them, than what we give to wild and hurtful
Beasts, whom we destroy by Snares and Gins, and all Advantages. The which also
was never denied to the Venetians, whilst they encountered and took them in the
open Seas; but to enter into privileged Places, and violate a Sanctuary of the
Grand Signior's, without respect to the mighty Power of so dreadful a Monarch,
was an act so insolent, as could never obtain Pardon without due Compensation
for the Offense; which could not be done, but either by a Restitution of the
Vessels, or else of a like Number in the places of them.

Hereunto the Bailo replied: That if an Accommodation could not be made on
other Terms, nor Peace maintained, but by a submission to Pirates, and
supportation of all their Injuries and Robberies, a War must inevitably ensue;
for the good success of which they depended on the Blessing of God Almighty,
and the general Assistance of all Christendom, which will esteem it self
universally concerned in this Cause, and obliged as well to make good this
Quarrel against Pirates, as to preserve Venice for their main Bulwark and
Defense against the Ottoman Force.

You make me Smile (answered the Chimacam) when you tell me of the Power of
Christendom, which contains nothing more of Terror than the Name. Do not I
know, who have been Pasha of Buda, that the Emperor has no Money; and that
when the Sweeds, a small and inconsiderable People, have made War upon him,
they have almost overrun his Country? As for France, if they understand their
own Politics, they will scarce be persuaded to lend assistance to the Empire,
when we make War against it. The Spaniards have so much to do at Home, and to
conserve themselves from the Encroachments of their powerful Neighbor the
French, that they are wholly unable to lend Forces to wage a War at such a
distance from their Dominions. Wherefore considering the Advantage we have upon
you, which we well know and understand; you must either have War on these
hazardous Terms, or else purchase your Peace with a considerable Sum of Money.
In making of which Bargain you must consider, that you have to deal with a
mighty Prince, and not with a Merchant; and therefore your Offer ought to be
large at first, so as it may gain Credit, and be received with a favorable
Ear; for a small Sum to him is like a little Morsel given to an hungry Stomach,
which serves only to increase the Appetite. And you know, that we our selves
are often forced to sacrifice to the Avarice of our Prince, by effusions of
vast Sums of Money, which are always best compounded for, when they are done
readily, and at first, before we give our Master time to consult with his
Pillow, and to make up our Accounts according to the Calculation of his own
Reckoning. Let me therefore exhort you to follow the like Example, and
immediately make an Offer of three hundred thousand Zechins of Gold, which if
you will do, and employ my Interest to make this Composition for you, I hope,
though with some difficulty, to gain its acceptance. To talk and reason of
Things past is but to beat the Air, because the time is vanished and gone; but
you may consider of the present, that you may secure the future. We sell you
Peace at this Price; if it be worth your Money, take it; if not, refuse it, as
you judge the Purchase most agreeable to your Interest.

At this time Christendom was embroiled in its usual Combustions, so that
Assistance from other Princes was not only uncertain, but without all
Foundation; so that the Venetians could have no sure Trust to any other than
their own Force. In regard that many were desirous at that time to see the
Venetians engaged with the Turk, that so they might not be able to concern
themselves in the War of Italy, which then grew hot by the Wars of Savoy,
Modena, and Matoua, favored by the Protection of the Spaniards, by whose means
all the Differences arose about the Valtoline. Considering which, the wise
Senate being willing to purchase so great a Blessing to their Country by a
moderate Price, gave Liberty to their Bailo to compound for it at what rate and
terms he was able; which by the Bailo's Dexterity in the Management, was
concluded for the Sum of two hundred and fifty thousand Zechins, which was
esteemed for a great Service, and redounded much to the Reputation of the
Bailo: after which Conclusion, the former Articles were ratified, and these
which follow added thereunto.

That the Ambassador or Bailo should be set at Liberty, and permitted to
return to his own Habitation: That Commerce be renewed as formerly between the
Subjects of both Countries: That all Controversy about the Matters happened at
Valona, for ever be silenced and forgotten. When at any time the Pirates of
Barbary shall happen to enter within the Ports of the Grand Signior, they shall
give Security, that they will commit no Damage or Spoil on the Subjects of
Venice. And in case they shall have taken any Prizes belonging to the aforesaid
State, they shall not be admitted nor protected in the Ports belonging to the
Grand Signior. Wherefore in virtue hereof all Aga's, Captains of Castles, and
other Ministers who shall not obey and observe this Capitulation, shall be
deprived of their Office; and if the Venetians shall then enter violently into
the Port, where such Enemies have taken Refuge, it shall not be imputed to them
for a Crime, or esteemed a Breach of the Capitulations. And farther, if the
Venetians shall at any time encounter the aforesaid People of Barbary in the
open Sea, it shall be lawful for them to assault, take, and destroy them
without notice, or exceptions of the Ottoman Port. And lastly, the new Bailo
lately elected, shall pay unto the Grand Signior five hundred thousand Pieces
of Eight, which make two hundred and fifty thousand Zechins of Gold. This
Writing was firmed and ratified about the middle of the Moon Rebiul in the
Hegeira or Year of Mahomet 1049. September 1639.
Hereof Authentic Copies were immediately dispatched to the Beglerbeys,
Sangiacks, and Kadi's on the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, and to the Pasha
of Bosna, for better Publication of the Peace, and free Traffic and Commerce
between the Subjects of both People.

The Baron Chinski arrived at that time from the Emperor in Quality of Envoy
Extraordinary, An Envoy sent from the Emperor to the Grand Signior.
to congratulate the Grand Signior's Success in taking Bagdat, and making a
Peace with Persia; but not bringing with him Presents to that value, which on
this occasion were expected, he was not looked on, not considered with that
Favor and Respect, as was agreeable to his Character and Quality. And there
happening a Dispute between this Envoy and the English Ambassador concerning
Precedence of place; the Turks yielded it to the English, being made to
understand the Difference which Christian Princes make between the Title of an
Ambassador and that of an Envoy, though the Turks use but that one word of
Elchi to express both. And though the Baron Chinski labored to diminish the
Dignity of an English Ambassador at Constantinople, by alleging, that he was
elected by the Company of Merchants for Conservation of their Trade only, and
afterward confirmed and honored by the King: yet this Argument was in no wise
prevalent with the Turks, who esteeming the Commission of the Prince, and the
Charge of an Office the only Qualification to ennoble a Person, made no
Difficulty to determine the Point in behalf of the English. And though some
Italian Writers say, that the English Ambassador gave fifteen Purses of Money,
or seven thousand five hundred Dollars to the Chimacam for this Favor; yet
those who understand how unwillingly the Turky-Merchants part with their Money
on defense of such Punctillio's and Niceties, especially where the Ambassador
might have avoided the bringing them into Dispute, will more readily believe,
that the Turks from free motives of their own Justice and Reason judged this
Honor due to the Ambassador, than that he should purchase this indisputable
Point by the disgraceful means of Money.

All matters being now determined between the Turks and Persia, and the black
Clouds blown over from the Venetians, The Turkish Counsels uncertain about a
War.
the Grand Signior studied how and where he might turn his Arms with most
Advantage: he had conceived an irreconcilable pique against Ragotski and
Matthew for the Causes before related; but having an intention to make use of
their Force against Poland or Germany, or against them both together, he
dissembled the Passion he conceived against them, and rather deferred his
Revenge, than pardoned the Liberty which they had exercised without his License
or Assent. Sometimes he resolved to recover Asac out of the hands of the
Cossacks; sometimes he thought of making War upon Poland, judging himself much
affronted by that King, for not sending an Ambassador to congratulate his late
Successes: Then he supposed, that a War in Germany would be more easy, and the
Conquest more profitable by reason of the Riches of the People, and the
Fertility of the Soil, to which pretenses could never be wanting on the score
of those Differences which always arise amongst the People of the Frontiers.
During these Debates and Counsels, Preparations were made for War both by Sea
and Land, as yet uncertain where they should be employed: The Vizier returns
from Persia.
To command them the Great Vizier was ordered to hasten his Journey from
Persia, whose Arrival was celebrated at Constantinople with a solemn Entry; and
for a particular and distinguishing Honor, the Grand Signior sent him a Vest
from his own Back to wear on the day of his Triumph. This Vizier was a Person
very austere in his Behavior, bold and valiant, as he evidenced by his Actions
in taking Bagdat, zealous for his Master's Interest; and, what is rare in a
Turk, not much addicted to his own: He had acquired a great share in the Esteem
of his Master, and his Authority increased, as the daily Decay of the Grand
Signior's Health rendered him less able for Government. For now the strong
Complexion of Morat began to grow feeble by excesses of frequent Debauchery,
his Stomach was become cold and weak, not able to digest the lightest Meats,
his hand shook, and a paralytical Distemper seized him in every part; so that
his Mother and the Physicians persuaded him to forsake the use of Wine, as
Poison and Destruction to his Health; and he, whilst he was sensible of his
languishing Condition, like a true Penitent, made many Protestations and Vows
against it, forbidding the accursed Poison to be received within the Walls of
the Seraglio: Howsoever his kind Heart could not possibly withstand the
Temptation of a Banquet, to which his Pot-companions did sometimes invite him;
amongst which the Great Vizier would not be wanting also to please and cajole
the Humor of his Master with the Liquor that he loved. But his chief and
constant Camerades in drinking were his Persian Favorite, and Mustapha Pasha
of Bosna, one educated in the Seraglio, promoted to the place of Selictar Aga,
to whom he gave the stately Palace of Ibrahim Pasha on the Hippodrome, together
with his eldest Daughter in Marriage. These two stout Sons of Bacchus persuaded
the Grand Signior to appoint one solemn Drinking-day in time of the Biram,
which is the great Festival of the Year, and introduced by their Prophet in
imitation of our Easter. Morat being at this time possessed with the Spirit of
Debauchery, accepted the Motion, and invited the two Drunkards to dinner with
him. The Persian provoked his Pleasure of drinking by salt Meats, and by
peppered and spiced Dishes; the sort of Wine they most used, was a sweet
Malvoisia, sometimes twisted, and encouraged with the strong Waters, called
Rosa Solis, of which they sucked so long, and with such Excess, that falling
under the force of it, they were insensibly carried away to their several Beds.
This dissolute Repast became fatal to the Grand Signior; for a Fire being
kindled in his Veins and Bowels, he fell into a violent and continued Fever.
The Physicians being called, were fearful to administer Remedies, lest proving
unsuccessful, their Lives should pay for the ineffectual Operation: At length
they agreed to let him blood, The death of Sultan Morat.
but this hastened his Death. For he died the fourth Day of his Fever, being
the 8th of February, in the seventeenth Year of his Reign, and the one and
thirtieth of his Age, having ruled in the height of all Disorders and irregular
Excesses, which his youthful Years enabled him to support. With his Death all
his thoughts and Designs of making a War against Christendom perished, having
sworn after his Return from Persia to reduce all his neighboring Countries to
the Mohammedan Law. His Character.
He was of a most cruel and implacable Disposition, having amongst his other
Acts of Tyranny imbrued his Hands in the Blood of his two Brothers, Orchan and
Bajazet; as also strangled his Uncle Mustapha, whose innocent Weakness had been
sufficient to secure his Life against any, but the most horrid Monster of human
Tyranny. He left no Son; for though he had diverse, they died in their Infancy,
notwithstanding which his Kingred were so detested by him, that he envied the
Descendence of Monarchy on his Brother Ibrahim, who was preserved by a strange
Providence from his Fury: Often saying, that he wished that he might be the
last of the Ottoman Line, that the Empire of that Family might end with him,
and devolve unto the Tartar. He was certainly the most absolute Prince that
ever swayed the Ottoman Empire; but of no Religion, seldom fasting in the Month
of Ramasan, contemning and laughing at the Santones, and others of their
Religious Orders. He was very inquisitive into all Actions of the City, for
which he maintained his Spies, and oftentimes took his Rules and Measures from
Discourses of People concerning his Government. He was a great Dissembler,
ready, active, and revengeful, covetous to Extremity, having left fiteen
Millions of Gold in his Treasury, which was empty when he entered upon the
Sovereignty. In short, he was so bad, that he had scarce any Allay of Virtue;
being so great a Tyrant, that at length he became his own Assassinate, and fell
unlamented by all but the two Companions of his bestial Excess.

The End of Sultan Morat's Life.
THE REIGN OF Sultan IBRAHIM, TWELFTH EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
SVltan Amurath, or Morat, after a Fever of eight Days continuance, caused by
an excess of Debauchery in Wine, having on the eighth of February, 1640,
according to the New-Stile, expired his last Breath. Vid. the Ott. State.
His Mother, called Kiosem, comforted her self with the thoughts thather Son
Sultan Ibrahim still lived, and was the sole Surviver, and undoubted Heir of
the Ottoman Family. To whose Succession, that she might make the more facile
and undisturbed Entrance, she consulted with all the Viziers, requesting their
Consent and Assistance, in the lawful promotion of her remaining Son to the
Throne of his Ancestors: For she had understood, that Morat, who always
abhorred the ill-shap'd Body, and weaker Mind of his Brother, envied him the
Dignity of the Ottoman Scepter, and therefore had bequeathed the Succession to
the Tartar, having, in the Heat of a Debauch, and Fumes of Wine, compelled his
Pasha's to swear to the performance of his Testament.

Wherefore the Queen, assembling them together, with gentle Words, desired them
to remember, That Ibrahim was the Lawful Heir, and their true Emperor; that the
Tartar Han was a Stranger, odious to the Soldiery, and not beloved by the
People: that an Alteration of this Nature could never be contrived and
executed, without danger to the Actors; and that they, to whom she assured the
continuance of the same Honors and Offices, in Reward of their constant
Allegiance, would be in hazard of losing all, by the coming of a Foreign
Prince, who having Confidents of his own to prefer, and grand Necessities to
satisfy, would make bold even with Estates and Provinces to prefer his
Favorites, his Kindred, and Countrymen, and establish the firmness of his
Government on their Ruin. Yet, setting aside those Considerations, touching
their own Safety and Interest, she promised, That if they would reach out their
Hands unto her Son, for to lift him unto the Throne, he should acknowledge his
Empire from them, and accordingly love, tender, and esteem such faithful
Subjects.

The Viziers, after some Reflections on the Tie and Obligation which Sultan
Morat had caused them to make to him, declared, and published it to be
unlawful, and void; protesting, That they were resolved to maintain inviolable
the Allegiance they owed unto Sultan Ibrahim, descended from the Ottoman Blood,
which they reverenced and adored, with an Awe equal to the Religious Esteem
which their Forefathers had of it; and therefore, with one Voice they cried
out, Let Sultan Ibrahim live.

Herewith the Council breaking up, the Viziers, accompanied with all the
Officers and Attendants of the Seraglio, went with Shouts and loud
Acclamations, to the Prison of Ibrahim, to salute him Emperor; for he, poor
Prince, had now for four Years remained a sad Recluse in a dark Room, where he
had received neither Light nor Air, but what came from a little Window, which
sometimes in favor was opened to him from Above; and what was worse, the
continual expectations, and fear of Death, without Friends, Conversation, or
Hope, rendered those Apprehensions worse than Death it self; which daily were
represented to him in that Solemnity, as might terrify a Mind more constant and
firm than his.

So soon as he heard the Shouts and Voices of a Multitude near his Door, he
immediately conceived, that the Fate was now come which he had so long
expected, and therefore he barred his Door, and denied to give Entrance: And
when the Viziers proclaimed him Emperor, (fearing it might be some Artifice of
his Brother, to see with what Joy he would entertain the News) he answered,
That he did not so much as think of the Empire, nor desire it, but only prayed
that Sultan Morat might live, to whom he pretended not to be a Brother, but a
Slave: And when he perceived that they began to force the Door, though with
terms of Respect and Observance, he still endeavored to keep it close; for
Nature had taught him to conserve a Life, for Nature had taught him to conserve
a Life, howsoever Miserable, and void of Consolation.

He continuing thus resolute not to open, Reverence to his Person commanded
them to forbear any ruder Violence; until the Queen Mother over-hearing all
this Stir, descended her self in Person; and first causing the dead Corpse of
Sultan Morat to be extended before his Door, with gentle Compellations, and
confident Assurances, averred the Death of his Brother. The Voice of his Mother
began to dissipate the Fears, and being in part already convinced by his Ears,
he adventured to peep at the Door, and giving then entire Credence to his Eyes,
his Heart and Spirits consented to revive; and s retiring back into his
Chamber, he willingly received the Congratulations of the Ministers and
Soldiers; which being past, he readily applied his Shoulders to the Coffin of
his dead Brother; and having bore his share of that dear Burden to the Gate of
the Seraglio, he there resigned it to his Domestic Officers, who buried him in
the Sepulcher of Sultan Achmet.

From thence he took Boat, and passed to the Mosch of Jub's Seraglio, where in
the space of eight days, he completed all the Ceremonies of his Coronation;
and afterward, according to the Custom of his Ancestors, he rode through the
City to his great Palace; but whether it were for want of practice, or by
reason of a Posture natural unto Fools, he fat so ridiculously on his Saddle,
as moved rather the Laughter than the Acclamation of the People.

In fine, being entered the Seraglio, he began to breath, and enjoy the Air of
Liberty, with so much contentment and satisfaction, that he unwillingly would
empair the least Particle of his late acquired Freedom, by thinking, or
attending to Business, and as if he enjoyed sufficient, committed all to the
management of his Mother; howsoever, being desirous to handle something of the
Government, he did it with so little Grace and Dexterity, that it plainly
appeared, that that Soul animated a Body not fit to sway or wield a Scepter.

The Queen Mother, to maintain the Word she had given to the Viziers, continued
them all in their respective Offices; so that, though there was great
disproportion in the Mind of the two Princes, yet the Ministers being the same,
there seemed to be little or no Alteration in the Government.

The Great Vizier remembering well the thoughts of War which Sultan Morat
meditated against the Cossacks, and being desirous of Glory, and continuance of
his Power, resolved to prosecute the same Design, hoping to meet a Spirit in
Ibrahim equal to the Generosity of his Brother. Reasons for a War with the
Cossaks.
To this War many and various were the Motives; as first, A natural desire of
Revenge on the Cossacks, for having infested the Black Seas, that they might
thereby provoke Poland to a War, which when they had reduced to some Extremity,
the Emperor would consequently fall in to their Assistance, and thereby create
Quarrels, which must necessarily open a large Field of Troubles; which being
sown with the Seed of Discord, could not fail to produce Causes and Pretentions
for a War.

It being thus resolved, to which the Vizier neither wanted Eloquence nor
Reasons to persuade, great Preparations were made for a War, which was intended
to be maintained for many Years: During which time, God, who disposes all
Things at his Pleasure, permitted a false Report to fly, that the Persians were
providing a great Army to besiege Bagdat; to which the Turks giving entire
Credence, it was resolved in the Divan, that those Preparations against
Christendom, should be diverted toward the Parts of the Eastern Countries. By
this vain Rumor only were all these Grand Designs disappointed, and all
farther Thoughts vanished for the present of molesting the Christians. From
whence it is observable, how necessary are the Foreign Residences of Ministers,
and how absurdly the Turks err; who, by reason of their Pride, vouchsafe not to
entertain Ambassadors in the Courts of Strangers, being beholden to the Jews,
or Armenian-Merchants for all their Intelligence they receive touching the
Affairs of Neighboring Kingdoms.

The Wars being thus suspended, the Great Vizier had time to cast his Eyes
about him, and contrive the Ruin of such whom he suspected most dangerous to
his Condition. Amongst the rest, none appeared more formidable than Mustapha
Pasha, Captain-Pasha, a young brisk Person, and Favorite of the Queen Mother,
whom to remove was difficult and dangerous, being a Vizier as well as he, and
in one of the most eminent Degrees of Dignity in the whole Empire: And
therefore that he might touch him with smooth and gentle Terms, he practiced
upon him the ordinary Decoy of Preferment, proffering him the Government of
Buda; which whilst the one seemed out of modesty to refuse, the other with the
greater force of Complement, and obliging expressions of Friendship, pressed
him to accept. At length, overcome with importunity and kindness, Mustapha
received the Proffer; whereby being divested of the Queen's Protection, he was
soon after overtaken in his Journey toward his Principality, and by another
Mandate required to take his way to the Province of Silistria, the smallest,
and most inconsiderable of the Empire: in which he was no sooner invested, than
a second Edict took off his Head.

But another Mustapha, more fortunate, was sent Pasha to Grand Cairo in Egypt;
he was a mortal Enemy to the Crim Tartar, of whom he showed his hatred at
Rhodes, by putting his Son to Death, for having said, That Sultan Morat, and
Sultan Ibrahim dying without Issue, the Empire was to descend to his Family.
This Son of Tartar was then at Rhodes, it being a Custom always to have one of
them as a Hostage for the Father's obedient Comportment toward the Turks,
their place of Residence being either at Rhodes, or some Town on the Black Sea,
as we have elsewhere declared.

The Sultan in this Interim had little regard unto the Government, both for
want of Capacity, and by reason of his luxurious and wanton Appetite, the which
he indulged in the highest excess of Sensuality; for having been accustomed to
a Prison, and Restraint, he knew not how to enjoy that freedom he had
recovered, but by subjecting it to the imperious servitude of his Lusts. This
Humor the Vizier and great Ministers cherished in him, by continual Banquets,
Feass, and Entertainments, in which he always took high contentment and
satisfaction. His other Recreations were, Horse-races, and Shooting with the
Bow, rewarding the most dexterous Archers. Business was a Stranger to him, he
knew not what it meant, nor thought there was other Employment for the Emperor
than to study those Pastimes, which most corresponded with his Youth and
Nature: only the Vizier would sometimes, in Matters of high Importance, demand
his Assent, which was either out of formality, or else to secure himself with
the Name and Authority of his Master.

The News of Sultan Ibrahim's promotion to the Throne being arrived at Venice,
the most serene Republic dispatched Pietro Foscarini as their Ambassador
Extraordinary to complement the Sultan. Ambassadors sent to complement Sultan
Ibrahim
The Prince of Transylvania in like manner sent his Tribute, which was some
Hawks, and twelve Vessels of Gilded Plate, as feudatary Acknowledgments for the
Lands held, and for his Confirmation in the Principality.

The Ministers of other Princes having passed the like Addresses, which were
customary, the Ambassadors of Poland made Complaints of the Tartars, whose
Incursions against them, the Turks, by Conditions of Peace, were obliged to
restrain; but in this, as in other Occasions since that time, the Poles could
obtain no Redress from the Turks, who willing to have the Christians oppressed
or ruined, either seemed not to give Credit to the Subject of Complaints, or
else to find out Excuses to acquit the Tartar; which being so known and common
a Practice with the Turk, it is to be wondered why the Poles have sent so many
late Messages of this Nature, which in former, as well as in this present Age,
have proved fruitless; a pregnant Example of which we shall find in the Reign
of Sultan Mahomet, Son of this Ibrahim.

Amongst other Corruptions these Times, Aspers were so cut and clipped, that the
Dollar rose from eighty to an hundred and twenty Aspers; which Irregularity
being complained of in the Divan, all Moneys were reduced to their intrinsic
Value; and the Aspers called in to be coined in the Mint, to the great Damage
of the People.

But this Matter will not appear strange, if it be compared to the Vellion of
Spain, and to the Permission in Turkey, of the base Alloy of Temins, by which
never any Nation before was ever so cheated and abused.

And now the Storms of War, which threatened from Persia, being blown over, it
was judged seasonable to reassume the thoughts of War so long meditated against
the Cossacks: In order unto which, Galleys were commanded to be built, which
should draw little Water, and purposely made to pass the Shoals on the Black
Sea near Asac, for the recovery of that Place out of the Hands of the Enemy.
Another Squadron also of Galleys was designed for the Archipelago, to oppose
the Galleys of Malta and Naples, which much infested those Seas.

To the first Enterprise, the Tartar much excited the Turk, by reason that Asac
did not only hinder his Incursions by Land, but rendered his Navigation in the
Black Seas very unsecure. To the second, The Galleys of Malta much provoked
them, under the Command of Frederick the Landgrave of Hesse; who by the
Persuasions of the Cardinals of Savoy, and Barberini, from a Protestant was
become a Roman Catholic, and had obtained the great Cross of Malta; and with
several Galleys and Ships, performed some Exploits at Biserta, and at the
Golletta near Tunis.

The Year 1641 being now entered, the Sultan passed a most Luxurious Life in
his Seraglio, consuming an immense Treasure on his Women; and whilst whese two
Fleets were preparing to proceed on their respective Expedition, that intended
for Asac had almost been diverted by the Rumors and Disturbances on the
Frontiers of Hungary; but they were soon afterward appeased, by an appearance
of an Envoy from the Emperor, and return of a Chiaus to Vienna, with
Ratification of all the former Articles and Conditions of Peace. Howsoever the
German Internuncio was braved at the Port, for not appearing sooner with his
Presents and Complements of Congratulation, for the happy Entrance of Sultan
Ibrahim to the Ottoman Throne; so apt are the Turks to believe Acts of
Civility, or Ceremony, to be Parts of Obedience and Submission; and what
Christians have once given them voluntarily, is afterward exacted as a Matter
of Debt or Duty.

And being thus freed from a Suspicion of Troubles in Hungary, and exempted
from the Fears of waging two Wars at once, (which the Turks always studiously
avoid) they dispatched a Letter into Poland, to demand passage for their Army,
through that Country, to the Siege of Asac; but that not being consented unto;
the Turks prepared to open their way by Force, and the Poles to defend the
Passage. In which interim, many Disasters concurred, sufficient to discourage
the Turks in their Design; who are a People, that superstitiously calculate the
Success of their Enterprises, by the difficulty or smooth success of their
first beginnings: For when the Vizier was ready to depart, a dreadful Fire
happened in Constantinople, to the quenching of which, applying not only his
Orders, but his own Person; he adventured so far, that he burned both his
Hands, and singed his Beard in that manner, that he was forced to take his Bed
for several Days, where he was honored with a Visit of the Sultan.

News also came at the same time, that Tauris, or Ecbatan, on the Borders of
Persia, was miserably ruined by an Earthquake; and what was worse, the Sultan
himself was seized with an Apoplexy, which turned to a Paralytical Distemper,
the Cause whereof was attributed to his excessive use of Women; to whom he was
so immoderately addicted, that he consumed his Days and Nights in their
Apartments. This Disease, which is rarely or never cured, being joined to a
Report given out by his Ladies, that notwithstanding his Venereal Heat, he was
yet Impotent as to Women; created a Belief, or at least a strong probability,
that he might die without Issue, which caused high Confusion in the Counsels of
the Grandees, that no Design could make any cheerful Progress, until Provision
was first made for Supply of the Ottoman House; for the Succession of the
Tartar was in no manner convenient or secure; but rather that the Throne should
be furnished with the Son of a Sister, or of a Niece, than to subject
themselves to the Rule and Passions of a Foreign Prince. And though the Sultan
did afterward recover his Health, yet all suspected and feared, that by the
immoderate Heat of his Veneri I Inclination, he would die without Children;
every one discoursing, as moved by his Passion, or his Interest.

About this time arrived an Ambassador at Constantinople from the Softa of
Persia, bringing a Ratisication of the Peace; who was so much the more welcome,
by how much more the present Conjuncture rendered it advantageous; and being
ushered in with exceeding rich Presents, ravished the Hearts of the Turks,
whose good Nature melts and dissolves with the sight or hopes of Gifts.

In Dalmatia, near the Consines of Zara, the Turks made Incursions on the
Venetian Territories, and caused some Disturbances: but being chastised by an
Ambush laid for them, whereby about two hundred of them perished; all Matters
were again reconciled, and the Peace renewed.

And now one would imagine, that the Design against Asac, by such diversity of
Obstructions, were absolutely laid aside; which though they were of that
Importance, and especially the fear of Ibrahim's Death, to detain the Vizier at
Home; yet he thought fit to prosecute the Design under the command of the Pasha
of Silistria, to whom he had committed the Conduct of this War.

The Pasha proud of his Charge, The Siege of Asac.
rejoiced to be employed in a War, wherein he apprehended so little difficulty,
and prognosticated to himself nothing but Glory and Victory; esteemed the
Defendants for no other than Fishermen, and better experienccd to sail their
Boats, and govern their Saiks in the Black Seas, than to draw up an Army in the
Field, or defend their Walls. This Confidence was farther increased, by an
Embassy at the same time from the Moscovite, who not only renounced all
Assistance or Concernment for that Town, but renewed with them his Friendship,
and Articles of ancient Agreement.

The Ottoman Army, besides Janisaries, and other Turks, consisted of
Moldavians, and Walachians, and a great number of Tartars, which at first
entered into their Trenches, and besieged the Town; but here they rested not
securely, by reason of the frequent Sallies the Besieged made upon them; and
more especially by the Mines which they sprang, to the terror and damage of
their Enemies. The Turks moved hereat, made furious Assaults, but were as
valiantly repulsed by the Defendants, who threw scalding Water, and Pitch, and
burning Sulphur upon the Assailants; so that not being able to take the Town by
Force, they retired to their Trenches, and deliberated in what manner, by fair
Promises, and Money; they might invite them to Surrender. Hereupon the
Captain-Pasha, the Tartar Han, and others, tried the Efficacy of large Proffers
of Privileges to the Town, their Country, and Inhabitants; with a Gratuity of
twelve thousand Hungers of Gold: But these Promises could make no more entrance
into their Hearts, than the Turks could do into their Walls, which they seemed
resolute to defend, wanting neither Provision, nor Ammunition, nor courage for
the War: but on the contrary side, all these were wanting in the Turkish Camp;
so that fifteen days passed without any Action, until they were supplied by the
arrival of certain Brigantines, and light Vessels, dispatched with all
expedition with the necessaries of War: At the coming of which, the Turkds
prepared for another Assault, which they continued uncessantly for the space of
seven days, but were received with that vigor by the Besieged, that they could
not gain one palm or inch of ground; So that at length with disgrace, and
discouragement, they were forced to give over their Attempt, despairing to gain
the Town in the time, and with the Force which was allotted for this Enterprise.

With this ill Success, Extremity and Famine pinched the Turks in their
Trenches so much, that an Ox was sold for fifteen Zechins, a Lamb for three,
and a Measure of Barley, which ferved a Horse for one time, for a Dollar; so
that at length they were forced to raise the Siege; and the Captain Pasha, by
tempestuous Weather, was constrained to shelter his Fleet in the Port of Caffa.
In their return Home, the General was fearful of having forfeited his Head; the
Commanders were silent, and ashamed of their Success, and the Souldlers
discouraged, famished, and poor; for they had lost three thousand Spahees,
seven thousand Janisaries, and eight hundred other Soldiers, besides
Moldavians, Walachians, and Tartars; those that survived of the Foot were
naked, and many sick; the Spahees were without Horses, with which they were
supplied by the Tartars; and in fine, so unsuccessful were all Matters, that
the Veteran Soldiery avouched, that they never endured a more cruel, nor a
more miserable War.

And now we shall end this Year 1641, The just punishment of a Persian Traitor.
with the ruin of Emir Guimir, a Persian by Birth, a Favorite, and yet Traitor
to his Natural Prince. This Emir, in the last Wars which Sultay Morat waged
against Persia, was entrusted with an Embassy, and with Couduct of part of his
Army, but he betrayed both to the Turk, under whose Protection he took
Sanctuary, and obtained great Gifts and Preferments, for a Reward and Price of
his Treachery. Sultan Morat afterward bestowed a magnificent Seraglio upon
him, situated on the Bosphorus, enriched him with a vast Treasury, and what is
more, with his Favor, making him his Companion in his Pastimes, and his
Confident in his serious Counsels: It was he that first persuaded the Sultan to
drink Wine, in which both of them were beastly intemperate, and mighty and
valiant to bear, until the heat thereof having extinguished the natural heat of
their Stomachs, it became too cold and crude, unless corrected, or fortified
with Rach, or distilled Spirits. The Fumes of such strong Drinks, were the
cause of the extravagant Actions which Morat practiced in his Life, and
afterward became the means to hasten his Death; whose days being ended, it was
time also for prosperous Wickedness to expire, and to meet a Punishment equal
to its Demerits, Wherefore one day, (having desired License of the Vizier to
return to his own Country, where it is believed he had by Money purchased his
Pardon) he was called to the Vizier's Presence, and there, without any
Impeachment, Process, or Accusation, had the String applied to his Throat, and
strangled on the place; the reason hereof some give, to be the immense Riches
which Sultan Morat had bestowed upon him, though there wanted not many Causes
to render him suspected, and obnoxious to the present Government; first,
because he was too well acquainted with the Secrets of the Seraglio, and of
that State, to live in any other country than the Turkish Dominions; then it
was feared that the Persian Ambassador might make use of this Person to act
what Treason he pleased on the remainder of the Ottoman Family, on promise that
such an Attempt should expiate his former Villainy, and regain the favor of his
natural Prince. But such signal Actions as these, are commonly wrote in such
large Characters of Divine Justice, which never lest treason unpunished, either
in this life or the other; that we need not search or enquire for a further
Cause or Occasion of this Punishment.

The Year 1642 being now entered, and the Turks desirous to repair their last
Years Disgrace, resolved again, with better Preparation and Conduct, to attempt
Asac; but before they would engage, according to their usual Custom, they
determined to conclude all Umbrages, and Matters of Dispute arisen on the
Consines of Hungary. To which end, the Emperor deputed the Baron of
Qnestemberg, with other Barons; and the Turks on their side commissionated the
Pashaws of the Confines, with Instructions not to insist too strictly on the
Conditions, lost it should retard the Peace, and obstruct the other Design of
War: Wherefore the Turks condescenging to Matters reasonable; and yielding up
part of their Usurpation, a Peace was concluded for twenty Years, much to the
Advantage and Favor of the Christians.

And now, The Birth of Sultan Mahomet.
to give farther Courage to the Prosecution of higher Attempts, the whole
Turkish Empire was replenished with Joy, for the Birth of a young Prince Sultan
Mahomet, that now reigns; so that the supposed Impotency of the Father (whereby
the Ottoman Family might have been extinguished) was proved otherwise by plain
Effect; and the fear of those that ruled the Empite vaishing by the Rising of
this new Star, all places were filled with Joy and Triumphs; only the Tartar
Han finding himself thus disappointed, was supposed not willing to concur
heartily in this common Joy. In this manner vaished the appearance of Civil
Dissension in that Family, which now flourishes and increases every day, and
insensibly creeps forward to the Design (which they hope) of an Universal
Monarchy. Pardon me, O Christian Kings, if I say insensibly, for methinks you
are sensible of the least touch you receive from one another, but feel not the
gripes and pinches of your Common Enemy, who like a Hectic Fever has mingled
with your Blood, and stolen into the Marrow of your Strength, where he will
lurk until he has dissolved the Fabric of your Christian World, unless
expelled by Concord amongst your selves, and the Divine AssiStance favoring
your united Forces.

But now to return again to the famous Siege of Asac; The War renewed against
Asac.
It being the custom to cast all Miscarriages in War on the General, the
Vizier displaced the Captain-Pasha, taking upon himself that Office and Title,
of which there was never any former Example. In the Place likewise of the Pasha
of Silistria, was constituted Mustapha Pasha of Egypt; which Government,
though much inferior to his former, yet was received without fence of
Disgrace, it not being the Riches or Power of any office that confers Honor,
but the Favor and good Will of the Sulan. Nor did only the Miscarriage of the
late War tend to the disrepute of the former Pasha of Silistria, but the Report
of his having poisoned the Tartar Han increased the difficulty of reconcilement
with his Superiors, which being a Matter rather suspected than proved, excused
him from farther punishment than only a deprivation of his Office.

The new Pasha of Silistria thus taking upon himself the Command of the Army,
and Conduct of this War, assembled a Force of Turks, Tartars, Moldavians, and
Walachians, far exceeding the number of the last Year. At the News of which,
and of the Fleet of Galleys designed to besiege them by Sea, they apprehended
their Danger so great, that without the Assistance of the Moscovite, they
concluded it impossible to defend their City; to him therefore they made
Applications for Succor, representing unto him the extremity their Affairs
were in, by reason of that powerful Enemy which threatened them; and that having
always acknowledged him for their Protector, there was no Refuge left them but
under the defense of his Arms. But hereunto the Moscovite gave a brief reply,
That he had lately concluded Peace with the Turk; since which, having received
from him no occasion of breach, he could not with any Justice engage so soon
against him in a War.

The Cossacks being thus disappointed of their principal Hopes, The Inhabitants
abandon Asac.
resolved to abandon their City; but to make the best advantage of their
flight, they carried with them all their Movables; and demolished their salls,
and ruined their Houses, leaving the Place a notorious Spectacle of Despair and
Ruin; and no other Possession to their Enemies, than the compass of so much
ground pestered with Rubbish, and rude heaps of Stones. The Pasha howsoever
abundantly contented, that his very Name was sufficient to affright his
Enemies, entered the City with Triumph, where he began to repair the Walls, and
invite the Inhabitants to return, with all assurance of Security, and
Protection. This gentle Treatment recalled many back to their Homes, so hardly
are Men weaned from their Native Country; and in a short time the City
beginning to fill, all Matters seemed to return to their pristine State and
Condition.

About this time the Persian, The Persian renews his League.
by his Ambassador, renewed his League with the Turk, and confirmed it in the
Name of the new king; which was performed on condition that the Soft should
demolish the Fortress of Fortrina, which he had, contrary to Articles, built on
the Frontiers, not far from the Caspian Sea; which that it might assuredly be
performed, a Capugibathee was dispatched to see it effected.

And in this manner, Asac being subdued, and a Peace secured with the Persian;
The Turks, who can neither live in quiet with their Neighbors, nor observe
Capitulations longer than they turn to their advantage, contrived to take
Giavarine, alias Rab, a strong Fortress on the Confines of Hungary, by a
Stratagem which they designed in this manner: Certain soldiers habited like
Peasants, The Turks seek to take Rah by Stratagem.
were crowded into several Carts, covered with Hay, which being entered within
the Walls, were immediately to leap forth, and surprise the Sentinels and Guards
at the Gates (which might easily be executed on Men, whom twenty Years before
of Peace had made secure) these were to be seconded by four thousand Soldiers,
which lay ready in a Neighboring Valley; but it happened, That an Officer of
the Garrison returning from Hunting, had by chance discovered this strong Party
of Turks, which caused him to quicken his pace toward the Town, and overtaking
in his way certain Carts of Straw, which appearing to be laden in a form
different to what was usual, increased in him a farther suspicion of Treachery;
how soever, he proceeded forward with the more haste, yet without any
appearance of Jealousy: until being entered into the Town, he declared what he
had seen, at which the Garrison was immediately in Arms; and having permitted
the Carts to enter, the Bridge was drawn up, and the Carts being searched, the
shole Fraud and Treachery was discovered; and having made the Turks Prisoners,
and armed the Walls with Soldiers, the whole Design was disappointed; so that
those who lay in Ambush returned to their own Cities, The Emperor hereupon
resolved to send an Ambassador to Constantinople, complain of this Treachery;
whereof the Turks being ashamed, and the more because it did not succeed;
resufed to admit the Ambassador, unless the Emperor would first agree to pay a
yearly Charge of an hundred thousand Ris-Dollars to the Port; not by way of
Tribute, but of present; in which unreasonable Demand, they took more
confidence, in regard they perceived that the Emperor was engaged in a War
against the Swede. Upon this dishonorable Demand, the Emperor deferred the
Embassy intended, supposing it less perilous to adventure a War in Hungary,
than dishonorable to condescend unto a Proposition so derogatory to the
Majesty of his Cesarean Greatness.

This Year 1643 being entered, the Prince of Transylvania conveyed his Annual
Tribute, being ten thousand Zechins, to the Port; which when the Agents of that
Prince presented before the Vizier, he seemingly refused it; pretending that
the complete Tribute was to be fifteen thousand, according to Agreement: but
the Agents replied, that five thousand had been remitted unto Bethlem Gabor,
not by way of Gratuity or Recompense for his Service, but in Exchange, or as
the price of two Cities, which the Prince had yielded to the Sultan, out of his
own proper Estate in Hungary: With which Answer the Vizier remained satisfied,
being jealous of the Turbulent and active Spirit of that Prince.

During all these Wars and Revolutions in Kingdoms and States, Sultan Ibrahim
contained and contented himself within the Precincts of his Seraglio; where
becoming a faithful and valiant Soldier of Venus, he consumed more Treasure in
that War, than his Brother Morat did in Foreign Conquests; and being, as it
were, entered into the Mohammedan Paradise, where the Company of fair Women is
the chiefest Felicity promised, he labored to increase the Ottoman Family, and
to acquit his People of the apprehension they had of wanting an Heir to succeed
in the Throne; so that on the 15th of February he had a second Son born, and a
third on the 12th of March following; which absolutely took away the Reproach
of his Frigidity or Impotence, proving afterward the most lascivious and
devout Sultan that ever aspired to the Mohammedan Heaven.

This Year the Turks armed out twenty Galleys more than usual, besides thirty
Sail of Ships, and Gally-Grosses; in the beginning of June, riding at the
Seraglio Point (where the Commanders in Chief came to take their leave of
Sultan Ibrahim) they divided into two Squadrons; one of which consisting of
twenty Galleys, under the Command of Beker Pasha, took their Voyage into the
Black Sea; the remainder under the Captain Pasha, sailed for Cyprus, with
intention to do Justice on the Pasha of that Island, whose Riches gained by
Oppression, had debauched him from due Obedience toward his Prince; and being
arrived there, without Rumor or Noise, giving signs of good Will and Respects
toward the Pasha, one day he sent to invite him Aboard to banquet with him;
where the Pasha foolishly coming, and having well eaten and drank with him, his
Entertainment had not time time to digest, before he breathed his Last; for
being on his departure, the Slaves assaulted him, and strangled him by Order of
the CaptainPasha.

No other Matters remarkable did the Turkish Fleet perform this Year at Sea,
before they returned again to their Winter Quarters. Howsoever this Year proved
savourable to many poor Christians in Slavery; for there happening a most
miserable Plague in Alexandria, which relaxed the Spirits of Men, and rendered
every one so negligent in his Office, that about fourthousand Slaves taking
advantage of such Remisness in their Guardians, seized a Ship in Port, and
crouding themselves therein, set Sail, and landed some of their People at
Candia, others at Malta, the rest at Marseillia, by which means they happily
regained their Liberty: on which encouragement eight hundred more adventuring
to perform the like, and fighting in a Body at the Gate of Alexandria, three
hundred of them were flain, the rest leaped into a Gally, which though without
Oars, had yet her Sails to the Yard, and having the fortune of a favorable
Wind, arrived safe at Candia; in like manner they became free, taking
convenient passage from thence to diverse parts of Christendom: These Slaves
were all redemanded by the Grand Signior from the Venetians; in which no
Satisfaction being given, was one Cause and Original of that War which
afterward ensued.

And now the Year 1644 being begun, Ragotski, who was never contented but in
Combustions, and never at. ease but when he was proving new Projects, made
Demands of certain Places on the Confines of Moravia, situated within the
Mountains, which he challenged as the Inheritance of his Son; besides other
Pretenses which he made in right of Bethlem Gabor. To forward which Designs,
moved with an inveterate Enmity to the Austrian Family, he endeavored to win
the Hearts of the Commonalty with a plausible Declaration for Liberty, and to
throw off the Yoke which had so long gauled the Neck of Hungary; whereby having
raised an Army of twenty thousand Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, he entered,
and spoiled the Country of his old Enemy and Neighbor the Count of Humanay an
Hungarian, took Solnock by force, and besieged Fileck, and Cassovia: For
suppression of which Insurrection and Rebellion of Ragotski, the Emperor was
forced to a War; and having Rendezvoused his Army at Presbourg, the Conduct
thereof was committed to the Charge of Cout Puceain.

The Turks having intelligence of these Preparations for War, commanded twenty
thousand Men to march into those Parts to oppose these Combustions on the
Frontiers; with sixthousand of which the Count Puecaim encountering furiously,
assaulted and routed them. And in the mean time Ragotski laying aside all care
for the War in Hungary, applied himself to relieve Olimz in Moravia; but in his
March thither he was recalled by the Inhabitants of Sendar, which is a Castle
erected on a Hill near Cassovia, offering to surrender unto him; but the
Governor Forgatz, of the People, a Civil War began amongst themselves, but at
length the advantage falling unto Ragotski, the Gates were opened unto the
Transylvanians; with which Success their Spirits being raised to higher
Matters, they proceeded forward, until General Getz with a strong Body, gave a
stop unto their Progress. And thus was the Fire of sar rekindled again in
Hungary, by means of Ragotski; to whom notwithstanding the Turks would never
adhere, being well acquainted with his turbulent and unsteady Humor. In the
mean time the Emperor dispatched his Ambassador with rich Presents to the
Sultan, desiring him to forbear giving farther Assistance unto Ragotski; but
what between Skirmishes, Propositions, and Treaties, Matters were not complsed
until the 14th of August 1645, at which time all Articles were concluded and
signed between the Emperor and Ragotski.

But to return now to the Affairs of Constantinople; Sultan Ibrahim having the
Fortune of Active and Prudent Ministers, attended entirely to his Pastimes and
Pleasures, without Prejudice to his Interest, and the State of his Empire; for
the first Vizier being Faithful and Vigilant, immediately cut off those Members
with the Sword, which he suspected in the least manner inclinable to Sedition;
amongst which were the Pashaws of Aleppo and Caffa. For by this kind of
seasonable and speedy Remedies, the Plethory of the Ottoman Empire is commonly
evacuated, and the Body Politic thereof restored to its pristine state of
Health and Safety.

In like manner the Valede Sultana, being a Woman of great Courage and
Abilities, attended carefully to the Welfare of her Son, whom she sometimes
decked up, and set forth as a Property of Majestic Gravity to the People,
whilst she her self assumed the Authority, and carried allthings with a high
and imperious Spirit; and being ambitious to be feared as well as honored, she
laid Viloent Hands on the first Vizier, called Mustapha, and strangled him; for
though he was an Active and Faithful Minister, yet because he passed something
on her which she imagined did favor of neglect, and because she apprehended
his Power, which was greatly confirmed by the Interest and Favor he had with
the Janisaries, and their Favorers, she resolved to make him an Example, as
well of her Revenge, as her Power; after whose Death the Charge of first Vizier
was conferred on Mahomet the Pasha of Damascus.

The fame Fate befell the Captain-Pasha, who was likewise strangled for having
over-boldly, or peremptorily, made answer to some Impertinencies of the Grand
Signior; and his Office was afterward conferred on Beker Pasha of Rhodes. With
such Rigor as this do the Sultans govern, who resolve to be obeyed, and to
have their Commands executed without delay or contradiction.

Whilst these Matters were in agitation, The Tartars make Incursions into
Poland, notwithstanding the Peace.
the Tartars forgetful of their Peace, made another Incursion with thirty
thousand Men into Russia, against whom Konispolski having made Head with twenty
thousand Men only, overthrew them, and killed twelve thousand, and took three
thousand Prisoners, pursuing the rest to the Borders of Walachia. In like
manner Wisnowick, a noble Polander, happily encountered another Party of
Tartars, as they were on their return from spoiling the Countries of Moscovia;
of whom having killed 10000 Men, he recovered their Booty, and sent the rest
Home naked and empty. This was the true and most effectual Means for the
Polanders to avenge and right their Injuries, and more prevalent then Ambassies
and Messages of Complaint unto the Port; which we have experienced since, and
in the present Reign of the Son of Ibrahim, to have been so far from producing
Matter worthy so much as the Charge of the Ambassador, that they have been
retorted with lgnominy and affronts.

But here Ibrahim perceiving how the Poles had avenged themselves with their
own Sword, would seem to approve of the Action, which he could not hinder; and
to appear a sincere Observer of the Peace, he deposed the Tartar Han for his
unlawful Incursions; which was such a satisfaction to the Crown of Poland, as
they never could obtain by force of Justice, Complaints, and Virtue of passive
Valor, until their active Fortitude cook their Cause in Hand, and pleaded for
them.

On the 19th of March of this Year, a fourth Son was born to Sultan Ibrahim;
and on the 19th of February following, being in the Year 1645, notwithstanding
all the Reports of his Impotency, was born a fifth Son, named Solomon, to the
great contentment of his People.

The Turks Galleys this Year, under the Command of Beker their new
Captain-Pasha, made an Attempt on the Coast of Calabria, bringing from thence
two hundred Slaves; and attempting the like near Corton, paid for their former
Booty, with the loss of five hundred Men.

How soever, the Galleys of Malta, being six in number, had better Success as
to themselves, though the Consequences thereof proved fatal to the Venetians,
having given the first occasion of that long War, which afterward ensued
between the Turk and them.

The truth of which Story is this, The Story of Kuzlir Aga, his Slave and Son
taken by the Malteses.
free of all Romance or Fable, which the Knights of St. John or Malta would mix
therewith: It happened that the Kuzlir Aga, or chief Eunuch, which governs the
Women in the Signior's Seraglio, having cast his Eye on a fair Slave, then set
to sale by a Persian Merchant, became so enamoured of her, that he purchased
her for himself, under the Notion of a virgin, at the price of four hundred and
fifty Dollars: But the Eunuch had not long entertained this Lady in his
Service, before she proved with Child; not by him (you may conceive) if you
understand how the Eunuchs of this Country are disarmed of their Virility: At
which he was so greatly offended, that he banished her from his Society, and
confined her to the House of his Steward. The time being come for her to be
delivered of her great Belly, it proved a Son; and some Months after, the Aga
being desirous to see the Babe, was so pleased with the aspect of it, that he
resolved to adopt it for his own, ordering it Clothes, and other Necessaries
agreeable to its Condition. It happened that about that time Sultan Mahomet
(which now reigns) was then born; and there wanting a Nurse for the Child, this
beautiful Slave was preferred to the Honor; so that she was entertained near
two Years in the Seraglio: During which time Sultan Ibrahim took such an
affection to the Nurse's Boy, that he loved him better than his own eldest Son,
who was of a bad Complexion, and of no better Air in his Face than his Father,
and took great delight to play and sport with him; at which the Mother of
Sultan Mahomet was so displeased, that she could not longer endure either Nurse
or her Boy; and for her sake, took so much displeasure against the Kuzlir Aga,
who preferred her, that neither his presence nor Service were acceptable; and
so violent she was in her Passion, that one day, when Sultan Ibrahim was
playing with his Women and Children in the Garden, according to his usual
Custom, throwing them one on the other into the Water, the Queen grew so
furious, that she could not contain longer from venting her Anger in unhansome
Terms, and jealousy against the Nurse and her Son. At which the Sultan being
much displeased, and being ill-natured, (if we may speak boldly of an Emperor)
took her Son (which is now Sultan Mahomet) out of her Arms, and with some few
Curses swung him into a Cistern; where he had been certainly drowned, had not
every one in that instance applied themselves to save him; at which time he
received the Mark or Scar he wears at this day in his Forehead.

All these Matters served for farther Fuel to nourish the implacable Spirit of
the Queen; which the Kuzlir Aga well observing, judged it prudence to give way
to her Fury, and so begged his Dismission from the Court, together with his
Slave and Son; and that having wisited Mecha, according to his Law, he might
enjoy a Retirement in Egypt, which is the Portion of banished Eunuchs.

The Queen easily consented hereunto; nor was it difficult to procure the
License of the Sultan, who was as easily persuaded to any by those who were
about him; wherefore the Eunuch having provided, to be gone, shipped himself
with his great Treasure, on the Fleet which was now designed, and ready to
depart for Alexandria, which consisted of three Ships; one a great Gallion, and
two others of lesser Burden, and seven Saiks; these having at the beginning of
their Voyage found contrary Winds, The Engagement of the Turkish with the Malta
Galleys.
put into Rhodes; from whence loosing with more favorable Weather, they
unfortunately met with six Malta Galleys, excellently well manned, and
provided. The Admiral Gally immediately Boarded one of the Saiks, and took her,
manned only by Greeks; by whom they were informed of the Condition, Quality,
and Cargo of the greater Ship, which gave Heat and Resolution to the Soldiery.
In like manner, with little Oppsition, the Galleys called the St. John, and
Joseph, possessed themselves of one of the lesser Ships, which being laden only
with Timber, brought from the Black Sea, to build Ships at Alexandria, was of
little value, having forty Turks aboard, eight Women, and a Child which sucked
at the Mother's Breast. In the mean time, the three other Galleys, called the
St. Mary, St. Lorenzo, and Victory, attacked the great Gallion, and having cast
their Iron Graples into the Ship, with the Motion of the Ship, the Irons gave
way and broke, only that of the St. Lorenzo held fast, so that the whole force
of the Ship, both of small and great Shot, was poured in upon the Gally, to
their damage and loss of Men. In the mean time the Admiral Gally came in to
their Assistance, and Assaulting the Ship on the other Quarter, made a
Diversion of their Men; and having thrown in their Graples, they scaled the
sides of the Gallion, as if it had been a Fortress; where being entered, they
remained for some time at handy-blows with the Turks; but at length, all the
Galleys coming to their help, having made an end of subduing the other Ships,
the Turks were forced to retire under Covert of their Decks, which they
defended still with singular Valor, wounding the Christians with their half
Pikes through the Gratings.

But, in fine, the Captains of the Galleys, perceiving that this was not the
way to compel them to a speedy Surrender, ordered several Musketeers out of
every Gally, to sire in at the Windows and loop-holes of the Ship; by which
having killed their Commander in Chief, their Valor and Constancy began to
fail, and desirous to save their lives with loss of Liberty and Estates, they
cast down their Arms, and begged Mercy.

In this Engagement were killed the Captain of the St. Mary, and seven
Cavaliers, of which five were French, one Italian, and one German; the Admiral
himself, and the Captain of his Gally were both wounded; seventy nine Soldiers
and Mariners killed, and an hundred thirty two wounded: Of the Turks it is not
certain how many fell, in regard as they were killed, according to Custom, they
cast them overboard; the Eunuch himself, though always educated in the
softness of the Seraglio, and in the Conversation of the Female Court, yet in
the end concluded his days like one of the Masculine Sex, fighting valiantly
with his Sword, until overwhelmed by his Enemies: by which it is observable,
that those Persons lose not their Courage with their virile Parts; for it has
been known in former days, how that Eunuchs have been Generals in the Turkish
and other Armies, and conducted their Affairs with admirable Courage and
Success.

The Prize which the Christians had gained in this manner, was very
considerable; for besides the Gold, Silver, and Jawels, which were the Treasure
this Eunuch had amassed in the Reign of three several Sultans, they gained
three hundred and fifty Slaves, besides thirty Women, some of which were young
and Virgins; so that there was not a Soldier or Seaman who had not a
considerable share of benefit proportioned unto him. With this Fortune, towing
their Prizes, they in a short time came to an Anchor in the Port of Calismene,
in the Island of Candia, called anciently Phenice, on the South Side of the
Island, remote from all Venetian Garrisons; and where (as it is reported) they
were supplied with no Provisions, excepting a small quantity of Biscuit, which
was furnished by a Coutry Fellow, who for that very Cause was shot to Death.
From hence the Galleys departing, arrived in Malta with their Prizes, where
they were received in great Triumph. The young Son of the Eunuch (for so we
call him) was reported to be a Son of the Grand Signior, fent into Egypt to be
Educated, and was accordingly saluted, treated, and reverenced by the Grand
Master; the same Opinion was dispersed and confirmed in all parts of Europe,
and the Error for many Years maintained at the Expense of the Of the Knights
of Malta.
Religion, until the Boy growing up to a good Age, and not judged worthy of a
Ransom, or enquiry after by the Turks, it was thought convenient for him to put
off his State, and Greatness, and become a Friar, and I think a Dominican, and
this is he who now goes under the name of the Padre Ottomano.

The News hereof arriving at the Ottoman Court, Sultan Ibrahim was transported
with Anger, threatening Destruction and Ruin unto Malta; besides he showed a
most inveterate Passion against the Venetians, for not guarding the Seas from
his Enemies, and for relieving them in their Ports. In which Rage and Fury, he
put his own Captain Pasha to death, and Summoned the Christian Ambassadors,
braving them all for the little respect was shown to his proper Shiping; and in
short, was angry with all, but reserved the Effect of his Wrath to be poured on
the Venetians, to which this Accident administered the first Original, and will
afford us ample matter of Discourse in this ensuing History.

For the Grand Signior first made his Complaints against Venice, to their
Minister, or Bailo, then resident at Constantinople, called Soranco; alleging,
that contrary to the Articles of Peace, they had afforded Prvisions and
Entertainment to his Enemies in Candia, and at a time when having made Prize of
his own Ship, and Domestiques of his Seraglio, they seemed, with more
extraordinary demonstrations of Hospitality than usual, to receive them into
their Harbors. To which the Bailo made Answer, That his Majesty was ill
informed of the true state of those Matters; for that the Port to which the
Malteses came, had neither Castle nor Fortress belonging to it, but was an
open, wide, and unfortified place; for if the Grand Signior is not able to
defend those Ships from careening, as they have often done before Rhodes it
self, how was it possible for the Venetians to drive them from the Seas, and
deny them the use of that Salt Water, which has neither Fort nor Castle to
reach and command them? With which Answer Ibrahim seemed to remain satisfied;
and Matters appeared so appeased on the side of the Venetians, that Soranco,
though a Person of a most acute and penetrating Judgment, imagined nothing less
than a War: and though he was assured otherwise, by something that the English
Ambassador had discovered in that Matter; yet because it came not first from
the Report of one of his own Interpreters, he would not seem to believe or give
credit thereunto, notwithstanding the strong Probabilities that might persuade
it.

Indeed, Christian Ministers must necessarily, with much Difficulties, and less
Inspection, govern and penetrate Affairs in the Turkish Court than in any
other; because access to the great Ministers is seldom privately or familiarly
admitted, from whence wise Men most commonly take their Measures and
Observations; but on the contrary, are forced to act all by the Negotiation, of
their Druggermen or Interpreters; and as they hear with their Ears, so are they
oftentimes beholden to their Reflections; which how subject they may be to
Error, is best known to those Ministers who have practiced much and long in
that Court.

And in this manner Ibrahim covered his Design against Candia, by pretense of
making War upon Malta, to which he had lately received so just a provocation.

To this Enterprise, none instigated him more than a certain Hagia, or Tutor,
which had accompanied him in the time of his Solitude, and had instructed him
in the first Principles of the Mohammedan Doctrine; he was a subtle and
understanding Man, and one who kept a secret Correspondence in the Christian
Courts; for being Master of what Gold he pleased, he paid for his Intelligence
with Liberality and Secresy; and though he was no Prophet, yet he pretended to
be a Magician, or Conjurer, or one that had a Command or Sovereignty over
Familiar Spirits; an Excellency greatly admired and reverenced by the Turks.
This Man had for a long Season attended an opportunity to promote a War against
Venice; esteeming their Territories very convenient to be laid to the Turkish
Dominions, and their Force an under-Match for the Puissance of the Ottoman
Empire. And now this Accident provoking the Desire of the Turks to this War,
and the Opportunity appearing commodious to cover the Design, under pretense of
Assailing Malta, it was secretly resolved to attempt the Island of Candia; for
as its Strength and Situation made it the Key to all the other Isles of the
Archipelago, so it would be the Bullwark of the Maritime Countries, from whence
the Passage would be short and easy into Africa; from whence the Galleys might
advantagiously relieve Cyprus, and guard the Fleet from Egypt, and from thence
might be opened a Door to invade Sicily, and the other parts of Italy. On these
Considerations, War being resolved against Candia, Reports divulged the Design
only against Malta, and for that end, Orders were issued for building and
fitting an hundred Galleys, and as many Ships of War; and Commands sent into
Barbary for assistance of all their Naval Force, and the Day appointed for
Rendezvous and Departure; all which time the Enterprise was kept secret, and by
no more Symptoms suspected, unless by the unusual Caresses the Turks at that
time over-acted in their officious kindness toward the Venetian Bailo.

The Report of these great Preparations flying over all Parts of Europe, was
entertained at Malta, with some Apprehensions, as being the Place on which all
the Storm was to refund its Fury.

Whereupon the Cavaliers or Knights of that Place, summoning a Council,
resolved to cite all the Fraternity to repair to the Defense of their Capital
Seat, and of their Order and Patrimony. Likewise Letters were directed to the
several Officers, to prepare and send Powder, Match, and Lead, Iron Buckets,
and Timber to make Carriages for Cannon, and for other Uses; as also Corn,
Biscuit, Salt, Flesh and Fish, Vinegar, Wine, and all other sorts of Ammunition.
They likewise instituted some Officers over the Waters, to see that the
Fountains and Conduits should be made clear which were to serve the City; and
that those without, that were to remain in the possession of the Enemy, should
be carefully and artificially poisoned; all the Mills remaining in the Fields
were transported into the Town; the Doors and Windows of Wood belonging to the
Peasants Houses, were taken down and carried into the City, with all their
Utensils, and what else was portable, so that nothing remained but the wide
Fields, and an open Air to breath in.

In the mean time, the Venetians being a wise and jealous State, suspected the
werst of all Events, and feared what their Minister at Constantinople could not
discover; which caused them to make some Preparations, but yet with that
dexterity and secresy, as not to render them diffident of the Turks
Proceedings. For to be jealous of a Friend, is sometimes to make him an Enemy;
and Distrust always argues Disaffection, which Prudence teaches to conceal from
those who are more powerful than our selves. Some were notwithstanding of
Opinion, that the Complaints of Ibrahim were only Artifices to extract the
Blood of Gold, which they judged fit to administer, if it were possible to,
satisfy the Appetite of those Leeches. Others were of a contrary sense, and
would by no means admit it for good Counsel, or Policy, to buy their Peace of
the Turk; for, besides that it was disagreeable to the Grandeur of Venice, it
was but a Shadow that they purchased, since their Enemies could on every slight
Occasion reassume what they had sold, and make the Menaces of War, and the Sale
of Peace, serve them for a perpetual Fountain, an Mine of Gold and Treasure;
and that since it was necessary, at one time or other, to cast off this Yoke of
Tyranny; the sooner it was done, the Advantage would be the greater, and the
Honor more apparent to the World, seeming to make War rather their Choice,
than their last Remedy. Howsoever Orders were given to the Bailo, with all
Prudence and Art, to touch gently the Pulse of the Turks, to discover if Money
would redeem the present Quiet of their State.

But the Resentment that the Turks had conceived, was grown apparent in the
comportment toward the Bailo; for having one day demanded Audience, he
attended several hours without admission; yet when the Ambassador of Ragotski
come to the Vizier, he no sooner entered the House than he was received: and at
the same time it was told the Bailo, that he might retire, for that there was
no Place nor Season at present to afford him Audience. In the mean time Ibrahim
himself walked often to the Arsenal, to forward and hasten his Preparations,
laying an Embargo on all Strangers Vessels in all Ports of the Ottoman
Dominions. Orders were likewise dispatched to Thebes, Negropont, and other
Parts of Greece, for making Biscuit; and to the Morea for cutting and squaring
of Timbers, and sacking Wools to fill up Trenches; in all which Rumor and Stir,
there are was no other discourse but of Malta, and of throwing that Island into
the Sea with the Shovel and Mattock, and rendering it the most dreadful Example
in the World of the Ottoman Rage and Greatness.

With such Preludes as these, began a War of long continuance, maintained with
various Successes for diverse Years; the fatal Issue whereof, we our selves have
seen and heard. But it is strange to consider, that an Exploit so Martial as
this, should commence in the Reign of a Sultan wholly given up to his
Pleasures, and so swallowed in Sensuality, that all those luxurious and wanton
Actions which are recounted of Sardanapalus and Heliogabalus, are flat and
faint Similitudes of that prodigious Effeminacy, in which this Sultan outdid
all other Examples of former Ages.

Amber was the common Perfumes which burned perpetually in the Women's
Apartments, and the common Sauce to most of his Viands; not perhaps because it
so much pleased his Palate, as that it was a provocative, and incitement to his
Lusts.

And this puts me in mind of a Story I have heard of an English Merchant,
living then at Galata, who was Master of a rare piece of Ambergriese, which was
in form like a Pyramid; the News whereof was told to the Grand Signior late at
Night, when the Smoke of the Persumes began to abate: Which so soon as he
heard, though it was near Midnight, he dispatched a Messenger to call the
Merchant with his Ambergriese; who being knocked out of his Bed in haste, by
the importunity of the Officer, came to the Seraglio Gate two hours before Day;
where he attended until it was broad Light, and then, without more words, found
a Market for his Amber, and before his departure received 13 thousand Dollars.
The Female Court was then extremely rich and splendid, all Italy was scarce
able to supply it with Silks, and Cloth of Gold; so that the Trade was in those
days flourishing above other Times, and gave great employment to English
Shipping: and so impatient were the Women for their Gay Clothes, that so soon
as the News of a Ship from Italy came, and that she was arrived within the
Castles of the Hellespont, but there detained by contrary Winds, Galleys were
immediately dispatched to bring up their Silks, which they oftentimes forced
away without any Account or Price made with the Merchant; of which that worthy
Gentleman, Sir Thomas Bendysh then Ambassador, complaining to the Vizier, and
finding no other Relief than good Words, resolved on an Expedient of making
known his Cause to the Grand Signior, which was this.

In Turkey they have a Custom, that when any one receives a notable Injury, or
Injustice, from the Chief and Great Ministers of State, they put Fire on their
Heads, and running to the Grand Signior, no Man can hinder or deny them access
to his presence. In like manner the English Ambassador not being able to obtain
Satisfaction from the Vizier, in return to his many Complaints, drew out all
the English Ships in Galata, which were then thirteen in number, and drawing in
their Guns, and shutting the Ports, put fire on every Yard-Arm of their Ships,
and came to an Anchor just before the Seraglio. The Customer being the first
that espied this unusual sight, immediately apprehended the Reason, and sent to
acquaint the Vizier thereof in all haste; the Vizier likewise fearful lest the
Complaints should by this means come to the Grand Signior's Ear, sent the
Customer aboard with a considerable part of the Money, and desired that the
Fires might be extinguished, promising faithfully to comply in payment of the
rest; hereupon Consultation being had between the Ambassador and the Merchants,
the Ships returned to their Stations, not seeming to have been taken notice of
by those in the Seraglio.

And notwithstanding the great number of Women within the Seraglio, all which
were at the Devotion of the Sultan; yet Ibrahim not being contented herewith,
passing one day to Scutari, had by chance cast his eye on an object which much
pleased him: what it was, becomes not the modesty of my Pen to relate; but
being returned to his Seraglio, he sent Orders to the Vizier, to seek out for
him the biggest, and best proportioned Woman which was to be found in all
Constantinople, and the parts thereabouts. Hereupon Emissaries were dispatched
into all Quarters of the City; at length they happily procured a huge tall
Armenian Woman, well proportioned according to her height, and a Giantess for
her Stature; which being found, she was presently washed and perfumed in the
Bath, and as richly Clothed and Adorned as the shortness of time would permit:
There was no great difficulty to persuade her to become Turk, having so high
preferment in her prospect. So that being introduced to the Grand Signior's
presence, he became immediately Enamoured, and was so pleased with her Society,
that he preferred her before all the Women of his Court; an Evidence whereof he
gave, in that he could not deny her in any request she could make, and
particularly about that time the Pashaluck of Damascus being void, this Woman
begged it for her self, substituting another in the Office, who was accountable
to her for all the Profits and Emoluments thereof: By these particulars of
favor the Queen Mother becoming jealous, one day inviting her to Dinner,
caused her to be strangled, and persuaded Ibrahim that she died suddenly of a
violent Sickness, at which he poor Man was greatly afflicted.

But not to insist long on these luxurious Pastimes, we shall return again to
Matters of higher Concernment: Ibrahim had now understood, that the Venetians
growing jealous of his Preparations, began likewise to Arm, and provide for the
worst; which being in no wise pleasing to the Turks, who were apprehensive that
their Marine Forces consisted most in surprise, caused Ibrahim to complain of
the Defensive Posture in which they Arrayed themselves, alleging, that
Suspicions of this Nature argued no hearty Disposition toward their Friends;
nor was any thing more contrary to a good Correspondence, or more disobliging
than such like Jealousies, which oft-times beget that Enmity which was never
designed; and farther it was judged necessary, if possible, to dissuade the
Bailo from a belief of any Hostility designed against his Republic; to
inculcate which, none was esteemed so proper an Instrument as the old cheating
Hogia, who was the first Motive to the War; a Preacher who imagined that the
excellency of his Religion afforded him a privilege to falsify, lie, and commit
any Act for advantage thereof, though never so contrary to Truth and Morality.
This Santone, with the Testimony of one or two more grand Professors, with many
Asseverations and Vows, endeavored to persuade the Bailo, of the Grand
Signior's good Intentions toward Venice, and his fixed Resolutions to destroy
Malta. And though the Concernment which those godly Elders showed, and the
earnestness they used, whereby to inculcate a Credence to what they affirmed,
were enough to discover their contrary Intentions; and though it is said, that
the Venetians could not heartily believe what they so strongly suspected; yet
hereby, and by the common vogue of the People, they abated much of their
Caution and Heat, which they otherwise had used in due Preparations and
Provisions against an Evil so fatal and destructive in the sequel.

The first Act of Hostility was committed by Giacomo da Riva, The beginning of
the War.
who being sent for Sopraveditor to Tino, was in his way to touch at Candia,
there to deliver Ammunition and Provisions for War; but being encountered by
some barbarous Vessels, who assailed him for a Merchants Ship of small Force,
were received so warmly that he sunk one of them, with which the rest left him
and fled, relating at Constantinople, that they had been ill treated by the
Venetians, and that they gave the first Assault upon them, because they were
called to the Assistance and Service of the Grand Signior.

The Fleet and Land Forces being already put to Sea, the Report and Opinion
still continued, that the War was designed against Malta; wherefore such as
apprehended the Hazard, and were acquainted with the Difficulty of such an
Enterprise, began to inform the Grand Signior how impossible it was that this
Action should be accompanied with good success. To which Arguments he made no
other reply, than by a seeing obstinacy, resolved with the Ottoman Sword, to
cut all those Knots and Difficulties which opposed him in the Work. At length
one Salee Efendi, a Preacher, who had obtained some more than ordinary Esteem
with the Grand Signior, advised him, That before he commenced a Work of that
importance, he should inform himself of the true state of that Place, from a
certain Aga, who was lately returned from Malta. The Grand Signior being very
willing to hear any thing of this nature, called the Aga, who related to him
how impregnable both the City and Castle were; how the Knights were provided
against all Assaults; that the Island it self is only a Rock, not containing
Earth enough for an Army to entrench; that the Approaches must be made by the
Pick-Axe and Mattock, it being all Stone. In short, it was not a place to be
taken in one Summer, and the Winter coming on, it affording no shelter, nor
provisions of it self, was not capable of relief in Seas so stormy, and from
Countries so remote, without hazards, losses, and frequent Shipwracks. Ibrahim,
who had designed all along to make War upon Candia, seemed little concerned or
moved at this Discourse. The Galleys and Ships which were now all in a
readiness, being come forth to the Seraglio point, the Grand Signior entered
his Grand Ciosk, situated on the Bank of the Sea; where the Selictar Aga,
General, and all the Chief Commanders, came to perform the usual Ceremonies of
Obedience and Duty before their Departure. At this solemn Assembly the Grand
Signior declared, That his Intentions were to make War upon the Infidels,
according as every one should understand by his respective Commissions, which
should now be delivered unto them: That he expected the highest Demonstrations
of Courage in them imaginable, and what was agreeable to the Conductors of the
Ottoman Armies: That Reward and Punishment were in his Hands, and that he
resolved to dispense them according to their Merits: That they should not doubt
of all due Assistance and Succors; for he had so well contrived, and so justly
fitted all his Measures, that he was already provided of Men, Timber,
Ammunition, and Money sufficient to maintain and carry on this War for seven
Years. At which they all gave a shout, and declared, that they were ready to
spend their Blood and Lives in Execution of his Commands. Whereupon every one
received a rich Coftan, or Vest, and the General a Scimitar set with Diamonds;
who being a young Man of about 26, or 27 Years of Age, had a Council of six
graver Pasha's allowed him; and then the Commission for the War was brought
forth sealed, with Orders not to open it, until they were past the Dardanelli.
Hereat the noise of great and small Shot from the Galleys and Ships, resounded
through all Constantinople, and the Commanders repairing to their Vessels, the
Assembly broke up, and every thing was put in a posture to make Sail.

It was now the last day of April, 1645, old Style, when the Fleet first broke
ground, which consisted of 73 Galleys, besides the 8 Galleys of Barbary; 2
Mahons, or Galleasses, one great Gallion called the Sultana, 10 Ships of
Alexandria, 2 of Tunis, and 10 of English and Dutch Ships, which coming to
Constantinople for Trade, were there pressed into the Service, with about 300
Saiks and Caramussals, which carried Soldiers, Provisions, Ammunition, and
Utensils for War. Their Militia consisted of 7000 Janisaries, 14000 Spahees,
and about 50000 Timariots, and other Soldiers, with about 3000 Pioniers; these
all were to Rendezvous at Scio; where they arrived the 7th of May. But before
their departure from Constantinople, the Bailo Soranco, or the Venetian
Ambassador, thought fit, in Complement, and for discovery, to make a visit to
the Captain-Pasha, by whom he was received with frank Courtesy, and assurance
of Friendship; so that though he suspected the worst, yet could he collect no
certain assurances of Peace, or War; however he advised Signior Cornaro, then
Governor of Candia, that though he could not certainly penerate into the
bottom of the Turks Design, yet he apprehended that the Storm might fall on
that Kindom, understanding that the Captain-Pasha was not well inclined toward
the most Serene Republic: wherefore, he ought to be watchful and circumspect,
yet with as little demonstration of jealousy as was possible, so that if the
Turks should there arrive, he should afford them all conveniences of Watering,
Provisions, and other Refreshments.

The Fleet being departed from Scio, for Napoli di Romagnia, the Northern Wind
so freshned, and blew so hard, that the Galleys were separated, and forced to
put into diverse Ports, and the Saiks and Caramussals to Anchor at Micono and
Tino. At the latter of which, belonging to the Venetians, they had license to
Water, and and were refreshed with such provisions as the Island afforded; and
now after this flurry of Wind, the Fleet being again united, they were seen off
at Sea from Cerigo, an Island of the Venetians at the Mouth of the Archipelago,
and failing toward the Channel of Braccio de Maina; and the next day 9
Galleys, a Gallion, and a Brigantine, made toward the Isle of Cerigo, and sent
a Letter a shore by a Boat to the Proveditor, from the Pasha of Rhodes,
demanding their usual present of Coffee and Sugar, which was given them, they
assuring all Friendship, and real good Intentions toward the People, and
Dominions of Venice.

But in the mean time a Satia laden with Arms and Ammunition from Venice, bound
for Retimo, unhappily falling into the Turkish Fleet, was intercepted by them,
and taken, which unmasked all the Design, and made the Turks appear in their
true Colors, notwithstanding all their religious Protestations, and outwardly
fair Comportment, the usual disguise of the Mohammedan Sincerity.

Toward the end of May the Turkish Fleet was discovered from Carabuso, a small
Fortress of the Venetians, some distance off at Sea, standing to the Westward,
which gave some jealousy to them at Candia; and being compared with some
precedent Acts, as that of sounding the depth of Water about St. Theodoro with
a Brigantine, (which is a small Rock lying off of Canea) which pretended to
come from Sancta Maura with Turkey Merchants, afforded undeniable grounds of
assurance to those in Candia, that the War was designed against them;
howsoever, the Ottoman Fleet rendezvousing again at Navarino, a place far
distant from Candia, altered their Apprehensions at Venice, and elsewhere of
this War, deeming it now certain, that this Design had no other aim or mark but
that of Malta.

But this opinion was no sooner entertained, than it was confuted by open Acts
of hostility; for the Captain-Pasha being arrived at Cape Colonna, by some
called Sunio, immediately dispatched a Brigantine to Constantinople, with
advice of his Proceedings and Intentions to pass directly for Candia; whereupon
it was thought seasonable to publish the War against Venice, which was
performed with committing the Ambassador Soranco to Prision, and giving Orders
through all the Archipelago to destroy or enslave all the Subjects of that
Republic. And here the Turk practiced his usual beginnings of War with more
than ordinary Caution; for though with other Princes, whose Territories border
on him by Land, he usually endeavors to strike at the same time when he gives
the Salutations of Peace; Yet here being to contend at Sea, where he is
conscious his Forces are inferior to those of Venice, he practiced all those
feigned Artifices, confirmed with as many holy Vows and Protestations, as their
Religion hallows, and makes lawful, when they can bring advantage and increase
to the Mohammedan Faith.

But though the Venetian Republic was so politic as outwardly to demonstrate
a Religious Confidence of their potent Neighbor, whom they were conscious not
to have provoked by any breach of Capitulations; yet were not so secure of his
Faith, and so easy to believe his fair Dissimulations, as not prudently to
provide against the utmost Effects of his Power and Treachery. Wherefore,
whilst the Turk prepared, they armed likewise secretly, made considerable
Levies without noise, commisionated thirty extraordinary Commanders of Galleys,
took up seventeen English and Dutch ships into their Service, armed out two
Galliasses extraordinary; and when the Turk had unmasked his Design, they then
imparted their Condition to all the Christian Princes, craving their Succor
and Assistance to maintain the Common Bulwark of Christendom againtst the comme
Enemy. The Galleasses were commanded by Girolamo Morosini; the Galleys, of
which fifteen were made ready, and afterward put to Sea, all commanded by
Noblemen, were under the Conduct of Antonio Capello. Francesco Molino was made
Proveditor General, a Person of untainted Justice and Honor, and extraordinary
zealous and vigilant in the Public Interest, whose indefatigable Labors and
Care of his Country, promoted him afterward to be Doge of Venice. By his Order
and Counsel, extraordinary Proveditors were sent to Candia, Cerigo, and Tino,
as Places most feared, and in danger; and Orders were dispatched to Andrea
Cornaro, then General and Inquisitor in Candia, to arm out twenty Galleys from
the Arsenal of Canea; and to promote this Design the better, he hired two
English, and one Dutch Ship, then in Port of Malomocco, to carry unto Candia
Timbers fitted, and already squared at Venice, for building Galleys; besides
which he sent Cannon, Corn, and all Ammunition of War, with fifty thousand
Zechins in Gold for encouragement of the Militia, with a recruit of two and
twenty Companies of Foot, formed and collected out of diverse Nations.

Intelligence being come of the imprisonment of the Bailo at Constantinople,
the Senate by a common and unanimous Suffrage elected Francesco Erizzo, then
Doge, General of the Sea; judging, that their Arms would prosper under his
Command, which had formerly been successful under the auspicious Conduct of his
Ancestors; and he, though a Person of seventy four Years, worn out with Age and
Cares of the Public, did yet cheerfully consecrate the remainder of his days
to the Service of his Country. But whilst he prepared to crown the end of his
Life with the Glory of this important and generous Enterprise, Death terminated
all his Intentions, leaving him with the honorable memory of his past Actions,
and with a Laurel hanging over his Head, which had his Life continued, had been
planted on his Brows. But that this Accident might not give interruption to the
weighty Affairs now in had, Molino took his place, and proceeded in his Voyage
and Designs, and arrived with the Venetian Fleet at the Island of Corfu. In the
mean time the Turkish Fleet careened and fitted themselves at Navarine with all
Necessaries to assault Candia; in which interim advice came to Canea, that the
the Bailo was imprisoned at Constantinople, by a Letter from Soranco himself;
which he had dropped from the Window of his close restraint, and dispatched by
one of his Confidents with a Vessel express; which was not sooner arrived, than
it was that Night confirmed by all the Beacons or Watch-Towers of the Country;
who having discoverd the Turkish Fleet far distant as Sea, gave a general Alarm
by the Fires they made.

The next Morning being the 23/13 of June, they discovered the whole Fleet,
near Cape Spada, which being drawn up in the form of an half Moon, took up a
vast tract of Sea; and sailing slowly with fair Weather, and a smooth Sea,
displayed themselves with the greatest terror imaginable to the Islanders. At
length the lighter Vessels began to edge in with the Bank of Gogna, (which is a
place distant about eighteen miles from Canea) and were followed by the grosser
and heavier part of the Armata.

And now, before I proceed farther, I should make a pause, and describe the
Antiquity, the Geography, and the present State of this famous and renowned
Island, but that is already performed so distinctly and elegantly by other
Pens, that it shall be sufficient for me to declare here in brief terms, how
this Kingdom became the Patrimony or Possession of Venice. In the Year 1204, a
Sale thereof was made to this Republic, by the Marquess Bonifaccio of
Montferratto, by an Instrument sealed the 12th of August at Adrianople, and
signed, and delivered, in the presence of Marco Sanudo, and Ravano du Verona,
Ambassadors in the time of Enrigo Dandola Doge; but the People of this Island
not consenting unto the sale, opposed themselves against it, until the
Venetians by force of Arms procured their Obedience, and confirmed their
purchase by a double Title. Hereupon such noble Citizens as adventured their
Lives in his acquisition, obtained the Estates of the Rebellious Greeks, being
obliged in proportion to the Lands they held, to maintain Men and Horse at
their own Charge, and are therefore called the Feudatary Cavalry. So that the
whole Country is divided into three parts; viz. the noble Venetians or Cavalry;
secondly, the noble Candiots, or Colony, which were Infantry that came to
inhabit from Venice; and thirdly, the Greeks or Natives of the Country which
never rebelled, but took part with the Venetian State: the first two speak
Italian, and are of the Roman Church; the others speak Greek, and conserve the
Right of that Religion.

The Ottoman Fleet now touching the Shore at Gogna, took Livery and Seizin
quietly of that flourishing Isle of Candia, where they Encamped a while to
refresh their Forces, and prepare all things in order to their Conquest. In the
mean time, the news hereof alarmed all Venice, and not only hastened them in
the expedition of their Fleet, but warmed their applications to all Christian
Princes, from whom they craved help in the general defense of Christendom:
which some at first imagined would have been granted, as it was once in the
time of the Holy War; or that those whom the Declaration of a common Crusada,
or Devotion, or sense of Religion could not move, yet at least the
consideration of their Countries Defense, or the maintenance of a Bulwark of
Christendom, might persuade to wage Arms against the Turk, as a Common Enemy:
but what cold Apprehensions the Christian Princes entertained hereof, both the
faint Supplies and Assistances they administered, and their bloody and vigorous
Wars one against another, have abundantly testified, to the fatal loss and ruin
of that Country. And though in the beginning there were better hopes, by means
of the Pope's earnest intercession with all the Princes of Italy, to whom he
showed a fair Example, by uniting his own Galleys with the Venetian Fleet, and
amongst the rest prevailed also with the Republic of Genoua, to employ their
Galleys in this Noble Enterprise, which tended to the Glory of God, and the
common Safety and Preservation of Italy: yet that Leaven of vain Punctilio's,
which has so often betrayed the Christian Cause to the advantage of the Turk,
gave a stop for some time to these Proceedings. For before they would enter
into Arms, they desired the Genoeses, that the right of bearing the Flag should
first be determined in favor of their Admiral, before that of Toscany, or
Malta: And though the Pope, to take away this occasion of dispute, proposed to
have no other Flag worn besides his own, under which all Italian Princes,
without impeachment of their Honor, as Auxiliaries, and Military Adventurers
might promiscuously wage War; yet this could not appear satisfactory to the
Genoeses, who not only took this occasion to demand the precedence before
Toscany and Malta; to which the G. Duke (who was not inferior in State, and
superior in Title) and the Malteses (who time out of mind, and by Decree of
Charles the Fifth, claimed Precedence on the Seas before them) would never
assent; but also thought fit to avail themselves in this Conjuncture, to obtain
from the Pope the Grant of a Royal Court, and that Treatment which is given to
Kings, or Crowned Heads. But because these Demands seemed to contain those
Difficulties in them, which could not be granted without the manifest
displeasure of other Princes, the Pope resolved to afford what assistance he
could from himself, and therefore granted a Levy of a thousand Foot out of his
own Dominions, with free liberty to buy what Ammunition and Provisions were to
be found in the Ecclesiastical State, with imposition of a double Tithe or
Tenth on the Goods and Dominions of the Clergy; so that these Succors of the
Pope, and the Auxiliary Forces of Naples, Toscany, and Malta, under the Command
of Prince Ludovisio, General of the Church, being united to the Venetian Fleet,
did speedily compose a most puissant and formidable Force; however, by reason
of Dissentions amongst the Commanders, and other Misfortunes derived from
thence, to the Christian Arms, nothing succeeded fortunately this Year. For the
Turks having gained their landing at first without opposition, overthrew the
Christians in several small Skirmishes, and afterward forced Canea, the second
City of that Island, which they took with much blood and slaughter of the
Christians.

The Turks having made so successful a progress this first Year, as to possess
themselves of one of the most considerable Cities, took Courage to proceed in
their Conquests; in which they had the fortune to make themselves Masters in
the next place of Retimo; in defense of which, the General Andrea Cornaro, lost
his Life by a Musket shot. Nor more successful were the Venetians this Year at
Sea; for what with Quarrels among the Commanders, and with their coldness and
negligence in their Business, they suffered the Turkish Vessels to pass freely,
without giving them that interruption which was very facil to Men resolute and
concerned: Nor was the opportunity which presented to ruin the Turkish Fleet
made use of, then lying half disarmed, and ill provided, at the Isle of St.
Theodoro, (which is a Rock opposite to Canea) where at that time, it is
believed, they might all have been burned, had the occasion been improved,
agreeable to that Advantage which then offered: so that toward the latter end
of the Year, the General Molino returning Home, either by reason of some
distemper, or by revocation from the Senate, which seemed to be ill satisfied
with his ill Fortune, or his ill Management of the Public Affairs; he was
dismissed from his high Charge. And Gio. Capello, Procurator of St. Mark, was
constituted in his place.

This Year was remarkable for the ruinous Differences between Sir Sackvile Crow
Baronet, our King's Ambassador then residing at Constantinople, and the Turkey
Company. The Original of which seemed to arise from the Civil Dissentions at
Home; for so unhappy were those Times, and so ill affected were English Minds
with Rancour and Malice against each other, that this Leaven of Discord could
not be confined within the Banks of Great Britain and Ireland, but seemed to
diffuse it self over the Seas, and as a Contagion, infected the Minds, Goods,
and Interests of the English, to what Quarter or Climate soever they were
transported.

In the Year 1638, Sir Sackvile Crow was, with the Consent and Approbation of
the Turkey Company, dignified by his Majesty with the Title and Authority of his
Ambassador to the Grand Signior. For Maintenance and Support of which, the said
Company were to pay him the yearly Sum of five thousand Zechins, in four equal
Proportions, which is above the value of two thousand Pounds Sterling. And
farther, before his departure from England, paid him six hundred Pounds
Sterling toward the Furniture of his House, Plate, and other Necessaries;
defraying all the Charges expended for Transportation of his Lady, Followers,
and Provisions to Constantinople.

Sir Sackvile Crow, from the time of his arrival at the Ottoman Court, until
the end of the Year 1645, managed the Affairs of the Company to their general
Satisfaction, and with the Esteem and Honor of the Turkish Ministers, who
considered him as a Person of Courage and Resolution, and in every way
qualified for that Employment.

At length Differences arose between this Ambassador and the Company, touching
the Right and Title to that Benefit which is called Strangers Consulage is 2 in
the hundred, in the value of all the goods belonging to Stranger-Merchants,
laden on English Ships, and all other Ships which not being in amity with the
G. Signior, set up the English Colors, and come under the English Protection,
as is lawful by our Capitulations.
Strangers Consulage; the first pretending to the same on a Grant made to him
thereof by his Majesty, and the Custom of Sir Peter Wych, and other preceding
Ambassadors. The others challenging the same, as the chief and principal Means
they had to ease the vast Expenses they were at, for maintenance of their Trade
and Government; for which they had always contended and strugled with the Power
of preceding Ambassadors, and which Sir Sackvile Crow himself seems, by an
Article which he had made with the Company to have relinquished to them in
these words.

That during the time of his Employment as Ambassador, he would content himself
with such Allowance from the said Company for his Pains and Care to be taken in
their Business, as is specified in the said Articles, being 5000 Zechins per
Annum.

This Right of Strangers Consulage, is now confirmed to the Turkey Company, by
virtue of their Charter which his Majesty was pleased, in the Year of his Happy
Restoration, graciously to Renew, Confirm, and Amplify to them; the which was
more easily granted, by the concurrent Assistance of the Right Honorable the
Earl of Winchelsea, then designed for Ambassador to Constantinople, who on some
Considerations offered from the said Company, assented thereunto.

But Matters of a higher Nature than this, inflamed the Accounts and
Differences between the Ambassador and Company. For first, one John Wolf, at
that time Treasurer at Constantinople, becoming Insolvent for great Sums of
Money, Sir Sackvile Crow alleged, that those Debts were National, arising from
the late Changes of State Officers, their extravagant Exactions, and Avanious
Practices: and therefore to extinguish this Public Debt, he made a Leviation
of one hundred and ten thousand, nine hundred and fifty Dollars on the English
Estates at Constantinople and Smyrna, detaining the Companies Ships in those
Ports, until the aforesaid Debt was satisfied and cleared. The Ground and Cause
of which, will more plainly appear by this following Warrant.

Sir Sackvile Crow his Order, dated in Pera of Constantinople the 26th of
January 1645. Directed to all Captains, Commanders of Ships, etc. Prohibiting
the lading of any Goods or Estate on their Ships.
WHereas by the unhappy failings of some of our Nations here, and at Smyrna,
and through the many late Changes of this State's Officers, and their
extravagant Exactions on us in those Difficulties; and by sundry other avanious
ways, our Nation is brought into a great Debt: For which We, or those, and that
Estate which shall remain on the Place, who, and whatever, in case of Exigent,
and force of Payment, whenever that shall happen, must (if not otherwise
provided for) in all probability, and according to the rude Customs of this
State in like case, look to be made liable unto. There being at present a full
and competent Estate of the Levant Companies arrived here, and at Smyrna, which
as well by the Obligations of their Charter, as by the Laws of England, the
said Companies own Institutions and Customs in cases of like Nature, ought as
well to bear the said extraordinary as ordinary Charges, and so pay those
Debts, which either are, or shall be adjudged and declared to belong unto them.
We having taken pains in drawing the said Accounts to a Head, and for discovery
of the Truth thereof; and (after a Certificate being directed thereon) for the
more formal Satisfaction only of the said Company, being advertised that some
of those who with us have had the view, and been present at the Examination of
the said Accounts, whom it concerns on the Companies behalf to make such
Certificate, on our Order; for some private Respects, make scruple to certify
the said Debts, as they appeared before us and them: And hearing also that the
General Ships here in Port, and that at Smyrna, prepare, and make haste to be
gone: In Providence, as well for own safety in the Premises, as for that due
regard we owe to his Majesty's Honor, and the Public Interest for the future,
We find it requisite, and hereby order and require, that until the said Debts
shall be fully declared, and their payment settled by Leviation, and the same
paid or undertaken, in, and by some such fitting and secure way, or ways, as in
such case is requisite, and by us shall be determined and so declared: That
none of the Factors of this Scale, or that of Smyrna, by themselves, or others
whoever, after publication hereof, here and there respectively, lade on Board
either of the General Ships, or other Ships whatever, any Goods, Faculty, or
Estate whatever, for themselves or other whoever. And that the Captains and
Commanders of the said Ships, in the mean time, and until Our farther Order in
this behalf, not only forbear to take in, and lade aboard either of their Ships
any such Goods or Faculties for any of his Majesty's Subjects, or other
Strangers whoever; but also that they abide and depart not, either this Port,
or that of Smyrna Respectively, until our farther Order and License in that
behalf: Whereof not only the Merchants, Factors, Masters, and Commanders
aforementioned; but our Interpreters.
Druggermen, and other Vnder-Ministers here or there, are to take notice, and
observe accordingly; as they, and every of them concerned herein, will answer
the contrary at his or their Peril. Dated in Pera of Constantinople this 26th
of January, 1645.

To all Captains, Commanders of Ships, Merchants, Factors, Druggermen, and all
other his Majesty's Subjects and Ministers whoever, in the Ports of
Constantinople and Smyrna.
SACKVILE CROW.


The Turkey Company was altogether unfatisfied with this Leviation, alleging
that a great part of this Debt arose from Moneys lent by Sir Sackvile Crow
himself to Wolf, at a high Interest; for securing of which, and of his
Principal, he had in this manner taxed and charged their Estates. But Troubles
and Differences ended not with this Payment; for still the Controversy about
Strangers Consulage was depending, which with other Matters, caused great Heats
and Animosities on both sides: So that some of the Turkey Company, Men of the
better Principles, thought it most advisable to Petition his Majesty to
constitute another Ambassador, with Letters of Revocation, to recall this; but
others, who were the zealous Men of those Times, who had tasted the sweetness
of Sequestrations, and proved it to be the Grand Catholicon of all Remedies,
persuaded that his Estate should be Sequestered. This, I say, may perhaps have
been the attempt of some few; though the generality of the Company have so far
disavowed the Seizure of his Lands and Estate in England, that they declared
themselves ignorant of any Estate he had there. Howsoever this Apprehension
being fixed in the Mind of Sir Sackvile Crow, he proceeded to strange
Extremities against the Company: For he not only caused all the Goods and
Moneys belonging to them, within the Grand Signior's Dominions, to be
sequestered and seized by his Agents, but also imprisoned the Persons of all the
English Merchants and Factors which were considerable, either at Constantinople
or Smyrna. The Particulars of all which will appear with more clearness by this
following Warrant.

Sir Sackvile Crow his Second Warrant, dated in Pera of Constantinople the 30th
of April 1646, directed to John Hetherington, Lorenzo Zuma; Enordering (upon
false Pretenses) the Sequestration of the Merchants Estates at Smyrna,
according to a Schedule.
WHereas the Levant Company, sometime before our coming to this Place, by a
Court of their Assistants, thereunto especially authorized, treated with Us
touching a yearly Allowance for our Care and Pains during our residence here as
his Majesty's Ambassador; to be had and taken in such Particulars as might have
relation to their Trade and Occasions: And for a conclusion of such Treaty as
aforesaid, did offer unto us the election of any one of their Agreements,
formerly made with any of our Predecessors in like occasion. And for a further
manifestation of their sincerity in their said Offer, upon our accord
thereunto, did, at the Court aforesaid, in public give into our Hands and
Possession the Copies of five of their Agreements, made with our said
Predecessors, with Power to choose which of them we should best like of, to be a
Rule and Pattern for an absolute Conclusion and Condition to be drawn up
between us and them; thereon also promising that they would make, grant, and
confirm the like unto us. And whereas we thereon, and to the Purposes and Ends
aforementioned, chose and fixed upon that Agreement, which the said Company had
made with Sir Thomas Glover, formerly Ambassador, Resident for the Crown of
England, with this State: And his Majesty by his Favor, did assure the same
unto us, graciously promising to make his Employment of us here, as good and
beneficial in all the Allowances and Perquisites thereof, as it had been to any
of our Predecessors whoever, and we expected no less. The said Company finding
themselves mistaken in their Offer, (as they pretended) first retired from the
same, denying their said Agreement, (though sufficiently proved before his
Majesty); and then by force of Presents and Money given underhand to the
Officers of that Time, so prevailed against us, that we could not only not
obtain that Right, which since has appeared unto us, and (as well by their own
Agreement, as by his Majesty's Judgment then, Custom, and their former
Contracts) was due unto us; but were forced after to other Agreements with the
said Company, by which (over and above all such Rights, Privileges, and
Perquisites, as then were and should be granted unto us by his Majesty's
Capitulations; and besides all other Gratifications and Allowances accustomed
to be given to his Majesty's Ambassador, (which in Household Provisions only the
said Company assured us, were to the value of 800 l. per Annum Sterling, at
least) and over and above such Plate and Household Stuff as they assured us, we
should find of theirs here, and hold to our use during our Residence, (of which
we found not the value of an Asper) the said Company did covenant with us, (for
and in respect of our Pains and Care only therein agreed to be taken by us, in
their Affairs and Occasions as aforesaid, for and during all our time as his
Majesty's Ambassador with this State) they would pay, or cause to be paid unto
us, the Sum of 5000 VIII sterling.
Chickeens per An. to be paid by equal Proportions quarterly beforehand; by
their failing wherein (besides our other Engagements for them to a very good
Value) twenty and five thousand Dollars or thereabouts, rests at this day due
and unpaid unto us: And whereas also after the Agreements aforesaid, upon
several Arguments held before his Majesty, concerning the Rights of that
Consulage, which amongst other things is granted by the Grand Signior, and
payable by his Capitulations to his Majesty's Ambassador Resident at this
Imperial Port from Strangers, (to which the said Company could show no likely
or probable Title) the said Company were adjudged to relinquish their Pretenses
to the said Consulage; and a Grant thereof under his Majesty's Royal Hand and
Signet, was thereon made and given to us, for our better support during the
time of our Residence here. The said Company (upon Conditions between them and
us agreed) did also promise to give us Content therefore; with intent
nevertheless thereby to get advantage of our credulity and absence, and to draw
us out of suspect of their evil Intentions toward us, which has since (as
well by their several interruptions and hindrances here in the Collection
thereof, as their practices, and endeavors at Council Table before his
Majesty, and by their other Appeals to the Courts of Parliament, where in these
Times of Distractions, they presumed of some better advantage) has appeared
unto us: Whereby, and by suggesting several Untruths against us, and by other
false ways they have endeavored not only to deprive us of the Strangers
Consulage, and benefit thereof; but under that color also, and these their
Pretenses, to keep themselves from paying, as us from taking such other
Consulage, as was, and is as much our right and due unto us from themselves, by
the said Capitulations, and the Grand Signior's Grant thereon, for all their
own Goods traded in: And now of late, but suspecting our just Intentions of
making a claim thereto, (for until this present day we never made any demand
thereof, or public pretense therein) to prevent what they suppose we might
justly do in our own Right, (for we take God to Witness we knew no other
cause): under like unjust and scandalous Pretenses, we are certitified, that
they not only go about to get us removed from our Employment here, but upon
false Suggestions, loose and bare Suspicions only, have gotten Order for the
seizure of all our Lands and other Estates in England into their power; as some
of their own Servants and Factors here have the confidence to report and
affirm: and as we are assured from thence, without hearing of us; nay, so much
as intimation to us of the Grounds thereof, or such Matters and Things as they
pretend at least to have against us, whereby we might answer for our selves;
and so, whilst we are laboring (as for these many Years we have done, with all
fidelity) for them and their public Interest (whereof, as we have proof
sufficient in our Actions, so we have him that is Judge of the World for Witness
to our Conscience) they are contriving the ruin of us and our Posterity. Which
manner of proceeding, so unjust, horrid, and odious before God and Man (as in
all reason we ought) taking to heart, and our serious consideration, and as
well that Violence which is offered to the Laws, and his Majesty's Honor and
Interest therein, as our Self and our Family; not pretending to extend that
Authority which his Majesty has put into our Hands to unlawful Ends, but only
to make a just use of it for the right and lawful defense of our selves and it,
in the several Occasions aforementioned; finding by Account under the Hands of
the Treasurer of the said Company here, that for such Goods as they have
brought in and carried out from the Port of Constantinople, there is due unto
us according to the Capitulations, and the Grand Signior's Grants therein, to
the value of Dollars Ryals of 8/8, seventy four thousand: and that for the like
in Smyrna there is due Dollars Ryals of 8/8, one hundred thousand in circa; and
rating that Estate in Land which they have gotten into their power as
aforesaid, but at the value we were offered for it, viz. at ninety seven
thousand and five hundred Dollars; in all, two hundred seventy one thousand and
five hundred Dollars. Besides, (for ought we know to the contrary) they may
else have prevailed themselves upon of ours, and as due to us by Privy Seal to
the value of one hundred thousand Dollars; and Leases under the Great Seal to
near as great a value more. We hereby enorder Sequestration of all Moneys,
Merchandises, and other Goods and Faculties whatever, within the Dominions of
the Grand Signior wherever, belonging to the Parties and Members of the said
Company, in the Schedule hereunto annexed, the chief Fomentors, Contrivers, and
Abettors of these unjust and horrid Proceedings; requiring you, John
Hetherington, and you Lorenzo Zuma, or one, or both, or either of you, by the
help and means of that Officer sent by the Vizier, and those Commands in your
Hands, (being now at Smyrna on other like Occasions) according to your
Instructions herewith sent, to board and enter all Ships and Vessels, and to
break open, and enter into all and every of the Houses, Warehouses,
Counting-houses, of all and every of the Parties in the Schedule hereunto
annexed and aforementioned; and there to Attach, Arrest, and take into your
custody and possession; and as arrested and sequestered, to take, carry away,
and put into safe custody, all such Moneys, Merchandises, other Goods and
Faculties of what Nature soever that you shall discover, find out, and get into
your power, belonging to any of the Parties, or under the Marks of the Schedule
hereunto annexed; and the same to keep, so arrested and sequestered, for our
better Indemnity, Satisfaction, and Defense, against all Pretenses of the
Levant Company beforementioned whatever, until we may be heard therein by due
course of Law, and till farther Order from us in that behalf; for which this is
to be your Warrant. Dated in Pera of Constantinople, this 30th of April, Anno.
1646.

To our loving Friends and Servants, John Hetherington, and Lorenzo Zuma.
Sackvile Crow.
To perform and put in execution the foregoing Warrant, it was necessary to
make use of the Turkish Officers Power, and Authority: Wherefore Sir Sackvile
Crow demanding Audience of the Grand Vizier, and representing Matters unto him
in that manner, as he judged most agreeable to his Cause, was heard by him with
a gentle and gracious Ear; and assurances made to him of all Respect, Favor,
and Assistance imaginable. For the Turks had now smelt out a Cause in
Transaction, which with good improvement might be worth them many Purses of
Money; and was of such a Nature, as that their Religion, and Doctrine, obliged
them to nourish, having the prospect of gaining Money, and enflaming Christian
Discord. On these Grounds Sir Sackvile Crow easily obtained Commands from the
Vizier, directed to the Kadi of Smyrna, to act all things according to
direction of him the Ambassador; and to enforce Matters with better execution,
a Chaous, or Pursuivant, accompanied with John Hetherington, and Lorenzo Zuma
Interpreter, was dispatched to Smyrna, with Commands to carry up the Consul and
Factors to Constantinople, and to break open the Warehouses, and make seizure
on such Estates belonging to the Turkey Company, as would answer the Demands
and Pretentions of the Ambassador. Accordingly the Consul and Factory were
carried up, and with that other of Galata, imprisoned in the Ambassador's House.

In the mean time the Agents at Smyrna, with assistance of the Kadi, sealed up
all the Merchants Warehouses; but when it came to execution and Seizure, more
Difficulties arose; for the Turks, Armenians, and Jew-Merchants, made high
Clamours to the Justice, that many of the Goods belonged unto them, some were
not yet paid for, others were only Pawns in the English Hands; and all the Town
being desirous to favor the Cause of the Merchants, a great Uproar and Hubbub
arose amongst the People: The Kadi affrighted hereat, grew more slack and faint
in his Proceedings; but the Cordial of 1500 Dollars, and Gratuities to his
Servants, overcame the Difficulties, and gave him new Resolution; so that at
length, being attended with the Principal Officers of the Town, he began first
with the Consul's House, making Seizure, and delivering out of the Warehouses
all the Goods found there; with some Caution howsoever, and respect to those
Pretensions which Stranger-Merchants made thereunto; as appears by the
following Letters.

Joh. Hetherington and Lorenzo Zuma, their Letters to Sir Sackvile Crow,
advising further of their Proceedings, dated in Smyrna, June 16. 1646.
Right Honorable,
YEsterday we received your Lordships of the 4th present, being the Copy of the
3d: And to day we received your Lordships's of the 8th, and rejoice to hear
your Lordship is in such a readiness for your just Demands, and wish your
Lordship less Trouble, and better Success than we this day have had, and we
doubt for many days shall encounter here. This morning the Cadie's Son, with
his Neipe and principal Officers came; and we began first with the Consul's
House. But before we began, 'twas spoken in the Kaddie's own House, and all
over the Town, our Design to seize what we could find; about seven a Clock his
Son came and entered the Consul's House, and opened all the Warehouses, and took
from thence, with Elford's and Keeble's, some four hundred Clothes, and nine
Bales Mohairs; we left behind us 38 Bales of Silk, 13 Bales his Servant
pretended were sold by his Master to Mr. Brent, to be paid by Bill of Exchange
at Constantinople, and when advice came the Bills were paid, the Goods should
be delivered; in the mean time they lie in Mr. Lancelot's Warehouse, with some
40 Clothes, 60 Barrels of Tin, which Tin belongs to Mr. Sainthill, and sealed
up by the Neipe and us. Before we had ended at this House, the whole Town was
in an Uprore, being fomented by Jews, and some of the young Fry left behind,
and proclaimed in the Streets, that the Town would be undone, the Trade lost
and go to wrack, if this was suffered; so that before the Consul's Door were so
many of the scum of the Town, the Streets were packed thick of them. On the
other side, a more unruly Enemy threatened worse things, the Master of the
Golden Lion, who had before given Barnardiston 9000 Dollars at Cambio, and had
no Goods in his Possession, hearing how it would fare with them, Lands forty
Men at Barnardistons's House, and vowed he would have his Money or Goods, or
swore he would beat down the Town; so likewise the Jonas got her Sails to
Yards, that the Kaddie's Son and the Chiouz, desired to let it alone until
another day, for fear of worse Events: So when they had made an end at
Lancelot's House, would stay no longer, but promised to come another day.. The
Estate before mentioned we carried away in spite of Envy, and have put it up
in a safe Cane. As soon as this was done, because the Captain would not come
ashore, I got Jordan to go aboard the Golden Lion, and know the Master his
Intent, and to acquaint him with the Danger might ensue thereon; all we could
urge was nothing, except he had satisfaction for his 9000 Dollars; at last told
him, if we knew where his Estate lay, we would endeavor to help him to it; so
he found it out, and we delivered it to him, and the Man was very well
satisfied. And now we hope to find little Impediment, and to morrow Morning the
Caddie's Son promises to come again, and we doubt not the same day but to make
an end. If your Lordship saw the little regard these People bear to the Grand
Signior's Commands, the Caddie, or ought else but their private Ends, your
Lordship would (as we hope your Lordship will) not blame us if we procured but
the half of what your Lordship's Letter mentions. To morrow (if God bless us)
we shall send your Lorship more punctual Advice, and for the present crave
leave to subscribe our selves,

Smyrna, June 16. 1646. Your Honors Most faithful, most obliged, and most
humble Servants, John Hetherington. Lorenzo Suma.


John Hetherington, and Lorenza Zuma 's Letter to Sir Sackvile Crow; dated in
Smyrna, June 19. 1646.
Right Honorable,
OUrs of the 16th advised your Lordship, how with the Caddie's Son, his Niepe,
and Chia, we had entered the House of Mr. Lancelott, and taken into our
possession the Goods we found therein, not pretended unto by Strangers; and how
by the insolency of Nicholas Terrick, Master of the Hopewell, (formerly the
Golden Lion) we were interrupted that day from proceeding any farther; and how
by the means of Captain Jordan, we had pacified that young, rash, and
undiscreet Man; and that we hoped the next Morning to proceed without
interruption, but it fell not our so: for the next Morning we went to
Barnardiston's House, thinking to make all sure there; and when we had begun,
in comes the Master with a Crew of his own, and said, those Goods he had
recieved were not sufficient to give him satisfaction, and demanded of us the
rest. We answered, We could not give him these Goods we had sealed up before he
came into Port, for wat he demanded; but assured him if he knew of any thing
standing out, we would endeavor, the best we could, for his Satisfaction: Upon
this, as we understood since, a young Man of the House whispered the Master in
his Ear, and told him, if he were not satisfied before the Goods went out of
the House, all was lost, he would never have a Penny of it: Upon this, away
goes the Master aboard, with this young Man in his company, and loosed his
Sails, but threatened nothing. Upon this come in the Jews, and told the Niepe
and the Chia, that the Master would shoot down the Town; but for all our
persuasions that he durst not, away runs the Niepe and his Company, and leaves
us there alone: so we resolved to have done it our selves; but the Merchants
had so worked with the Hamalls, that there was not one to be seen; so being
alone, and seeing his Boat coming ashore, well manned, and fearing a surprise,
we presently repaired to the Chiouzes, and desired him to go with us to the
Caddies, to see if we could have any better assistance from him. By this time
the Town was in a great Uproar, and the People something too insolent; the
Caddie, to prevent the worst, presently caused the Shops to be shut up, and
immediately sent for all the chief Men of the Town, (who by Presents before we
had made our Friends) and there before them all, and a great company of the
Townsmen, cause the Commands to be read, and told them how much they were bound
to see the Grand Signior's Commands put in execution, and what dishonor it
would be for one Ship to command the Town.. So after they had disputed the
Business, the Caddie sends an Officer aboard (accompanied with the Druggermen
to the Nation) to know whether he would hinder the prosecution of the Grand
Signior's Command, or no, and to know his Answer? He presently denied he ever
intended to shoot at the Town, only desired his own: So presently after the
People were a little appeased, we went to work again, and so this day have
finished all: it being done in such confusion, we cannot give your Lordship
that exact Account you may expect within a day or two; for then we will send
your Lordship the Particulars, with the Values; in mean time we stand upon our
Guard, having some 20 or 30 of the Soldiers of the Castle to keep watch every
night; for (my Lord!) here is no small Hobbub in the Town, and threatening both
of us and the Estate, but we will secure both as well as we can. We have sent
your Lordship a rough Draught of what we have, and what we have left sealed up,
and find it fall short far of what your Lordship expected: the sooner your
Lordship disposes of it, the better; for assure your self, there is daily some
Design or other hatching: We should be very sorry, after all this, to have it
miscarry, therefore pray (my Lord!) dispose of it (to prevent the worst) as
soon as you may. Your Lordship was pleased to inorder us to change our Lodging,
being too near the Waterside, and in a Merchant's House; which, as soon as we
can get a secure House, we will; but the farther from the Waterside, the more
dangerous, if the People of the Country should intend us any ill.

The French, and many others, pretend Debts of many of those People that are
gone up, and would know who shall pay them, and pretend to be paid out of their
Estates; but we have put them off, telling them, we believe your Lordship will
hardly let your Estate go to pay their Debts; nevertheless, shall advise your
Lordship of it: so have secured none, only to one Huzoone Amet Aga, one of the
chief Men in the Town here, Mr. Lancelott having given him a Bill of Exchange
for 475 Dollars, and the Bill returned unpaid, we were forced to deliver into
the Hangee's Hands, for his Security, 10 Clothes.

We have given the Ships liberty to lade, by reason of their continual
grumbling, but fear our Design on the Jonas will not take; for the Caddie
seeing the stubbornness of Terrick, will not assist us as he promised. We have
not ought to enlarge at present, but to subscribe our selves,

Your Honors, John Hetherington, Lorenzo Zuma.


Matters running thus high, and the Breach made so wide, there remained little
hopes of an Accommodation: For now the Merchants at Galata, having obtained
their Liberty from the Ambassador's House, by the Vizier's Command, entered into
a Consultation in what manner to govern their Affairs, electing some particular
Men to that Employment, which they called by the Name of the Sealed Knot, which
much provoked the Anger of Sir Sackvile Crow, and more, because that deserting
his Protection, they made Applications to the Here Coppes, Agent for the States
of Holland; who readily embraced the defense of their Cause, and willingly
represented to the Grand Vizier the Aggrievances, and ill Treatment of which
they complained. The French Ambassador, on the other side, being a great
Favourer of Sir Sackvile Crow and his Proceedings, assisted him both at Smyrna
and Constantinople. All which will more particularly appear by the following
Letters.

The Factors General Letter to the Levant Company, dated the 28th of June,
1646, in Constantinople.
Right Worshipful,
SIrs, at present we have our Heads and Hands full, and all little enough to
preserve your Estates from devouring, and out selves from that Evil Consequence
might ensue upon such unheard of Proceedings and Intentions, as have been long
in private agitation; but when the Monster came to the Birth, there wanted
strength to bring forth; so, in a good hour we may say, the Snare is broken,
and doubt not the Devices of the Crafty is frustrate by him, whose Almightiness
shows it self most, when we Mortals are least capable to help our selves. We
shall, according to our Obligation, give your Worships some account of the last
Progressions of his Lorship Sir Sackvile Crow, whom his Majesty sent hither
Ambassador, and to be a Protector of your Estates, and our Persons; how he has
performed this Charge and Duty formerly, your Lorships have in part heard; what
has happened of late, we shall now chiefly insist upon.

After his Lordship had caused the stay of the Ships in this Port, and at
Smyrna, under pretense of this State's requiring it, in respect of their Wars
with the Venetians, the Sampson and Smyrna Merchant, having been here almost
seven Months, to the great loss and damage of Ships and Goods; he picks a
quarrel with the Factory of Smyrna, for not complying according to his Order,
in the payment of their Parts of the last Leviation-Mony; and hereupon sends
down John Hetherington one of his Servants, a most lewd, debaucht, profane,
riotous Fellow, (yet his Lordship's Kinsman) accompanied with two Chiouzes, two
Druggermen, a Janizary, and other Servants, to proceed with those who should
refuse to pay their Leviation according to the Instructions he had given the
said Hetherington, and Lorenzo Zuma, Druggerman: But before the arrival of
these Agents, the Nation there had undertaken the payment by an Obligatory
Letter to his Lordship; this would not satisfy, nor deposition of Goods for
Security, until Answer should come from hence of the payment of their Bills of
Exchange, which was tendered; but the second day after their arrival,
Hetherington and his Retinue goes to the Caddie's, and thither causes the
Consul and all the Nation to come; where it was pretended they had laden the
William and Thomas with Corn, and sent her away; and therefore, by virtue of an
Imperial Command, (very privately here procured) the Consul, and six more of
the Nation, were delivered into the Hands of the Chiouz, and so brought up
hither, not being suffered to return to their own Houses, but put a day and a
night into an offensive dark place, the Doors and Windows not only shut, but
nailed upon them, not suffering either their Friends or Servants to come at
them, or a Window open till the evening, for which also they paid Dollars 100.
In this disgraceful manner they were brought hither, where they have been since
the 22d of the last Month, Prisoners in his Lordship's House to the 21st
present, notwithstanding they had complied in paying the Leviation Moneys in
less than a Week after their arrivals; and by fair Promises, put off from day
to day, for their dispatch to their Business at Smyrna, which could not but
much suffer by their absence: Their magazines and Counting-houses continued
sealed from the time of their Attachments; the Spips not permitted to lade, or
depart, though empty; and no Debts due to them would be paid in this their
Absence and time of Distraction.

The Leviation Moneys being satisfied, (of which Dollars 31000, his Lordship
forced into Cancellaria); and we of Smyrna expecting no more rubs in the way,
his Lordship, the 16th Instant, calls a Court, and there declared, That of what
Moneys had been collected, there would not remain much on the old Account;
therefore provision must be made for the future growing Charge, for so much as
upon this pretended Imbargo, no Ships would come in haste, and he and his must
be maintained, which he would provied for: Hereupon, when we could not do
otherwise, Dollars 25000 was promised, half by this Factory, for which his
Lordship caused us to enter into Bond, as he did those of Smyrna for the other
half; this being effected, which we should not neither altogether have been so
ready to have complied in, but thereby to put a period to all other Demands,
and enable our selves to proceed in our Business for your Worships better
Service.

The 18th present his Lordship calls another Court; and after arguing of some
General Matters, with a seeming sadness, tells us how that he had been wronged
by false Information from hence and Smyrna, (but he was so far from proving it,
as that he would not discover so much as whom he suspected) and thereupon the
Levant Company at Home had, by means of the Parliament, procured Sequestration
of his Estate and Lands in England, and endeavored to surprise his Person; and
therefore, according to Religion, Reason, and common Policy, he ought to secure
himself and his Hostages; and thereupon he departed from us, requiring the
Nation speedily to resolve of some present Satisfaction that might secure his
Estate at Home, and person here, otherwise he vowed to God, he would suddenly
do it himself, with no little disadvantage to our selves and Principals. These
strange, unreasonable, and unexpected Demands, filled us with amazement, not
knowing what Answer to give to such a groundless demand; we desired the
Secretary Signior Dominico to know his Lordships more particular Desires
therein, that so we might better understand him, and to put his Demands into
such a moderate way, as he might receive some Satisfaction. He returned us
Answer, that we must resolve to satisfy his aforesaid Demands before we went
thence: Whereupon the Gates were shut, and also Guards set upon us, that we
should not converse with any, or convey so much as a Paper out of Doors. Thus
we are all surprised, made close Prisoners, and our Counting House, Warehouse,
and Chambers sealed up, to make sure of our Goods and Estates there also.
Continuing in this sad Condition all Night, and finding no Motion to proceed
from his Lordship to declare himself farther, four or five of us was appointed
by the generality, personally to crave his Lordship's particular Desires and
Demands of us: Whose Answer was, That the lowest value he could put upon his
Lands the Company had sequestered, was 25000 pounds Sterling; and for the loss
he should sustain by being put out of the Ambassadorship, which he says his
Majesty has granted him for his Life; therefore the Strangers Consulage he
rates at Dollars 5000 per Annum; which for the clear Gain of seven Years to
come, is Dollars 35000; for which he declared that he would not accept of any
Personal Security or Obligation whatsoever, but a present disposition of
Dollars 160000 in Money or Goods, into his own hands must be made. And if to
this we would not condescend, he told us, That he at the last Sacrament had
vowed to God (as he does now) to sacrifice his Estate, Himself, Wise and
Children, for the execution of this his absolute Intent; and till then, neither
our Persons, Estates, Ships here, or at Smyrna, should be free. We told his
Lordship, that finding not any of us had heard of any such Things was (or
intended to be) done against him by the Company, it would give us great
Satisfaction, to show us those Advices he grounded this Pretense upon. To this
no Answer was then given by himself, but dismissed us, leaving it to our last
and speedy Resolution, because he was resolved to strike home. Immediately
after he sent us word by a second, That he could not let his Honor descend so
low, as to show his Advices to any. This empty Reply, gave us too much reason,
not only to conclude this to be a feigned Pretense, but made us sufpect his
Intention and Aim was at all the Nation's Estate in the Country; and therefore
we returned him this reasonable and defensive Answer, as your Worships will
particularly perceive by the enclosed Paper: whereunto is adjoined his Reply to
that our Answer, as he pretended; tho it appears it was intended before, it
being dated a day before our Answer. Whilst thus we continued, it happened that
those four of us were fortunately absent from Court that day, who hearing of
our Conditions, wherefore, and why we were thus detained, and what an ill
Period these Proceedings tended unto, if not timely and prudently prevented;
they used their best endeavors to free us and your Livelihoods from the Claws
of Tyranny and Covetousness; they applied themselves to Signor Illustrissimo
Coppes, the States of Hollands Agent: who as he was ever a Friend and Favourer
of the Nation, so now he gave us good and great testimony thereof in this our
greatest Need and Extremity: and chiefly by his means with a Sum of Money;
together with the Clamors of the Jews, and many other of the Grand Signior's
Subjects against this our present Abuse, and destruction of future Trade: The
Vizier (whom they had well and sully possessed with the Truth of all Things)
after three days Imprisonment, sent a Chiouz for us to his Lordship's House,
from whence we were carried before the Vizier, who much upbraided his Lordship,
saying, He never gave him Commands for such Proceedings, notwithstanding his
Lordship's avaneous Allegations against his own Nation, by saying, an English
Ship at Smyrna was laden with Powder, Ammunition, etc. and there resided for
assistance of the Turks Enemies; and other the like Abuses, and destructive
Courses against those here; tending not only to the confiscation of Ships and
Estates, but the risgo of enslaving our Bodies, if not the loss of all or some
of our Lives, had his Hellish Plots taken effect. The next day after our
general Commitment, arrives five more of our fellow Factors from Smyrna, there
seized upon and made Prisoners; and so by his Lordship's Command, in that
nature brought to his House, and put amongst us, notwithstanding the advice
from, their Correspondents hence was at Smyrna, (before their departure thence)
that their part of Leviation Money was all paid in here; yet their Leviation,
with one third more in Moneys and Goods, was takne again from them by his
impudently impious Ministers there, and all the rest of their Goods continued
sealed up: So the Intent (as your Worships may plainly perceive) was no other
than first to get the Moneys here paid, then to seize upon their Persons, and
next to take away and secure their Estates; thereby to prevent a just,
reasonable, and natural Defense; and now it too plainly appears, (because his
Lordship's Imployers had taken course no Messengers should come unto us);
Horsemen are daily dispatched unto us by our Friends at Smyrna, advising us to
the 20th Instant, of the unnatural and devouring Progressions they had there
made; which was done by the assistance of the Caddie, whom they had well
bribed, beginning to act there at the same time as we were here all imprisoned;
so there was no intent of staying for our Answer to his extravagant Demands.
They first fell upon Mr. Lancelot's House, thence proceed all throughout the
Nation; so that they have not only taken away all the Goods, Moneys, and
Effects whatsoever they could find in their Houses, at Home or Abroad, but
broke open and ransacked all our Chambers, Trunks, and Counting-houses, which
mounteth to a far greater value than his demands of Dollars 160000; and by
large Promises to Informers, endeavor to discover and take what is owing them
abroad by People of the Country; and have so threatened our Friends and Servants
to deliver our Books, and declare where is more of our Estates, that they are
constrained to leave our naked Houses to the open World, and betake themselves
to the Ships in Port for Refuge. All this it seems contents them not, but are
contriving Provisions, by policy and force of some Rogues of the Country, to
unlade what Goods the Nation had put on board the Jonas. For all which, we have
not only the advice of our distressed Friends there, but such infallible
Information, as your Worships may perceive by the enclosed authentic Copies of
Letters from his Instruments at Smyrna to his Lordship here; by which you will
too plainly perceive his Lordship did, and still does aim at all the Estate the
Nation had in the Country; and for that cause he was so much enraged for the
departure of the Hercules, and William and Thomas, whose Goods he esteemed as
so much loss to him.

We have been now seven days out of his Lordship's hands, and are endeavoring
to free that Estate they have already taken at Smyrna, as also to defend our
Selves and your Estates in future from him, and free the Ships out of Port,
(which no question at last will be proved have been detained by his Lordship to
this ill purpose) and if possible, to procure the return of Dollars, 20 in
30000, his Lordship has unavoidably forced from us in the Leviation Account,
upon strange Pretenses. All which (by the assistance of our obliged and worthy
Friend Signior Illustrissimo Coppes; together with the expense of Dollars 30 in
40000, to the Vizier and other Turkish Ministers) we doubt not but speedily to
effect; for without this honest defensive Remedy, we can expect nothing but
ruin to all your Estate in the Country, which still he threatens, and
endeavors by all his devilish Policy and Means to effect: But the Vizier, and
the two Caddeleskiers, who are our Judges, are so possessed with the Truth and
Reason of our Cause, as well by the People of the Country, as our Selves, that
they have given us full assurance, by Promises, Protestations, and sound
Probabilities, that our just Demands shall be accomplished; for which we all
faithfully and earnestly endeavor Night and Day, and so do hourly expect a
good determination of it: and till there be an Issue or Settlement given to
this our confused Condition, (which we hope will not continue for many days) no
particular Principal must expect Advice from any Factor here, because no
private Man can fitly advise any thing, till the general Business be better
ordered: And as we proceed therein, we shall by all Ways and Conveyances give
your Worships a true and exact Account. We do humbly beseech your Worships to
acknowledge the good Offices of the State's Agent to their Ambassador with you,
and so fully certify him, that Illustr. Sign. Coppes appeared no ways against
his Lordship as Ambassador, or trenching on the King's Honor, but respectfully
and modestly for the safety of your Estates.

To particularize all Passages and Circumstances in this Business, would prove
more troublesome than needful to your Worships, so please to accept of this
Relation; for this is the present stat^ of yours and our Condition; which
though not so well as we could wish, yet better than we could imagine; for the
Hand was up, the Match lighted, and a little more time would have blown up all,
We need not put your Worships in mind speedily to send us another Protector,
seeing the Necessity of your Occasions craves it too plainly; and in confidence
of your speedy Resolution thereof, we shall continue, hoping our Desires will
be satisfied, and the Estates in better security, by his speedy arrival here,
which God in Mercy grant.

His Lordship's Cause is so bad, that Signor Dominico your Secretary, Signior
George, and all other Druggermen, have not only declined his Lordship, but
apply themselves to us, (and especially the former). In fine, we conceive his
Lordship finds his former bad Proceedings have made him incapable to return
into England, and also uncertain of his Residence here; which, together with
the improvident use he has made of his Golden Time, that he intended to seize
upon all He and his unworthy Instruments could catch hold of; for to this
purpose he diverted the Golden Fleece's advantageous Design for Venice; which
at first was approved and caused by his own consent; and occasioned her Factor
here, to whom she was consigned, to let her him to freight, that so Himself,
Family, and undue gotten Estate, may be conveyed (as in supposed) into France,
with whose Ambassador, there has been often a more than ordinary
correspondency of late.

Galata of Constantinople, June 28. 1646. Before the sealing up of our Letter,
we have procured an Imperial Command for the recovering of the Estate into our
Hands, taken away at Smyrna; as also for the attaching the Persons, and
bringing those good Agents of his Lordships hither, to answer their Proceedings
and Behavior: the obtaining of which Command, we are not a little glad of,
being our Obligatory Testimony of the Vizier's being our Friend, and ties him
thereby to continue so, which we hope effectually to find, two days hence, when
his Lordship is to appear with us before him; but in case he refuses (as
already he has done) the Vizier will give Sentence against him.

Your Worships may be pleased to take notice, that his Lordship's chief
Counselor, in these his undue Proceedings, is Mr. Henry Hyde, of whose good
Service in your former Occasions at the Morea, we need not to give testimony;
but can assure your Worships, that since his coming hither, he has occasioned
great Disturbance among the Nation; and now at last (had the Design before
mentioned taken effect) mingt have raised his decayed Fortunes, by the ruin of
Yours and our Estates; but, thanks be to God, the Counsel of Achitophel is
truned into Folly. And for your late Treasurer John Woolf, the satisfying of
whose Debts has so mounted the last Leviation, he is so far from acknowledging
the Courtesies done in acquitting him from his Creditors, that he is become
Assistant (though a weak one) to his Lordship in the Proceeding aforementioned:
And having deserted Galata, with Mr. Henry Hyde, resides at his Lorship's,
laying their Heads together in contriving Mischief against those from whom they
have had their Maintenance.

In case your Worships should not be in a posture to procure an Ambassador so
soon as you may desire, that you would please in the interim, and as soon as
may be, to obtain a Letter from his Majesty to the Grand Signior, or Vizier, in
approbation and acknowledgment of what is done; and that his Lordship be not
nimbler than your Worships in getting the like against us, which doubtless he
will endeavor. We shall not farther enlarge at present, but intend shortly,
when all things shall be fully and absolutely settled, to write to your Worships
again. So we rest.

At Instant a Copy of his Lordship's Letter, with others directed to him, being
come to hand, we send them herewith; and from Smyrna are advised that the
Persons of Hetherington and the Druggerman are detained aboard our Ships there;
and by this time the Command is with them, which will warrant the bringing them
up with their Papers, that are also aboard; by which the Plot will more plainly
appear. To morrow we expect his Lordship's appearance before the Vizier, when
we have hopes to reward the Trouble he intended others, etc.

Kept until the 6th of July, 1646. Your Worships most obliged and humble
Servants, John Wyld, John Lancelot, Nicholas Read, William Ashley, Thomas
Berkley, Dixwell Brent, Nath. Barnardiston, James Moyer, James Modyford, Daniel
Edwards, William Chapel, Roger Fouke, Gyles Ball, John Tie, John Ball, William
Pearl, John Pixley, George Hanger, Samuel Barnardiston, John Swift, William
Gough, Thomas Pigot, John Abney, Francis Ashwell, Robert Frampton, Gyles Davis,
John Plomer, James Davison, William Osburn, Henry Davy, Richard Strode, Philip
Farewell, John Erisey, Jonathan Dawes, Ralph Gosnold.

Your Worships most obliged, most humble, and faithful Servant, Domenico
Timone, Secretary.




The Factors General Letter from Smyrna, dated the 4th of July, 1646, to the
Levant Company.
Right Worshipful Sirs,
IT may please you, our last from hence was by the Ship William and Thomas,
advising his Lordships Proceedings for another Leviation, for discharging your
Debts at Constantinople, being then informed that the whole amounted unto
Dollars 118109; and how we were resolved to withstand it, until your Worships
further Pleasure should be signified unto us concerning the same, for such
Reasons as we then presumed to lay open unto you; and that in the mean time we
had presented our Grievances to his Lordship's gracious perusal, the Copy
whereof went annexed to our said Letter, to both which you may please to have
reference.

The 24th of March following, our Consul called a Court, and declared his
Lordship's Answer to our said Letter, disliking our Proceedings; and by a new
Order prohibited the lading of Goods, and receiving them on Board, and the
departure of Ships, until the said Leviation were paid, according to his former
Order, and Schedule now set down, showing each Man his proportionable part for
his Factory of Smyrna, amounting in all to Dollars 54950, and for the Factory
at Constantinople, to Dollars 56000, is together Dollars 110950. Whereupon, we
generally desired that his Lordship would be pleased to suspend the execution
of the said Order of Leviation, until such time we should receive your Worships
farther Order about it, without which we our selves were like to pay it out of
our own Purses, as in the last Leviation; receiving since particular Orders
from some of our Principals, not to pay any Leviations, otherwise it should be
for our own Accounts, and not theirs.

The 24th of April, the Consul called another Court, signifying unto us, that
his Lorship did require an account for the departure of the Ship William and
Thomas, and Success, contrary to his Lordship's Commands, there being an
Officer of the Vizier's come down to apprehend Captain Tho. Porter, and to
carry him up to Constantinople, (which Ships departed at their own pleasures,
being not in our powers to stay them.) And that concerning the Leviation it was
inevitable, and his Lordship was resolved upon it, and therefore would force us
unto it, and expect repair of Honor from the Delinquents. Whereupon fearing
his Lordship's farther displeasure, which might beget some greater
Inconveniences amongst us, we presumed to yield unto his Lordship's Commands,
by way of a submissive orderly compliance, and conform our selves unto the
payment of our parts of the said Leviation, in proportion to the Estates were
received on the last general Ships, Hercules, Sampson, and Smyrna-Merchant,
according to our particular Assessments; as appears by our general Letter
presented to his Lordship, and entered in Cancellaria, grounded upon the result
of this days Court; desiring his Lordship would be pleased to allow us four
Months time for payment, for such Reasons as we have alleged in the same.

The 6th of May, the Consul told us he had received other Letters from his
Lordship, prohibiting not only the Lading of Goods, and the Departure of any
Ships, until the Leviation be settled; but also therein more fully signifies and
declares, That until the Grand Signior's Fleet be gone forth, he cannot permit
any Ship, either at Constantinople, or here, to lade or be dispatched; and that
accordingly his Lordship is so required of this State. And in like manner has
ordered and commanded those whom it concerns, both above, and in this Port, to
observe the same. And moreover farther witnessing, which accordingly (as he
said) he was bound to acquaint us, how that the Embargo at Constantinople, and
here, was seconded; and his Lordship, to avoid farther Dangers and
Inconveniences to the Public, could not refuse his Consent thereunto.

The 10th of May arrived here Mr. John Hetherington, a Servant to his Lorship,
and Signow Lorenzo Zuma a Greek, one of his Lordship's Druggermen, from
Constantinople; who the next Morning moved our Consul to call a Court for the
Nation; where being assembled, the Consul told the said Hetherington and
Lorenzo, That their Desires were performed, and therefore required them to
deliver what they had in Commission from his Lordship: who produced an Order of
the 27th of April, directed to the Consul and Us, for payment of the said
Leviation forthwith, or else to proceed according to his farther Order,
Warrant, and Instructions in such behalf; and we to be answerable to such Loss,
Damage, and Inconveniences as may ensue thereby. To which we answered, That
the Leviation was subscribed unto, and therefore desired the said Hehterington
and Lorenzo to stay four or five days, until his Lordshio should return Answer
to our Letter of the 24th of April. The said Lorenzo told us, He would retire
and peruse hsi Lordship's Commission, and in two hours return, to have a more
full and satisfactory Answer from us: which being expired, he declared, That
his Lordship's Commission required forthwith ready Money or Goods, (being hsi
Instruction, from which he could not vary). Whereupon Mr. John Lancelot first
answered, (as he was a Merchant) He could not deposit his Cloth, for his
Credit's sake, but would give his Bills for his and Mr. Dixwell Breat's
proportionable part of the Leviation, payable at Constantinople per Mr. Thomas
Pigot, at five days sight, into his Lordship's Cancellaria; which was refused,
unless they would deposit the value in Cloth, and one third part more toward
Charges, in the possession of him the said Lorenzo; which they said again, for
their Credits sake (as they were Merchants) could not consent unto; so referred
themselves unto the said Lorenzo's farther proceedings, if these Proffers would
not be accepted of, being not possible for them at present to procure Moneys at
Interest, or otherwise.

The like Conditions we all in general proffered for our proportionable parts,
but were refused by the said Hetherington and Lorenzo. Whereupon the Consul
told them, they had all our Assents for payment of the Leviation; and if that,
with such Reasons and Proffers as propounded, might not be satisfactory, the
Consus, and we in general, referred our selves to the said Lorenzo's farther
Proceedings.

After this, the said Hetherington and Lorenzo presently repaired to the
Caddies, accompanied with a prime Chiouz of the Vizier's, and declared their
farther Commissions: After publication whereof, the Caddie sent for the Consul,
and all our Nation, where the Capitulations were first taken away by Warrant,
and the Consul in a most barbarous manner was laid hold on, with Dixwell Breat,
Daniel Edwards, John Pixley, Samuel Barnardistion, George Hanger, and James
Moyer, and committed Prisoners into Custody of the said Chiouz and Officers,
and transported to a House (taken by them on purpose) where they were
violently, and in a formidable manner, thrust into a dark Chamber, and at
length were forced to present Dollars 300, to have a Window set open to give
them Light and Air; the Consul telling the said Hetherington and Lorenzo,
before he was surprised, in the presence of the Caddies, That neither he, or
the Nation, had any ways transgressed the Grand Signior's, or his Lordship's
Commands, and that he did not fear what they could do unto him, no not so much
as to die, in performance of his Faith and Trust to the Levant Company, whom he
had truly served; as likewise for his Love and Affection he bore to the Nation
here under his Charge, whom he would never betray, hoping shortly to see his
own Country again, And in two hours after, the said Hetherington, Lorenzo, and
Chiouz, Caddie, and Neipe, sealed up all the Countinghouses, Magazines, and
some Chambers; and in two days after, transported the Prisoners over-land up to
Constantinople, where they were delivered to his Lordship's Power and safe
Custody; we in the mean time being left like so many Sheep without a Shepherd,
and ignorant where to seek protection.

The next day after departure of these Prisoners, the said Hetherington and
Lorenzo sealed up our Cloth in our own Warehouses, for what concerned our
proportionable part of the Leviation, at the rate of Dollars 45 per Cloth, and
one third part more toward Charges.

The 18th day of May, at the instance of the said Hetherington and Lorenzo, the
remainder of us left here behind met together, where the said Hetherington told
us we had not brought in our Bills of Exchange for Constantinople, for the
parts of our Leviation, and one third part more; unto which we answered, We had
complied with his Lordship's Commands, in all willing and obedient manner,
according to our present Possibilities, until we should be able to satisfy the
same with our ready Moneys here, or by our Bills payable in Constantinople, at
five days sight, wherein we promised to use our utmost Endeavors, hoping to
redeem our Cloth again, which we had deposited, and they sealed up for our
proportionable Parts of the Leviation.

In few days after arrived here one of the principallest Chiouzes of the Grand
Signior, with new Commands sent down by his Lordship; by virtue whereof the
said Hetherington and Lorenzo seized upon the Persons of John Ball, Henry
Davey, Phillip Farewell, Nathaniel Barnardiston, and John Ingoldsby, who were
committed Prisoners to the said Chiouz, who used them with some humanity, and
sent up the next day to Constantinople, to be delivered unto his Lordship's
Power; after whose departure (all Law being set aside) the said Hetherington
and Lorenzo by this Command came down, opened all our Warehouses, and by
Violence carried all our Goods away into several Canes of the Truks; as well
what they had sealed up, for the Leviation, as all other Goods of what nature
soever they could find, unless it were such as was sealed up, and belonged to
Turks, and other of the Grand Signior's Subjects; and left many of us so bare,
that we had not wherewithal to afford us a piece of Bread to keep Life and Soul
together, only bare Promises. The said Chiouz remaining behind, put us daily
into great Fears that we should all be sent up, or clapped up here in Prison,
which caused many of us to repair on board the Ship for Succor, here being in
Harbor the Ships Rainbow, Jonas, Hopewell, and Triangle.

In all which time of this Distraction and Sufferings, our Miseries have been
much condoled by the chief Turks and Inhabitants of this Place, who seem to
sympathize with us in our sad Conditions; and had not the Commands been so
powerful, the whole Town would have risen up in our Defense and Protection, who
have privately advised of these Abuses; which as they themselves confess, are
like to ruin, not only this Scale, but that of Aleppo and Constantinople also,
to the Dishonor of the Grand Signior, and ruin of many of his Subjects; and of
a profitable and acceptable Friend (our Nation) to become a potent Enemy
against them.

The 28th of June came Letters from Constantinople, advising the Vizier's Order
for rescuing both Factories from his Lordship's Imprisonment, and particular
Advice to some of us here left, for appreheading the Persons of the said
Hehterington and Lorenzo, and to keep them in safe Custodies on board our
Ships, fearing (we having no Order as yet to receive our Estates out of their
Possessions) they might convey our said Estates away, or sell them for half
their Worth, and so make their private escapes out of Town, expecting daily a
Chiouz to carry up their Persons to Constantinople, and to free our Goods,
hoping all will go well again for us. Hereupon the very same day, the said
Hetherington and Lorenzo, (without any noise or rumor) were by the Mariners
conveyed on board several Ships from the said Hetherington's Lodging, viz.
Hetherington on board the Triangle, William Hodges Commander; and Lorenzo on
board the Hopewell, Nicholas Terrick Commander; where now they remain, to the
contentment of the Inhabitants here, who daily expect their sending up to the
Port, there to answer to such Crimes and Insolences as shall be objected and
proved against them.

Thus we have presumed plainly and distinctly (accordingly as we conceive it
becomes us) though briefly, to present unto your Worships perusal, the whole
Process of his Lordship's Proceedings against us here in Smyrna, (since our
last) according to our experience of the Passages; by which your Worships may
easily conjecture his Lordship's farther Intentions. And for what has occurred
at Constantinople, your Worships will receive by this Conveyance, advise to
both which we pray you to be referred; which being taken into your deliberate
Considerations, may afford such future Means of Protection, and encouragement
to enter into a way of settling this Turkey Trade in such a posture, that we hope
these Losses may be repaired with advantage.

And so we humbly take our leaves, having given your Worships testimony of our
Concordance, in the discharge of our Obligations and Duties; and in conformi^y
we subscribe, evermore resting,

Smyrna, July 4. 1646. Your Worships humble and obliged Servants, Robert Keble,
Thomas Lancelot, John Wild junior, Lawrence Chambers, Will. Oxwieck, Arnold
White, Daniel Bassano, William Whetcombe, Robert Dawes, Samuel Browning.



But not to insist long on a Subject so ungrateful, as the Difference was
between the Ambassador and his Merchants; the Conclusion, and Issue of all was
this. After Sir Sackvile Crow had spent at the least seventy thousand pieces of
Eight of good ready Money, and the Turkey Company two hundred thousand; the Turks
finding the Ambassador's Exchequer to be almost exhausted, for that Presents
and Purses of Money came not in so plentifully as at first; and on the contrary,
feeling the Spring of the Levant Companies Treasury still to run fresh and
quick, their Inclinations toward the Ambassador grew more cold and faint, his
Agents were not admitted so readily to Audience as formerly, nor his Petitions
and Addresses received with that candor, as when Money and Interest made their
entrance easy; in the mean time, the Merchants were heard with great patience,
their Cause and Complaints esteemed reasonable; and in short, Sir Sackvile Crow
was dismissed from Constantinople, in a manner not usual for Ambassadors, nor
agreeable to that Quality and Character: and was succeeded by Sir Thomas
Bendysh, who was Authorized and constituted in that Embassy, by Commission from
his Majesty King Charles the First of ever blessed and glorious Memory.

Gio Capello being constituted General in the place of Molino, as we mentioned
at end of the preceding Year, departed from Venice early in the Spring, having
under his Command fifty Galleys, six Galleasses, and forty Ships of War, and
four Fireships, besides other Vessels, which are necessary Attendants on so
great an Armata; which grand Preparations raised the Minds of the Christian
World to expect the abatement of the Ottoman Pride, and other Effects equal to
the magnificent Ostentation, and triumphing Glory of this mighty Power: But
God, who gives not always Success to the Powerful, nor the Battle to the
Strong, was not, it seems, so well satisfied for the Sins of Christendom, as to
judge it worthy to be delivered from the Scourages of its Grand Oppressor.

Whilst Capello remained with the best part of the Fleet at Candia, Tomaso
Morosini, Admiral of the Ships, showed himself in a Bravado with twenty two
Sail before the Castles of the Hellespont, called the Dardanelli, defying the
whole Turkish Power, with Colors flying, and Drums beating: nor did they dare
to answer the bold Challenge, until in a dead Calm, some few light Galleys
presented themselves in a seeming Battle, with whom, for want of Wind, the
Ships were on the disadvantage, and rather received Prejudice than gave it; so
that both sides were contented with the Action.

Morosini withdrew from that Station, and returned to his General at Candia; to
whom having joined his Forces, he earnestly perswad^d him, together with the
Proveditor Grimani, to engage the Turkish Fleet, which they assured him was
much inferior to them, both in number of Vessels, and in Skill and Courage of
the Combatants; and that the Success of this Year consisted in the cutting off
the Enemies Succors, which was their sole Relife and Dependence, without which
they could not longer maintain the Ground they possessed, but must deliver up
that and themselves to their pleasure. But the cautious General would not
assent to this Resolution, judging it over-rash and precipitate; for that the
Fortune of Candia, and other Isles of the Archipelago, was not to be hazarded
on the Success of one Battle.

During which Dispute, and irresolution of Affairs, the Turkesh Fleet,
consisting of three hundred Sail, arrived at Canea, where they landed forty
thousand fighting Men, which turned the Scale of the War, and rendered the Turks
so powerful, as not ever more to be expelled, or their Offspring extirpated
from the Confines of that Island. By this time the Pope's and Malta Galleys
were come to their Assistance, and united with the Venetians; so that Capello
setting sail from the Port of Suda, resolved to engage the Enemy at St.
Theodoro; which was effected accordingly, though with little Success, for the
Turks had fortified themselves, and secured their Galleys with that advantage,
that they could not be assaulted without great hazard of the Christians; and
when they endeavored to burn them, their four Fireships took fire too soon,
and proved of more fear and astonishment to the Truks (to whom this Invention
was as yet unknown) than of real damage. After this the Venetians returned
again to Suda, where having intelligence that thirty Turkish Galleys, with Men
and Provision (which they had collected in several parts of the Archipelago)
were on their Voyage to Canea, Capello preparing to intercept them with a Force
of Galleasses and Galleys, and leaving Grimani and Morosini to command the main
Body of the Fleet, he in person bent his Course toward Cerigo.

In the mean time Mustapha Pasha departed from Canea, in order to his return to
Constantinople, with fifty seven light Galleys, two Ships, two Galleasses, and
many Saiks; but meeting in his Passage with a hard storm of Northerly Winds, he
lost seven of his Galleys, and several other Vessels, so that he resolved to
divide his Fleet, and send part of them to Scio, and himself with the other
part to make for Negropont. This Fleet was followed by some other Vessels under
the Command of Mahomet Celebee, Brother of the Pasha of Algier, who being as
far in his way as the narrow Streights of Andra, he was there stopped by the
Fury of the Northern Winds, (which are the Master-Winds of those Seas) and by
the impetuous rage thereof, was carried to the Island of Zia; where having
given License to the greatest part of his Soldiery to Land, they carelessly
strayed abroad, and without suspicion of Surprise, merrily passed their time in
eating and drinking. In the interim, advice hereof being carried to Tomaso
Morosini, then with some Ships in the Port of Milo, he immediately, without
loss of time, applied himself to assault the Turks; and being followed by the
Proveditor Grimani, he took two of their Ships, whilst Mehmet Celebee, with
about two hundred of his Men, betook themselves to the weak shelter of an old
demolished Fort, and afterward surrendered themselves to the discretion of the
Conqueror.

Morosini and Grimani, encouraged with this Success, resolved to pursue the
Enemies Fleet; in order unto which, Morosini first putting out to Sea, was
instantly carried away by a fierce gale of Wind toward Ambro, and separated
from the rest of his Fleet, and thence again was tossed by the impetuosity of
the Storms unto Rafti; of which Mustapha Pasha having Intelligence, made haste
to attack this single Vessel, with forty Galleys; giving order to the Bey of
Rhodes, to lay him aboard with fifteen Galleys, the strongest and best armed of
all their Squadron: Morosini nothing dismayed, bearing the same constancy of
Mind in the midst of his Enemies, as at a distance, boldly showed himself on
the Quarter Deck, encouraging his Men with his words, and by his Example, to
Actions worthy their Religion, Faith, and Country for which they contended. The
Turks continued for some time to batter the Ship at a distance with their
Cannon, but with little damage to the Christians; who returned their Shot to
better advantage. Hereby the Turks perceiving that Blows given so far off did
little Execution, resolved to Board the Vessel, and subdue Her by force of
Arms, and being come to the side of the Ship, the Soldiers were fearful to
enter, suspecting some trains of Powder to blow them up, until Emurat, one of
the Captains, struck off the Head of one or two of his own Men, whom he
perceived backward in the Assault, which affrighted the rest into the greater
danger, and forced them to enter the Ship, who were soon followed by the
Galleys of the Bey of Rhodes, of Milo, of Mehmet Bey, and others; so that now
two hundred of the Enemy were Combating with Swords and Half Pikes upon the
Deck; Morosini flair.
in which storm, Morosini fighting amongst the thickest, was shot through the
Head with a Musket Bullet, and so gloriously finished his Days in the Service
and Defense of his Country; gaining to himself a Laurel, and an Immortal Name
of Glory and Renown.

The Christian Soldiers little regarding all this time the fall of their
General, stoutly maintained their Fight, in which they received encouragement
from the prospect they had of two Galleasses making haste to their Succor; at
whose nearer approach, the Turks desisted from their farther Attempt; being
unwilling to purchase a Victory at the dear rate it would cost them.

The Body of Morosini was transported to Venice, and his Obsepuies Celebrated
in a manner more Triumphant than Funebrous; the Proveditor Grimani was likewise
declared Captain General in the place of Capello; who having, as it were,
Besieged the Castles at the Mouth of the Dardanelli, taken several places in
the Archipelago, and put the Enemies Fleet often unto flight, he thereby, and
by other Acts of Valor, rendered him justly renowned through all Chrstendom.

These were the chief and most memorable actions by Sea, performed this Year;
Those by Land were acted chiefly in Dalmatia, where the Turks poured in their
Forces on the Venetian Dominions, but were bravely repulsed by Leonardo
Foscolo, who took Ali Bey Prisoner, the Commander in Chief of the Sangiac of
Licca, and slew his Son; besides which, he took Saccovar, Polissano, Islan, and
other Fortresses and Castles, full of Arms and Ammunition, which were the
Magazines of the Country; he also recovered Novegrade out of the hands of the
Turks, which was afterward demolished by Order from the Senate; which
Victories were followed with other Successes; nothing being able to oppose the
Valiant and Prosperous Arms of Foscolo; for besides the taking and sacking of
several other Forts and Castles in Dalmatia, Obraozzo, Carino, Ottissian,
Velino, Nadino, Vrana, Tino, and Salona, in the Confines of Croatia, and Bosna,
became a Prey to the Venetian Arms.

But to this successful Progress of the War, a stop was given for some time by
the sickness of Foscolo; in which interim, the new Pasha of Bosna, called
Mahomet Techli, a Circassian born, a Person both Generous and Valiant, with an
Army of forty thousand Men, besieged the strong Fortress of Sebenico; Sebenico
besieged.
but was bravely repulsed by the Valor of the Inhabitants, the very Women
exceeding the imbecility of their Sex; and Children and old Men, with the
weakness of their Age, strengthened themselves with Resolution against their
Enemies, and so valiantly behaved themselves in defense of their City, that the
Turk was forced to raise his Siege, having gained nothing but the loss and
slaughter of many of his People, and the best of his Soldiery; whereby he
gained an assurance of the Invincible Strength of that place, and the Valor of
the Inhabitants.

Foscolo in like manner recovering his Health, continued the un-interrupted
course of his Victories, and thereunto added the taking of Scardona; so that in
Dalmatia the Venetian Affairs ran so prosperously, that nothing could be
desired to render them more happy and glorious. For the Turks not only were
expelled from the Confines of Dalmatia, but likewise that Province became more
quiet and secure than ever it had been in the Times of Peace.

But the joy of these Successes was very much allayed by the unhappy Fate of a
great part of the Venetian Fleet, at the Island of Psara; which being lanched
from Candia with intention to assault the Turks within the Dardanelli, The ruin
of the Venetian Armata at Psara.
unfortunately were driven by contrary Winds to that unsecure shore; where
contending with a most furious Storm, a great part of the Fleet was cast away,
and the General Grimani himself drowned. About which time, the Turks, for the
greater Terror of the Christians, laid close Siege to the City of Candia, and
made many and various Attempts thereupon, carrying on their Assaults with the
height of bravery and Resolution, the Particulars of which require a distinct
History; but by the invincible Fortitude and Courage of the Christians, they
were repulsed with that slaughter, and with the loss of so many Men, by Sallies
and other Stratagems of War, that the Turks were at length constrained to raise
their Siege with dishonor and confusion; during which time many of the
Nobility and Persons of Quality lost their Lives; amongst which, the principal
were, Vicenzo della Marra, Governor General of the Arms of Candia, and Count
Remorantino, natural Son of the Duke of Loraine, Commander in Chief of the
Forces that came from beyond the Alps.

General Foscolo encouraged by the many glorioes Enterprises that he had
obtained, resolved to consummate all by taking the strong and famous Fortress
of Clissa, Clissa taken.
situate in the Consines of Dalmatia, and Borders of Bosna, on the top of a
sharp and craggy Mountain, environed with Rocks and unaccessible Passages; the
difficulty of the attempt rather inflamed than abated the Courage of Foscolo,
so that he Valiantly Besieged and Assaulted that Place; during which time, the
Priest D. Stephano Sorich. Captain of the Morlachs, intercepted the Succors
which were sent thither, and Georgio the Proveditor, overthrew Teccbeli Pasha
in a Field Battle; so that the Inhabitants desparing of Relief, surrendered up
themselves to the mercy of the Venetians; and thus Clissa being taken, the
Senate Commanded that it should be more regularly Fortified.

And here the Christian Arms met some interruption. For the Morlachs desirous
to cast off the Turkish Yoke, and return to the protection of the Venetians,
designed to surprise Scutari; and at the same time the Archbishop of Durazzo,
with seven thousand Albanians, was to seize upon Croia, and Alessio; but the
Design being discovered by the traitorous practices of some false Brethren,
before Matters were maturely grown, or the time of Execution, it had certainly
cost the Life of all the Morlachs, and seven hundred Venetian Soldiers joined
with them, had not the increase of the Waters hindered the speedy March of the
Turks, who resolved to cut them all off without mercy, who regard to any; so
that having time to disperse themselves, and take refuge in the Mountains, the
most of them preserved their Lives from the Cruelty of their Enemies; only some
certain Ecclesiastical Persons falling into their Hands, they imputed unto them
the cause of the Rebellion, and in a barbarous manner impaled them on Stakes.

The Turks enraged for the loss of Clissa, dispatched Dervis Pasha into the
parts of Bosna, with a potent Army, threatening to Assault Spalatro; whom to
divert, Foscolo, together with Priest Sorich, Captain of the Morlachs, entered
into the Enemies Country; spoiling, burning, and destroying wheresoever they
came. The Morlachs more greedy of Prey than ambitious of Glory, divided
themselves into small Parties to rob and pillage; in which interim they were
assaulted by the Turks, but being scattered, were so far from making a stout
resistance, that they committed themselves to a shameful flight, in which great
numbers of them were miserably Butchered; nor could the valor of Sorich, nor
of the Governor Possidaria, reduce them by their Examples into any Order:
whilst together with some few valiant Dalmatians, and Morlach Captains, they
endured the shock of all the Enemies Fury; in which Skirmish the Turks lost
seven Agas, and about seventy Soldiers: On the Christians side were killed
four hundred, some few Slaves, and about seventy Ensigns taken; amongst the
rest the good Priest Sorich scorning to turn his back, had the misfortune to
fall into the Enemies hands, whom they flead alive, and afterward impaled; and
though they subdued his Body, yet he was still master of his mind; bearing the
same constancy in his Torments, as he had showed Magnanimity and Courage in the
Face of his Enemy.

Whilst these Martial Affairs were transacting, with the Blood and Life of many
thousands on both sides, Sultan Ibrahim, like a stout Soldier of Venus, waged
another War in the Elysiums of Cupid; and casting aside all thoughts of Candia,
remitted the sole care and management thereof to the Vizier and Pashas of the
Divan; following a Life so lascivious and sensual, as can neither be imagined
with a chaste Fancy, or described by a modest Pen.

A principal Instrument of his Delights, and Engine to compass his Amorous
Designs, was a certain cast Wench of his, which he named Shechir Para, which
signifies a little piece of Sugar; for it seems she was so complaisant and
dulcid in her Humor and discourse, as merited that apt Name to express the
sweetness of her Conversation; this Woman having the convenience to visit all
the Baths in Town, took notice of every Woman which she saw of more than
ordinary Features and Proportion, and having enquired her Condition and
Dwelling, presently reported the same with all advantage to her Sultan, who
having heard the Beauty described, be came passionately Enamoured, and could
find no repose in his Fancy, until his Instruments, either by fair words or
violence, had seduced her, or forced her to his Bed. But growing now
extravagant and over-wanton in his Amors, he fell in love with the Sultana, or
Widow of his Brother Sultan Morat: To win her Affections he had recourse to his
Dear Shechir Para; who used all her Arts in this Service: but her pretty
wheedling Terms could prevail nothing on this Lady, who answered her in short,
That at the Death of her Lord Sultan Morat, she had resolved upon a perpetual
Widowhood, for that the memory of him was still so lively in her, that she
could not entertain the thoughts of admitting any new Embraces. This repugnancy
and opposition inflamed the heat of Ibrahim like a Fever, so that he resolved
to assault her himself one day by force, and took his time just as she came out
of the Bath; but she being a bold Woman, and disdaining the wandering loves of
Ibrahim, laid her hand upon her Dagger, (which Sultana's and great Ladies
usually wear) threatening to wound him in her own defense; the noise and
brawling hereof being overheard by the Queen Mother, called her from her
Retirements, and concerned her in the Quarrel; who whilst she reproved her Son,
for the rape he intended on his Brother's Wife, gave opportunity to the Sultana
to escape; and so delivered her out of the hands of this Satyr. But Ibrahim mad
with love, and fuming with disdain to be checked and opposed by his Mother,
Commanded her immediately to the old Seraglio, where he confined her to several
days Imprisonment, during which time he understood in what manner she had
treated his large-siz'd Armenian, of whom we have already spoken; whereof the
Queen Mother being conscious, submitted her self with all humility to her Son,
begging his Favor and Pardon; and so well acted her part by those who carried
her Addresses, that she over came quickly his easy Nature, and was again
restored to his Grace, and her Lodgings in the new Seraglio.

In the mean time Shecher Para traveling over all the Baths in Town, to
discover new delights for her Master, at length had the fortune to cast her
Eyes on a Daughter of the Mufti, a Maid of Incomparable Beauty and Features of
Countenance, and proportion of Body, which she reported to Ibrahim so sensibly,
as if she her self had been in love; and after she had praised every Part and
Member of her, she concluded in sum, that she was the most Excellent and
admirable Piece that ever Nature framed. The Sultan had no sooner heard the
Story, but according to his usual Custom, fell most desperately in love, and had
immediately, without farther consideration or counsel, dispatched his
Emissaries; or without other Preamble, Ceremony, or Courtship, to have fetched
her to him; had not the sense of the late Rebuff he had received from his
Brother's Wise, made some inpression of fear in him; and the apprehension he
had of the Power of the Mufti, created in him a certain Caution and Respect in
the treatment of his Daughter: wherefore he rather resolved to send for the
Mufti, with whom he treated of honorable Terms concerning Marriage; promising
to take her into his Bosom, and prefer her in Honor equal to any other of his
Sultana's.

The old Man who was tender of, and doated on his Daughter, knowing well the
wandering humor of the Sultan in his Amors, intended rather to marry her to
some great Personage, with whom she might be more happy, than in being a
Soltana: for he considered, that Ibrahim having already other Sons, her Issue
would either be Sacrificed for security of their Brothers, or else spend their
days in a Prison, and become Grey-headed, whilst they breath in a medium
between Life and Death, and are sad Recluses in the Grave of their unhappiness.
These considerations were well imprinted in the mind of the Mufti: but because
he durst not deny his proposal, he dealt with him as Inferiors usually do with
their Lords and Superious; that is, he returned him thanks, expressing infinite
Obligations, that he would vouchsafe to cast his Princely Eyes on the
unworthiness of his Family: however he advised him, that according to the
Canons of their Law, of which he was the Expositor, and obliged to be a severe
and precise Observer; it was great Impiety in a Father to impose on the
Affections of his Child; so that though he could heartily wish that his
Daughter would embrace this Honor, to which he would exhort her with all the
earnest Persuasions of a Father; yet if she proved refractory thereunto, it
would not be becoming his Power to force her; and therefore hoped his Majesty
would believe, that in proceeding thus far, he had performed that Duty which
became him, both as a Father, and a Loyal Subject.

Ibahim supposing that by this Concession he had gained his Design, thanked and
embraced the old Man, whom dismissing with plenary satisfaction, he remained
now with an impatient expectation, and hopes of enjoyment. Next Morning the
Mufti returned early to the Grand Signior, and having first sufficiently
instructed his Daughter to refuse the Sultan's Proffers, told him plainly, that
he had used all his paternal Authority and interest with his Daughter, that he
might induce her to accept this mighty Fortune, which cast it self upon her;
but that it found not that ready acceptance with her as he expected; what could
be the reason he knew not how to conjecture, since Women are commonly
irregular, and unreasonble in their Affections.

Ibrahim being in this manner disappointed, and more angry to encounter any
boundary or restraint to the imperious violence of his Lusts, than opposition
against the puissance of his Arms; dismissed the Mufti with some neglect and
disdain, whom he resolved to treat with Rigor, and his Daughter with
Courtship. In order to the first, he banished him the Count, and forbad him his
presence in any other place; grew sullen and unsatisfied at all his
administrations of Justice, intending thereby to induce him to a resignation of
his Office, there being nothing more irksome to an ingenuous Spirit, than to
serve and not to please. On the other side he dealt with the young Lady in a
different manner, by the crafty and flattering insinuations of his trusty
Shechir Para, who so forcibly managed her Tongue full of curious Words, mixed
with Threats, representing the Storms and Fury of the Sultan's Rage; and again,
the Glory, Splendor, and Happiness of the Seraglio; where she should Reign as
Empress and Sovereign of the World: all which she expressed with that passion,
and lascivious enticement, as would have shaken a firmer Constancy, than the
Virtue of a Turkish Maid: but she being well admonished by her Father, remained
obstinate in her Denial: but to quiet the importunity of this Seducer, she
begged her not to solicit her Father in this Request, but rather that she
would intercede in her behalf with the Sultan spplicating him with all humility
to pardon her Childish refusal, and to leave her unto her unto her own Liberty
and Choice, and a single Life: to obtain which favor from her, she produced a
Diamond of considerable value, desiring her to accept of that from her, and to
become her Friend, her Assistant, and Protectress. Shechir Para being overcome
by her Maiden Modesty, could no longer resist such forcible Entreaties; and
having her Eyes obscured with the luster of the Jewel, promised to change her
Note, and excuse her refual with the advantageous and compassionate Terms
possible; and so taking her leave with a courteous farewell, repaired to the
Sultan, to give an account of her Negotiations.

Ibrahim, having with more doubtful Fear attended the Issue of this last
Conference, than he did the Success of his War with Venice; received his
Shecher Para with exceeding joy, who being come in, began to recount all the
Particulars that had passed: but the sum of all was, that this silly Maid was
sufficiently sensible of the honor of being a Soltana, of being Courted by his
Majesty, of the Joys, Delights, and Glory of the Seraglio; but that when she
reflected, how that she was to bring forth Children to die by untimely Deaths,
and to end their Days by Poison, or the Bow-string, or at least to live
miserable Lives separated from Mankind, and immured within Walls, and Intombed
whilst they breathed; she could not but tremble with some horror, and judge,
that all the blandishments of Worldly Fortune were but a transient Paradise;
which could not possibly recompense, or outweigh the sense and tenderness she
conceived for the misery of her unfortunate Offspring. Howsoever she so
couched her Discourse, that she gave Ibrahim some hopes to overcome at length;
by which she appeased a little his Fury and Despair, and extracted some Jewels
and Gifts in reward of her past Labor, and encouragement for her future
Service. In this manner Ibrahim had patience awhile, expecting something
farther from the industry of Shecher Para; but finding no effect of all his
expectations and gentleness, at length resolved to break through all
Considerations of Respect, either to the Father as the Mouth and Oracle of the
Law, or to the simple and foolish innocence of the Maid; and therefore ordered
the Great Vizier to cause a Watch to be set on the Girl, either going in, or
coming out of the Bath, and without farther Ceremony to bring her unto him.
This Order being executed accordingly, and the Maid hurried to the Seraglio;
Ibrahim possessed and enjoyed her for some days, but with those Tears,
Reluctance, and Sullenness, as tood off from the edg and appetite of Enjoyment;
so that he returned her back again with scorn and contempt unto her Father; who
at first dissembled the injury with the same Countenance as he did before, when
he was interdicted the Sultan's Presence; suppressing his revenge like a
concealed Fire, which bursts out afterward with more violent Flames. But
though the sense of Obedience and Duty toward his Prince allayed much of the
choler he conceived against him for the Rape of his Daughter, yet he knew not
how to pardon the Great Vizier, whom he termed no other than a Ruffian or
Pandor; the Minister of his Master's Lusts, and not of his Laws, and of Justice.

Thus full of indignation he applied himself, and made his complaint unto one
Mahomet Pasha, a principal Member of the Divan; one of great Wisdom and
Practice in the Conduct of Affairs, and one with whom he had a particular
Friendship and Intimacy. Nor less interest had he with Janisar-Aga, or General
of the Janissaries; to both whom, with tears in his Eyes, and with such words as
the sense of his injuries suggested, he railed at the Vizier, and aggravated
the Ravishment of his Daughter with all the circumstances of Villainy and
Violence.

These two Friends heard the Story with a sensible remorse, and immediately
concluded, That for the Honor and Security of the Empire, it was necessary to
depose Sultan Ibrahim, and for the same Reason to cut off the first Vizier;
agreeing amongst themselves that Mahomet Pasha should receive the Seal and the
Office. To effect which, they deemed it necessary to draw the Qneen-Mother into
the Conspiracy, being a Woman of great Authority, and having, as it were, the
Reins of Government in her Hands, by reason of the weak Judgment of her Son.
But because it was difficult to persuade the tenderness of a Mother to the ruin
of her Son, the wise Mufti resolved first to sound her Inclinations and
disposition toward this Design: and being well informed of her fierce
Circassian Nature, and the Jealousy and Anger she conceived against Shechir
Para, obtained License to be heard by her, as if he would beg her Intercession
with her Son in his behalf; and being admitted to discourse with her, he
thereby plainly discovered her most inveterate hatred and displeasure against
her Son; not only for this, but for many other Actions of like nature.

This discovery which the Queen had made, gave him the boldnesd to propose the
confinement again of Ibrahim to his old Prison; not that he should be
absolutely laid aside and deposed, but only corrected awhile, and being put in
remembrance of his past Condition, might be tanght Wisdom, and instructed for
the future, what moderation and justice Sultans are obliged to exercise in the
Administration of Government; and so subtly did he insinuate his Discourse,
that the Queen Mother assented to the Proposal, and that the Seal should
beconferred on Mahomet Pasha; for she had conceived an irreconcilable hatred
against Achmet the Grand Vizier, by whose Counsel she was sent to the old
Seraglio, and was united in Confederacy with the detested Shechir Para.

The Mufti greatly satisfied to have gained so considerable a Conspirator to
the Party, communicated the whole Business, with the Progress of it, to the two
Kadileschers, or Lord Chief Justices of Romelia and Anatolia; who approving
thereof, and promising their utmost assistance, the 7th. of Angust was the Day
appointed for the Insurrection of the Janissaries, who being all in a readiness
on that day, went in a tumultuary way to call the Mufti, the Kadileschers, and
other Officers and Ministers of the Law, whom they seemingly forced to
accompany them to the presence of the Grand Signior, of whom they demanded,
that the present Vizier Achmet should be deprived of his Office, and that
Mahomet Pasha should be constituted in his place. The Grand Signior at first
refused their Demand, but being persuaded by his Mother that it was necessary
to content the Militia in that tumult; he consented thereunto, and having
called Achment, he took from him the Seal, and conferred it on Mahomet Pasha,
and therewith the Office of Grand Vizier. Achmet trembling at the consequences
hereof, resolved to commit himself to the Mercy of the Mufti, and therefore
hastened to his House to attend his return, hoping to find him his Protector,
under whose Shadow and Roof he fled for Sanctuary.

The Soldiery having thus obtained the first fruits of their Insurrection,
accompanied the Mufti unto his Home, where finding the deposed Vizier Achmet,
the Janisar-Aga immediately Commanded him out of Doors, from whence he had no
sooner drawn his Foot, than that he was seized upon and strangled, and his Body
thrown before the Gate of the new Mosch.

The next day being the 8th of August, 1648, the Janissaries again arising in
the like Tumult as before, came to demand of the Mufti, Whether that according
to their Law, Sultan ibrahim as a fool, and a Tyrant, and unfit for Government,
ought not to be deposed? To which the Mufti giving Answer in the Affirmative,
sent to cite Sultan Ibrahim the day following to appear in the Divan, to
administer Justice to his Soldiers and Subjects, who expected it from him. But
Ibrahim supposing that he had sufficiently satisfied the Soldiery, by putting
the Vizer out of Office, laughed at the Summons which the Mufti made him; which
being seconded by a Fetfa, which is a point of Law resolved by the Mufti, who
is the Mouth or Oracle thereof, viz. That the Grand Signior being called to
account, is obliged to appear before the Justice; the Sultan in high disdain
tore the Paper, threatening the Head of the Mufti: but it was now too late he
having already sufficiently fortified himself with the Power and Strength of
his Rebellious Companions. This Fetfa was immediately seconded by another of a
higher nature, which declared, That whosoever obeyed not the Law of God, was
not a true Mussulman or Believer; and though that Person were the Emperor
himself, yet being become by his fithy Actions a Kafir or Infidel, was ipso
facto, fallen from his Throne, and no farther capable of Authority and
Government. This Fetfa being seen by Ibrahim, he tore it in pieces, commanding
the Grand Vizier instantly to put the Mufti to Death, as guilty of Treason
against his Prince: but having now lost his Authority, his Commands were not
longer regarded, nor any reverence had of his person: For the Janissaries being
again assembled about five a Clock in the Afternoon, came with their usual
tumult to the Gates of the Seraglio.

And now Sultan Ibrahim losing all Courage at this third attempt, fled into the
Arms of his Mother, begging her Assistance and Protection. She being a bold and
subtle Woman, employed all her Rhetoric and Eloquence to persuade the
Souldlery not to offer Violence to the Person of their Lord and Master;
promising that he should relinquish the Government, and retire himself with a
Guard into his old Lodgings. Ibrahim comforted a little, that he should save
his Life, shrunk himself willingly into his old Shell, wherein he had so long
conserved his Life.

In the mean time the Conspirators taking forth his eldest Son Sultan Mahomet,
set him on the Throne of his Father, and planting the Sargouch, or Imperial
Feathers on his Head, saluted him for Emperor with loud Acclamations. Ibrahim
continued his Imprisonment for some days with great patience, but at length
growing desperate and furious, often beat his Head against the Wall, until at
length, he was on the 17th strangled by four Mutes.

In this manner Sultan Ibrahim ended his Days, which puts me in mind of the
saying of a wiser and a better King than he, That there is little distance
between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes. And this Example made a great
Officer understand how King Charles the Glorious Martyr was put to Death. For
he, I think it was the Great Vizier, falling into Discourse with the Chief
English Interpreter at Constantinople, not then calling to mind the Fate of
Sultan Ibrahim, demanded, How, and when King Charles was put to Death? Sure,
said he, Your King must have no Power, or your People must be more Rebellious
and Mutinous than other Nations of the World, who durst commit an Act so horrid
and vile as this. See, said he, How our Emperor is revered and observed; and
how submissive and obedient half the World is to the Nod of our Great Monarch.
To which the Interpreter replied, that to recount unto him the History and
Occasion of this prodigious fact, would be too long and tedious for him to
hear: but that the time it happened, was some Months after the Death or Murder
of Sultan Ibrahim; which was an Item sufficient to give him a perfect
understanding of what he required.

Sultan Ibrahim having in this manner ended his Days, the Government was
committed into the hands of the Grand Vizier, and the old Queen Mother (which
is she whom we call Kiosem in the Ottoman State) and of twelve Pashaws; who
were to manage all Affairs with supreme Power, during the Minority of Sultan
Mahomet, who now Reigns.

Ibrahim was the fifth Son of Sultan Achmet, born of the same Mother with
Sultan Morat, Educated like the other younger Sons of the Ottoman Family;
within the Walls of an obscure and unhappy Prison; so that it is no wonder, if
wanting the advantages of seeing and practicing in the World, he should neither
have studied Men, nor been experienced in the Art of Government. Nor less
strange is it, being natural to humane Infirmity; for Men who have lived under
Restraint, Affliction, and fear of Death, to become licentious and immoderate
in all kind of Pleasures, whenever they pass on a sudden from the depth of
Misery to some transcendent degree of Happiness and Prosperity; which as, I
say, all Men are naturally subject unto, so more especially those whose
Religion indulges them all kind of sensual Carnality in this Life.

Ibrahim was in his own Nature of a gentle and easy Temper, of a large
Forehead, of a quick and lively Eye and ruddy Complexion, and of a good
Proportion in the Features of his Face, but yet had something in the Air of his
Countenance, that promised no great Abilities of Mind. And giving himself up to
all kind of Effeminacy and Softness, attended not unto the Government of his
Affairs; and therefore it was his greatest misfortune to be served by wicked
and faithless Officers to whom he trusted, and to whom he gave Credence,
wanting in himself the Talents of Wisdom and Discretion to discern their Malice.

The continual apprehensions that he entertained of Death during his
Imprisonment, had so frozen his Constitution with a strange frigidity toward
Women, that all the dalliance and warm Embraces of the most inflaming Ladies in
the Seraglio, could not in a whole Years time thaw his Coldness; which was the
occasion at first of that Report, which spoke him to be impotent toward Women:
during which time he attended to his Ministers of Justice, and to a management
of the Affairs of his Empire, which in the beginning of his Reign gained him a
Credit and Reputation, and raised a great expectation of his goodness and Care
of his Subjects Welfare; and evidence of which, he gave in his Charge to the
Great Vizier, that he should put no Man to Death unless for Capital and
Enormous Crimes. But at length losing himself in Lusts and Sensualities, he
forsook the Helm of his Regency, committing the guidance of his Empire to other
Hands: and as he was ignorant of War, so he foolishly sported in the Calms of
peace; and suffering himself to be guided only by Fortune, felt the Stroke
thereof in his last Unhappy Fate.

THE REIGN OF Sultan MEHMET, OR MAHOMET IV. THIRTEENTH EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
ANNO 1649.
SUltan Ibrahim perishing in this manner, by the mutinous Violence of the
Soldiery, his Son Mehmet, or Mahomet, being a Child of seven Years of Age,
succeeded in the Throne: During whose Minority, (which was to continue for the
space of ten Years longer) his Mother, who was the first Sultana, assisted with
the Counsel of twelve Pashaws, took upon her self the Regency, and in the first
place resolved to continue the War against the Venetians, which Ibrahim
intended to conclude, having engaged himself far in a Treaty of Peace with the
Bailo or Ambassador, which resided at the Port for that Republic.

Whilst these Matters were transacting, and Preparations making to prosecute
the War; the Malignant Humors of the Empire began to ferment unto that degree,
as affected the Body Politic at first with unnatural Heats, which soon
afterward proceeded to a Fever, and then to a dangerous Convulsion. The
ill-affected Part was the Militia, which is the Heart and Principal of the Life
of that Government. For the Spahees and the Janisaries, being the Horse and
Foot, entered into a desperater Controversy.

The first judged it their Duty to revenge the Death of their Sovereign, Sultan
Ibrahim; and in order thereunto demanded the Head of the Great Vizier, as the
Chief Author and Contriver of the Death of his Lord and Master. The others
being conscious to themselves of having, by their Arms, carried on the
Conspiracy, not only declared their Resolutions to defend the Vizier, but owned
that what he had acted was by their Order, and at their Request and Instigation.

The Spahees being highly provoked with this Declaration, swelled with Anger
and Malice against the Janisaries; and both sides being equally proud and rich,
could not bear each others Reproaches. The Spahees being Men of Estates in
Land, looked on themselves as the Gentry, and to have the greatest Share in the
concernment of the Empire. The Janisaries living regularly in their Chambers,
or Martial Colleges, looked on themselves as the better Soldiers, and the
more formidable Party; and the truth is, both of them were proceeded to that
height of Command and Authority in Government, that had they not been
suppressed by the cruel Hand, and bloody Disposition of Kuperlee, as shall be
more largely related hereafter, this Empire was then in danger of falling into
as many Divisions, as there were at that time Pashaws, or great Captains. The
cause hereof proceeded from the warlike disposition of Sultan Morat, who being
the most Martial Man of his Age, preferred none but Men of great Courage, and
such as had signalized their Valor by undoubted proofs; And such Men as these
he loaded with Honor, and raised them to the highest and most ^minent Charges
in the Government.

But Morat dying soon afterward, these Great Men had time to enrich themselves
during the gentle and easy Reign of Sultan Ibrahim; which being seconded by
the Minority of this Young Sultan, their Pride knew no bounds, either of
Modesty toward their Commanders, or Reverence toward their Sultan. Hence it
was that the Soldiery dividing, so great a Sedition arose amongst them, that
at last they came to Blows, resolving to decide the Controversy by the Sword.
But the Quarrels of Turks amongst themselves not being Commonly of long
durance, the Care and Vigilance of the Magistrates prevented all open defiance
in the Field; but yet could not so pacisie their Animosities, but that several
Skirmishes, or Rencounters, passed between them in the Streets, wherein the
Spahees were always worsted, and at length were forced to abandon the City,
scarce daring for some time to own the Name of Spahee within the Walls of
Constantinople.

These Disturbances gave the Venetians some hopes to accommodate their Peace
with better Advantage; but the Reply to this Proposition was more fierce and
positive than ever, and so ill resented that the Bailo going from his Audience,
was on the 27th of April seized on, and with all his Retinue. clapped into
Prison and Chains; being sent to those Castles which are s^ituate on the
Bosphorus, in the middle way between Constantinople and the Black Sea. But this
furious severity, by the intercession of other Christian Ministers, continued
not long, before the Bailo received more gentle Treatment, by the Sacrifice
which the Turks made unto themselves of Grillo, his Interpeter, who being
called down from the presence of the Bailo, was immediately, by two Officers,
strangled, and his Body thrown out at the Window of the Castle; the which act,
though it may seem unjust and barbarous to us, has yet been frequently
practiced amongst the Turks, being to this day their common use to threaten the
Druggermen, or Interpreters; which is the cause that they often mince, or
wholly alter the sense or meaning of their Masters, on those Occasions, when
words are spoken by them ungrateful to the Turks.

The Turks bearing this Disdain to the Venetians, labored to re-enforce their
Armies in Candia, and supply them with Ammunition and Provisions; and thought
the Venetians lay before the Mouth of the Dardanelles to intercept all Succors
which might be carried thither; yet the Turks, notwithstanding their Divisions,
having recruited their Fleet with forty Galleys, and ten Great Ship, broke
through the Venetians, and in despite of them, convoyed five Galleys laden
with Soldiers and Ammunition, and landed them safe at Canea; and about the
same time six Galleys, and ten Ships of Barbary, entered into the Port of Suda.

The General which commanded in Chief was named Chusaein Pasha, a Person of
great Courage and Experience; he had for some time besieged the City of Candia,
but for want of Men and Ammunition was forced to rise from that Place, and
retire to Canea and Retimo, whilst in the mean time the Candiots received
recruits of Men, and supply of Provisions, improving their leisure-time to
fortify their Town with such Works as rendered it almost impregnable, and made
it become the Wonder and Discourse of the World after some Years succeeding.

Nor was the War only carried on in Candia, but also in Dalmatia, Morea, Bosna,
and Albania. For Foscolo, the General of Venice, designing to force some Corn
from the Parts of Castel-nuovo, he landed some Men there, but was so ill
received by the Turks, that he was forced to retreat unto his Vessels with
great disorder, and no less dishonor. But he had better fortune in the Parts
of Bosna, where he repulsed the Enemy to the very Gates of Sarsay, the Capital
City of that Province, and took upon composition the Fortress of Risano, which
is situate between Cataro and Castel-nuovo; but at length the Turks receiving
an additional Aid of sifteen or sixteen thousand Men, the Venetians were forced
to quit their new Conquests, and retire into their own Country.

During the time that these Affairs were in agitation, the young Emperor was
proclaimed, and his Inauguration celebrated with the usual Ceremonies, but with
Rejoicings, and hopes extraordinary; who being yet scarcely arrived to eight
years of Age, many Mutinies and Troubles arose in diverse Parts of the Empire,
as in Damascus, Syria, Anatolia, and other Countries, where the Pashaws refused
to pay in the customary Taxes and Tribute, declaring, That they would keep the
Money in their Hands during the Minority of the Grand Signior; and that when he
came to Age of Government, they would be accountable to him both for the
Principal and for the Improvement.

The Turks in Hungary making incursions into the Territories of the Emperor,
were overthrown by the Count Forgatz, near Buda, where the Pasha was taken
Prisoner, and his Son slain.

Nor better fortune had they in the Assault they made on the Fortress of
Clissa, where having lost five thousand Men, they were forced to retire with
great dishonor.

The Cossacks also in this Conjuncture grew more bold, so that they covered the
Black Sea with their Boats, doing great damage to the Saicks, and other
Vessels, which traded in that Sea; and at length came up the Bosphorus above
Therapea, giving a great Alarm, with much Fear and Confusion to all
Constantinople.

Amidst these Misfortunes, and intestine Troubles, new Disorders, arose in the
Ottoman-Empire; For, as commonly, all the blame of miscarriages and ill
successes in Turkey are cast upon the Head of the Commander in chief; so the
Enemies of the Great Vizier took the advantage in this conjuncture to reproach
his ill Government, and carried the accusation so far, as to depose him from
his Charge and Office; in whose place the Aga, or General of the Janisaries,
succeeded.

The Spahees in Asia, being displeased with this Election, assembled in a Body
of seven or eight thousand, and marched toward Constantinople, pretending to
revenge the Death of Sultan Ibrahim; their Numbers daily increasing, the Divan
very much feared lest the Party which favored the Spahees in Constantinople,
should join themselves to the Asian Mutineers; to prevent which it was judged
good Reason and Policy, to anticipate the Justice they demanded, by taking away
the Life of the deposed Vizier; which being easily assented unto, and without
much hesitation performed, gave some little stop to the Fury and Heats of the
Spahees.

Notwithstanding all which, as the Divisions which the Turks entertain amongst
themselves, were never so great as to afford the Christians any Advantage
thereby, so the Venetians did not reap any Benefit from these Quarrels; but on
the contrary, the Turks studiously attended to their Affairs in Candia, passing
thither with sixty Galleys, thirty great Ships, and twenty five other smaller
Vessels, laden with Men, and all sorts of Provisions and Ammunition for War; so
that in this Year 1649, the Affairs of the Turks remained in that Island in
this happy and hopeful posture. Amongst these Ships were thirteen English,
which the Turks took up at Smyrna, and forced into their Service. For though
the Ambassador, Sir Thomds Bendysh, then Resident at Constantinople, opposed
the Engagement of these Ships what was possible, and also the Commanders and
Seamen were very unwilling and dissatisfied to undertake the Design, yet the
Turks with Menaces, and Promises of Reward, forced them to carry Men and
Ammunition to Candia; so that, making a Virtue of Necessity, they complied with
that which they could not resist.

ANNO 1650.
CHusaein Pasha, Governor of the Island of Candia, having received these
Succors and Recruits, resolved to besiege the Chief City of Candia; to which
intent, drawing out from the Ships, and Garrisons of Retimo and Canea, what Men
he was able, he formed an Army of thirty thousand Men, with which he marched,
and pitched before the Town. He was provided also with twelve Pieces of Cannon,
four thousand Sacks of Wool, three thousand Ladders, and with a good quantity
of Grenades; with this Force he attaqued the City in two places, viz. on the
Forts of Martinengo, and Mocenigo; and pressed so hard on the latter, that
notwithstanding the generous resistance of the Defendants, he won the Fort, and
there planted the Ottoman Colors; fortifying it with more Cannon, and a good
number of Men.

Count Coloredo, Governor of that Place, was then sick, the Garrison very weak,
and things reduced to the last terms of extremity; when General Balbiani,
Admiral of Malta, arrived with six Galleys, and there landed six hundred Men,
and sixty Kingts; which with great Courage mounted the Guard of the Fort
Martinengo, which was the place of most Danger and Honor. The Turks excited
with a desire to welcome the new Guests, made three desperate and furious
Assaults on this Fort, but were with equal Valor repulsed by the Defendants;
at which Disgrace and Foil being highly enraged, they resolved on a fourth
Attempt, which they pursued with that Courage and Success, that the Venetians
were forced to give way to their Violence, with the slaughter almost of all
those which defended this Fort; until the Cavaliers of Malta, who having no
greater Glory, nor readier Will, that to spill their Blood for the Christian
Cause, rallied all the Force they were able, and made so prosperous an Attaque
upon the Fort, that they recovered it again, with the Blood and Destruction of
all those who defended it; but they enjoyed it not long, before the Turks
regained it with the like success and slaughter: which variety of Fortune the
Venetians being sensible of, and that they could not bear such costly
Interchanges with the Turks, had recourse to their ultimate Remedy of Mines,
which succeeded so happily, that the whole Fort was carried into the Air, and
therewith two thousand good Soldiers of the Turks; with which Destruction, and
other Repulses in diverse places, they were so weakened and discouraged, that
they raised the Siege on the fifth of October new Style.

In this Interim, the Tartar Han, called the Krim, demanded the Guardianship of
the young Sultan, as of right belonging unto him; but the Council answered
hereunto, That their Master was already in better Hands than those into which
they desired to transfer him; and that his Grandmother, and the Divan, wanted
neither Wisdom nor Fidelity to direct his Affairs: with which answer the Tartar
being forced to remain satisfied, was able to revenge himself no farther, than
by exciting the Cossacks to infest the Seas; which gave some diversion to those
Arms, which otherwise had all been employed against the Venetians.

But these Designs from Tartary did little trouble the Council, in comparison
of that Spirit of Discord which was arisen between the Spahees and the
Janisaries; for both Parties being emulous of each others Greatness, endeavured
on all Occasions to elevate their Chief Commanders to the highest and most
profitable Places of the Epire: which Dissension touching the principal
Ministers of State, who were all engaged on the one side or the other,
administered great Troubles, and retarded the execution and success of all the
grand Designs of the Empire. Nor was it of less importance and dishonor to the
Divan, that their Fleet was hindered passage by the Venetians, who blocked up
the Mouth of the Dardanelles; whereby all intercourse with Candia was
interrupted: but being resolved to remove this Obstacle, they commanded the
Captain-Pasha to force his Passage; which he accordingly performing, was so
warmly received, that he quickly lost two Galleys, and after much Blood, and
loss on both sides, was forced at length to retire again within the Streights.
But what was of worse consequence to the Turks, was the inveterate Discord
between the Spahees, and Janisaries; who having been unadvisedly embarked
promiscuously together, came oftentimes to Words, and then to Blows; which
ended not without the Bolld and Death of diverse of each party. These mischiefs
increased the rage which the Turks at Constantinople conceived against the
Venetians; who were all thereupon (not excepting the Bailo Soranzo, nor his
Secretary Ballarino) interdicted the Territories of the Grand Signior; and sent
back into their own Country.

The Captain-Pasha, that he might be in a capacity to make a second Attempt to
force his passage, sent to Constantinople for new Recruits: when News came that
the Siege of Candia was raised, and that the Turks had lost the Fort of St.
Theodoro; which so angered the Spirit of the Queen Mother against the Vizier,
that she immediately deposed him from his Charge, and therewith had taken away
his Life, had not hte Faction of the Janisaries protected him in this Extremity.

The Pasha of Buda was introduced into his place, a Person of a turbulent and
ambitious Spirit, who to increase his Favor with his Mistress the Sultana,
evidenced his Heat and Zeal against the Venetians, and to that end sent
immediately express Orders to the Pasha of Bosna, to invest Clissa with all the
Power he was able; and therewith he presented him with a Cimeter, and a Halter;
the former to be his Reward in case of good Success, and the latter to be his
Punishment in case of Misfortune. But this furious Vizier continued not so
long, as to experience the Issue of this Command; for he was in a few days laid
aside, and Chusaein Pasha, the General of Candia, was placed in his stead;
howsoever his Orders were to remain with the Army, by which means, much
Emulation and Contest was prevented, which might otherwise have happened
between the Spahees, and Janisaries, at the Election of a new Vizier; and
thereby all excuses taken from the Soldiery of absence from the War, who could
now pretend nothing of Reason to withdraw themselves, on score of attendance on
the Vizier's Person; and to supply his Authority at the Regal Court, a Chimacam
was substituted to administer Justice in place of the Vizier, which is usual on
such Occasions.

Notwithstanding all which, Affairs succeeded not extraordinary well for the
Turks in Candia; for being straightened for Provisions in Canea, by the near
approach of the Christians, the Turks were forced to make a Diversion, by
appearing in great Troops before Candia; which they were enabled to do, by the
Supplies they had lately received, with the arrival of their Fleet of Galleys;
for the Winter Season approaching, the Venetians were constrained to abandon
their station before the Dardanelles, and to leave the Passage open for the
Enemy. And so this Year ended, rather with Advantage than Disgrace to the
Christians.

ANNO 1651.
WIth these great Succors and Supplies sent to Candia by the Turks, Affairs
must necessarily have succeeded prosperously to their Designs, had not
intestine Discords at Home interrupted their proceedings; which arose from a
Jealousy and Emulation between the Grandmother and Mother of the young Sultan.
For each of them pretending to the tuition or guardianship of the Emperor,
during his Minority, diverse Parties and Factions formed at Constantinople, from
whence all that Trouble and Combustion arose, which we have at large related in
the third Chapter of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire.

So that now it was no time to talk to the Soldiers or People of a War in
Candia; For the first thought themselves engaged to contrive a Settlement and
Determination of Disputes at Home: and the latter being irritated with a new
Tax laid on them, for want of Money in the Treasury, exclaimed, and talked loud,
and at length, instead of paying, broke out into open Rebellion; which by
assistance of the Soldiery, was appeased, under no less Terms than the Death
of several principal Ministers of State.

During these Divisions, the Venetians had time to arm out a very considerable
Fleet for defense of Candia; Foscolo, who had been General in Dalmatia, being
sent thither with title of Generalissimo in the place of Mocenigo: But these
Dissentions amongst the Turks, according to their usual Custom, lasting not
long before they came to a Conclusion, by the entire destruction of one of the
Parties; the Chief Ministers began to reassume again the thoughts of
prosecuting the War in Candia, and to send Recruits to reinforce the Army under
the Command of Chusaein Pasha, who was returned with new Forces and Courage to
assault the City of Candia.

At this time a certain Greek, pretending to be a Person of Quality, and
discontented with the Turks, fled from them to the Christians, where being
received with all kind and obliging entertainment, he had thereby liberty of
seeing and visiting all the Fortifications of the Place. After he had observed
and discovered as much as he desired, this traitorous Fugitive fled again to
the Turkish Camp, where he revealed what places were most strong or best
fortified, and where the Town was weakest, and most easily to be assaulted. The
Venetian General being awakened at this Discovery, and considering the numbers
of his People to be few, in respect of the Enemy, and that the Outworks could
not be maintained without a more numerous Garrison, he resolved to destroy some
of those Forts; and accordingly blew up with Mines four Bastions, which being
at a distance could not be relieved without much danger. The Turks hereby
making conjectures of the weakness of the besieged, cheerfully assaulted the
Fort of St. Demetrio, thinking to carry it without much trouble; but contrary
to their expectation, they encountered so bold a resistance, that they lost
three thousand Men on the Place.

At Constantinople they were still so intent to carry on this War, that having
prepared, and laden on the Fleet great quantities of Grenades, Bomboes, and
Mortar-pieces, with other Fireworks, the Captain-Pasha, with hopes agreeable
to his Force, set forth to Sea, with eleven hundred Sail, consisting of
Galleys, Ships, Galleasses, Saiques, Brigantines, and smaller Vessels, with
resolution to engage the Venetian Fleet, whose Commanders also were equally
desirous and ready to consent with them to a Battle.

On the 7th of July, the Venetians being at an Anchor in the Port of St.
Ermina, discovered the Turkish Fleet, to which, as they were much inferior in
number, so they were superior to them in the agreement and experience of their
Commanders. The Turks having passed forward on their way, the Venetians pursued
them, and the better to draw them to a Battle, Mocenigo ordered two Ships,
commanded by Barbaro and Dolphino to cross the Turks at the point of the
Island; and his Vice Admiral, Bataggio, with four Ships to engage the main Body
of the the Turkish Fleet; to whose assistance many other Vessels coming in, he
so rudely treated several Galleys, that they were forced to seek harbor in the
Port of Chios, now Scio, with the loss of Mahomet, Pasha of Anatolia, who was
sent to succeed in the Office of Chusaein Pasha, the General of Candia; but
Night coming on, the rest of the Fleet retreated to the Isles of Naxia and
Paros.

On the tenth day the Turks having watered their Fleet, gave a signal of
defiance to the Venetians, by discharge of two pieces of Cannon; and the
Venetians accepting the Challenge, both Fleets gave a furious charge one to the
other; but the Turks were not able to withstand the Courage and Skilfulness of
the Venetians; for the Captain-Pasha having lost many of his Men, and the Poop
of his Gally being carried away with a Cannon-shot, the whole Fleet was put
into Disorder, and then unto flight, so that the Galleys began to employ
themselves in toaing the Ships. But one of their Mahones being separated from
the rest, was assaulted by two Galleasses, and some Ships, and finding none to
come in for Succor, the Captain was killed, with four hundred Soldiers, and
two hundred were taken Prisoners.

In the mean time Mocenigo, the General, gave chase to the Galleys, which two
to a Ship were toaing the heavier Vessels as fast as they could; but being
hardly pursued, were forced to cast off the Hauser, and shift for themselves as
well as they were able. A great Victory obtained by the Venetians over the
Turks.
The Turkish Ships seeing themselves thus abandoned, fired whole Broadsides
upon the Enemy; but the Venetian Galleys leaving their own Ships astern, that
they might pursue their advantage, Querini boarded a Great Galleass, called the
Soltana, upon which were three hundred Soldiers, who offered to surrender upon
promise of Quarter for their Lives. But the Christian Soldiers heated with
fight, and not then understanding any thing of Conditions, desperately boarded
the Vessel, whereby the Turks being reduced to an extremity of despair, gave
fire to the Powder, and therewith carried, as well the Vanquishers, as the
Vanquished, into the other World.

According to this example four other Vessels burnt themselves, one of 60 brass
Guns, and three others of 40 to 44. Fifteen Vessels of the Starboard Wing saved
themselves by good sailing. Of the Larboard Wing, Captain Nicolo, a Renegado,
with his Ship, was taken by the Admiral of the Galleasses, likewise another
Great Vessel by Lazaro Mocenigo, and another by Proveditor Melino. In short,
there was not one Vessel which remained in sight of the Venetians, which was
not either taken, sunk, or burnt. Notwithstanding all which, considering the
Vessels which were escaped, and the 3 thousand Men which the Turks had landed
at Naxia, in order to their being transported unto Candia, the Victory seemed
to be very imperfect; wherefore the Venetians attending another encounter with
the Turkish Fleet, did happily meet them in a few days after; and being
encouraged with the late Success, as the Enemy was low in their Spirits and
Resolution, they bravely attaqued the Turks, and took 39 Galleys, 23 Ships,
three Galleasses, together with the three thousand Soldiers which were then
embarked from Naxia: Those which escaped took Refuge in the Port of Rhodes.

After this great loss, the Turks entertained no great Designs of the Conquest
of Candia; but only to conserve Canea, and the footing that they had won in
that Island: nor did ever the Turks after this, dare to stand a formal Battle
with the Venetians at Sea, but rather contriving to escape than to fight, did
ever after build light Galleys, for transporting of Men and Ammunition, with
intention to wage their War only at Land, and not at Sea; it being a saying
ever after common in their Mouths; That God had given the Sea to Christians,
and the Earth to the Turks.

To these ill Successes abroad, were added great Dissentions at Home; for the
mutinous Spahees in Asia, having united into a strong Body, marched toward
Constantinople, to join with their other Brethren in those Parts. The
Janisaries on the other side, not less diligent to oppose their Enemy, to
revenge the Outrages committed on their Brethren, whom the Spahees had
ill-treated, having cut off the Noses and Ears of several of them; besides all
which, they proceeded to that height of Insolence, as to demand the Heads of
the Great Vizier, and of the Aga of the Janisaries; and being now by their
numbers rendered formidable to the Court, it was judged agreeable to the
present Conjuncture, to satisfy in some measure these Mutiniers, by discharging
these two Officers of their employment, which did in some degree for the
present quallfy and appease these Tumults.

ANNO 1652.
THE Seditions at Constantinople were scarce quieted, before advice came of a
Rebellion of the People of Grand Cairo and Damasous, who both at the same time
conspired, as if they intended to cast off Subjection to the Ottoman Family;
the which Mutiny and Disturbance arose to that Head, as gave great cause of
fear to the Divan; and employed all their Counsels and Contrivances for this
whole Year, in what manner they might reduce this People to their Duty and
Obedience. During which time, the Christians in Candia had time to breath, and
opportunity to provide themselves with all Ammunition and Provisions; and to
repair their old, and add new Fortifications to their Town.

ANNO 1653.
BUT these Troubles being with time composed, the Grand Vizier desired greatly
the Conquest of Candia, which being by experience proved to be with difficulty
guined by the Sword, he endeavored to win it by fairer Terms; and to that end
wrote a Letter to the Republic of Venice, in Letters of Gold; wherein he
declared, that it seemed strange to him, that the Senate had not dispatched
their Ambassador to him with the surrender of Candia, in regard that thereby
they might assure themselves to purchase a certain Peace, which they vainly
retarded by such delays. Howsoever in these Letters no mention was made of the
Causes, or Reasons, why Signior Capello, who was an eminent Person, being
Procurator of St. Mark, and sent thither for Bailo, was so ill treated with
Imprisonment at his Arrival, notwithstanding the permission and encouragement
which was given for his kind reception, obtained at the instance of the French
Ambassador; but this Restraint continued not long upon him, before he was
released with a daily Allowance (which continued for some time) of 1200 Aspers
a Day; and afterward the Court returning from Adrianople to Constantinople, he
was permitted to lodge in the Palace which belongs to the Bailo's of Venice.

The Venetian Fleet being Victorious at Sea, made it their work to keep the
Mouth of the Dardanelles always blocked up, whereby they hindered all Succors
from Candia: notwithstanding which diligence, the Venetians being sometimes
forced, for the sake of Water and Provision, to abandon that Station; the Turks
took hold of the opportunity to escape forth; but being eagerly pursued by the
Venetians, they were forced to take Sanctuary in Rhodes, where being again
blocked up, the affairs in Candia suffered much, and the Complaints from thence
were loud at the Court. So that Orders were sent, and often repeated unto the
Captain-Pasha, that he should spend no longer time in Rhodes, but that in
despite of all Difficulties, he should immediately proceed to Candia, and
fight through the Venetians in case they remained in the way to interrupt his
passage; but the Captain-Pasha notwithstanding these Orders, and Menaces which
accompanied them, could not persuade himself to the Hazard of a Battle; till at
length, the season of the Year spending, and being wearied in the Port of
Rhodes, he resolved to adventure abroad; but instead of going to Candia, he
plundered the Islands as he passed, and returned to Constantinople, with 40
Galleys, where he hoped with the Booty he had plundered to appease the anger of
the Divan against him: but this Sacrifice did not much avail, for he was not
sooner arrived, than his Person was seized, and Goods sealed up for the use of
the Grand Signior; the which Seal his Sons broke open, and taking with them the
richest and most considerable part of their Father's Estate, laded it on one of
the Galleys, and fled therewith into Foreign Parts, little regarding that
danger in which they had left their Father to perish. During which time the
Venetions still maintained their Guards on the Coasts of Candia, not suffering
any Recruits of Men, or Provisions for War, to be transported thither; so that
if the Turks designed to prosecute this War, it must be by new Forces, and such
as were able to encounter the Marine Power of the Enemy; the which being
resolved upon by the Council, a heavy Tax was laid on the people to carry on
the Design, which they not willingly supporting, made a public Insurrection in
the City; and at the same time also the ancient Quarrel between the Spahees and
Janisaries, began again to ferment; which Troubles being added to a Rebellion
raised by the Pasha of Aleppo, who increasing in strength and number, came
marching toward Constantinople, put that great City into a horrible Fear and
Confusion.

ANNO 1654.
THE Venetians judged that these Troubles would naturally produce some
Advantage to them, and much facilitate the Peace which they had long desired:
but as Seditions amongst the Turks are always too violent to continue; so these
Discontents evaporated in a short time, and new Resolutions were taken to
prosecute the War in Candia; for notwithstanding that Monsieur de Ventelay, Son
to the French Ambassador, mediated with agreeable prudence to compose Matters
in order to a Peace, yet his Endeavors were all insignificant; for neither had
Signior Capello Audience granted him, nor that liberty which was promised
before his Arrival; the Turks still insisting on the Surrender of Candia, would
not understand any Terms which did not entirely invest them in that Conquest.

To effect which by Force, which could not be performed by Composition; the
Pasha of Buda was Elected for Captain-Pasha, or Commander in Chief of the Seas;
and Orders given to equippe a new Fleet of Ships, and Galleys, for transporting
the Succors of Men and Provisions to Candia: where Chusaein Pasha the General,
being wearied with his long Siege of the Town, withdrew his Men at some farther
distance for their better refreshment; for they wanting all Conveniences in
their Trenches, began to Mutiny, and to refuse the performance of their Duty,
until the General satisfying their Pay, and dispensing liberally Largesses to
the Officers, gave them new Encouragement and Satisfaction; with which, being a
little enlivened, Chusaein sent a Herald, with a defiance to those in the City,
challenging them to fight a pitched Battle with him: but the Christians refused
the Offer, thinking it more prudence not to accept, than loss of Honor to deny
an Answer to the Challenge. Then the Turks sought some means to effect their
Design by Treachery; to which end, they treated with a certain Captain for
delivery of one of the Gates of the City; which he promised to do unto the
Turks, but gave Advertisement unto the Governor. The Pasha the night following
advanced with some Troops, hoping to find one of the Gates opened to him; but
instead thereof, the Defendants having prepared a Mine to receive them, sprang
the same so opportunely, that it carried away the most of those who were
engaged in the Design, and therewith their hopes of becoming Masters speedily
of that impregnable Fortress. Wherefore they resolved for a while to repose,
and attend those Succors which were now preparing at Constantinople.

The Fleet being put into a readiness, the Soldiery departed with their usual
hopes of Success; but meeting with their Enemy again at the Mouth of the
Dardanelli, the Fight was furious and hot for a long time between them, but
concluded to the disadvantage of the Turks, who there lost 6000 Men, two
Galleys, three Ships, and a Mahone: howsoever they broke through the Venetians,
and landed 12000 Men in the Isle of Candia. The News of this defeat, and the
Confirmation thereof, by the wounded Men which were landed at Constantinople,
made a great noise amongst the people. Howsoever the Turks persisting constant
to their Intentions of prosecuting the War, sent Orders to the Captain-Pasha
again to fight the Venetians so soon as the Fleet was refitted, and restored to
a condition to engage in another Battle; but the Venetians scarce gave them the
leisure to repair, before they attacked them again, whereby they put them to
such disorder, that they were forced to take refuge in the first convenient
Port; where having attended a favorable Wind, they hastened to Constantinople;
and from thence were dispatched into the Black Sea against the Cossacks, who
very much infested those parts.

The Captain-Pasha being arrived, extolled his own great Services and
Adventures, and on the contrary vilified the Great Vizier, disparaging all his
Actions, as mixed with weak Counsels, and prosecuted with Cowardice, or want of
true Resolution: the which took such deep impression in his absence, having
none to answer for him; that all being given for granted which was alleged
against him, Orders were dispatched to Candia by an Officer to take off his
Head, in whose place this Captain-Pasha succeeded.

Amidst of all these Combustions of War, the mediation of Peace was carried on
by the French Ambassador: For though Signior Capello was actually Resident on
the Place, qualified with the Character of Bailo for the Republic of Venice;
yet the Turks would scarce vouchsafe to Treat personally with him; and indeed
his sufferings by Imprisonment, and other barbarous Usages, had affected him
with such a melancholy, as rendered him incapable for some time of administering
public Affairs; for having lost his Reason, by giving way to sad and black
Thoughts, he laid violent Hands on himself, by wounding himself in two or three
places of his Belly; but the Wounds proving not Mortal, he was in a short time
restored again to a sound Estate both in Mind and Body; as I shall some few
years after have occasion to relate from the words of his own Mouth, which he
was pleased to utter to me on his Deathbed, the day before he departed this
Life.

ANNO 1655.
THE Great Vizier after all his evil Insinuations against Chusaein Pasha, fell
very sick and infirm; so that the Court considering him as a Person incapable
of farther Service, cast their eyes on the Pasha of Aleppo, who being a daring
Martial Man, was esteemed to be the better Chief in such a hazardous War, which
for being on the Sea, was unusual and displeasing to the Turks. Against him
nothing could be objected besides his Rebellions and Contrariety to the
Government; but hereunto it was presently answered, that the extravagance of
his humor proceeded only from his Ambition of being Great Vizier; which when
he had attained, that thirsty desire of Glory, which he exercised for acquiring
this Office, would be busied in thoughts to advance and improve his Honor in
Actions beyond his Predecessors.

Letters being arrived at this Pasha's hands, which called him to Court to
accept this Charge, did secretly please the humor of his haughty Spirit;
howsoever, he remained for a while in some suspense and irresolution, not being
assured whether some Deceit might not be concealed under this specious
appearance of Preferment: But considering, that the way unto Gains and
Advantage was by daring Adventures, he resolutely accepted the Proffer, and put
himself in his March toward Constantinople, with a glorious Equipage of forty
thousand Men, thinking therewith to make good his Retreat, and secure his
Person in case that Deceit were discovered which he rationally suspected. Being
arrived near unto Constantinople, he received from the Great Signior several
Messages of Kindness, and a good welcome; and was accordingly received into the
City, and invested in the Office, with all the Circumstances of Favor and
Honor imaginable.

Having thus taken possession of his Charge, he promised the Grand Signior that
he would employ all his Endeavors to restore the decayed Estate of Affairs,
and reform the Government. And as an earnest thereof, he began to remove such
Ministers from the Court which were suspected by him; and to render himself the
more Absolute, he cut off several others, whom he imagined might in any wise
disturb or control him in the management of his Affairs.

After which he dispatched his Orders to all Maritime Towns of the Empire, to
fit and make ready what Galleys and Ships were possible to be provided,
intending thereby to set out the greatest Fleet that ever was seen in the
Levant: but to complete this Work, two great Difficulties arose; The first was,
to find a wise and well experienced Commander: and the next, was in what manner
to persuade the Spahees and Janisaries to embark; for they having heard and
seen in what manner their Companions had perished in this miserable War,
absolutely refused to go; and though the Animosities of these two orders of
Soldiers were irreconcilable one to the other, yet in this common Cause being
united, they raised so horrible a Sedition, that they assaulted the Mufti in
his very House, and pursued him within the Gates of the Seraglio with a
thousand reproaches and injuries, as an Author of evil Counsels, and a
Disturber of the common Peace and Quiet of the Empire. Nor was it possible to
appease this Tumult, but by anticipating to them four months Pay; with which
their Minds being made more pliable, they gently yielded to Obedience, and
suffered themselves to be embarked for Candia.

Zarnozau Mustapha was made Captain-Pasha; or General of the Fleet, which was
very numerous, and well equipped, consisting of sixty Galleys, eight Mahones,
thirty great Ship of War, and sixty one Galleys belonging to the Beys. After
having remained three days at the mouth of the Dardanelles near the Castles,
they went out in this Order; The Bey's Galleys were the first, then followed
the Ships, next the Mahones, and the Rear consisted wholly of the Grand
Signior's Galleys. The Van of the Fleet being the Bey's Galleys, which are
always the best manned, and provided, were ordered to attack the main Body of
the Christian Fleet, for that, being seconded with the Ships, they would be
able to sustain the Shock until the Mahones could come up, which were directed
against the Starboard Wing of the Enemy, composed of Galleasses. The Venetians,
though much inferior in Number, yet as great in Courage, gave evident Signs of
their desire to fight, with hopes, by God's Blessing, to obtain a Victory. The
Venetians whilst the Turks passed, remained still with their Anchors apique,
which the Turks interpreting as a token of their Courage and Boldness, were so
daunted, that they began to ply toward the Coast of Greece; but being forced to
pass (...) the Guns of the Venetian Admiral, they (...) so ill treated by his
Broadsides, that they were discouraged from making a second Charge. The Ships,
and other Vessels fared little better being forced to pass under the Guns of
the Enemies Fleet. The Captain-Pasha attempted to pas^ (...) Coast of Anatolia,
with his lighter Galleys, but being hindered by a strong party of the Enemy, he
was forced to follow the rest of the Fleet, taking his Course with them by the
Coast of Greece. In this Charge one of the Turks Mahones was sunk, and two
disabled: But the greatest Fight happened between a Squadron of the Turks
Ships, and four of the Venetians, which had been hard put to it, had not the
Captain Mocenigo come in to their Assistance; howsoever, the Venetian Captain
of the Ship, called the Crown, was slain by a Musket shot.

In short, the Christians boarded the Turks with so much Vigor and Resolution,
that they took several of their Ships, and mixing with the thickest of their
other Vessels, they put many Ashore, and others escaping in their Boats, left
their Slaves and Galleys to the disposal of the Enemy; so that the Venetians
obtained that day a hundred brass Guns, with a signal Victory, having had no
other important Loss, unless the Ship called the David and Goliath, which being
overpowered, was burnt by the Turks.

The People of the Turks, who were in daily expectation to receive intelligence
of a Success, agreeable to so great Preparations, were much troubled to hear
the News of the Defeat given to their Naval Forces; of which Miscarriage, the
World dividing it self into different Conjectures, the most part, especially
those of Constantinople, attributed the Misfortune of all to the ill
Government, and want of Experience in the General. Wherefore to appease the
People, especially the Merchants, who were weary of this Marine War; from
whence they reaped nothing but Losses of their Ships and Goods; It was thought
fit to enter into a Treaty with Signior Capello, the Venetian Bailo, concerning
a Peace; but he having his Commission taken from him, for the Reason before
related, his Secretary Ballarino supplied his Office; and in Order to an
Accommodation, had two Audiences with the Great Vizier, to whom, and to others
of the Divan, he made Presents of rich Pieces of Cloth of Gold, in the Name of
the Republic. Howsoever the Turks thinking it dishonorable to accord unto
other Terms, than the entire Resignation of Candia, proceeded in their
Preparations as formerly; at which the Merchants and Tradesmen at
Constantinople received such matter of Coffeehouse, that in Tumults they
cried out for Peace at the Gates of the very. Seraglio; and behaved themselves
with that Insolence, that the Janisaries were called to drive them from thence
by force of Arms; howsoever this Tumult and Riot of the People ended not
without the Life of the Great Vizier, to whose fury he was made a Sacrifice.
And though his Son appeared at the Gates of the City with forty thousand Men,
to demand Justice on the Murderers of his Father, yet the People were so far
from being dismayed thereat, that their Fury and Rage increased to a greater
height, and required the Authority of the Divan to keep things from running
into the Inconveniences of a Civil War.

ANNO 1656.
THese Disorders induced the chief Ministers to enter into another Treaty with
Ballarino, proposing to withdraw their Forces from Candia, and make a Peace,
upon the payment of ten Millions for the Charge of the War: And to incline the
Venetians hereunto, the Turks gave severe Orders to their People living about
Corfou, to molest the Inhabitants of that Island with all Acts of Hostility
imaginable: and farther published, That their Intentions were to set out a more
numerous and stronger Fleet, than any which from the beginning of this War had
sailed on the Seas; and in order thereinto, great Numbers of Slaves, consisting
of Cossacks and Moscovites, were bought of the Tartars, and transported to
Constantinople.

The Venetians were not in the least affrighted at these Boastings of the Turk,
but on the contrary, knowing that their Affairs in Candia were well secured and
provided, gave Orders to Ballarino to desist from farther Treaties, and to
procure his License to depart. And the Turks, to evidence their intentions to
prosecute the War, entered into Canea with twenty eight Sail, laden with Arms
and Provisions, on which also were fifteen hundred Men. By this conveyance was
sent a Janisar-Aga with Orders from the Grand Signior, to constitute Chusaein
Pasha in the place of Captain-Pasha, or Admiral of the Seas; but he judging
this to be a Design, or Lure, to draw him from his Post, or Office, wherein he
was more strong and secure, acknowledged the Honor of the Employment, but
framed Excuses to continue his Seat and Place of Residence, which the Chief
Ministers were forced to accept; it being a Conjuncture more seasonable to
dissemble, than to resent his refusal.

Whilst new Preparations were making against Candia, so horrible a storm of
Mutiny and Sedition arose at Constantinople, as constrained the Grandees of the
Council to quit for the present all thoughts of providing for the War against
the Enemy, that they might defend and save themselves from the Fury of their
own People; For the Spahees and Janisaries joining together, pretended to
reform the Abuses of the State; to perform which, in a furious Tumult, putting
themselves in Arms, they ran to the Divan, where they deposed the Great Vizier,
A Rebellion at Constantinople.
and discharged diverse other Officers of their Employment; The Mufti was
constrained to fly to Jerusalem, and the Queen Mother scarce remained secure in
her old Seraglio. And to so great a height their Rebellion proceeded, that they
proposed even to dethrone the Grand Signior himself. And having thus cast off
all Respect and Duty to their Prince, they entered the Imperial Palace, and
forcing the Guards, broke up the Treasury, and carried two millions from thence.

Amidst of this horrid and affrighting Confusion, Merchants and well-meaning
Citizens remained in the most astonishing apprehensions imaginable; for all
Laws being broken, and Justice unregarded; the whole City laid open to be
pillaged and sacked by the licentiousnefs of an unbridled Soldiery. For
several days the Offices both of the Mufti, and Great Vizier remained vacant,
by reason that the two Factions of Janisaries and Spahees could not agree upon
the Election. At length the most seditious amongst them wearying out the others
with Quarrels and Contests, advanced a Fellow of no Understanding or Reputation
to the eminent degree of Great Vizier; in which condition he remained not long.
For the Fire of the multitude being with time quenched, and the popular Heat
abated, this new Vizier was displaced, all things returning to their usual
Channel, and Authority to its Fountain.

And that Matters might more easily be restored to their ancient order, the
Grand Signior called for the Pasha of Damascus to receive the Dignity of Great
Vizier; for he being a Person of eighty Years of Age, and of long Experience in
Affairs, having managed the most weighty Charges of the Empire, was looked on
by all as the most proper Person to compose and heal these great Distempers in
the State; and this was that famous Kuperlee, who was Father to him who
succeeded him in this Office. The Pasha of Silistria was also constituted
Captain Pasha, and Chusaein was confirmed in his Government of Candia.

And now the bright Beams of Justice and Government having dissipated the
Storms and Fury of popular Sollevations; the Grand Signior in Person mounting
his Horse, accompanied with his principal Ministers of State, visited all the
Parts of Constantinople, where making Inquisition for the principal Leaders and
Fomenters of this Rebellion, he seized on some, and without further process,
boldly executed them in the Face of the People.

But before things were reduced to this condition, four Months were spent in
this horrid Confusion; and what is most strange, this Great Empire for so long
time remained without a Pilot, tossed on the Waves of popular Commotions; all
which served to give ease and respite to the Venetians in their War, but not to
operate toward a Peace; so resolute were the Turks in their Design of making
an entire Conquest of Candia.

Far having again Equipped a most formidable Fleet, consisting of sixty light
Galleys, twenty eight Ships, and nine Galleasses; they attempted to make their
way for Candia, and therewith to fight the Venetians in case they should oppose
them in their Voyage, to which they were the more encouraged upon sight of the
Venetians, who appeared at the Streights of the Dardanelli, with no more than
twenty nine Galleys, and some Boat, or Brigantines; howsoever the Turks were
not so confident in their numbers, but that they judged it requisite to fortify
themselves with two Batteries; one on the Coast of Anatolia, and the other on
the European shore; whereby they imagined, that they might cause the Venetians
to give way, and open a Passage to their Fleet.

But notwithstanding the continual shot which the Turks made upon them,
Engagement between the Turks and Venetians.
they still kept their Station from the 23d to the 26th of June; when the Wind
coming about to the North, which was favorable for the Turks to Sail out, and
to bring them nearer to their Enemies, they began gently to approach; and the
like the Christians endeavored, being desirous to join Battle; at which
firmness of Resolution, the Turks being a little startled, became willing to
avoid the Fight, and to creep under the shelter of the point of Babiers, which
locks in one of the Bays between the Castles and the Mouth of the Dardanelli.
But the Wind on a sudden turning favorable for the Venetians, the Prior of
Rochelle with his Squadron, and Mocenigo with three Ships under his Command,
made up toward the Castles, with design to cut the Turks off from their
Retreat; the others valiantly assailed the Turks, who defending themselves like
those, whose chief security consists in their Arms, there ensued a most
miserable slanghter on one side, The Venetians obtain the Victory.
and the other; at length the Success of Victory happened to the Venetians, who
were animated by the courageous Example of their General Marcello, though he
having Boarded, and become Master of a great Ship called a Soltana, with the
Gally which attended her, was shot in the thigh with a Cannon Bullet, and
thereby gained the glory to die Conquering, and Triumphant.

After whose Death, the Proveditor taking upon him the Command of the Fleet,
prosecuted the Victory so close, that excepting fourteen Galleys which escaped
with the Captain-Pasha, and four Galleys of the Bey's; all the whole Flect was
either taken, sunk, or burnt. The Venetians not being able to man all the
Vessels that they had taken, set many of them on fire in the Night, excepting
only twelve Galleys, four Ships, and two Galleasses, which they reserved for a
Demonstration or Evidence of their Victory. With this glorious success five
thousand poor Christians obtained their Freedom, and had their Chains and
Shackles knocked off. What number the Turks might have lost is uncertain; but
as to the Venetians, it is reported, that besides their General, there were not
above three hundred Men in all killed and wounded.

The Venetians being encouraged by this Success, attacked the Island of
Tenedos, and in the space of four days became Masters of it; as also in a short
time afterward of Stalimene, anciently called Lemnos; the which shameful
Losses and Overthrow, so irritated the Mind of the Grand Signior, that he gave
Orders to carry the War into Dalmatia, intending the next Summer to go thither
in Person; and in the mean time Commanded by the Pasha of Bosna, that the City
of Ragusa should be put into a readiness to receive his Troops, being judged a
convenient Place for the Seat and Magazine of Arms for those Countries.

But the poor Republic greatly apprehending this Misfortune, than which there
could be no greater Mischief, nor Ruin to their Country; dispatched certain
Deputies with their yearly Tribute to the Port, with Instructions, that in the
way thither, they should supplicate the Pasha to intercede with the Grand
Signior in their behalf, representing to his Majesty, that they paying their
annual Tribute for Protection, ought not in justice to be exposed to the
licentiousness of an Army, which their little Territories were not capable to
receive, nor provide with convenient Quarters: at which Message the Pasha being
highly incensed, answered rudely, and imprisoned them; threatening to strangle
them, in case their Government did not obey the Commands of the Sultan.

ANNO 1657.
BUT the chief Ministers at the Port, taking into their consideration the
present State of Affairs; that the City of Constantinople was full of
Discontents; the Persian on one side, and the Moscovite on the other, ready to
invade diverse parts of the Empire; that there were Designs to depose the Grand
Signior, and set one of his Brothers on the Throne; besides a multitude of
other Dangers; the resolution of the Court's removal, and of the Grand
Signior's March into Dalmatia, was suspended; his Presence and Authority being
esteemed most requisite in such a conjuncture of Troubles at the Heart and
Center of his Empire. After which, the appearance of the Grand Signior in
Public was less frequent; for that he might hasten the departure of the
Spahees and Janisaries for Candia, he deferred his Journey to Adrianople for
some time; but they being averse to this War, refused to march, until first
they had received all Arrears which were due to them; the which audacious
Proposal so incensed the Grand Signior, that he caused the Heads of two of the
most forward Mutineers to be cut off in his presence.

This unseasonable rigor rather provoked the Spirits of discontented Men, than
abated them; and the continual Prizes which the Venetians made on the Turks,
and stoppage of Provisions, which did usually supply Constantinople from the
Archipelago, raised the price of Bread, and of all Victuals in that populous
City; so that the People murmured and exclaimed, as if they had been reduced to
their last Extremity.

The Grand Vizier considering that the loss of Tenedos was the cause of all
these Inconviences; promised the Inhabitants of Constantinople, that he would
regain it in a short time; in order to which, he set forth a very numerous
Fleet to besiege that Fortress; but contrary Winds, and bad Weather, forced
them into a Neighboring Port, where they attended the conjunction of the Bey's
Galleys with them.

The General of the Venetians having received advice hereof, put to Sea, that he
might hinder these two Fleets from joining; and was no sooner in the Channel of
Scio, than that he met with ten Sail of Barbery Men of War, convoying a great
number of Saiques, and other Vessels, of which fourteen were laden with
Provisions, carrying also with them two hundred thousand Crowns, which was the
Tribute of Rhodes: These the Venetians assailed with such Courage and Success,
that they burnt the ten Ships, and many of the Saiques; killed a thousand
Turks, took four hundred Prisoners, delivered three hundred Christians; with
the loss only of an hundred killed, and three hundred wounded.

This and other Losses augmented the Discontents at Constantinople so that the
Grand Vizier, to hold up the Spirit of the People, resolved to go in Person to
Tenedos; and accordingly equipped a Fleet of eighteen Ships, thirty Galleys,
ten Galleasses, with an innumerable Company of Saiques, and other Vessels,
whereon he embarked twenty thousand Horse, and eighty thousand Foot; with which
Army the Vizier sailed out of the Dardanelli, on the 17th of July, having first
received Intelligence, that Mocenigo was not returned from the Morea, where he
had been for some time in chase of certain Ships. Howsoever the Turks found not
the Passage so clear, but that they encountered with a Squadron of eighteen Sail
of Men of War, under the Command of Signior Bembo; the which seeming an
inconsiderable number to the Turks, they assailed them with undoubted hopes of
Victory. The Admiral and Vice Admiral of the Turks, with five other great
Ships, charged the Venetian Admiral, who defended himself so bravely, that for
three hours they lay Board and Board; the rest of the Turkish Fleet assailed
the other part of their Enemies Fleet so close, that the Fight became terrible
and bloody, both for one and the other, until at length the Turks being
worsted, were put to flight, and in the pursuit, a great Turkish Sultana was
put ashore near Troy; one of their Galleasses was disabled, two of their Ships
sunk, and the rest were chased as far as Metylene, being put by the Island of
Tenedos.

In this Interim, the General Mocenigo was on his Voyage toward the
Dardanelli; and being come within the noise of the Cannon, he hastened with
more diligence; and arrived so seasonably to the assistance of Bembo, that at
his appearance most of the Turkish Galleys began to turn their Sterns, and make
toward the Shore of Anatolia, with such disorder, that of twenty eight
Galleys, and two Galleasses, there were but five only which kept company with
the Bastard Gally of the Captain-Pasha, and entered with him under the defense
of the Castles. The rest of the Fleet was chased by Mocenigo; but the Turks
being to windward, the Christians were not able that day to come up with there.
The next day the Wind being more favorable, a Council of War was held aboard
the Venetian General; during which Consultation, they espied five Galleys
making toward the Point Baba, there to secure themselves under the Shore: and
thereupon resolved, that whilst the Captain General, with a Squadron of Malta,
attempted those five Galleys, and others which had taken the same place of
Refuge, the rest of the Fleet should keep firing at those without.

Accordingly the Captain General made toward the Point Baba, where passing
within Musket Shot, and under the reach of five Batteries, an unfortunate Shot
in the Powder-room blew up the Ship, and therewith ended the Days of this
valiant Mocenigo, who died full of Honor and Glory; his brave Actions
continuing his Memory in all the Histories of Venice. The Proyeditor succeeding
in his Command, prosecuted the same Design; and as if he would imitate the
ancient Funeral Piles, he celebrated the Obsequies of his General, by burning
the Admiral Gally of the Turks, and thence retired toward Tenedos.

After the Turks had refitted their Vessels, and put their Fleet in a
reasonable posture, they departed from Metylene the 28th of July at Night, and
on the 30th were on the Coast of Tenedos; Tenedos taken by the Turks.
where immediately landing five thousand Men, and great numbers approaching
ready to set their foot on Shore, the Defendants of the Fortress summoned a
Council of War; at which all agreeing that the Island was not tenable against
so great a Force, embarked their Men, Ammunition, and Artillery, and resigned
their place to the disposal and command of the Enemy. After which Success the
Turks in like manner landed ten thousand Men on the Island of Lemnos; where,
having laid a formal Siege to the Castle, they made a general Assault, but were
repulsed with the loss of five hundred Men, leaving their Scaling-Ladders to
the Besieged. They made afterward diverse Attempts, but in all were beaten off
with considerable loss; so that they had abandoned the Enterprise, had not the
greater fear and apprehension of the Divan at Home, confirmed their Courage
against the Enemy; until at length the Christians being wearied with two Months
Siege, Lemons retaken.
without hopes of Relief, were forced to a Surrender; which was performed on
Articles, That they should depart with Arms, Baggage, and have free liberty to
embark themselves for Candia.

These two important Places being regained by the Turks, were the Subject of
great Joy to the Court, and of Courage and Satisfaction to the Inhabitants of
Constantinople: So that the Grand Signior apprehending that by these Successes,
the Seditions and Mutinies of the City were appeased, he took his Journey to
Adrianople; where to evidence his Grandeur to the Bailo Capello, and the
Secretary Ballarino, he made his entry with an Army of twenty thousand Men,
besides the ordinary Attendance of the Court, and usual Concomitants of the
Ottoman Train.

After which Ostentation, the Grand Signior encharged Ballarino to write to the
Senate, That though he was able to overrun all their Country, and take from
them their Capital City, yet such was his Clemency, that he was contented to
grant them Peace, on Conditions that they surrendered to him all the Island of
Candia, with the Fortress of Clissia in Dalmatia, and payment of three Millions
of Gold for the Damages of the War.

But these seemed to the Senate to be such unreasonable Propositions, and so
prejudicial to their Honor, that they resolved to maintain the War, and to
defend themselves more vigorously than ever.

ANNO 1658.
NOtwithstanding the Designs of the Turks against Dalmatia, they were not less
intent to their Affairs in Candia, designing to try their Fortune once again in
the Siege of the principal City of that Name, for that falling into their
Hands, the whole Island would quickly be reduced, and with that Conquest an end
would be put unto the War.

The Venetians, on the other side, attended to their Business with all
diligence, not neglecting any Provisions which might secure their Interest in
that Country; and that they might regain what they had lost, they held
Intelligence with some Persons in Canea, hoping by their means to surprise the
Town; but the Turkish Governor, being very vigilant, reinforced his Garrison
with five hundred Men: and Chusaein Pasha coming to his Assistance with thirty
Galleys, disappointed the Venetians of landing at that place.

The Rendezvous of the Army which was to march into Dalmatia, was ordered to be
at Adrianople, where the Brother-in-Law of the Pasha of Aleppo, who was
Commander of the Forces of that Place, arriving later than the day prefixed,
was for that reason put to death by the Great Vizier.

This Severity so enraged the Pasha, that immediately he raised an Army of
forty thousand Men, and marched toward Scutari, threatening Constantinople it
self, unless the Head of the Great Vizier were given him by way of reprizal for
that of his Brothers. The Divan being startled hereat, returned him a gentle
Message, neither denying nor granting his Demand, as if they intended to amuse
him with Hopes: But he interpreting this Delay for a Refusal, did not only
perfist in requiring the Head of the Vizier, but of four other principal
Counselors, whom he judged to have concurred in the Sentence for his Brother's
Death; and in farther prosecution hereof, he burnt and spoiled all the Country
about Constantinople; and the Plague raging at the same time in the City,
affected the Inhabitants with such Sadness and Discontent, that the chief
Ministers apprehended more Evil from thence, than from the Enemy without.

The Army of the Pasha daily increasing, and being grown from forty to sixty
thousand Men, caused the Vizier to abandon all other Thoughts and Designs but
those which tended to the destruction of the Pasha, and his Accomplices; so that
there necessarily followed a Revulsion of the Forces from Dalmatia; the Vizier
himself diverting them from thence and Transylvania, marched with the whole
Army toward Constantinople.

Yet before the Great Vizier departed from Adrianople, he persuaded the Grand
Signior to set the Bailo Capello, and the Secretary Ballarino at Liberty, that
thereby he might give some jealousy to the Rebels, as if he designed to make a
Peace with Venice, to have more Power, and better leizure to make his War
against them. This Counsel, though prudently given, had yet little Influence on
the Humor of the Pasha, who continued his March, fortifying himself in the most
advantageous Passes of the Country: But what was most bold of all his Actions,
and rendered his Pardon beyond the Clemency of his Sovereign, was the
proclaiming a Youth of twenty Years of Age, then with him in his Army, to be
the Son of Sultan Morat, and consequently the lawful Heir of the Crown; and
that in right of him, he had taken possession of a great part of Asia, and was
marching toward Constantinople, with resolution to dispossess Sultan Mehmet,
and exalt this lawful and undoubted Heir on the Throne of his Ancestors.

This and other Rumors from Persia, that that King taking the advantage of
these Disorders, was making Preparations to regain Bagdat, or Babylon, and
revenge himself of all those Cruelties which the Turks had inflicted on his
Subjects and Country, increased the Fears and Cares of the chief Ministers of
State.

Notwithstanding which, Chusaein Pasha prosecuted his Business no less in
Candia than formerly, in hopes to put an end to the War there before the end of
the Summer; and in order thereunto, he received a Recruit of five and twenty
thousand Men from the Morea. But the daily increase of the Pasha's Forces, and
his approach toward Constantinople, as it was a Matter of the highest
Consequence, so it required the most prudence and caution in the management.

In the first place therefore by Fetfa, or Resolve from the Mufti, the Pasha
was declared a Rebel, and guilty of High Treason against the Sultan;
notwithstanding which, a Chaous was dispatched with Letters of Pardon, if now
repenting of his Fault, he would disband his Army, and return to his former
Obedience, he should be received into Grace and Favor. The Pasha received the
Chaous with the same Ceremony and Honor, as if he had been an Ambassador,
being willing to consider him under that Character, rather than under the
Notion of a Pursuivant, or Officer sent to affright him into his Duty; and in
Answer to the Message, replied, That it was not in his power to condescend to
any Conditions, for that since he had assumed the Cause of this Youth, who was
the Son of Sultan Morat, concealed to that Age by his Mother, for fear of the
Power of his Uncle, he could not assent to any Terms or Conditions less than
the Exaltation of him to the Ottoman Throne. And so carrying this Young Man
with him, as a Property, whereby to cover his Rebellion with the Guise of
Justice and Duty, he maintained a Court for him after the Ottoman Fashion; and
causing the Tagho, or Standards, to be carried before him, he permitted him to
give Audiences, send Dispatches, and to take on him all the Royal Marks of
Empire.

The Army of the Pasha was by this time increased to seventy thousand Men, one
part of which he sent toward Scutari, and another toward Smyrna, which
alarmed all the Countries round about, and gave the Grand Signior such cause of
Apprehension, that he tried diverse Means, and made many Propositions of Honors
and Benefits to the Pasha, whereby to allure him to Obedience: One while he
offered to him the Government of Grand Cairo: but that being rejected, he
endeavored to raise Men in Asia to oppose the progress of his Arms; of which
some numbers being got into a Body, and perceiving the formidable Force of the
Pasha, revolted, and joined themselves to his Party.

This Extremity of Affairs, caused the Grand Signior not only again to proclaim
the Pasha a Rebel, but to give liberty to his People to destroy him and his
Soldiers in any parts where they should encounter them. In pursuance of which
License, a Village in Asia having killed twenty five or thirty of the Pasha's
Men, which came thither to refresh themselves; the Pasha was so enraged
thereat, that he caused his Soldiers to put Man, Woman, and Child to the Sword
throughout the Village. And in this manner the Affairs of the Turks remained in
the greatest Confusion imaginable through the whole course of this Year 1658.

ANNO 1659.
NOR did this Year begin with better Omens of Success, for to the other
Dangers, was added a Report, that the Persian had taken the Field with two
hundred thousand Men, for recovery of Bagdat, or Babylon, which was the ancient
Patrimony of his Forefathers; so that the Grand Signior being rendered thereby
more willing to agree and accommodate Affairs with the Pasha, proffered to him
the Government of the Province of Soria for ever, paying only a yearly Homage
of an hundred thousand Sultanees, in lieu of three hundred thousand, which that
Country always yielded. But the Pride of the Pasha scorned a Proffer of so mean
a Consideration, having nothing less in his Thoughts than the entire enjoyment
of the Empire, or at least to partake an equal share thereof with the Sultan.

For the Hopes of the Pasha increasing with his Army, which was now grown to
eighty thousand Men, he took up for some days his Headquarters near the
Fortress of Tocacaia, within the days march of Smyrna; and thence approaching
toward Constantinople, the chief Ministers concluded, that there was no other
Safety but in their Arms; and that the Pasha was not to be reduced to any terms
of Gentleness or Moderation. Accordingly the Great Vizier passed into Asia with
a numerous Army, and speedily joined Battle with the Pasha, which continued for
some Hours with great slaughter on one side and the other; but at length the
fortune of the Day turned in favor of the Pasha; and the Vizier's Army being
routed, he lost all his Cannon and Baggage, and he himself was forced to save
himself in the Neighboring Countries; where not being pursued by the Pasha, he
had time again to collect his torn and scattered Troops. The News hereof
multiplied the Disorders and Confusions at Constantinople, to which being added
the Motion of the Persians, and that they were to join with the Pasha; as also
some Troubles in Transylvania, caused by the unquiet Spirit of Ragotski,
together with the ill Humor of the Malcontents in the City, made all things
appear with equal or greater Danger at Home than Abroad.

Wherefore, as the ultimate Remedy of these imminent Dangers it was resolved,
that the Grand Signior should go in Person to the War, on supposition that
Reverence to his Royal Person would produce that awe on the Spirits of his
Subjects, which was not to be effected by Violence, or force of Arms. According
to this Resolution the Grand Signior passed into Asia, and joining his Forces
with those of the Vizier, composed an Army of seventy thousand Foot, and thirty
thousand Horse; with which marching boldly toward the Enemy, the Heart of the
Pasha began to fail him; so that calling a Council of his Officers, he proposed
his Inclinations toward Terms of Agreement, rather than to hazard all on the
Uncertainties of a Battle; the Spirits of the Soldiery being now become
tractable by the appearance of so great a Force, assented to the Proposition;
and thereupon Articles being speedily drawn up, were sent to the Grand Signior
for his Approbation; who, though he would not seem to refuse any thing therein
contained, yet declined a personal Treaty, as being a Matter too mean for his
Imperial Person to capitulate with his Vassals; and therefore ordered, that
Mortaza Pasha should Treat in his behalf, promising to confirm whatsoever Act
Mortaza Pasha should conclude in this Matter.

Mortaza being thus made Plenipotentiary, refused to treat with the Pasha,
until such time as he had retreated with his Army at a distance of some days
March from the Grand Signior's Camp; which being performed near a Town called
Alexandria, he foolishly suffered himself to be separated in a private Place
from his Army, on pretense that Peace was more aptly concluded in a free
Retirement, than under the constraint and force of the Soldiery. Here Mortaza
meeting the Pasha, forcibly strangled him, with seventeen of his Accomplices,
whom he had brought with him for Witnesses to his Capitulations with the Grand
Signior. With the news hereof the Army of the Pasha soon disbanded, every one
with shame and silence shifting for himself, retired to his own Country and
Home. And herewith easily ended this Civil War almost in a moment, which but
now threatened the Extirpation of the Ottoman Race.

The cruel Vizier retained his thoughts of Revenge, which we shall shortly hear
in what manner he vented on the great Spahees and rich Men in Asia, who had
joined themselves with the Pasha in this Rebellion. This good Service promoted
Mortaza, and rendered him more considerable to the Grand Signior; so that he was
employed in the Assistance of the Tartars, against Ragotski in Transylvania,
and afterward preferred to the important Charge of Bagdat, or Babylon, of
whose Success, and Fate, we we shall hear in the Sequal of a few Years.

But as yet the Commotions of Asia were not so wholly extinguished, but that
the Nephew of the Pasha of Aleppo, in revenge of the treacherous Death of his
Uncle, took up Arms, and was followed by the People of the Territories
depending on Aleppo. To his Assistance came in also the Son of Chusaein Pasha,
late General in Candia, whom the cruel Vizier had put to death, notwithstanding
the merit of his late Services, which might seem to atone for his former
Misfortunes, and make satisfaction for noncompliance with Instructions; but
this Vizier, who never pardoned any Person, would not begin with an Act of
Clemency toward one who was none of his Creatures or Confidents depending on
him.

To these joined the Bey of Torgue, who casting off his Obedience to the Pasha
of Cairo, entered into the Cabal with ten thousand Horse; so that a formidable
Army being composed by this Union, gave a new subject of Fear and Apprehension
at Constantinople. But the Great Vizier so dexterously managed his Affair, by
sowing Dissension between the Chiefs, and bestowing Largesses on the Soldiery,
that the Army unsensibly mouldred away, leaving their Generals, and Commanders
to shift for themselves, and exposing them to the Justice of a Vizier, who was
unacquainted with Mercy, and never pardoned any who was either guilty of a
Fault, or supected for it.

Toward the end of this Year, the Vizier built the lower Forts, which are
situated at the entrance into the Dardanelles, commonly called by the name of
the Queen-Mother's Castles. And dispatched a Chaous to the Pasha of Canea, to
put all things in a Readiness for the Siege of Candia; Orders were also given
to the Pashaws of the Inland Countries to prepare themselves for the Wars
against Dalmatia, and Transylvania.

ANNO 1660.
THE Rendezvous of the Army being appointed at Belgrade, the Vizier hastened
thither in Person to quicken the Preparations, and March of the Soldiers,
which were flocking thither from all parts. This Vizier Kuperlee, though aged,
was yet very active and vigorous, by which he created so much confidence of
himself in his Master, that he acted nothing in all the Government but by his
Counsel and Direction: which being always jealous and bloody toward those who
had any Power in the Empire, he for that Reason cut off the Casir of Damascus,
who though he was a good Governor, and a faithful Servant, yet because he was
a Favorite of the Queen Mother, and conserved the State of his Affairs in a
laudable posture, he grew jealous of his Power, and therefore sacrificed his
Blood to his own Security and Bloody Disposition.

The which act of unjust Cruelty so enraged the Queen Mother, that she for ever
after bore a mortal hatred to this Vizier, and continued the same to his Son,
which was the famous Kuperlee; but his Moderation and Discretion was so well
tempered with respect toward her, that She at length not only pardoned the Sin
of his Father in him, but became his Friend, and relished the Services which he
performed for his Master.

The Venetians having about this time received considerable Succors, namely
four thousand French Foot, which his most Christian Majesty, after the
Conclusion of Peace at the Pyrenean Treaty, had most generously Spared to that
Republic, were enabled to attempt some notable Enterpaize; and thereby so
hardly pressed the Pasha of Canea, that he earnestly wrote to the Grand Signior
for Succors; assuring him, that without present Relief, he should be forced to
surrender his Town to the Mercy of the Enemy. The Grand Signior promised him
speedy Relief, and for his better encouragement sent him the Present of a Sword
and a Vest of Sables; in the mean time the Venetians took three Forts, viz.
Calamo, Calegro, and Epicarno, and proceeded to lay Siege to Canea; but the
Enemy having received a Supply of three thousand Men into the Town, the
Christians quitted this enterprise in hopes of beating the Turks out of new
Candia; which was lately built near to the old Candia, with design to keep that
Town straightened by perpetual Alarms, and by the vicinity of so bad a
Neighborhood.

The Grand Vizer being very Aged, was subject to many Infirmities, and falling
sick at Belgrade, he was advised by the Physicians to change the Air, as the
best Remedy for his Disease; and indeed they were all careful to give him the
best and safest Counsels, for that he often threatened them, if he died of that
Sickness, he would send them all to the next World before him. The Vizier
following the Advice of his Physicians, returned to Adrianople, where having in
a good measure recovered his Health, he sent Orders to Hali Pasha, then General
of the Forces in Hungary, to hasten the Siege of Waradin, being esteemed by the
Turks an advantageous Fortress for carrying on their Conquests in that Country;
of the taking of which Town, and of all the Trouble in Transylvania, caused by
the ambitious humor of Ragotzki, we shall treat at large in the following
History. For being come to that time, in which Providence allotted me a charge
at Constantinople; I was thereby somewhat elevated on a rising Ground, whereby
I could with my own Eyes survey the Transactions of that great Empire; and for
that Reason I call them my Memoirs; which for being Matters transacted in my
own Time, I have thought fit to introduce them with a short Advertisement to
the Reader.

THE MEMOIRS OF Sir Paul Rycaut, Containing the HISTORY OF THE TURKS, FROM THE
YEAR 1660, to the YEAR 1678. With the most Remarkable Passages Relating to the
ENGLISH TRADE In the space of Eighteen Years.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THIS following History is some part of those fruits arising from my vacant
hours of eighteen Years residence in Turkey, seven whereof I completed at
Constantinople, in quality of Secretary to the Lord Ambassador; and for eleven
Years I exercised the Office of Consul at Smyrna. In the first times of which,
I had great advantages to observe, and make my Annotations; having for the most
part been acquainted with the persons as well as with the affairs of those
concerning whom I write; and indeed the incumbence which was then upon me,
obliged me to a knowledge both of persons and business. My latter time, which
was that of being Consul, constrained me to an attendance on matters relating
to the government of our Trade; and therefore it is not to be expected, that at
that distance from the Court, I should lay down Transactions so positive, and
particular, as in the preceding Years; yet the acquaintance, and correspondence
I afterward continued at Court, and the care I took to inform my self of what
occurred, qualified me in some measure for an Historian; at least put me into a
condition to make a Breviate, or Collection of certain Observations occurring
in the Turkish Court.

When I first entered on this work, I was carried with a certain emulation of
French and Italian Writers, of whose Ministers few there were employed in the
parts of Turkey, but who carried with them from thence, Memoirs, Giornals, or
Historical Observations of their times. In which our Nation has been so
defective, that besides some scattered and abrupt Papers, without coherence, or
method, adjoined to the end of Knoll's History of the Turks (which is an
excellent collection from diverse Authors.) one shall scarce find five sheets of
Paper wrote by our Countrymen in way of History. At which omission having often
wondered, I resolved from my first entrance in those Countries, to note down in
a blank Book what occurred in that Empire, either as to Civil, or Military
affairs; with what Casualties and Changes befell our Trade, that so both one and
the other might serve for Examples and Precedents to future Ages; the which
after some years afforded me materials to compose and frame this following
Discourse. In which, having by Gods assistance thus far proceeded; As it may be
an Example to my Successors, to spin and draw out the thread of this History
through Ages to come; so it will be a good part, and office, of those who
reside there at present, by a more diligent enquiry to correct, and amend what
I have mistaken, or misunderstood.

For next to the immediate attendance to the Charge and Trust imposed upon me,
I judged it a chief duty toward my Country, to denote and Record certain
Transactions relating to Trade, which is the grand Interest that has engaged
England to a Communication and Correspondence with these remote Parts: nor does
the World perhaps expect much less from me, than that I should add something to
the History of the Turks in our time; which howsoever imperfectly I may perform
it, yet the Offices which I have exercised, and the impartiality with which it
is wrote, may gain it some credit and reputation in the World. For in the
writing hereof, I cannot be taxed with animosity to any person; nor am I to be
esteemed as possessed with affection, or partiality to any side; which is a
point of sobriety, and good temper, necessary for all Historians: For we who
lived in those parts, were little concerned for the House of Kuperlee, or for
the Favorites of the Court; nor was it of any moment to us, whether the
Faction of the Spahees, or Janissaries prevailed; or whether the Courtiers, or
the Soldiers, ruled the Empire: only we esteemed it our duty, to speak best of
that Government under which our Trade thrived most. And tho the times of Sultan
Ibrahim were the golden days for Merchants, which employed our Navigation
beyond the memory of any times, either before, or since; and consumed of our
Manufactories (tho not in greater quantities yet) perhaps with better advantage
and profit to our Nation: Yet I ought not to be so injurious, or ungrateful to
Sultan Mahomet the Fourth, as to accuse his Government of Oppression, or
Violence toward us, or of any breach of Articles, and Privileges, which he
had granted to his Majesty's Subjects; but shall rather applaud, and be ready
to own that Justice which our Complaints have found, and met at the Ottoman
Court, under the protection of those worthy Ambassadors sent by his Majesty to
stand Sentinel on the Guard of their Country.

For whereas in the time of Sultan Morat, when the Military men bore the sway;
Injustice and Violence, which mingled in all the actions of Rule, had an
influence also on the English affairs: And when in the time of Sultan Ibrahim,
that the Female Court had gained the predominancy, and that vast Treasures were
expended in Riot and Luxury; the prodigality of great persons made it necessary
to be rapacious and unjust: But in these more moderate times of this present
Sultan, when neither excessive Wars abroad, nor Luxury nor immoderate expense
at home, exhausted the Coffers; We may easily imagine, that the disorders of
State did not drive the Rulers to a necessity of exercising unjust Arts, which
are always most certain Symptoms, either of a bad Government, or a vicious
incliuation in the Prince.

The English Trade, according to the Chronicles of Sir Richard Baker, was first
introduced into the Country of the Turks, in the Year 1579. but Sagredo an
Italian Writer, accounts only from the Year 1583. perhaps before that time
Overtures were only made for a Trade, which might be so inconsiderable, as that
until then it was not esteemed worthy to be adorned with an Ambassador, or to
be opposed by the Ministers of Foreign Princes. For so soon as an Ambassador
from England appeared at the Ottoman Court, with Credential Letters from Queen
Elizabeth, the French and Venetian Ministers took the Alarm, and opposed his
reception, especially the French, who (as Sagredo reports in his History of the
Turks) represented unto the G. Vizier, how much this new Friendship with the
English would obstruct that ancient Alliance which was made with his King, and
would impeach and lessen the Privileges and Trade which they enjoyed in those
parts: To which the Vizier answered, according to their usual phrase and style;
That the happy Imperial Seat where his Master resided, was called the Port,
because it was free and open to all such who desired to take refuge and
sanctuary therein, and therefore the English without just reason ought not to
be excluded. That the Sultan ought not to be denied that freedom of love and
hatred, which was common to all Mankind; and that he was as well resolved to
choose and cherish his Friends, as to prosecute and destroy his Enemies.
Whereunto the French Ambassador urged, That since it was the pleasure of the
Grand Signior to admit the English; that at least they should be obliged to
enter Constantinople under the French Colors. But the English Ambassador
replied, that his Mistress who was so potent, scorned all Dependencies on other
Nations, and would rather abandon the Friendship of the Sultan, than admit the
least diminution of her own honor: And embellishing his Discourses (as Sagredo
proceeds) with the representation of that advantage and profit, which the
English Trade would bring to the Ottoman Empire; he so ensnared the hearts of
the Turks, that they preferred the admittance of new Guests, before the
Alliance of ancient Friends. Since which time our Commerce and Trade with the
Turk has been in its increase, and being governed by a Wise and Grave Company
of Experienced Merchants, has by Gods blessing brought an inestimable Treasure
and advantage to the English Nation, which that it may still continue,
increase, and flourish in all Ages and times to come, is the hearty desire, and
Prayer of him, who is a true, and faithful Servant to that worthy Society, and
a sincere Wellwisher to his Country.

Farewell.
THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROR OF THE TURKS, Beginning
in the NINTH YEAR OF HIS REIGN.
The First BOOK.
Anno Christi, 1661. Hegeira, 1072.
IT was now the beginning of this Year, when the Earl of Winchelsea arrived at
Constantinople, the first Ambassador sent abroad from His Majesty of Great
Britain, Charles the Second, after his happy Return to the Glorious throne of
his Ancestors, to Sultan Mahomet, the Thirteenth Emperor of the Turks; it
being judged fit, that amongst other Alliances which were to be contracted with
Foreign Princes, and States, this of Turkey should not be omitted, but rather
in the first place considered: In regard, that as the flourishing Estate and
Prosperity of England's richess depends absolutely on her Foreign Trade, so on
none more particularly than on that of Turkey, which consumes great quantities
of her most staple and substantial Manufactures, and makes returns in
whatsoever Employs, and gives Bread to the poor and industrious of the Nation.

But before we come to treat of the Successes of this Ambassador, and the
various Transactions in the Turkish Affairs; we shall relate some accidents
which befell us in our Voyage by Sea to Constantinople. The Earl of Winchelsea
and his Lady, with a numerous Retinue being embarked on the Plymouth Frigate,
commanded by Sir Thomas Allen, and accompanied with a Catch and two Merchants
Ships, the Prosperous and Smyrna Factor for Turkey, set sail from the Downs on
the Twentieth of October. 1660. And proceeding with a favorable Gale, and fair
Weather, until we were come to the height of the Norward Cape, or Cape
Finisterre; we then contended with so severe a storm, that we were forced to
bring our Ship under a main course, to fasten our Helm, and lie, and drive. In
the Twenty nineth about Five in the Morning, our main Tack flew, which shook
and strained our Mass so violently, that it was shivered in two places between
Decks: The danger hereof might have proved of ill consequence, had the Mast
gone by the Board; for in all probability it would have carried up our Decks,
unfixed both our Pumps, and laid us open to the Sea; but the Providence of God,
and the diligence of our Seamen was such, that we soon struck our Top Mast,
boared our main Yard, and so fished the Mast it self where it was defective,
that with the help of our sore-Sail, and the benefit of better Weather we
safely arrived on the Thirty first in the Port of Lisbon. Lisbon.
The Match being then in Treaty between Charles the Second our Dread Sovereign,
and Catherine the Infanta of Portugal, now our gracious Queen; all the
concernments of England were extremely acceptable to the Court of Portugal; and
particularly the Person of the Earl of Winchelsea, a Peer of England, qualified
with the Character of Ambassador Extraordinary to the Ottomon Port. For at our
first arrival there, I being then Secretary to the said Earl, was employed to
carry a Letter to the King, which was received by the Council of State then
sitting: After the Letter had been read and considered, I was called in, and an
answer given me by the Marquis de Nissa, and D. Gasper Faria de Sevarin then
Secretary of State, to this purpose. That they were glad, so grateful an
opportunity presented, whereby they might Demonstrate their warm and real
affections toward the King of England, by serving his Ambassador in so
necessary a piece of Service as that which was required: That Orders were given
to furnish the Ship with a Mast, and what she wanted, out of the Kings Stores;
and that both his Excellency and Lady, with all their Retinue should be
welcomed a shore, with due regard to their Quality and Condition. The Day
following his Excellency was complemented from the King, by a Maestro de Campo
sent to him on Shipboard; and being come ashore, and lodged at the House of Mr.
Maynard the English Consul, he was visited by D. Francisco de Melo, (who had
besore, and was afterward employed Ambassador into England) and by D. Antonio
de Saousa and others. After Eight days his Excellency had Audience of the King,
and the Queen Mother, and was received by both, with many demonstrations of a
hearty desire to contract a firm Alliance with England. He was afterward
invited by the Conde de Odemira Governor of the young King, and Chief Minister
of Portugal, to a Quinta, or Garden-house at Bellain: where were present the
Duke of Calaval, the Visconde de Castle Blanco, and D. Francisco de Melo; the
entertainment was very splendid, with variety of Dishes, and Wine,
corresponding rather with the inordinate Tables of English, than with the
frugality, and temperate Diet of Spaniards. Our Ship being in this interim
refitted, we returned aboard on the Twelsth of November; the Earl of Winchelsea
being presented by the King, with several Hampers of Sweetmeats, Vessels of
Wine, and other Provisions for his Voyage; and his lady by the Queen Mother,
with a Jewel of considerable value, and with diverse boxes filled with Purses
of persumed Leather, and Amber Comfits.

On the Thirteenth we set Sail, being designed by Order of his Majesty for
Algier, Algier.
to settle a Peace with that unsettled People; where arriving on the Tewenty
second day about Three a Clock in the Afternoon, we came to an Anchor about Two
Miles distant from the Town, which we saluted with Twenty one Guns, but
received none again in answer thereunto; it being the custom of that People,
not to acknowledge Civilities, but to repay injuries, and not requite benefits.
We found that they had already begun to break the Peace: Having brought in
thither an English Ship, which lay between hope and fear of freedom, or
seizure: So soon as we had dropped our Anchors, a Boat came from that Ship,
acquainting us of the State of Algter, and how near Matters were to a Rupture
with them; by this Boat my Lord Ambassador sent a Letter to the Consul,
appointing him to come aboard; who the next Day, being the Twenty third,
appeared accordingly; to whom his Excellency imparted the Instructions and
Orders from his Majesty to renew the Peace on the former Articles; and
particularly to insert a Caution, That the Algerines should on no terms search
our Ships, but that the Passengers, and goods thereon, whether of English or
Strangers, should be free and exempted from all seizure, and Pyracy whatsoever.
I being appointed to assist the Consul in this Treaty, accompanied him ashore,
and in the first place we applied our selves to Ramadam Bullock-bashee, then
the Chief of their Divan, and Head of their Government; whom we acquainted,
that on the Ship in the road, was an Earl of England, sent Ambassador by his
Majesty our King to the Grand Signor; and in his way thither was appointed to
touch at Algier, and to inform the Government of that place of the happy
Restoration of his Majesty to the Throne of his Father, and to confirm the same
Peace which was before concluded with usurped Powers, and so delivered him the
Letters from his Majesty, which were superscribed in this manner:

To their Excellencies the Aga, Jiabashees, and rest of the Honorable Council
of State and War, in the City and Kingdom of Algier.

Ramadam answered us, that he was well satisfied with the Proposal; that there
was a Peace already with the English, and that they were Brothers; that the
next Day was appointed for a general Divan of great and small, at which we
might freely open our breasts, and declare whatsoever was committed to us by
our King and his Ambassador.

But for the better understanding of the State of Algier, at this time, we must
observe, that for many years before, this government was composed of a Divan,
the Chief and Head whereof was a Pasha sent every Three years to preside there,
and had so continued, until that some few Months before this time one Halil a
poor Fellow, who had no better Estate than the Sixteenth part of a Vessel, but
bold and desperate, complained one Day in open Divan against the Pasha,
accusing him of many miscarriages, with which he so affected the Divan; that he
rudely threw him from his Seat, drubbed him, trampled on him, and plucked the
Hairs out of his Beard, which is the greatest mark of ignominy and contempt
that any Person can offer to another; and having committed him to Prison and
Chains, he with the Divan took upon himself the unlimited Power of an Arbitrary
Government: And thus for the space of Six or Eight Months this Miscreant
tyrannized, and ruled without control: Until an obscure and contemptible Moor,
an ordinary Jerbin or Countryman, instigated (as was supposed) by the Aga, or
General of the Soldiery, approaching near him in the Streets, under pretense
of kissing his Vest, Halil killed by a Moor.
struck him with a long Knife between the Ribs; which boldness of the Moor so
astonished the Attendants which were about him, that none had power to lay
hands on the Murderer, but suffered him to depart, and fly unpursued: Of this
wound Halil dyed in Two days, in which time be nominated Ramadam his Kinsman to
be the most Proper, and fit Person to succed him in the Government; and this
recommendation so prevailed on the Divan, that he was elected for their Chief:
A Person of a most sordid, and Mercenary Soul, immersed in Covetousness, and
Gluttony, guided by his Lust and Interest, unless some times restrained by the
Authority of the Divan, and the fear of popular Insurrection.

This Ramadam according to his Promise before recited, summoned us the day
following, being the Twenty-fourth to the Divan; The Algier Divan.
which consists in all of Twenty-four Bulluck-bashees, who are Officers of the
Soldiery, each commanding Twenty-four Soldiers under him, Jiabashees are of
another degree; it may be in good Turkish Odabashees, or Captains of the
Chambers of Janisaries.
Twenty-four Jiabashees, and Eighteen Ancients or grave Seniors: Though for
that present, there appeared no more than Forty-five, the others being at Sea,
or abroad; Ramadam was placed in the Chair, or in a Seat at the upper end, and
the Aga sat by him, the others stood on their feet, and put themselves into
Two Files, or Ranks; and then Ramadam began with a loud Voice to cry, The
English are come to treat a Peace with you, and have brought Letters from their
King, and from their Ambassador now aboard going for Constantinople; which
very words every one distinctly pronounced, and repeated them, carrying the
Voice from the lower to the upper end; I fancied, that it was after the manner
of our repeating Syllogisms in disputations, that so no mistake might be, and
that the Respondent might have time to consider and weigh the argument. Then
Ramadam demanded, whether they were pleased to enter into Treaty with the
English; which words being repeated as before, and answered in the Affirmative,
the Letters were read in the Turkish Translation; with the Articles of Peace
proposed, which were as follows: I. THat the English shall be obliged to
protect all Passengers belonging to Algier, aboard their Ships, to the utmost
of their power, against any of their Enemies. And in like manner all foreign
Passengers, Merchants and others, their goods, and Estates embarked, and laden
on English Ships, shall pass free, and be protected from the Ships of Algier,
and be suffered to pass without molestation. II. No Shipwreck of English on the
coast of Algier, shall become prize, nor their goods forfeited, nor their men
made Slaves, but the People of Algier shall do their best endeavor to save
both them and their goods. III. That neither the Consul, nor other Englishman,
shall be obliged to satisfy the Debts of another Englishman, unless he has
been bound, or become Security for him. IV. That no Englishman in matter of
difference shall be subject to any Judgment, but that of the Divan. V. That the
English in differences amongst themselves shall be subject to no determination,
but to that of the English Consul. VI. That either side are to furnish men of
War with all necessiries their Ports afford, at the Market rates, without
paying custom. VII. If any grievance happen, neither party shall break the
Peace until satisfaction be denied.


These Articles being read, were all approved except the first; for they
declared, that they would have a Liberty to search our Ships, and take out the
Goods and Persons of Strangers; for that otherwise, we having this privilege,
might carry away the Trade of the whole World in our Shipping; and that French,
Spaniards, Italians, Dutch, and all other Nations, had no need of other
protection and safeguard for their Persons and Goods, than to put them under
the English colors: And that then their men of War might rove the Seas to no
purpose, their City become poor, and their Soldiers starve, when they returned
home. We on the other side, being sensible how prejudicial and dishonorable
such an Article as this would be, and how ruinous to our Navigation, and having
his Majesty's Command to the contrary, absolutely refused to assent, or agree
thereunto. Whilst we were thus arguing, a great fat Turk appeared with two
young men his Slaves, one a Frenchman, and the other a Dutchman, requesting
Ramadam to recommend him to us for passage to Smyrna; and having performed his
request to him by kissing his Hand, Ramadan made it his request to us in behalf
of that his Kinsman, recommending him to our care and protection, and conjuring
us thereunto, by that Sacred league of Peace that was between us: We readily
assented thereunto, and at the same time took hold of the Example to represent
the reasonableness of that Article on which we insisted. For shall we (said we)
protect your People, and will you require, and impose it upon us as a matter
Just and Sacred? And shall not the greatness of our King have a Liberty to
dispense the like Privilege to other Nations, his Neighbors, and Allies,
governed by Kings and Princes, who are Christian, and of his Kindred, and near
Relations? But neither this, nor any other argument was Reason, or Sense to
them; nor did they care to answer it by other arguments, than that of their own
disadvantage thereby; and that if they assented thereunto, their Ships might
better rot in the Mould, than to venture them out at Sea with expectation of
booty. They told us also stories of English Ships which had delivered some
Algerines to their Enemies; and one particularly, who had sold a Hundred Turks
to the Venetians. In answer hereunto, we assured them, that upon complaints and
proofs made hereof to our King; his Justice was such, as that he would not
suffer a piece of such Treachery to escape unpunished. And as to that argument,
which they urged, that in this Case none would be employed besides English
ships; we largely represented the necessity of employing French, and Dutch, and
the Ships of other Nations. But these People being Deaf and Blind to any
Reason, but that which agrees with their interest, we concluded nothing; for
after a long and loud discourse, and repetition of the same things over and
over again, we at length told them, that it was not in our Commission to
conclude on these terms; but that we should inform the Lord Ambassador of
their desires, and resolution, and that we would return the next Day with his
peremptory Answer; not but we knew, that the Instructions from his Majesty
extended not so far; but that we might have occasion to leave matters, as it
were in suspense, and part fairly from them, at the present. For as to my own
particular, I did not like to remain with such Company, not knowing how far the
perfidiousness of that People might transport them to a Barbarity against the
Laws of Reason and Nations.

The wind blew all this day so hard at West, that our Ship drove, and a great
Sea went; so that there was some difficulty for me to get aboard; howsoever in
regard it was necessary to render his Excellency an account of the proceedings
of that Day, I eased the Pinnace of all Provisions, and unnecessary Company,
and so by God's Providence got safe, though wet, aboard that Evening. I did not
fail immediately to render an account most exactly, how every thing passed, to
the Lord Ambassador, letting him know, what fruit was to be expected by a
farther Treaty with this People. Wherefore it was thought fit rather to keep
the business in suspense, than to come to an open rupture with them; and rather
than to use long discourse to them, or persuasions to little purpose, to write
them this short Letter, the superscription of which was to Ramadam their
Governor in Chief, and to the rest of the Divan.

WE are sorry that there should be still one difference in our Treaty, The last
Letter to the Divan.
relating to the search of Ships, and delivering up Merchants Foreigners, and
Strangers goods. This is an Article which the King my Master did not think you
would have insisted Usurpers, and his Subjects, and therefore did not empower
me to conclude with you in it. Howsoever, I shall acquaint the King my Master
of your earnest Desires, and Resolves in this Business, and doubt not, but what
is Just and Reasonable, will be assented unto. Wherefore in the mean time we
must desire you, whilst his Royal assent is expecting to your proposals, that
the Peace may continue on the same Terms that it now stands. Let your Friend
and Kinsman come aboard, (as is desired) and he shall be welcome, and we shall
protect him to the uttermost of our power. And on this Promise and word of
ours, you may rely on, as of a Christian, and a true Englishman. Our desire
also farther is, that the Lord Obryan may remain in the Consuls House until
such time as his Ransom comes. And so we wish, that a hearty and long Peace may
be continued between the two Nations. Given aboard the Plymouth Frigate,
November 25. 1660.

Winchelsea.


Upon delivery of this Letter, it was concluded, that the former Articles
should stand in force; only that difference about searching our Ships should
remain in suspense, and be specified, as not fully agreed on: Howsoever they
would search our Ships, and it should not be accounted a breach of our
Capitulations, until the King should intimate his dislike thereof. And that
when Notice should come from his Majesty to Algier, that he approved not
thereof, then it should be lawful for both sides to break into Acts of
Hostility. This moderate course we thought to be less prejudicial to us for the
present, than an open, and sudden War: For by this means we gained the
releasement of two small English Ships which their Men carried in thither, and
had time to give notice to our Merchants in all Ports and places, of the true
state of our business with Algier.

On the Twenty-seventh of November, we departed from the bay of Algier with a
prosperous, and steady Gale, steering N.E. and N.N.E. for Messina, from whence
we intended to dispatch Letters unto all places, rendering advices to his
Majesty, and the Merchants, of the State and Condition of our Affairs, and
Negotiation at Algier: And whilst we pleasantly sailed with a prosperous wind,
on a sudden a cry was made of Fire, in the Ship, which astonished us all with a
great amazement. For the Cooper it seems, going into the Steward's Room to
stave a Cask which formerly had some Brandy in it, by chance a Snuff of the
Candle fell in at the bung, which put the whole Vessel into a Flame: But the
same Man immediately stopping the Bung, soon smothered the Fire, and therewith
extinguished thatand our fears. As to other Matters, Messina
our Voyage to Messina was speedy and happy, for we arrived there on the Second
of December.

Some Days passed before we could get pratick; for having touched at Algier, a
place always suspected for the Plague, great scruple was made of admitting us
to free converse in the Town: Until the Lord Ambassador gave under his Hand
and Seal an assurance of the Health of our Ship; on confidence of which we
received Pratick, and the Palace called Paradise, where commonly the Vice-Kings
are lodged, was appointed to receive his Excellency and his Retinue, and the
Furniture thereof ordered by D. Francisco de la Villa Padierna, a Spaniard, who
was Stratago, which is as much Commander in chief of all the Castles and Forts
in and about Messina. So soon as his Excellency landed, this Stratago made him
a Visit, and at his departure left his Guard with him in a Complement, but in
the mean time the Jurati, who were six in number, chose (as I think) every
year, or every third year by the Citizens for Government of the City, were
wanting in the like civility toward our Ambassador; four of which are chosen
out of the Burgers, and two out of the Gentry, for they took no notice of him,
nor sent him any message until the hour that he was about to depart, when his
Excellency refused to receive their visits, excusing his neglect of attendance
to matters of Ceremony, at a time when business urged his departure: whence
this omission on the Jurats side proceeded, may in probability be derived from
the antipathy they have to the Spaniards and their Government, always running
contrary to that, unto which they find the Spanish Ministers most inclined.
During our abode at this place his Excellency having returned his Visit to the
Stratago, accompanied with D. Joseppe de Luna a Cavalier of Maltha, and having
wrote a Letter to the Conde de Ayala then Vice-King of Sicily, residing at
Palermo, he gave advices unto all places of the doubtful state of our affairs
with Algiers, that so Ships might be cautious of that people, and how they
adventured themselves abroad without Convoy; and having completed these
Dispatches, we again returned aboard on the ninth of this Month; when the
Stratago, abounding in all points of civility, sent an honorable present of
all sorts of fresh provisions aboard Ship, and soon after came himself in
person to bid Farewell to his Excellency. At his coming aboard we gave him nine
Guns, and at his going off fifteen, and so soon as our Anchors were away, and
our Foretop-Sail filled, we bid adieu to the Town with twenty one Guns more,
which they returned by firing all the Guns of the five Castles, under command
of that Stratago, which is an honor they seldom pay to any other, than the
Generalissimo of Spain, the Vice-King, and the Popes Admiral.

We had so fair a Wind, and so prosperous a passage, that we arrived at Smyrna
on the 14th of December, where we found the Prosperous and Smyrna Factor, the
Merchants Ships which we had lost in the Storm, Smyrna.
happily arrived. Here we remained for some days to order and settle several
affairs according to Instructions given by the Turkey Company. And on the sixth
of January, being Sunday and Twelfth-day, we returned aboard to prosecute this
Ultimate stage of our Voyage to Constantinople; our Frigate the Plymouth
Anchored near the Town within the very Port of Smyrna, from whence sailing with
a fresh Easterly Wind from the shore, we were carried without the Port, and out
of command of the Castle; where the wind failing, and being wholly calm, we
Anchored until the next morning, when with a gentle gale at South-East we
proceedded forward, and being as high as Cape Caraborno, toward night the Wind
came about to the N.E. with so strong a Gale, that with some difficulty we
weathered the Cape, and making over for the Island of Mytilene, and bringing
our Ship under a main course, we intended to pass the night under the shel^er
of that Isle: All this night the wind so increased one hour more than another,
that in the morning it was grown to a perfect storm, and the Sea into a breach;
the sky was so black, and thick, and the Sun so red, and louring, as signified
the continuance of it; and the spray of the Sea was so forcibly carried by the
wind over the Ship, that Masts, Yards, and Decks were querned with a white
Salt. This extremity of weather made us think of some Port, or Harbor, wherein
to secure our Ship. The Island of Ipsera lying S. B. W. about eight Leagues
from Mytilene, was judged by our Master to be the most convenient and safe
place, wherein we might spend the fury of this storm; wherefore putting before
it with our Foresail, and our Mainsail in the Brailes, A miraculous escape from
shipwreck
the wind was so forcible, that it carried away our Foresail like Paper from
the Yard; and bringing another in the place thereof, it had the misfortune to
be soul of the slook of our Anchor, and so became as unserviceable as the
former: being thus deprived of the benefit of our commanding Sails, we set our
Spritsail, and Main-course, and so steered in between the two Isles of Ipsera
the greater; and the less. Being shot within, and keeping as near aluff as we
could to the shore, we on a sudden struck upon a Rock, which astonished us all
with a strange amazement; the Ship fetched five Sallies, or Seeles upon it with
such violence, that we expected to sink immediately into the deep; and indeed
if we consider the forcibleness of the wind, the turgency of the Sea, and the
weight of our burden, having four hundred persons aboard, and sixty Guns
mounted, it will appear little less than a Miracle, that the Ship brake not
into more pieces than our numbers were aboard. I stood then by the Mate, when
he fathomed our depth of water by the Lead and Li^^; and we had then seventeen
foot and a half by the side, but the Ship drawing eighteen foot, we began to
fear a total ruin, and shipwreck, and with cast-up eyes, and stretched out
arms, thought now of no other than of our last and ultimate Port. But in the
midst of this horrid consternation and distress, it pleased God, who was our
best Pilot, and guided us to the edg of the Rock, to bring us clear of it; when
we soon espied some of our sheathing to swim upon the Sea; and running down to
the Well of our Pumps, we perceived a great increase of water, but not so much
but that Pumping once every half hour, we kept our Ship in a condition of
safety. Being thus by Gods Providence come to a convenient place of Anchorage,
being well furnished with ground-Tackle we rode for two days in a stress of
wind, with two Anchors a head, of which our sheet-Anchor was one, and with our
Top-masts and Yards struck. Afterward the wind abating something of its late
fierceness, though continuing in the same quarter, we had opportunities to go
ashore and to make some Provisions of Wine, of which that Island yields an
admirable sort, and as rich as any in the Archipelago, though the people are as
poor, or rather more miserable than their Neighbors. In three or four days, by
the ^ullage and weeds which the Leak had sucked in, the water began to stop,
and our Ship became so perfectly tight, that our Captain judged it not
necessary to enquire, when we arrived at Constantinople, into the damage which
we had received from the Rock; and the Ship afterward by Gods Providence
arriving safe in the River of Thames, was brought into the Dock at Woolidg,
where upon search was discovered a great piece of the Rock, as big as a man's
head, struck into the bilge of the Ship, and so firmly fixed, as if it had been
riveted within; which seemed so strange a thing, that hte Shipwrights before
they would take it from thence, first thought fit to acquaint the King thereof;
who was pleased in person to go and see it; which appearing a strange, and
almost a miraculous accident, His Majesty commanded it to be taken out, and (as
I am informed) it is kept in his Closet. And now for the better description of
this Rock, and for the avoiding of it, Seamen may observe, and take notice of
it in this manner.

The shallow water, Rocks about Ipsera.
or the Rock whereon we struck, bore N. N. W. N. from the place where we
anchored on the North of Great Ipsera, and lies about half a mile from the
shore. The mark is, the falling away of the South end of the first gray-cliff
which a gall upon the foot of the high hill, on which is a house, there is also
a white sand by the gray cliff; the longest way of the Rock is N. W. and S. E.
and the length not longer than the Ship; the water in the shallowest part
thereof is about thirteen or fourteen foot, with a Northerly wind; and
seventeen foot or more in the deepest which is the place where we struck; yet
as the people of the Island report, it has six foot more with a Southerly
wind; so that it is not strange, that our Master, though he had frequented this
place with the Venetian Fleet, should not have knowledge of it, for such a depth
of water is seldom noted in Waggoners for a place of danger.

There is also another Rock near the Town about half a mile distant from the
shore, bearing N. B. E. of the Point, the neat fluff point E. N. E. the
Northermost point of little Ipsera N. W. B. N. the Southermost point of little
Ipsera S. W. W. the Southernly point of Great Ipsera S. E. 1 S. upon it, there
is not above four foot water.

We rode here until the 14th day when between one and two in the morning, the
wind sprang out of the W.S.W. with an easy gale, with which we weighed our
Anchors, and put to Sea; the next morning early being the 15th day, we were up
with the Island of Tenedos, and toward Noon we entered the Hellespont with a
fresh gale, which was necessary to stem the strength of the current; and about
three a Clock we passed the Castles of Sestos and Abydos; from whence came off
a boat with a Druggerman, and Janissaries, bringing Letters from Sir Thomas
Bendish, then Ambassador at Constantinople, congratulating the Arrival of his
Excellency, and soon returned again ashore to carry the news of our entrance
within the Castles.

On the Seventeenth Day about Noon, being just Three months since the Lord
Ambassador with his Family embarked, we came to an Anchor near the Seven
Towers, from whence we gave notice to St. Thomas Bendysh of our near approach;
and having given Two hours space for to carry the intelligence, we weighed our
Anchors, and stood in for the Port of Constantinople: At this time, a
Bostangee, one belonging to the Grand Signior's Garden, came aboard, sent by
the Bostangee-bashee or Head of the Gardeners, to discover, and know what Ship
it was of such Equipage, and greatness; advising us also, that the Grand
Signior was seated in a Chiosk or Summerhouse on the corner Wall of the
Seraglio. Having thus our Anchor aboard with a fresh and favourablegale, our
Flags and Ensigns displayed, and a Streamer at every Yard-arm, our Guns and
Wast-clothes out; and being near the Wall of the Seraglio, the same Bostangee
came again aboard, acquainting us, that it was the Grand Signior's pleasure,
that we should rejoice with Guns, (which was his expression;) the Ship having
her Sails swelled out with a gentle Gale, and the swiftness of her motion
retarded by the current, gave the Turks an opportunity to take a full prospect
of her, the decks being full of men; we fired Sixty one Guns, as we passed,
Salutation of the Seraglio.
and with that order, that the Vessel could never appear with better advantage,
had she been described by the Hand of the most skilful Painter: And thus we
came to an Anchor on Toppennau side, where Sir Thomas Bendysh came immediately
aboard to congratulate the safe arrival of this new Ambassador: And now here it
may be enquired, whether the Seraglio returned any answer to this salute by
those Guns which lie under the Gardenwall, of which most, or all are
dismounted: I answer, not; for this having been the first Man of War, or first
Royal ship, that ever carried up an English Ambassador to Constantinople; it
having been the custom formerly to have them transported thither on some goodly
Merchant-ship laden with the rich Commodities of our Country, a return of Guns
was never demanded, or expected; and perhaps it was a matter not then thought
of; which if it had, and been required, it is probable, in that conjuncture (if
ever) it would have been granted; both because old Kuperlee the Father, then
governed, who was a great friend to the English, and Enemy to the French, whose
Ambassador was then under restraint, would have in mere opposition and hatred
to them, bestowed those honors on our Nation, which at another time could not
have been extorted for a great Sum of Money; and so much I collect from the
very words of Kuperlee, who after our Lord Ambassador had made his Entrance in
a more splendid manner than usual, as we shall understand by the sequel, he
demanded of our Chief Druggerman, how the French resented this treatment? He
answered, not well, but with an envious Eye, as he supposed; let them burst
with malice, replied the Vizier. Of late years since the glory and greatness of
France, their Ambassadors have been always transported up to Constantinople in
the Kings Ships. Monsieur la Hay the younger came on Man of War of the Kings,
and a Fireship; Monseur de Nointel, with Two men of War and a Fireship; and now
lately Monsieur de Guilleragues with no less an Equipage than the former. All
which before they entered Constantinople, made a stop about the Seven Towers,
capitulating first to have a re-salute from the Seraglio, before they would
pass their Complement to that place; which being denied, as a thing never
practiced; the French Men of War have of late passed with silence, without
giving, or receiving a salute: Howsoever, as things stand now, I should scarce
advise, that English Men of War should insist upon the like, for we having once
done it, a custom may be pretended; and that may give a beginning to such a
dispute which a new Ambassador ought studiously to avoid, the present
circumstances of France not suiting exactly with the sole Interest of Trade
which is exercised by England.

Against the next Day, being the Eighteenth, The Lord Ambassador landing at
Constantinople.
things were provided for the entrance of his Excellency; and indeed with that
state and handsome Equipage, that neither any Ambassador from England, nor yet
from the Emperor, passed with greater Splendour and Honor than this: For when
his Excellency first descended from the Ship into his Boat, the Ship fired
Fifty one Guns, so leisurely, that they so continued, until he set his Foot on
the shore; where mounting on Horseback covered with a rich Velvet Foot-cloth,
the whole Equipage marched in this Order, on Horseback also; First, The Vayvod
of Galata, and his Men. 2. The Captain of the Janisaries with his Janisaries.
3. The Chaous-bashee with his Chaouses. 4. The English Trumpeters. 5. The
English Horsemen, Merchants of Constantinople, and those of Smyrna, which came
to attend his Excellency by order of the Factory, being in number Six, with
their Servants. 6. The Ambassadors, Druggermen and Janisaries. 7. His
Excellency with St. Thomas Bendysh, attended with their Pages and Footmen. 8.
The Secretary and Gentlemen. 9. The Countess of Winchelsea in her Coach, and
Three other Coaches following with her Women, covered with Red-cloth, made
after the fashion of Wagons, lying on the carriages unhung. 10. Which were
followed by some Officers, and Reformadoes of the Ship. Such an appearance as
this being Extraordinary, the Streets were crowded with People, and all Windows
filled with Spectators; and that which made the passage more uneasy, was the
Rabble scrambling for Five Sol-pieces, of which sort of Money, 500 were by
Order of the Lord Ambassador scattered amongst the People, who regarded not the
danger of being trampled under foot, whilst they had the Silver in their Eye.


His Excellency being thus lodged at his House at Pera, he was immediately
saluted from the Emperors Resident by his Secretary; and soon after by Signor
Padavino Secretary to their Excellencies Balarino and Capello, of whom we shall
hereafter have occasion to name, being those who negotiated the Affairs of the
Venetian Republic. And the next Day following, the like Complement was passed
from the French Ambassador, and the Dutch Agent.

Three days after, the Grand Signior sent a Present to his Excellency of Ten
Sheep, Fifty Hens, The Grand Signiors present to the Ambassador.
a Hundred Loaves of Bread, Twenty Sugarloaves, Twenty Wax-candles, Ten whereof
were white, and Ten yellow. This we mention particularly, because it was a Gift
anciently bestowed in the times of the first Ambassadors; and though it had not
been of late years practiced, yet being found in the Old Registers, the custom
was again revived, because the Turks were in an humor to gratify, and show
all the Honor they could to the English Ambassador.

On the Twenty eighth of this Month of January, his Excellency had his first
Audience of the Great Vizier; His first Audience with the Vizier.
and being attended thither, ad met by the Turkish Officers on Constantinople
side, (in the same manner, as when he first landed) he was conducted to the
Viziers Palace; and being held up under the Arm by Two of his Gentlemen (that
being the fashion of great men amongst the Turks) he was introduced to the
Presence of the Vizier; who being aged and decrepit, was sitting on Cushions in
a little Room with a Fire, and his Feet covered, several Pashaws, Pages, and
other Officers standing by him. His Excellency and Sir Thomas Bendysh were
seated on Two Velvet stools; where first the Earl of Winchelsea having
presented the King's Letters to the Vizier wrote in Parchment, and put into a
Bag of Cloth of Gold; Sir Thomas Bendysh began to inform the Vizier, that this
was that honorable Person, of whom he had formerly acquainted him, was coming
to reside for Ambassador in his place: That he was of that Nobility, and
relation to our King, that had not his Majesty intended highly, and in an
extraordinary manner to Honor, and oblige the Grand Signior, he would not have
exposed his Kinsman, and a Person extraordinary, to the hazard of a Voyage so
long and dangerous as this. Then the Earl of Winchelsea-began to speak, and
relate the happy restoration of the King his Master to the Throne of his
Ancestors; extolling his Power, Greatness and Clemency in pardoning all, but
such, who were engaged in the Blood of his Father. That in his passage to
Constantinople, he had by Command of the King touched at Algier, endeavoring
to renew the former Articles of Peace, and release an English Lord (meaning the
Lord Obryan) taken Captive by them contrary to the Articles of Peace, but
without success, not being able to reduce them to any Terms of Reason, or
Justice: And enlarging in his Complements with assurances of the friendship
which the King his Master desired to conserve, and maintain with the Grand
Signior, as a token thereof, he acquainted him, that he was the first
Ambassador sent abroad by his Master, since his happy return, before he had
designed, or appointed any to Christian Princes. The Vizier readily answered:
That it was but Reason it should be so; since the Grand Signior was an Emperor,
and they but Kings; and he the greatest, and most Sovereign Potentate of the
World: And that as to the Business of Algier, he would take care of it, and do
him Justice. This having passed, Two China dishes with Sherbet were brought
forth, and given to the Two Ambassadors, and Two larger bowls of the same to
their Attendants: Then the Present was brought forth, and laid before the
Vizier, consisting of Twenty Vests; Four of them were of fine English Cloth of
several colors; Four of several colored Velvets; Fourof several flowred
Stuffs with Gold and Silver; Four of watered Tabbies, and Four of Sattins: In
recompense hereof both the Ambassadors were vested, with Six others, which
Vests are of no great matter of use, or value, more than that they are
evidences and badges of the Vizier's favor. After this his Excellency with Sir
Thomas Bendysh arose, and departed, wearing these Vests, until they were passed
without the Gates of the Viziers Palace, and then they delivered them to be
carried by their Servants, as the others did; and so his Excellency returned to
his House at Pera, with an appearance of a fair Correspondency, and with
assurances that the Capitulations and friendship should be maintained, and
conserved with a strict and inviolate Faith.

The day of giving pay to the Janisaries drawing near, the Ambassador's
Audience with the Grand Signior was deferred until that time, for with that
occasion the Court would appear in the most solemn manner, and the attendance
of the Soldiery would render all things more great and powerful: In the mean
time the Grand Signior often took a view from his Seraglio, of the Plymouth
Frigate, and frequently rowed round her in a Boat; and some say, he once came
Incognito aboard to see her; at length he was so pleased with her, that he
fancied her to be a very proper Vessel to carry Soldiers and Ammunition for
Candia; but proposing his Thoughts and intentions to the Vizier, he was
dissuaded from the demand, or constraint of the Ship, being admonished, that
this was a matter unpracticable, and uncivil toward a Prince, who on
confidence of Amity and Alliance with him, had adventured his Ship within his
Port.

The Twenty sixth day of February, Audience with the Grand Signior.
being Pay-day of the Janisaries, the Lord Ambassador had Audience of the Grand
Signior, which was performed in this manner. His Excellency, with Sir Thomas
Bendysh, departing from his House, with his retinue on Horseback, by break of
day in the Morning, was met on Constantinople side by the Chaous-Bashee, and
his Chaouses, and by them conducted to the Seraglio. We rode through the first
Court which was very spacious, and then we alighted from our Horses, and walked
through another Court leading to the Divan, or place of Judicature; at the
upper end of which the Great Vizier was seated; on his right Hand sat Five
Viziers of the Bench, of which the Captain-Pasha, or Admiral of the Seas, was
one; on the left were the Two Kadileschers or Chief Justices, one of Anatolia,
and the other of Romelia, and by them the Tefterdar Pasha or Lord Treasurer,
with Three other Pasha's: The floar of the Divan was covered with Carpets, and
on them a richer covering of Bags of Money, for payment of the Janisaries. The
Two Ambassadors with about Six or Seven of their retinue (amongst which I was
one) being admitted in, and placed at the lower end, their Excellencies
approached toward the Vizier, and were seated near unto him on Two stools
covered with Crimson Velvet, and some Discourse and Complement having passed
between them, they retired to another part of the Room, that they might give
way to Business. In the mean time the payment of the Soldiers went forward,
every Churbagee, or Captain, taking from the heaps, the Pay of his Soldiers,
and laying the Bags on their Shoulders, made up to the Vizier, and having
kissed the Hem of his Vest on his Knees, he retired with great Humility and
have from him, passing away with his side toward him, it being very unseemly
amongst them to turn their backs to Personages of that Dignity.

The Payment being over, Three small Tables were brought in; the first of which
was covered with a silver Voyder, at which the Two Ambassadors sat with the
chief Ministers; but the Great Vizier by reason of his Age and Weakness retired
into another Room. The other Two Tables were covered with a mixed Metal, which
served in the place of a Table-Cloth, at which the others sat: We had no
Knives, Forks, nor Plate; but only Wooden Spoons were laid for us, which was
sufficient in that manner of eating, for their Meats are most boiled, and
conveniently received by the Spoon; or are so well roasted, that they are
easily parted with the Fingers. The dishes were served in by one at a time, but
so fast, that we had scarce tasted of one, before it was snatched away to make
place for another; and I think there might be about Twenty several changes, in
this manner; at the end of all, to conclude our Feast, a great Bowl of Sherbet
was brought in, and we drank of it, as large draughts as we pleased. Being
risen from the Table, Eighteen Coftans, or Vests, being the usual number given
to the English Ambassador, with one extraordinary in favor to the New
Ambassador, were brought forth, and bestowed; and in the mean time, the Present
from our King to the Grand Signior, provided at the expense of the Turkey
Company, consisting of Fifty Vests, viz. Ten of Velvet, Ten of Satin, Ten of
Cloth of Gold, Ten of Tabbies, and Ten of fine English Cloth, were brought
forth and displayed in the open Court by Fifty men which carried them, and Four
English Mastiffs, which were more acceptable to this Grand Signoir than all the
rest. The whole body of Janisaries then paid, consisting of about Five
thousand, were drawn up in a body, and ranged on one side of the Courtyard;
amongst them there was that silence, that the least whisper, noise, or motion
was not heard; and as their Janisar Aga, and other Commanders passed, the
bowings they made in salute were so regular, and at the same time, as may well
testify the exactness of their Discipline, and admirable obedience, which has
in a great measure contributed toward their Conquests and Enlargement of their
Empire.

Being thus Vested, and ranked in Order, the Great Vizier entered into the
Presence of the Grand Signior; and then Two Capugi-bashes or Chief of the
Porters of the Gate, with long Silver Staves, took the New Ambassador under
each Arm to conduct him to the Chamber of Audience; those permitted to
accompany him were Sir Thomas Bendysh, the Earl of Winchelsea's Brother, Sir
Thomas Allen Captain of the Plymouth Frigate, the Interpreter, and my self, who
then being Secretary, carried the Credential Letters made up in a Purse of
Cloth of Gold. We gently knocked at the first Gate, which was immediately set
wide open to us, in the Porch whereof Forty white Eunuchs attended, clothed in
Vests of Satin, and Cloth of Gold of diverse colors, and stood with their
Hands before them with mavelous silence, and modesty. Coming near to the
Presence-door, where the Kapi-Aga or Chief of the white Eunuchs attended, we
made a pause in the Porch, and trod very softly, so as not to disturb with the
least motion, the greatness of that Majesty; and so profound was the silence,
that nothing was heard besides the murmurings of a Fountain adjoining hereunto.
Just at the entrance of the Chamber, hung a gilded Ball studded with diverse
precious Stones, the Floar was covered with Crimson Velvet; embroidered with
Golden-wyre. The Grand Signior himself sat in a Throne raised a small height
from the ground, supported with Four Pillars plated with Gold; from the top
hung several gilded Balls twined with Masses of Pearl; the Cushions he sat
upon, and those also that lay by, were richly embroidered, and beset with
Jewels, and on his right hand stood the Great Vizier. And having made a
considerable stop at the Door, the Two Capugibashees, who held his Excellence
under each Arm, brought him to the middle of the Room, and laying their Hands
upon his Head, made him bow, until he touched the Carpets with his forehead;
and then raising him again, they retired backward with him, unto the farthest
part of the Room; and in like manner they took all the others singly and in
order, placing them behind the Ambassadors. The Credential Letters from our
King were then presented, and appointed that they should be delivered to the
hands of the Reis-Efendi, or Secretary of State.

Then the Druggerman or Interpreter, by Order of the Lord Ambassador, read a
Paper in the Turkish Language to this Effect.

First, Declaring how the King of Great Britain our Sovereign Lord and Master,
was restored to the Throne of his Ancestors without War, or any Conditions: And
the great Clemency of His Majesty in pardoning all, but those who had a hand in
the Murder of his Father.

Secondly, Recommending the Merchants and their Interest to the continuance of
his usual Favor and Protection.

Thirdly, Begging the freedom of all English Slaves, as a particular Testimony
of Favor, and Grace to this New Ambassador.

These Ceremonies being performed, and the Paper read, we immediately departed,
passing to our Horses by the same way which we came: And being mounted, we drew
up a little out of the passage to see the Soldiers march by us, which indeed
appeared to be a very flourishing Militia of young Men, robust, and well
clothed; many of them running with Bags of Money on their Shoulders, and all of
them cheerful, and glad of the charge they carried with them; after them
followed their Commanders exceedingly well mounted: And last of all came the
Great Vizier attended with many Pashaes, and a goodly Equipage: And then his
Excellency, with Sir Thomas Bendysh, and attendance, proceeded forwards, and
returned to their home. After this Two visits were made: Namely, to the
Captain-Pasha or Admiral of the Seas, and the other to the Mustee; at the
first, Six Vests were presented; and at the latter, Five; and both were
performed, and accepted with such mutual kindness, that never did the Turkish
Ministers cast more serene countenances on the Trade and Concernments of
England, than on this conjuncture.

And thus the Earl of Winchelsea being very successfully, and with fignal
Demonstrations of Honor, and a good correspondence, seated in the usual
residence of Ambassadors, the Grand Signior, as a particular Note and mark of
his favor presented him with Three English Slaves, and returned a kind and
friendly answer to his Majesty's Letters, by Sir Thomas Bendysh, who embarked
on the Plymouth Frigate, and departed the Eleventh of March. And thus having
given the Reader a Relation of the State of the English concernments in Turkey:
Let us view and consider the Condition of the Turkish Affairs amongst
themselves.

At the arrival of this Ambassador, the important affairs of this vast and
still growing Empire, were governed by the Great Vizier Kuperlee; a Person
decrepit and infirm in body, by reason of his great Age, but of a solid and
subtle judgment; by Nature cruel, and by Years froward; which disposition was
singularly well fitted to do service to his Master, against the impetuous
storms of the Faction of those times, in which the Pashaws, and Chiefs of the
Soldiery (as often it happens in Empires, whose Body is grown too vast to be
ruled by a weak Head) became rich and powerful, and by the long Vacations of
Peace, insolent and wanton; for as then the Wars with Venice were carried on
faintly, only by sending forth an Armata of Galleys in the Spring; and the
preparations became rather accustomary, returning with the Year, and made for
exercise of the Arsenal, and amusement of the People, than designed with any
probable expectation of success or Victory, proportionable to that Treasure and
Trouble which maintained them. So that to encounter so many difficulties, and
predominancy of Ambition and Avarice, the Prince himself being young, the
Fortune of his Empire had more than urgent necessity of such a rough and cruel
disposition as was found in Kuperlee; who so seasonably made use of it, to the
destruction of all such, who might either endanger his Prince, or himself; that
in two or three Years time he became Master of the Lives and Estates of the
Grand Mutiniers; confiscating their richess and fortunes to the use and
security of his Master; having in his time put to Death thirty six thousand
persons, whom he proscribed in several Countries, and privately strangled in
the City, by virtue of his absolute and uncontrollable Authority, without
giving the Offenders liberty of Processes, or Pleas for their Lives, or the
solemnity of Scaffolds, or applause of a Funeral Oration at the Gallows,
whereby to win the affections and compassions of the vulgar, but went through
with his bloody and tragical business, without noise, or rumor, or knowledge
almost of the Soldiery, or the people; whilst the great Personages, whose
rapine and pride had contracted them envy and hatred from their inferiors,
stood confused and amassed, not having power to rebel, nor Sanctuary to fly unto.

Such is the effect of an absolute, and arbitrary power, which is Master of
times and affairs, and rather fits and squares Enterprises to Counsels, than
Counsels to Enterprises. Reges Hercule non liberi solum impedimentis omnibus,
sed Domini rerum, temporunque trahunt Consiliis cuncta, non sequuntur. Live.
lib. 9. The Grand Signior in the mean time applauded the diligence and
circumspection of his Minister; and though yet trembling with the memory of
late sollevations amongst the Janissaries; yet being young, and active, addicted
himself wholly to the delight of Hunting, and to follow the Chase of fearful,
and flying Beasts; whilst his Vizier so closely followed his game of Blood,
that he left no Person considerable in the Empire, who was not a Creature made
by, or depending on him; unless the Kahyabei, or Lieutenant General of the
Janissaries; Mortaza Pasha of Babylon, now called by the Turks Bagdat, and the
Pasha of Magnasia; Men, whose bravery, and generous Justice, or else their
Guards, or Fortune, had only seated beyond the reach and Sword of this Tyrant.
This was then the State of the Turkish Affairs amongst themselves; As to
Foreign, and Christian Princes; the Emperor, the King of England, the French
King, and the States of Holland, had their Ambassadors and Residents at the
Ottoman Court, with whom as yet passed a fair and amicable correspondence,
excepting with the French; whose Ambassador had then lately obtained his
release from Imprisonment, to which he was confined contrary to the Law of
Nations, and the Custom of the wisest, and most generous People of former Ages;
and compelled to return into France; an Agent being there settled by the
Merchants, to Negotiate their Affairs; the occasions and grounds whereof we
have at large signified in another place: which unlawful treatment of a Person
Sacred, none will much admire, who considers the humor of supreme Ministers
that judge themselves under no restraint or limits of Law, either Civil, or
National.

This Ambassador from France was called Monsieur le Hay, the Father, a Person
excellently well qualified, having with success passed in that capacity for the
space of 25 years until some misunderstandings passing between him, and this
Tyrannical Vizier, he suffered many indignities from him, which being added to
the extreme torment of the Stone, under which he labored, made him willing on
any terms to return to his own Country.

The Venetians notwithstanding the War, had two Ministers there resident; the
Eccellentissimo Capello, Procurator of St. Mark, a right worthy and noble
Person; and Signior Ballarino, a Person vigilant, and subtle, who omitted no
opportunities to advance his own Fortunes, and with that the benefit of his
Republic. The Emperors Resident, called Simon Renninghen, a Person sincere,
free, and open hearted, agreeable to the Nature of the Germans; had for some
Years, tho with some difficulty, continued the Peace, or rather matters from
breaking out into an open War; the Incursions on the Frontiers, and other
accidents, always administering occasions of discontent, and complaints to both
parties.

But that the Series of this History may be continud with an even Thread, The
history of Prince Rogotzki.
and clear light to the Reader, we must cast back our Eyes to the Year 1657.
when the Ambition of George Ragotzki, Prince of Transylvania, began New
troubles in his own Principality, and laid the Foundation of a future War
between the Emperor and the Turks. For now Poland was so wearied with the
incessant Wars of Muscovy (the inveterate Enemy of the that Crown) with the
frequent Rebellions of the Cossacks, and the invasion of the Swedes, whom the
traitorous Vice Chancellor, and his Adherents, had invited to the spoils of
their own Country; that King Casimirus was reduced to the ultimate extremity
of his Affairs; the public Exchequer, and private Treasuries were exhausted,
the Villages dispeopled, the Fields uncultivated, Traffic and Commerce ceased;
nothing but Wars, Robberies, and Confusion filled the Diurnals with News, and
the hearts of the Inhabitants with Sorrow and Calamities: Wherefore Casimer
King of Poland, vexed on all sides, and not knowing where or how to apply a
remedy, dispatched his Great Chancellor Albertus Pravesmoski, in Quality of
Ambassador, to demand assistance from Ragotzki, promising in recompense
thereof, to adopt his Son to succeed him in that Kingdom. No Message could
arrive more grateful to ambitious Ragotzki, who by so desired a proffer, seemed
to arrive to the Zenith of his Proseperity; which like the Land of Promise,
being only showed to his Father in a long Prospective, seemed now as it were,
by Inheritance, to devolve upon his Son; in order unto which, many days of
Treaty and Conferences were held between Ragotzki, and the Polish Ministers;
Ragotzki joins with the Swedes against Poland.
but Ragotzki insisting on certain particulars, which were not in the Power of
the King or his Commissioners to grant without the approbation of a Diet, the
Treaty was dissolved, and Ragotzki remained displeased, and angry; pretending
himself to have been deluded and slighted, resolved to avenge the Affront, and
by his Arms gain to himself the Crown of that Kingdom; so that raising a strong
Army, and joining himself in a Confederate League with Sweden, he invaded
Poland, wasting all the Frontiers with Fire and Sword. The Ottoman Port growing
jealous of the successes of these Affairs, and not so much of the Advance of
Ragotzki, as of the growing greatness of the Swedes, with whom unwillingly they
would be Borderers, issued an express Command. That without contradiction or
delay, he should immediately give stop to his March, and return with his Army
into Transylvania. And though the Emperor of Germany, and the Krim Tartar
declared their dislike of his proceedings, threatening to invade his
Principality at home, unless he retracted himself, and desisted from this
enterprise; yet Ragotski having his understanding blinded with Ambition, and
the lust of Rule and Government, stopped his ears to the menaces of his
Enemies, and the counsel of his Friends. This Ragotski enjoyed a State most
happy, large, fertile, and populous, in Power inferior to few, superior to
many; so that he might have passed peaceably and honorably with all, could his
great spirit have bowed to, and complied with his Potent Neighbors. The
difficulty of Ragotski's Affairs.
For on the one side the Puissant power of the Turk threatened him, to whom the
least Ombrages of displeasure administer occasion of War; On the side of
Hungary the Emperor overawed him: On the side of Valachia, and Moldavia he
lay open to the incursion of the Tartars. So that a man might rationally
expect, That this Prince should have esteemed it honor enough to have
conserved his own without rendering himself obnoxious to the jealousy and
suspicion of his Neighbors. But his great spirit was so enamoured of a Crown,
and so bewitched with the hopes of obtaining it, that nothing seemed difficult
or improbable to the acquisition of his longing desires, which were the
occasion of all those calamities and miseries in Hungary, which afterward
ensued.

In contemplation of all which foreseen evils, his Caesarean Majesty sent a
Message to the Ottoman Port, declaring against the temerity and audaciousness
of Ragotski; who in the mean time subdued the Fort of Bristia, invaded with
Fire and Sword the Province of Russia, plundered Podolia, and advanced as far
as Camonitz, a Fortress strong by Art and Nature; and joining afterward with
the Swedes, assisted them in the subjection of Cracovia. About this time the
Emperor Ferdinand the third began to send succors into Poland, and to protest
against the proceedings of Ragotski, but being surprised by sickness, soon
after passed to a better life; which for some time, giving a stop to the
assistance of Poland, was interpreted by Ragotski, as a happy Omen of his good
Fortune.

But how vain and deceitful are humane hopes, whose foundations are Ambition
and Violence! For Leopold succeeding in the place of his Father to Hungary, and
the Empire, immediately prosecuted the design in favor of Poland, and in the
first place besieging Turone, one of the chief Cities of Prussia, taken by the
Swedes, forced it to a Surrender. The King of Denmark also growing jealous of
the increasing greatness of the Swedes, nourished by ancient grudges, and
National Emulations, took up Arms in defense of Poland, and being at first,
flush of Money, gave constant pay and large donatives to mercenary Soldiers,
which increased his Army, drawing great numbers from the Swedish Colors; so
that being stoutly recruited, he entered into the Enemies Countries, possessed
himself of the important Fort of Olme in Norway; overthrew the Swedish Army at
Vorgast, and obtained a victory over their Fleet in the Baltic Sea. The Poles
also themselves, who at first revolted from their Prince, and favored the
Swedish proceedings, perceiving the Wind change, and become contrary to that
Party, began to abandon the interest they professed, and by degrees to return
to the due obedience of their King. Zerneski also the General, and Lubomiski
the Great Chancellor of Poland met the Swedish Forces near Cracovia, where
giving them Battle, discomfited the whole Army, killed fourteen thousand upon
the place, took all the Cannon and Baggage, and won that day a most signal
Victory.

Ragotski perceiving the face of things thus changed, and being by Command of
the Ottoman Port abandoned by his Moldavian and Walachian Forces, began to turn
his face toward Transylvania, where now he wished himself and Army lodged in
safety. But being overtaken by General Zerneski near the Mountains of
Transylvania, he was, tho unwillingly, engaged to sight, and was with that fury
assaulted by the Polish Horse, that tho according to his usual Bravery, he
charged in Person at the head of his Troops, yet he was not able to withstand a
violence so disadvantageous in number, but that his men being (...) put into
disorder, then to a Retreat, and then to open flight, his whole Army was
deseated, many of them perished by the Sword, others flying through the Woods
and Mountains, died with samine; Ragotski overthrown by the Poles.
and he himself obliged to buy a shameful Peace, engaging by Word and Oath to
the payment of a great sum of Money, was permitted with a mean Retinue to
return into his own Country. Nor did these misfortunes end here; but the
Tartars commanded by the Turks, in revenge and chastisement of Ragotski's
Enterprise without their consent, entered into his Principality with
considerable Bodies of Horse, against whose sudden Invasion, an Army under the
Conduct of his General Kemenius could not be so soon collected and disciplined,
as to be able to resist that fury of Tartars, who at their pleasure burned the
Towns and Villages, and carried away multitudes of people of both Sexes, and
all Ages for Captives into their own Country, amongst which some were of
Quality and Condition. Amidst which troubles came Letters from the Ottoman
Port, directed to the Nobles of Transylvania, The Turks threaten Ragotski.
declaring Ragotski a Rebel, and commanding that according to the Laws and
Privileges of that Principality, they should proceed to the Election of a new
Prince, and in case of refusal, all the ruins and calamities were threatened,
which they might justly expect in punishment of their disobedience from a
severe and angry Emperor.

Ragotski being well informed what was designing against him at the Ottoman
Port; and knowing that his power was not able to oppose so much puissance,
resolved to give way to necessity, He deposes himself.
and voluntarily depose himself, before he should be engaged thereunto by the
Imperial Decree; so that he calmly receded from his Principality, hoping that
his humility and submission might procure his pardon at the Court. The Nobility
of Transylvania being as well desirous to evidence their affection to their old
Prince, as their obedience to the Grand Signior, did immediately appoint a day
for Election, but with Proviso, that a general Petition should be made in
behalf of Ragotski, that he might be again restored unto ancient Grace and
Favor with the Port, who in the mean time swore to live peaceably in a quiet
and private condition, without making disturbance, or innovation in the
Government, and that when this Grace should accordingly be obtained, then that
the new Prince should recede, and suffer things to return to their former and
pristine Estate. For which purpose there was choice made of one Francis
Redeius, Redeius made Prince of Transylvania.
a Person of a peaceable and gentle temper, who would easily condescend to the
terms agreed, and as willingly resign up his Government again, as he
unwillingly received it. But though Ragotski had renounced, promised, swore,
and in appearance seemed to recede from his Government, and surrender all at
the irresistible Decree of a superior power; yet his high Spirit, and working
Brain could not dislodg that Ambition of his Heart, which at first privately
countermined and enervated the Power of the new elected Prince; but afterward
his towering Thoughts swelled too big to be suppressed under the cover of
Dissimulation, yielded just Reason to the Ottoman Port to suspect his designs;
who not being ignorant of what was past, dispatched Orders to the Pasha of Buda
to demand the strong Fort of Jancua for Caution and Security of the good
Behavior of the Transilvanians.

Ragotzki seeing himself thus discovered, Ragotzki again declares himself
Prince.
unmasked himself openly, and threw away his Vizard, and with a vigorous Force
and Courage reassumed the Rights and Standard of his Principality, forcing
Redeius not only to relinquish his Power, but to swear never again to usurp it,
tho enforced upon him by the Authority of the Turks.

These Extravagancies so exasperated the minds of the Turks, that whereas
before they began to entertain tender thoughts toward Transylvania, they now
meditated its entire Ruin and Conquest; and so laying aside Arguments and
Treaties, they made Levies of Horse and Foot both in Europe and Asia. Ragotzki
foreseeing how unable he was to resist a Force so unequal as the puissance of
the Ottoman Empire, without the succor of Foreign Force, resolved, like the
Prodigal Son, to throw himself into the compassionate Arms of the Emperor, as
his Father, earnestly supplicating, That whereas before, his disorderly and
disobedient Life had rather merited Punishment than Favor; yet in this Cause,
wherein the Interest of Christendom was concerned, he would compassionate the
common Good of the Christian Church, rather than chastise his particular
Misdemeanors. With this message Michel Mesces, his Chancellor, being
dispatched, was graciously received by the Emperor, and readily assured of
powerful Aid and Protection.

Ragotzki elevated with this courteous Treatment and Promises, had his whole
mind enflamed with hopes and desire of Revenge; so that assembling such Forces
as he could, he entered boldly into the Field against the Pasha of Buda, who
with a considerable Army, was ordered to March before, and enter the Confines
of Transylvania, and there unite with the Pasha of Temiswar.

In the Transaction of all these Passages, July was well entered, when both
Armies met in open Field; and tho the Forces of the Transilvanians were much
inferior to those of the Turk, yet Ragotzki full of his wonted Courage and
Heat, so vigorously assailed the Enemy, that he quickly broke and disordered
their Ranks, put them to flight, and killed three thousand upon the place. But
little did this advantage benefit poor Transylvania, for the Great Vizier soon
after following with the gross of his Army, consisting of little less than an
100. thousand Men, provided accordingly with Artillery, and all other Military
Ammunition; seconded by the Tartars, and assisted by the Moldavians and
Valachians, and a Rout of other barbarous Nations; laid Seige to the strong
Fortress of Janoua; The Vizier besieges Janoua.
of which and of several others, in a short time he rendered himself Master,
laying waste and desolate all the Countries round with Fire and Sword. The
Nobles of Transylvania sensible of these imminent and approaching Mischiefs,
dispeeded three Persons of considerable Quality amongst them, in an Embassy to
the Vizier; viz. Francis Daniel, John Lues, and Acatius Berclay, who greatly
labored by their Oratory to persuade the Vizier, that they were in no wise
consenting to the disobedience of their Prince, but did always readily submit
to the Ottoman Servitude; imploring his Clemency and Commiseration of their
distressed and ruined State. The Vizier inclining his Ear to their Petition,
stopped the Progress of his Arms, but increased their Tribute to such an
excessive rate, that the burden of it became insupportable, and appointed
Berclay, one of the Ambassadors, Berclay made Prince of Transylvania.
to be Prince; taking thereby from the People, the free Privilege of Election;
Commanding them to accept him without farther Dispute or Repugnancy. It is
uncertain whether Berclay designed the Principality to himself by any instance
he made to the Turks, or whether his Election proceeded merely from the Vizier
himself; yet this is certain, that returning home, Berclay applied himself to
establish his own Dominion, and to disappoint the designs of his Predecessor,
and his party.

The Turks being satisfied with this Submission, with the Subjection of several
places of Importance, with deposing of Ragotzki, and establishment of a new
Prince, began to disband a great part of their Forces; and the Great Vizier,
with the remainder, returned toward Constantinople; supposing the Fire of this
War to be totally extinguished.

In this condition of Repose, matters continued for about the space of two
Years, when Ragotzki impatient of his losses, and of the exchange of his
public State to a private Condition, inveterate in his hate toward his Rival
and Competitor, resolved to tempt Fortune once more, and make his ultimate
Assay, either to establish himself in his Principality, or at least to render
himself equal with other mortal Princes in the Grave; and so relying with much
Confidence on the zealous Affection of his Subjects, and the promise of
powerful Adherents, Ragotki makes new Troubles.
he once again justled himself into the Government, by the Expulsion of his
Rival; whom he could not behold with other than with an emulous and unpleasing
Eye. Berclay perceiving himself thus ensnared, neglected, and persecuted by all
Parties, represented these Innovations to the Ottoman Port, with the most
aggravating Circumstances imaginable; beseeching them to afford him aid, and
vindicate their own Honor in maintenance of him, whom they had constituted a
Prince, and was a Creature formed by their own favor. The Turks immediately
touched with the Sense hereof, Issued out Orders to Ciddi Ahmet, the new Pasha
of Buda; Commanded him without delay, to gather what Forces he could to
interrupt the designs of Transylvania; and to put matters unto a stand, until a
greater Army could second him, under the Command of Ali Pasha, appointed
General for this Expedition. The Pasha of Buda readily obeyed, and assembling
what Forces he could in Hungary, and joining with the Pasha of Temiswar, passed
the Danube, and with a very considerable Army entered Transivania. Ragotzki
undaunted at the near approach of his Enemy, boldly entered the Field with his
Forces, and joined Battle with them in the Month of May, 1660. between the
Cities of Clausenburg, and Giulia Alba. At first the Christians endeavored to
have intercepted the Enemies passage, by some Ambuscado or Stratagem of War;
but the Turks still advancing, were at length met by the Vanguard of the
Christians; to assistance of which several Bodies following one after the
other, it became a general Engagement of both Armies; in which Battle, Ragotzki
gave his usual proofs of Valor; declaring by his Actions, that he was resolved
to dye, or to Triumph. But being at length wounded in four parts of his Body,
and his Army overpowered with Numbers, he was forced to yield the Fortune of
the Day to the Turks; leaving 8. pieces of Cannon, and his Standard in their
hands; and the greatest part of his Army being either killed or taken, he
himself with a few of his Attendants, recovered Varadin; where after 18. The
death of Ragotzki.
Days distemper of his Wounds, he expired his unquiet and troubled Soul. This
was the end of that vain Icarus, who attempted to fly with feigned Wings and
borrowed Feathers; this is the fate of ambitious Spirits, whom Pride elevates
and exhales like a Vapor, unto that height, until it dissolves them into
Showers, or precipitates them into the abyss of all Confusion. His Character.
This George Ragotzki was of a tall and well proportioned Stature, black Hair,
and a frisled Beard: his Eyes quick and lively, of an active Body, and healthy
Constitution: his Spirit was high and great, which betrayed him to
Extravagancies: his Comportment was generous and courteous toward all, which
rendered him exceedingly beloved and esteemed by his Nobility: he was free in
his Speech, and eloquent in his Expressions, prudent in his Counsels and
Enterprises: had not the quickness and vivacity of his Soul made him something
rash and violent in his Attempts: he was of the Protestant Religion, leaving
behind him a Widow, and a Son of hopeful and happy endowments.

After the Death of Ragotzki, it might well be expected that these Storms of
War should be dispersed, and that Transylvania should at length enjoy the
Sunshine, and calmer Weather of Peace and Repose. But Ali Pasha, General of
the Turkish Camp, being by this time arrived the Confines with his powerful
Army, resolved not to return empty or in vain, without advantaging the Ottoman
Interest, and making some Satisfaction toward the Expense and Trouble of so
great an Army. Wherefore taking pretense against Varadin, for receiving
Ragotzki after his Defeat, abetting his party, and following his Interest,
designed to summon that important Fortress to surrender, which is fituated at
the foot of those Mountains which open a Passage into Transylvania.

The Inhabitants of Varadin terrified at the approach of this formidable Enemy,
The People of Varadin crave aid of the Emperor.
dispatched a Messenger to the Emperor, imploring with most effectual Arguments
his Sacred Protection and powerful Assistance against the common Enemy to
Christendom, representing to his Cesarean Majesty, how that the Turks in their
Capitulations with him, had agreed to Build or Erect no new Fort on those
Frontiers: and whereas it was the same thing to force and usurp a Fortress
already made, as to form a new one; the taking of Varadin was to be esteemed a
real Violation of the Articles of Peace. That his Majesty would be pleased to
reflect on the fatal Consequences which the loses of Varadin might prove to
Hungary as well as Transylvania; being that Gate, which obstructed, cuts off
all Intercourse between them and Germany. These Considerations with several
others, were exceeding prevalent in the Imperial Council; so that it was
resolved, that General Souches should prepare his Army, and put all things in
readiness to afford the Assistance which was desired; supposing that with the
German Regiments, and Hungarian Forces, might be formed an Army of about 25.
thousand fighting men. But in regard in those Instructions given to Souches,
there was a Clause, that he should be careful not to engage his Forces in any
attempt, where the event might be doubtful, he assembled the principal Persons
of that Country, and the Militia, to consult whether succor and relief might be
given to Varadin, without hazarding the Army in a doubtful and a dangerous
Adventure: in consideration of which point, a true Computation being made of
all the Imperial Forces, they were found much inferior to that calculate which
was made of them at Vienna; For that since Tockai, Zatmar, Kalo, and other
places belonging to the State of Ragotzki, had been Garisoned by German
Soldiers, there remained not of them above 4000. effective Men; the Hungarian
Forces which were supposed to have consisted of 2000. Men, could not form 600.;
the Haiducks which were computed to be 6000. Men, did not appear in the Person
of one; being all dispersed and retired to their own homes. The difficulty of
making War with the Turks.
The additional Forces from the Princes of the Empire were as uncertain, as the
Expectation of them long and tedious; for tho the Imperial Forces united are of
puissance sufficient to bid Battle, and Defiance to the numerous Troops of the
Ottoman Power; yet in regard the Union of that Body depends on the Assembly of
Diets, Treaties, and long Debates, which are subject to time and delays, caused
by different Factions, (which are impossible to be avoided amongst different
States) whose Disunions, Competitions, Emulations and Pretenses, always in such
meetings abound, and prejudice the common cause and benefit of the Empire; the
raising of such a formidable Army, becomes a matter always of time and
difficulty. Howsoever the Emperor, whose Hereditary and Elective Possessions
bordering on the Confines of the Enemy, is necessarily engaged to be the
standing Bulwark of the rest, and a Bank against the Inundation of barbarous
Nations; whilst other Princes whose Dominions are more Remote and Secure,
apprehend not the Premures and Storms that the Emperor sustains, and is
enforced to expel with the loss and diminution of his own People, and
impoverishment of his peculiar Treasure: To these Considerations, which
rendered these pious Intentions toward Varadin almost impossible, there wanted
Money, which is the Sinews of War, and the Soul of all Enterprises: And that
which farther retarded those Succors and Prosecution of the design in hand, was
the departure o His Cesarean Majesty from his Court at Vienna, on occasion of a
Progress as far as Trieste, to take Homage of his Provinces of Stiria,
Carinthia and Cragno; which was an Action much against the Counsel and Advice
of the Archduke Leopold his Uncle; who foresaw how great disorders would ensue
by the Emperors absence, in this Conjuncture, from his Imperial Court. Upon
which Considerations, Count Souches sent a true List of all his Forces, with an
account of the strength of his Enemy; remonstrating that it was impossible to
convey Forces into Varadin, without hazarding a Battle with Ali Pasha, which
would prove an absolute Breach of the Peace; which in this Conjuncture, and
want of Preparation, was neither honorable, nor safe for the Empire.

In the mean time Ali Pasha proceeded and encamped with his Army before
Varadin, Varadin besieged.
breaking first Ground the 4th of July, 1660. and beginning a formal Siege, he
soon begirt the Town, and continually laboring in making Trenches, Batteries
and Approaches, they arrived in a few days to the Counterscrap of the Wall. But
the better to describe the Siege and Assaults on this famous City, it will be
necessary first to explain the Condition and Situation of the place.

Varadin therefore is seated in a Plain, on the Banks of the River Chryse; to
the East it is environed with such craggy and rough Mountains, as render it
almost on that side unaccessible; to the South the Town extended it self most;
to the North it is washed with the River, over which some small, yet fruitful,
Hills raise themselves; it is encompassed with a Wall filled with Earth, after
the fashion of Modern Fortifications, and strengthened with five main Bulwarks,
and a very deep Ditch filled with the River Water: It was well provided both of
Victuals and Ammunition, and armed with Ordnance both great and small, as was
sufficient to have repulsed a puissant Enemy, and have sustained a long and
strait Siege. But the Garrison within consisted only of 850 Soldiers, an
inconsiderable number, both in respect of the Circuit of the Fortress, and of
that gross Army which encompassed it.

The Enemy being now, as it is said before, under the Counterscarp of the Wall,
they perceived that the Ditch was so deep, and filled with Water, that though
their great Guns had made open Breaches in the Walls, yet there was no
possibility to storm them, or bring the Soldiery to scaling Ladders, or handy
blows. The besieged also made such continued Sallies, with success and
slaughter of the Enemy, that after Three and Twenty days of vain labor to few
the Ditch, Ali Pasha was at length almost resolved to have raised his Siege,
and given over the Enterprise; upon which whilst he considered and ruminated
(as ill Fortune would have it) a certain Maid, which formerly had been a
servant to the Governor of the Garrison, then a Captive in the Turkish Camp,
having observed how on occasion the Citizens used to empty and drain the Ditch,
revealed the secret to the Turks, hoping thereby not only to purchase her
Liberty, Two ill accidents to the Garrison.
but with that also a Sum of Money for price of her Treachery; so that
discovering where another Ditch was to be opened, the course of the Water was
soon diverted, and the Walls of the Town laid dry and open to the Assailants.
As this happened without, so another accident within, equally dangerous, befell
the Besieged; for one day an Officer of the Ammunition going into the Stores
with a lighted Candle, by chance dropped a spark of fire from his Lanthorn into
the Powder, which taking fire, blew up the Powder, Grenades, Fireworks, and
all other military Stores, with the neighboring houses, and above a hundred
men; which loss alone was sufficient to have dejected the minds of frail men;
yet they so valiantly bore up their courages, that they seemed not in the least
abated, but rather animated with the height of anger and despair. The Turks
having now free access to the Walls, undermined some small Forts, which they
blew up, and thereby made so great a Breach, that with facility hoping to gain
the Town, if they made use of the occasion, they poured in such multitudes of
People as the Besieged were scarce able to withstand; and the Turkish Soldiery
being also weary of their sufferings, and irksomness of their tedious leagure,
resolved now or never to put an end to their labors; so that advancing with
their open Breasts to the top of the Battlements, without fear either of
Cannon, or Musketshot, they entered within the Walls, and planted the Turkish
Banners on the Works; but being afterward received by a resolute Company of
the Defendants, they were again thrown from the Walls, and tumbled back into
the Ditch with an incredible Slaughter. It is impossible here to describe the
anger, the courage, the despair which was apparent in the faces of the
Besieged, enflamed by the love of their own country, and hatred of the Turks;
so that three or four sustained sometimes the Assault of a Troop; and a small
number united, opposed a whole Sangiack of the Enemy. The Women also forgetting
the imbecility of their Sex, renewing in themselves the Courage and Vigor of
the Ancient Amazons, exposed themselves without fear upon the Walls, throwing
scalding Water, Stones, burning Pitch, and whatsoever came next to hand, upon
the Assailants; whom they so valiantly repulsed from the rising of the Sun till
twelve at Noon, that after much slaughter on both sides, the Turks growing
faint, retreated, and took breath a while within their Trenches. And now the
Soldiery considering the Obstinacy of the Christians, began to mutiny, and
resolving not to cast away their lives in vain, motioned to raise the Siege,
and be gone; which when the General opposed, they threatened to sacrifice his
Life to the Ghosts of their departed Brethren. But see, how many times the
Devil ruins the fortune of the Christians! for whilst they were in this
deliberation to depart, behold, a certain, Thracian one of the Garrison
Soldiers, advised the Turks that there were not above Three hundred found Men
remaining in the whole Garrison, A Thracian betrays the weakness of the Town.
that they were now reduced to their ultimate Crisis; so that if they appeared
only before them, and would but terrify them with another assault, the Town
was their own, without the least doubt of Surrender. This advice retarded the
hasty departure of the Camp; instead of which they again mustered themselves
before the Walls, and prepared to assault the Breach, resolving to put all to a
second extremity. The Christians within perceiving the resolution of their
Enemy, and being sensible how much they were infeebled by the last Convulsion,
and loss of blood, and as yet sore of their wounds, immediately spread a white
Flag of Treaty, which was as readily accepted by the Turks, and all Articles
agreed on the 17th. Varadin surrendered.
of August, and on the 20th. the Garrison marched freely out with Colors
flying, and Drums beating, with liberty to go wheresoever they pleased, without
hurt or injury; which Conditions were fully and faithfully performed and
maintained.

Varadin being thus yielded, Vienna troubled for the loss of Varadin.
afforded matter of discourse, of discontent, of fear, and apprehensions at
Vienna; some argued, That it was but common and natural Reason, when our
Neighbors house is on fire, to look to our own; others blamed the flow and
phlegmatic proceedings of the German Ministers, who in such urgent emergencies
as these, could fit as unconcerned, as Spectators at a Theater, who regard
nothing, which way the prize is carried; and in short, the whole Christian
World stood Admirers of this sottishness, esteeming either those Borderers
astonished and struck into a stupid timidity, or moved by principles of Policy,
which none besides themselves either understood, or penetrated. Only Count
Nicholas Serini, a Prince who had a fair and Sovereign Inheritance in those
parts, Count Serini designs against the Turks.
Commander of Croatia, and the Confines under his Cesarean Majesty, a most
mortal and inveterate Enemy of the Turks, could not endure their insults,
bravadoes and daily encroachments, but watching his occasion of advantage, when
Canisia was almost destroyed by a dreadful fire, and thereby their Ammunition,
and Provision for the most part consumed, he gathered what Forces he could
possible, and made use of the opportunity to lay Siege unto it, not doubting
but in that Conjuncture, and miserable Calamity of all things, to promote the
Interest of his Master, and the common cause of Christendom; which as soon as
he had done, he wrote a Letter to the Emperor, acquainting him that God had
opened him a Gate and Path to his Interest, and to a just revenge of the
Ottoman perfidiousness: Who having violated their Faith, and the mutual Peace
in taking Varadin, would be justly and gloriously recompensed by the loss of
Canisia; which being now, as it were by miracle, put into his hands, it were a
neglect of the Divine Providence not to improve with advantage an opportunity
so cheerful and so promising: to which, besides other arguments, he added, That
if his Cesarean Majesty should not think fit to concur herein with assistance
of his Imperial States, yet at least he would be pleased not to interdict him
from the Glory of that design, in which he questioned not but to succeed, and
in a short time to render not only to his Majesty, but also to the whole
Christian World, proofs of his Valor, and a good account of his Enterprise.
Howsoever, the Emperor's Council seriously considering that Serini's State
could not be engaged with the Turk without involving his Interest; -- is
forbidden by the Emperor.
and that the Princes of the Empire, though when assaulted, would willingly
contribute their Forces in the defensive part, yet would be backward to be the
Aggressors, and engage their States in an offensive and provoking War, did
therefore not only deny to second, or abet his designs with Military succors,
but positively commanded him to retire, and desist from his resolution against
Canisia; with which Answer, the Zeal and Spirit of Serini was so inflamed, that
throwing in passion his Cemiter on the Ground, he raised his well-formed Seige,
and retired to his proper Residence at Chiacaturno.

The loss also of Varadin moved the Transilvanians to consult their safety in
this extremity of their Affairs, The Transilvanians consult their safety.
which now amidst these dangers and storms which threatened them, appeared in a
desperate and languishing Condition, unless remedied by a desperate Cure, and
the resolves of some wise and valiant Counsel. Wherefore in the first place,
they concluded to depose Acatius Barclay, the Favorite of the Turks; and in
his stead they constituted John Chiminianus, or Kemenius, the late General of
Ragotski's Army. They beg assistance of the Emperor.
In the next place, they made their Addresses and Applications to the Emperor
for assistance, supplicating, as Ragotski, and those of Varadin had done
before, the powerful protection, and sacred Patronage of the Imperial Eagles,
alleging those Arguments of common safety, and mutual interest, which apparent
reason suggested, and which were the present Subject and Theme of all the
Courts in Christendom. To this Demand the Emperor assented, promising readily
his assistance, but with Proviso, that for his security, the Cities of
Zechelhid, Chowar, Julia, and other places, should receive Garrisons of German
Soldiers. The Transilvanians willingly accepted the Propositions, so that soon
after those places were supplied with German Garrisons. But as yet no effectual
Forces came from the Emperor, nay rather the German Councils seemed willing to
persuade the Turks, that there was no design, but to maintain the ancient,
friendly and amicable Correspondence; to which end it is said confidently, that
the Prince Gonzaga, Prince Gonzaga's Letter to the Pasha of Buda.
wrote to the Pasha of Buda, That those Garrisons sent to possess certain places
of Transylvania, were only in appearance, and not to create Dissentions between
the Austrian Court, and the Ottoman Prince; which Letters Ali Pasha sent to the
Transilvanians, with design, that discovering unto them an evident reason to
distrust the Emperor, they should wholly resign themselves to the good will and
disposition of the Port. But notwithstanding, these verbal assurances prevailed
not so much with the Turks on one side, as the German Garrisons administered
jealousy on the other: So that the Vizier raged furiously against the Emperor,
for encouraging Kemenius, who had treacherously murdered his two innocent
Brothers in his Rebellion against Barclay, the only true and lawful Possessor.
Nor did the Turks only vent their anger and disdain in words, but also by the
sad and calamitous effects of War; passing without farther parley into the
Emperors Dominions in Hungary, Count Serini builds a Fortress on the Turks
Dominions. 1661.
where they put all to fire and sword. Count Serini perceiving evidently hereby
that the War was broken forth, and that it was not longer time to stand at a
gaze, and not make necessary Provisions for defense; about the beginning of
June, he laid the foundations of a Fortress on the Banks of the River Muer,
within the Dominions of the Turks, about a League distant from Canisia, and in
memory of his Family and Name called it Serinswar, a place convenient to
assault, and offend the Enemy, and to fix the Bulwark, or Redoubt, of the
Province of Stiria, which work was laid with that secrecy, and executed with
such expedition, that it was almost finished before it was known, or notice
taken thereof by the Turks; but so soon as it was discovered, and the News
arrived at Constantinople, the old-Vizier Kuperlee stormed with rage, and in
his height of passion, signed a Command for strangling the Pasha of Canisia,
for not timely preventing the Erection of that Fort in its beginning. In like
manner this work was an occasion of disgust at Vienna; for though the Turks
were the first who had broken the Peace, and given just cause to the Christians
to provide all cautions imaginable for their safety; Yet I know not why, nor
wherefore, there wanted not certain persons in the Court either emulous of
Serini's Glory, or zealous of the Emperors Interest, who interpreted the
activeness, and forward heat of this Count to be like fire to inflame the Fuel
of Controversy between the two Empires; The just commendation of Count Serini.
yet certainly we cannot but meritoriously applaud the Heroic Spirit of this
Prince, who was provident of his Countries safety, watchful of the Enemies
Motion, soon touched with the sense of the Mohammedan infidelity, and in fine, a
zealous Champion of the Christian Cause. But now, with what Salve or Balsome
soever the Italian, or Spanish Chirurgions of Politic Government, imagined to
obduct a callous over the smarts or wounds of these differing States; the
Breaches grew every day too wide to be drawn up, or cemented by artificial
compliances, or verbal lenitives; The Emperor sends Forces to Transylvania.
for now the succors promised by the Emperor were arrived in Transylvania,
under the Command of Count Montecuculi, and joining with the Forces of
Kemenius, formed such a numerous, and well composed Army, as was judged not
only sufficient to contend for the interest of the Christian Cause, but also
for the entire decision of the Worlds Dominion: So that both Generals with an
unanimous consent, confident of Victory, agreed, not to expect the approach of
Ali Pasha, but boldly to meet and provoke him to Battle.

Ali the Turkish General perceiving the strength and resolution of the
Christians, thought it prudence for a while to detract from Engagement, and
temper the usual mettle of the Ottoman fury with cooler Counsels of advantage,
which delays and opportunities of time would administer: for observing that the
Transilvanians were divided into Factions, he humoured the dissenting party,
The Turks Policy.
by constituting Michael Apafi their Prince; a person in the flower and
strength of his Age, of great parts and abilities; and one who violently
affected the Principality, having but lately purchased his freedom from
slavery. In this manner Apafi passing from his Prison and Chains, to the glory
and trouble of a Throne, poor Transylvania remained divided, and taking Arms
against her self, went daily working and contriving her own ruin. This has
always been the Masterpiece of the Turkish Policy, and this disunion amongst
Christians has availed the Ottoman Interest more than their Swords, and
confirmed their obstinacy in Religion with a Miracle, as if the division of
Christian Princes (which in late Ages have frustrated the holy designs against
this common Enemy) had been an effect of their Prayers, and a Concession of
Divine Providence to their daily Petitions. So now the Transilvanians being
divided, great numbers of them revolted from Kemenius to Apafi, Kemenius routed.
which not only weakened, but discouraged the Christian Army with fear and
confusion; amidst of which, Ali Pasha took his time to assault them, not far
from Cladiopolis; and being assisted by the advantageous conjuncture of the
present opportunity, so wholly discomfited them, that he killed and took 50000
persons, which was the Issue of the present union, and the exclusion of
Kemenius, who was now forced to abandon Transylvania, and seek his refuge in
Hungary.

Howsoever Kemenius could not here rest satisfied, but revolving in his mind
certain ways to recover his Principality, obtained from Montecuculi some German
Troops; with which, and with his own scattered Forces, which at length he had
collected into a Body, he resolved to try his Fortune once more with the Turks;
and joining Battle with them, not far from Presburg, he fought with a
resolution becoming the desperateness of his design; either that day to Die, or
to Triumph. The Fortune of that days conflict remained a long time doubtful; so
equal they seemed on both sides to be in their Courage, in their Force, and in
their Conduct, until at length the advantage of the Turks number prevailing,
Kemenius was forced to a disorderly retreat, Kemenius a second put time to
flight
and afterward to a confused flight; in which, being by one of his own
Soldiers knocked from his Horse was trampled under foot, and the greatest part
of his People remained a Sacrifice to the enraged Weapons of the Turks.

Apafi's party being greatly encouraged with this success, joining with a body
of the Turks, laid Siege to Claudiopolis, Claudiopolis besieged.
the Court of the Transilvanian Princes, now Garisoned by German Soldiers, and
Governed by David Retani, a right valiant and trusty Soldier, who omitting
nothing which might conduce to the defense and maintenance of the Town, either
by his care or valor, made many successful Sallies upon the Enemy, and tired
and wearied them out in their Siege; until at length General Schenidau then in
Hungary, gathering what force he could, which were not above 6000 Men, marched
with all haste possible to the relief of Claudiopolis; the report of whose
approach arriving the Turkish Camp before his Person, or Army, and the common
rumor and fear augmenting much their number; the Turks were so terrifyed
hereat, that in haste and disorder they forsook their Siege after three Months
continuance; leaving great quantities of Victuals behind for want of Carriages,
and Beasts of burden. Schenidau having gained this success and honor with so
much facility, he reinforced the Garrison, and returned with Triumph home; The
Siege raised.
carrying with him great Booties of Cattle and other spoils of the Enemy. The
defense of this place was accounted almost miraculous; for besides that the
Fortifications were after the Ancient Model, it was unprovided of Cannon and
other warlike Ammunition; and therefore we are not to pass by the Governor
Retani without due Commendations; whose valiant and generous spirit, with
courage equal to his diligence, knew how to fortify and to defend his Walls;
For out of the Town Bells he founded his Artillery; he daily wearied the Enemy
with Sallies, surprised one of their Batteries, which most annoyed the City;
composed the Mutinies of the Citizens within; and in short, against the Opinion
of all, he defended and maintained it in the possession and right of the
Emperor.

Claudiopolis being thus relieved, the Turks stomached inwardly the disgrace,
and yet thought it prudence for the present to dissemble; and therefore upon
some addresses made for Peace from Transylvania, and certain Propositions
tendered by the German Resident; the Vizier coumerfeited his inclinations
thereunto so far, that he prohibited all farther Acts of Hostility upon the
Frontiers.

Notwithstanding which, the rumor at this time running, of a Combination of
all Christendom against the Turk, with Men or Money, The Turks jealousy.
forwarded by the endeavors of the Pope, and the contrivances of Venice,
increased the former jealousy, and caused the Skirmishes on the Frontiers to be
more hot and frequent: And the Vizier being froward and choleric, and by
nature jealous; matters had immediately proceeded to an open rupture, had not
the German Pesident, by his Moderation and Prudence, represented affairs in the
smoothest guise of Peace, and delayed the War rather than composed it; so that
this whole Summer was spent in disputes, messages, and debates on both sides.

The Vizier designing this War in his Eye, and desirous to comply with the
vagrant humor of his Master, The Turkish Court removes to Adrianople.
who was weary of his Seraglio at Constantinople, resolved to transfer the
Turkish Court to Adrianople, so that toward the end of June they entered their
Tents without the City. But before they could dispose their affairs for to
depart, the Plague, which is the Epidemical Disease of this Country, and the
common distemper of the Summer Season, began to break forth and diffuse it self
through all parts of the City; that in a short time the Keys of many Houses
were brought to the Grand Signior for want of Pretenders and Heirs surviving to
possess them: In greater Houses of Pasha's and others, where have been a
Hundred and fifty persons, scarce five have remained alive for burial of the
others; what the fury of that Mortality might be, was best conjectured by the
daily account was kept of the Corpse carried out of the City, by the Gate only
of Adrianople, A great Plague at Constantinople.
which for some Weeks amounted (I speak moderately) to Twelve or thirteen
hundred a Day; it being observed amongst the Turks, when above a Thousand in a
Day are carried forth Dead by that Gate, that then Prayers are to be made to
Almighty God to withdraw that heavy judgment. At which time the Greek and
Armenian Patriarchs are likewise desired to offer up their Devotions, and
intercede with God for mitigation of the Pestilence; and the same Day in a
Field called Okmaidan, do all assemble, though divided apart, to pray against
the common Calamity, it not seeming vain to them, that every one should call
upon his God. Nor did the Plague rage only in the City, but the Ships and Turks
Saykes were infected in parts remote on the Black Sea, and the Propontis, so
that above a Hundred Sail were reported to be lodged at several Ports for want
of Seamen to navigate them home. The Camp also where the Grand Signior, and
Vizier remained, was not exempted from this common Contagion, for the necessary
intercourse between that and the City communicated the evil equal unto both,
strowing the ways with dead Bodies, in that manner as represented a passage
conducting to a Coemetery, or Charnel-house, rather than to a Martial Camp or
Court of a Great Emperor. This mortality hastened the Grand Signior with his
Army and Attendances into a better Air, the Vizier was to follow a few days
after, but before his departure he settled and constituted his Son Chimacam, or
Governor of Constantinople. Things in this confusion and haste not being well
provided for, the Grand Signiors reception at Adrianople caused him to prolong
his Journey by taking a compass round by the Castles at the mouth of the
Hellespont, and from thence went to Dimotochum, where having lingered out eight
or ten days more, he made a solemn entrance into Adrianople, which will for
some years following be discoursed in this History as the Seat of the Ottoman
Empire.

The time of this great Mortality was no season for us to move in business or
action, we and all other Christians avoiding common conversation, every one
consulting his particular safety. Howsoever two businesses brought our Lord
Ambassador to Town from his Country Retirement. One was to obtain justice from
the Vizier, on two miscreant Turks who had committed a Robbery on his Page and
Steward, as they were drinking at a Fountain near a place called Bauchasarai, a
Village inhabited by Greeks; the Steward by the swiftness of his Horse escaped,
but the Page being sickly and weak fell into their hands, and was grievously
wounded by them. The G. Viziers justice toward our Ambassador.
Complaints hereof being made to the Grand Vizier, he seemed much concerned at
the evil treatment of the Ambassadors servants; and therefore sent the Nayp of
the Kadi of Galata to take notice, and write down the Wounds which the Page had
received; and at the same time dispatched Officers into all parts adjacent, to
take the Thieves, and to examine, and torment the people in places where it
might be suspected only that they were harbored, and that nothing should be
neglected in order to this discovery. It is incredible with what diligence,
severity, and violence this command was executed, the people in the Villages
where they had lodged or been, or but passed through, were all seized; and the
men examined under the Cudgel, with Drubs on their feet; the men, women, and
children of Baucha-sarai were carried, and some of them in Chains, to our
Ambassadors House at Pera; and all the Countries round were so ill treated,
that their common safety was concerned in the taking of these Thieves, and the
allarum was by this time so far spread, that it was more pressing and urgent
than our Hue-and-Cry; in short, one of the Thieves was taken, and he discovered
the abode of his Companion, and both were brought to our Ambassadors House, and
there put into the Stocks, laden with Chains, and guarded by the Turkish
Officers. The next day they were carried before the Stambol-Efendi, or Recorder
of Constantinople, they confessed the fact, and Hoget or Sentence passed upon
them, which by Law could reach no farther than to the Galleys; but being
brought before the Vizier, he had a mind to stretch the Law, and their necks to
a farther extent, and so without other demur calling the Hang man, ordered him
to put Ropes about their necks, and to carry them to the Lord Ambassador,
following his directions for their execution; and so accordingly one was hanged
by the Fountain, and the other on a Tree at the entrance into the Village of
Bauche-sarai. This Exemplary justice raised the reverence, and fear of the
Countrypeople toward our Ambassador unto that degree, that during the time of
the Earl of Winchilsea, nothing of this nature ever passed again, but on the
contrary, the Paisants, and the people in the Countries round, honored and
feared him like one of their Pasha's, or great men.

The other business was of a different nature relating to the Emin, or Customer
of Aleppo, who being dismissed of his Employment was now come to
Constantinople; before his departure from Aleppo, he had demanded of our
Merchants there 16000 Dollars for Arrears of Custom due to him, on Silk and
other Goods; his pretense was false and unjust, howsoever it being usual for
Turks upon every demand to gain an advantage, the matter was compounded with
the Sum of 2500 Dollars, and so the Customer departed with an appearance of
perfect satisfactation; notwithstanding which coming to Constantinople he
renewed his pretensions again, and by the favor of the Reis-Efendi or
Secretary of State, so proceeded in his business, that the Lord Ambassador was
forced to make a second composition with 2000 Dollars.

The Grand Signior and Vizier, as we said before, being now at Adrianople, the
Viziers Deputy, called by the name of the Caimacam, governed Constantinople, to
whom our Ambassador, according to custom made a visit, presenting him with
eight Vests.

Likewise in absence of the Vizier, it being usual for the Ambassador to make a
Visit to the Bostangee-Bashee, or Head of the Gardiners; his Excellency passed
that Complement on him, and presented him with four Vests. This person though
entitled Head-Gardiner, is yet of great power, making a considerable figure at
Court; for he not only commands all the Gardiners belonging to the many
Seraglio's of the Grand Signior, which are very considerable in number, but his
Jurisdiction reaches all along the Bosphorus, and commands the Villages, Woods
and Countries at a far distance, so that he may in English be compared to the
chief Ranger.

It was now toward the Winter, Kuperlee sends for his Son.
when this Vizier Kuperlee, finding himself mature with Age, and ready to fall
like Autumn Fruit, sent for his Son from Constantinople to bear a share with
him in the Burden of the Empire. This he did with the consent of the Grand
Signior, for he alleged, that being now feeble and decayed, he could not make
his personal Addresses as formerly, nor attend at the Court to render his
Majesty an account of his Affairs; and therefore had need of so trusty a
Messenger as his Son, to carry his advices and directions, and faithfully to
communicate what he should encharge to his Relation; all others being on some
consideration or other suspected, and at least Enemies to him, or to the Grand
Signior. the Sultan accepting the proposition and the Person, had often
occasions of discourse and familiarity with the Son, called Ahmet, who deported
himself with that faith and prudence in the management of all his Affairs, that
the old Vizier had no great difficulty to procure a Grant of succession for him
in that Office: For though there were many obstacles therein, as the abhorrency
of the Turkish Policy from all hereditary succession in places of trust; and
the Youth of his Person, not exceeding thirty two years of Age, and some
emulous, powerful, and ancient Competitors, who hated the Father; Procures
Succession for his Son.
Yet the old Fox had so ingratiated himself with his Master, for (to speak
truly) he had been the only instrument that had preserved him and his Empire
from falling into as many Divisions as there are Pashalicks, or Governments,
that the Grand Signior gave credit to him as to an infallible Oracle, Procures
the Succession for his Son.
assuring him that before any other, who might either pretend Merit, Age, or
Precedence, his Son should be preferred to the Succession. The old Man
acknowledged the favor with all humility and thankfulness, declaring, that he
had now served his Majesty faithfully for the space of five years, a longer
proportion than commonly Viziers had managed that Office, in such tempestuous
and distracted times, who either for their own offenses, or want of Providence,
or good Conduct, have made shipwreck of their own lives, and the Charge they
piloted: But he had lived in the worst of times, when the spirits of men with
discontent were enflamed round about him, and threatened the ruin of their
Prince and Empire; and yet had reduced things to composure, and to the
obedience of the Ottoman Yoke, that now he that was the Sultan might incline
his Head to rest with security, and enjoy his pastimes and pleasures, without
being interrupted by those Conspiracies, which destroyed his Father, and
endangered him in his years of Infancy. And because the continuance of his
Security and Glory depended on the execution of certain Maxims, which he had
framed to himself, he was chalking out to his Son such undoubted Rules and
Doctrines of Government, as would certainly tend to the glory and prosperity of
the Empire, being abundantly satisfied that his Son was faithful, prudent, and
active. But three things he particularly recommended to his Majesty.

1. Never to give Ear to the Counsels and Advices of Women. Rules given to the
Grand Signior.
2. To amass what Treasure he could possible into his Coffers, though with
Oppression, and impoverishment of his People. 3. To be continually on
Horseback, and keep his Armies in constant Action.
On the 19th of October, Kuperlee dies.
Kuperlee having ended his days, whose Disease was Old Age, and a Gangrene in
his Legs, his Son by Hattesheriff, or the Grand Signior's Patent under his
hand, taking the Seal, was constituted Vizier in the place of his Father, to
the admiration and disappointment of the graver Seniors, who were discontented,
not only to perceive themselves neglected, but that person also to supplant
them, who was judged incapable of the Office, according to the Canon, and
ancient Precedents of this Government.

The Body of Kuperlee was transported to Constantinople, where in his life time
he had erected a very stately and magnificent Structure, and his Monument over
the Grave, or Vault, where he designed to be interred. In his life time he had
filled it with Corn, which daily was distributed to the poor, and being emptied
after his death, received his Corpse, over which a small Mosch was endowed with
Oil for Lamps, and maintenance of certain Talismans and Softaes, to make
Prayers and Offerings for his Soul.

The Father being thus interred, Pasha of Magnasia cut off.
Ahmet his Son began to contrive his own establishment, and to settle his
Greatness on the foundation of his Fathers Rules of Policy, from whom not to
degenerate in cruelty of Nature, or leave his Legacies unpaid to those he had
proscribed, he in the first place sacrificed the Blood of the Pasha of Magnasia
to his Fathers Ghost, with some other petty attendences; so that the World
perceived that they had changed the Vizier, but not his tyranny, or at least
the same spirit of the Father seemed to be renewed, transmitted again into the
Person of the Son. But more difficult it was to obtain the like success against
Mortaza, the Pasha of Babylon, and the Kayab-begh, or Lieutenant General of the
Janisaries, who were long before (as we have said) marked out for destruction
by his Father. For the first was the most powerful Pasha of all Asia, vigilant,
and active, and had done and merited great rewards from his Master, and
particularly in decoying, and cutting off the Head of the Grand Rebel Asan
Pasha, who dared the Sultan at the Gates of his Seraglio; but understanding the
ill will of the House of Kuperlee against him, stood always on his Guard,
lodging without the Wall of the City, and under the protection of his Arms and
Soldiers, who were greatly affected to the generosity of his Person; so that,
though many attempts were made upon him, and that Officers, or Executioners
came from the Court, openly tendering from the Sultan the Present of a Sword,
and Vest of Sables, the usual Signals of the Ottomon Grace, but privately
bringing a Bowstring, or a Halter; yet they were all entertained at a distance,
and returned again with the same dissimulation they had used in their feigned
Addresses. In like manner the Kayahbegh, an ancient, prudent, and experienced
Commander, beloved by the Soldiery, and secured by the Privilege of his
Office, (for a Kayah-begh cannot be cut off during his Command, without
infringement of the honor and order of the Janisaries) preserved still his
Station, and Command in despite of the Viziers hate and endeavors. But what
could not be done by mere virtue of the absolute Power, was effected under the
appearance of honor and favor of the Sultan, who by his Royal Commission,
having made him Pasha of Damascus, he was at the same instant deprived of his
Military Power and Privilege, and lay now naked and exposed to the Arbitrary
Pleasure and will of ^s Adversary. Nor could his prayers or tears incline the
Grand Signiors mind to reverse his Order, who, together with the Vizier, rather
enforced it with the specious pretext of Favor and Grace for his former
merits, and with commendation of his Abilitles agreeable to the importance of
so considerable a Government, increased the just suspicion of Solomon, Solomon
Pasha in disgrace.
(for so the Kayah-begh was called.) not being ignorant of the Turkish Proverb,
A Kayah-begh is like a Fish in the Water, which out of its Element immediately
dies. Howsoever, Tac. Lib. 14. Ann.
ut finis omnium cum dominante, grates agit, he acknowledges the favor of his
Master, and gave thanks for it, according to the Duty of a good Subject, who
ought to acquiesce in the sentence of his Prince, which, though never so full
of severity, ought to be believed, and called Clemency. The Vizier now hasted
Solomon Pasha to depart with all expedition, not allowing him above Four or
Five days time to make preparation for so long a Journey, which otherwise he
would have prolonged, as one, like the rest of Mankind, desirous to protract
the thread of Life, imagining that in his journey, at some distance, where his
Death might be most obscure, and least noted, the Edict of the Grand Signior
might overtake him, and find a Grave for him in some solitary Desert, or
unfrequented Mountain. Wherefore he made one Day an Address to the Vizier,
under pretense of taking his last farewell, and freely acquainted him with his
apprehension and his fears, desiring that he would deal as frankly with him, in
letting him know the utmost of his Fate, for that now he was in his hand, and
was so good a Proficient in the Mohammedan Religion, as to oppose nothing which
was his Destiny, or inconsistent with the Decree of the Sultan. The Vizier
reverencing the Years, and pitying the Condition of so worthy a Commander,
abased solely by his Power, bid him be of good cheer, assuring him of his Life,
so long as he acted nothing contrary unto his, which he confirmed by Vows, and
all imaginable Protestations, encouraging him to proceed forward to his
Government with those cheerful Words and Assurances, that Solomon Pasha taking
his farewell with more ease of mind, and confidence of Life, departed Adrianople
in three days after his designment to the new Office: He is sent away.
But not many days Journey had he advanced into Asia, before the Grand Signiors
and Viziers Commands overtook him, altering his design for Damascus, and
instead thereof ordered him a Pilgrimage unto Mecha, and exile into the remote
and desert parts of Arabia, until he should be thought worthy to be recalled by
that power which banished him. In like manner some few days after, the Mufti
being on a Friday seated in his place, in the Mosch of Sultan Selim (a very
noble and famous Fabric) and attending there the Grand Signiors entrance, that
he might begin his Prayers, was unexpectedly whispered in the Ear, that he
should retire and give place to another Mufti; which immediately he obeyed, and
in four hours departed Adrianople, being banished to Gallipoli, for his
Friendship (as was supposed) to Solomon Pasha, and for not passing the Fetfa
for his Death, according to the will and desire of the Grand Signior.

During the Transaction of these affairs in diverse parts, the Wars against the
Venetians were carried on faintly; the Galleys had no other design, or
employment, than to transport recruits of Men and Ammunition to Canea, that so
the Turks might rather keep the ground that they had gained in that Island,
than add thereunto by new Conquests, until such time as that being freed from
other Wars, they might have leisure and opportunity to attend unto that alone.
Accordingly the Captain Pasha set forth at the usual Season from
Constantinople; and arrived at Scio with twenty three Galleys, besides his own
called the Bastard-Gally, or Admiral; the advice of which, coming to the
Captain General of the Venetians, he hastened thither with all his Fleet to
besiege him in the Port: but this seeming after some days a tedious work, and
what might lose too much time; he resolved to depart from thence, and so
leaving a sufficient Guard before the Port, he set Sail with two Galleasses,
thirteen light Galleys, and seven Auxiliaries for the Coast of Rhodes; where
his Brigantines advised, that the remainder of the Turkish Fleet were Anchored,
and were taking aboard two thousand Soldiers for reinforcing Canea; but before
the Venetians could arrive, intelligence was given them by the way, that the
Turks were loosed from Rhodes, and were Anchored under the Island of Patmos;
wherefore altering their course, they steered for Nio, and there watering their
Vessels, sailed near to Nixia, where the Vanguard discovered five and thirty
Galleys of the Enemy, which had made prize of a Tartana laden with Provisions
designed for the Venetian Fleet, and having taken out her lading, had set her
on fire. The Venetians having their Enemy in their Eye, gave them chase until
the Evening, when the Night coming on, put an end to the pursuit: but keeping
their course toward Candia, they had sight again of them the next Morning, and
coming nearer, the Turkish Admiral put forth his Flag of Defiance, as if he
intended to come to a Battle; but the Wind blowing hard, and the Sea
increasing, both Fleets were separated until the Morning; when the Venetians
discovered certain of the Enemies Galleys to Leeward of Milo, where bearing
down before the Wind upon them, five of them ran ashore; one was sunk, and four
were taken by the Venetian and Maltese Galleys, three of which fighting with
great Courage and Valor, killed diverse brave Cavaliers of one and the other
Country. The men which ran the Galleys ashore at Milo, did it with design to
secure themselves in that small Fort which the Turks possessed in that Island;
but they were not able to withstand the valor of the Venetians, who having
first recovered the Cannon of the Galleys which were ran ashore, with their
rigging, and what else was useful, they set the Hulls on Fire; and immediately
entering the Port, the Captain General landed two hundred select men, and
veterane Soldiers to besiege the Fortress, giving Orders to one Manolacchi
Macchiotti, who was well acquainted with the Turkish Language, to summon them
to a Treaty, the which they readily accepted, and were received to quarter at
discretion of the General; the next Morning they were brought down to the
Seacoast to the number of about nine hundred, amongst which there was a
Janizar-Aga, a Bey of Rhodes, and three of Constantinople, besides Captains,
and other persons of condition and quality. These Prisoners being divided into
several Galleys and Ships, the Venetians departed, and cruising about the Coast
of Candia, to hinder the importation of all succors, they encountered with
Antonio Priuli, with a good Squadron of Vessels under his Command.

THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
The Second BOOK.
Anno Christi, 1662. Hegeira, 1073.
AT the beginning of this Year the People of Algier sent Messengers and
Presents to the Grand signiors Court, then at Adrianople, complaining against
the Actions His Majesty's Fleet, under the Command of the Earl of Sandwich, had
done against their Town and Castles, pretending those Forts to be the Grand
Signiors, and the Affront offered to him, as willing to interest him in their
Quarrels and Piracies. And that their Addresses might be more graciously
received, they brought with them certain Presents, which tho in former time
swear Yearly, were now only as their Affairs required, and on this occasion
were doubled: for besides their Presents to the Ministers and Officers of
State; they brought to the Grand Signior a Ship made in Silver, beset with
Emrods, Rubies, and other Stones; fourteen young and hansom Boys, and a neger
Eunuch for the Seraglio. But the Earl of Winchelsea, His Majesty's Ambassador
there Resident, being then at Court, had so well prepossessed the Vizier with
the Ground and Reasons for the War, that the complaints of Algier were judged
in no wise touching the Ottoman Interest, or the breach of Peace, any
Impeachment of the good Correspondence and Friendship which then intervened
between the King of England and the Grand Signior. But their Presumption to
search English Ships, and take out Strangers Goods, was objected as an Argument
of their Disobedience and Rebellion, contrary to the Grand Signiors
Capitulations, which also was aggravated by their ill Treatment of the Grand
Signiors Pasha, whom they had beaten, imprisoned, and cast out of all Power and
Authority; which severe Reprehensions so terrified and discouraged them, that
they not only desisted from their Pretensions against the English, but began to
fear, lest the Power and Interest of the Ambassador at Court, should contrive
some mischief to their own Persons.

Soon after this the Vizier esteeming it necessary toward his better
establishment to gratify the City of Constantinople, The Gr. Signior persuaded
to return to Constantinople.
and the Grandees of the Empire, by the Grand Signiors return to his Imperial
Seat, prevailed with him, (as a matter wholly necessary) to adorn and comfort
that place by his Presence; for now he began to declare a kind of abhorrency to
it, in regard the memory of those Rebellions which were nourished in that
place, to the Destruction of his Father, and to the great hazard and narrow
escape afterward of himself, had taken that Impression on his Fancy, that the
Chamber of the Seraglio appeared melancholy and dismal, and the Walks of his
Garden solitary, and the noise of the Rooks and Daws amongst his Trees, were
like the croakings of Ravens or unlucky Birds. Howsoever the Vizier had so far
entered into his Affection and Esteem, that his Persuasions were stronger than
his own absolute Dominion; and prevailed so with him against the force of his
own Fancy, that about the Equinoctial he began his Journey toward
Constantinople, to the great Joy and Satisfaction of his People: But by the way
lingering out his time in Hunting and other Pastimes of the Woods and Fields; it
was the 30th of March before he made his Entry, for never was Prince so great a
Nimrod, so unwearied a Huntsman as this; never was he at quiet, but continually
in the Fields on Horseback, rising sometimes at Midnight, to ride up the
Mountains, that he might more early discover the Sun in the Morning; by which
extravagant course of Life, he wearied out his Court and Attendants, who began
to believe the amorous humor of the Father more supportable, than the wandering
Vagaries, and restless Spirit of the Son. The Gr. Signiors extravagant Hunting.
But not only were his Huntings tedious to his Court, but troublesome and
expensive to the whole Country, which were all summoned in wheresoever he came,
and sometimes thirty or forty thousand men appointed to beat the Woods for
three or four days, carrying before them the compass of a days Journey about,
enclosing all the Game and wild Beasts within that Circuit, which on the day of
the Hunt, the Grand Signior kills and destroys with Dogs, Guns, or any other
way, with abundance of noise and confusion; which Pastime, tho lawful in it
self, and commendable enough in so great a Prince, yet the frequent use of it,
was a burden and an oppression to his People, whilst in the Winter they passed
many cold Nights in the Woods, and being unused to that hardship, many of them
paid for their Emperors Pastime with their own lives.

The Grand Signior being now at Constantinople, The Vizier endeavors to
establish himself.
the Vizier judged not himself so well fixed in his Government, but that
through the Malice of his powerful Enemies, who were familiar to the Grand
Signiors Ear, he was then in danger to be shaken; the principal of which was
Kuzlir Aga, or chief Eunuch of the Women of the Seraglio, who by means of the
Valede, or Queen Mother, was ill-affected to him, being both inclined to prefer
some Favorites of their own, for the Diminutition and Eclipse of the Viziers
Power, one whereof was the Tefterdar Pasha, or Lord Treasurer, placed in Office
against the Viziers Approbation, which the Vizier understanding, made short
Work with him, depriving him of his Office, commanded him in a few hours to
quit Constantinople.

But the Queen Mother, and Kuzlir Aga resentting this Affront to their
Favourie, resolved to even scores in a piece of the like Nature: Wherefore they
obtained for the Viziers Kahya, or Steward, the Pashalick of Darbiquier, a rich
and honorable Government, not for any disaffection or hatred they had unto
him, but only to deprive the Vizier of the Counsel and Assistance of so knowing
and faithful a Servant; for he was a Person, who by his own Estate and Friends
had raised the House of Kuperlee, having in the time of his Poverty and
Meanness lent him that Sum of Money, which gave him the first Rise to his
Richess and Authority; for Recompense and Interest of which, old Kuperlee made
him his Steward, and shared to him his Honors and Prosperity; in which
deporting himself toward all People with the same modesty and evenness of
Temper which he used in his former Condition, he procured no Enemies to his own
Person, and such as hated the Interest he served, only wishing him disobliged
from it, so as to be able to dispense their Malice on the Vizier, without
concerning him in his Masters ruin. This consideration moved the angry Lady,
and the envious Eunuch to vex their Adversary by the removal of his most
faithful Creature and Servant.

Mahomet Kahya now Pasha of Darbiquier, after a reasonable and convenient time
allowed him for his Preparations, being very rich, set forward toward his
Government, with a very noble and numerous Retinue, having amongst the rest
five hundred Persons young, well mounted, and well armed; which notwithstanding
were not so strong, but before they were advanced many days Journey into Asia,
A notable Robber^.
were encountered by a greater force of bold and desperate Robbers, who engaging
with him, killed two hundred of his People on the place, rifled his Baggage,
and constrained the Pasha himself to fly to the next City. This strange and
audacious Robbery produced many Commands and Orders for Seizure and Suppression
of Theives in the lesser Asia. And because the custom is, that something must
be done in Compliance with the Imperial Commands, many poor innocent Men were
taken in the Fields and Mountains, and perhaps without any other Crime against
them, than that they were not masters of a thousand Aspers to bribe the
Officers, were for want thereof sent as Thieves to the Port, where without
further Conviction or Trial they were executed.

The Vizier being thus weakened by the removal of his faithfullest Friend, his
Condition was given over as desperate by the generality of the World, and
several appearances of Troubles arising from the Eastern and Western parts,
gave occasion to the Queen Mother, and her Party, to disparage his Abilities in
the esteem of the Sultan: Wherefore they exhorted him to imitate the Example of
his Renowned Predecessors, who made use of their Viziers only to ease them from
the troublesome part of their Government, but did not entirely throw off the
Knowledge and Privity of the important Transactions and State Affairs in the
whole Empire. This Lesson awakened the Grand Signior a little, so that he
declined some days his Sports abroad, and Exercise on Horseback, and instead
thereof passed much of his time in a Chiosk, or Garden-house on the Wall of the
Seraglio, just opposite to the Viziers Gate, where his chief Business and
Concernment was to observe such as went in, or came out; and when at any time
he espied those enter, remarkable for their Attendance, or difference of Habit,
he would send to know of the Vizier, what occasion drew those People thither,
what their Business was, and the like, by which he gave himself that
Satisfaction as to believe that he had now found the true way of inspecting his
Affairs, and taking care of his Empire. The Queen Mothers Enmity to the Vizier.
The Vizier was not insensible from whence this humor of the Gr. Signior
proceeded, nor ignorant what ill Consequences such petty matters might produce;
wherefore he resolved, if possible, to reconcile the favor and good will of
the Valede, or Queen Mother, but all his Addresses (it seems) were returned
fruitless; so difficult was it to appease the Malice of a feminine Spirit; and
this malice She so ill concealed, that it was often said by Turks of Quality
and Judgment, That the Great Viziers Mother, who entertained a Familiarity with
Spirits, as they believed, had by their Enchantments procured the Office of
Vizier for her Husband and Son successively, and prevailed still to preserve
her Son in the favor of his Master, yet could not by force of Magic get Power
or Dominion over the Valede; No Spells, it seems, had virtue enough to qualify
the Spirit of that angry Juno. Some hereupon judged, that the Vizier might have
thoughts to make Resignation of his Office, and to content himself with some
Pashalick of a higher and more eminent Degree; but Apprehensions and Jealousies
of their Dangers, and his own natural Ambition, soon stifled those
Considerations, resolving to continue his Charge in Opposition to all the
Difficulties and Dangers he might encounter. And perhaps he gave himself the
same Counsel which the Vitellian Soldiers did to their General. Tacit. Lib.
Hist. 3.
Nihil atrocius eventurum, quam in quod sponte ruant, moriendum victis,
moriendum deditis; id solum refer, no vissimum Spiritum, per ludibrium and
contumelias effandant, an per Virtutem. Men who must dye, whether they yield or
are conquered by force, have the same Fate; all the difference is, that the one
dies with Valor and Reputation, the other with Reproach and Cowardice. But to
execute this stout Counsel with Prudence and Wisdom, he conceived it necessary,
if possible, to reconcile the sincere Friendship of Samozade, the Reis Effendi,
or Chief Secretary of State, a Person the best practiced of any, in the Affairs
and Nogotiations of the Ottoman Empire, and one much in the Esteem and Favor
of the Queen Mother, and in order thereunto treats him with more Familiarity
and Condescension than was ordinary, or by many judged agreeable to the
Greatness of a Grand Vizier; for always when he came into his Presence, he
arose up, calling him secretly Father, Tutor and Companion, in supporting the
Burden of the weighty Government, and such other Compellations, as the Grand
Signior vouchsafed only to the Vizier: for tho this Reis Effendi was of the
greatest Abilities, and this present Vizier the most youthful and unexperienced
of later Times, yet it may be accounted one special mark and token of his
Prudence, in knowing how to elect so useful a Friend, and of his Policy in
procuring his sincere faithfulness toward him, and making him really his own.
To which end he conversed much with him, communicated all his thoughts, freely
demanded his advice, received his private Entertainments, and in fine, was
wanting in no points of affable Courtesy and Compliance, whereby he might
create him his own, contenting for some time himself with the name of Vizier,
tho the other as one, who best knew how to manage it, enjoyed the Power.

The Chief Officers of the Seraglio, That is, of the Hazoda, or Royal Chamber.
instigated by the Queen Mother to diminish something the Power of the Vizier,
put often the Grand Signior in mind, as a matter agreeable to his Dignity, to
have a regard to his Government, which caused him more frequently than his
humor served, to betake himself to his Choisk over against the Viziers Gate,
to make his usual Observations; and perceiving some Christians to enter the
Court with red Calpacks or Caps, and yellow Shoes (prohibited to Christians by
orders of inferior Magistrates, but never until now thought worthy the Imperal
Observance) immediately called for the Subashee or Constable of Constantinople,
and from the Window commanded him with great Fury to enter the Viziers Court,
and such Christians as he should find there with yellow Shoes and red Caps he
should first beat, and then send uncovered and barefooted home. The Subashee
armed with a Power in this matter as high as the Viziers, entered the House
without Complement or License, and encountering first the Kapikahya's or Agents
of Moldavia and Valachia negotiating the Affairs of their Prince and Country,
he rudely laid them down, and without Respect to their Persons or Office, beat
them on the Feet, tore off their red Stockins and Caps, and sent them home with
their Heads and Feet bare, derided by the People, The Gr. Signiors severe
Prohibition of yellow shoes, and red Calpacks to Christians.
and lamenting the Affliction of that Tyranny to which they were subjected.
This inhumane Treatment of Persons in a manner sacred, was seconded by public
Proclamations, strictly prohibiting all Christians from wearing red Caps,
yellow Shoes, scarlet Vests, and the like; and Janissaries from the use of
Hanjars or Daggers, and silk Turbants, upon pain of Death; which Order was so
strictly enjoined, that the Corners of every Street were furnished with
Officers to observe, and punish such as were found to offend. The Grand Signior
Rimself judged also the Execution of this Order of that importance, as to
deserve his own proper Care and Inspection; wherefore walking abroad, as his
manner was, in disguise, with his Executione at hand, encountered in the Streets
an unfortunate Bridegroom, an Armenian, who that day, on privilege of his
Espousals, had adventured to dress himself with yellow leathern Soks: nothing
was, or could have time to be pleaded in his behalf, before the fatal Blow was
struck, which sent him to his Grave instead of his Nupital Bed. This fury
continued some few days with much rigor, and strict observation, but
afterward growing cold again, all care was neglected, happening herein, as
commonly it does in all things, which have no other foundation than humor and
fancy.

But this inspection into petty matters did not so much disturb the thoughts of
the Vizier, as did the power and greatness of Mortaza the Pasha of Babylon, by
the Turks called Bagdat, a person of an undaunted Courage, and great Conduct,
whom he had hitherto suffered to live, contrary to the true knowledge of his
interest, and the Rules his Father had left him: wherefore he resolved to renew
his design and attempts against his Life, one I remember was in December of the
past Year, when in our Journey to Adrianople, we met a Messenger on the way,
who amongst other Discourses informed us, that he was then going to Bablyon for
confirmation of Mortaza, and as a testimony of the G. Signiors favor and good
will toward him, he carried him a Sword, and a Vest of Sables: we immediately,
and that truly, guessed for what Present the Sword was sent; for in some Months
after the Chaous-bashee, or chief of the Pursuivants, returned without delivery
of his Present. The Vizier seeks to cut of Mortaza the Pasha of Babylon.
For the wise Mortaza was so justly Jealous, that he would not so much as admit
him to his Presence, but returned him again with his Sword and Sables for those
who were more easy and credulous, and who believe to dye by Command of the
Sultan to be Martyrdom, and the only Crown of all their Merits and Deserts: and
knowing that he could not long subsist in Opposition to so great an Enemy; he
contracted an Alliance by Marriage with a Daughter of one of the Gordean, or
Curdean Princes, and in Dowry had one of the strongest Forts of those Mountains
delivered into his hands.

The Vizier finding himself thus foiled in his occult Artifices, began
publicly to profess his Enmity; and therefore in the first place persuaded the
Grand Signior, that the long continuance of Mortaza in that Government, beyond
the usual term, so Opulent and Powerful, and of a Spirit so Ambitions and
Rebellious, could not but prove dangerous to himself, and in time give him
Confidence of Competition for the whole Empire; which hazard to prevent with
most prudence and advantage, (there being a present occasion of good Soldiers
for relief of Candia) Mortaza and his Accomplices could not be better bestowed
than upon that Employment. The Grand Signior readily consented to his Counsel,
being naturally very apprehensive of Danger, and in his place constituted the
Aga, or General of the Janissaries, posting him away with all speed-possible to
his Government; who did not run so fast in his Journey, but that the advices of
the coming of a new Pasha, arrived timely the Ears of Mortaza, who judging it
an unequal match to contend with the whole Empire, gave way to his Successor,
but withal, kept himself so on his Guard, that his Adversary could not reach
his Head, and send it as the first fruits and Tribute of his new Office. For
yielding up his command as in an honorable manner of Retreat, he gave out,
that with his Army (reported to consist of Forty thousand Men) he was on his
March to Candia, but soon after his design was discovered to be otherwise; for
believing his own Force unable to contend with his Masters, he retired with his
richess, and some of those most faithful to him, unto his Fort on the
Mountains, and to the Protection and Country of the King of the Curdi, whose
Daughter he had Married, and remained in Epectation of time and opportunity, to
take his revenge on the Vizier, hoping that with time this storm would blow
over, and that the Beams of his Princes Favor would again shine upon him.
Curdi.
These Curdi are called by some Writers Cordiaei, from whence the Province had
the name of Gordiene, bordering on Assyria, the Kingdom once of Zabienus, who
siding with Lucullus against Tigranes King of Armenia, was by Tigranes murdered
with his Wife and Children. These People inhabit the Mountain Amanus, dividing
Syria from Cilicia, which by reason of the difficult access thereunto, was
never yet subjected to the Ottoman Yoke; they are said in former times to have
worshipped a black Dog, and dare not speak ill of the Devil, not for love, but
fear. But some report, that have lately been amongst them, that they have left
off that hellish Superstition, and embrace a certain sort of Religion mixed
with Christianity and Turcism; but yet without Baptism or Circumcision. In
brief, they are a bad sort of gross People at the best, contenting themselves
with little Religion, addicted to Blood and Robberies. These Curdi or
Gordeenes, being a people retired, keep within their Mountains, are shy in
their Conversation and Discourse, and afford us little subject, or opportunity
of knowing with any Satisfaction, their Religion or Manners; but from such of
our Countrymen, as have lately entertained Society with them, we have this
account. They are seated on those Mountains, as we have said before, which of
old are called Cordiaei or Gordiai, beginning near Aleppo, but running out as
far as Persia; they make show of the Turkish Religion for fear, but have in
reality another of their own, which permits them to eat Swines Flesh, and drink
Wine, as the Druses and Kalbeenes; Bacon being esteemed by them a particular
Cordial, or Restorative for the Sick. The chief Country and City of those near
Aleppo, is called Jeumee, where they have a Convent of twelve Priests with a
Superior over them, and another of the like sort near Mosul or Nineveth. The
two Chiefs of these Monasteries meet at fixed times to consult for the good of
the Commonweal. Their Devotions are private in a Cave; they tell us of but one
Book, which contains both their Law and their Rituals; being asked what they
thought of our Savior, they answered, he was their Breath, and their Soul; at
the name of Mahomet they Spit, and with Nicodemus his Circumspection and
Assurance of Secrecy, they declared, themselves and Christians the same, which
they would make appear so soon as they were delivered from their fear of
Bondage to the Turk. They say that they worship God, and will not curse the
Devil, to which no Force or Power can compel them partly, perhaps because they
have heard of our Saviors Precept, Bless, and Curse not, but rather, because
they hold, that the Devil and his Followers shall one day be restored to their
former seats of Blessedness and Dignity. When their Priests are together, and
Wine brought in amongst them, the Superior makes a sign for Silence, and
afterward a short Admonition, that Wine is the Blood of God. I have heard that
a Capuchin Friar was once invited amongst them, with Promise to give him a
sight of their Book of Rituals, and being come to Jeumee, was detained a day or
two in a Cave, on pretense that the other Superior of Mosul was then amongst
them, who being a severe Person, if he knew of his being there, would certainly
put him to Death, as one who came to alter their Religion; upon which Suspicion
the Capuchin forgetting his Curiosity, fled for safety, with all speed
possible. Their Priests are said to be Grave, wearing black throughout; their
Garments plaited or quilted; the Vestures of the Commonalty are agreeable to
Mountainiers, whose Natures are Rough and Boisterous, addicted to Blood and
Robbery, the common Vice of those People. I have heard, that the Son of a
Gourdeene Widow being killed by some of that Country, She assembled her nearest
Kindred, and required them to bring her the Windpipe of the Murderer, which
when they had done, She together with her Friends, eat in it Revenge. In fine,
their Religion may have some small Relics of Christianity, but mixed with the
dregs of other Religions. It Is possible they may be of the Manichee Race. Their
Opinion of the Devils Restoration, was once held in part by Origin: that of
Wine (that it is the Blood of God) was the Heathenish conceit of the Egyptian
Priests. Their whole Nation, if well united, may compose an Army of thirty or
forty thousand Men.

But to return to our purpose. The news of the Flight of Mortaza to this
Ignoble Prince, troubled the Grand Signior, who still retained some Impressions
of kindness to his Person, remembering his Generosity, Valor, and former
Deserts, the memory of which was increased also by the Friends of Mortaza, who
wanted not in the Court to represent them with some Compassion, arguing that
his flight was not of Contumacy or Contempt to his Masters Protection, but an
effect of natural Preservation; which worked so far on the Grand Signior, that
he immediately sent for the Vizier to enquire of him the State and Condition of
Mortaza. The Vizier to defend himself, and make good what before he had
counseled his Master, aggravated his Adversary's Crimes, and his Disobedience
and Flight to an inconsiderable King; with which, and some other light Excuses
and Persuasions, that the removal of such a Person was agreeable to the present
State of Affairs, and conducing to his own Security, easily pacified the Mind
and Affections of the Grand Signior; but no sooner was he returned to his
House, but advice was given him, that the Emaum of Mortaza, or his Priest or
Chaplain, was then at Constantinople, whom the Vizier immediately sent for, and
without any Plea or Indictment, struck off his Head, and threw his Body into to
the Sea, on pretense that he was sent thither, as a Spy for his Master, and to
give Intelligence, and a beginning to Rebellion: These were his colors and
allegations for his deserved Death; for Governors though never so wicked and
so absolute, and that have no need to render any other cause to the World of
their actions, than their own will, yet esteem it necessary to act under the
specious guise of justice, and in the good opinion of the multitude. The Aga of
Babylon encountered the same Fortune; for Mortaza giving place, he thought it
fit for himself to do the like; resolving for Constantinople, but being
intercepted in his Journey by the new Pasha, his Head was struck off, and his
Journey shortened.

But that which again renewed the trouble and fears of the Vizier, was a report
that the late Kahya-begh degraded at Adrianople, was secretly returned to the
City, and lived concealed, giving such Orders to the Janissaries as tended to
Mutiny and Insurrection, and that the pretenses and reports of his being gone
to Damascus, and thence in his holy Pilgrimage to Mecha, were but all false
stories to conceal his Residence at Constantinople. This set the Vizier all on
fire, and made him tremble with the thoughts of it; wherefore search was made
for him day and night, but not found; for in reality he as gone on his designed
Journey, only it was the misfortune of his Kahya, or Steward, as before it was
of Mortaza's Emaum, to fall into the Viziers hands, who being beaten to confess
where his Master was, died afterward of the blows.

But notwithstanding that Mortaza was fled, yet the Vizier laid not aside his
fears and thoughts concerning him, not knowing how soon he might be recalled
home, and seated in his place; of which various Examples are extant in Turkish
History; and therefore he sent orders to Mahomet Pasha, his late Kahya, now
Pasha of Darbiquier, as General (with the knowledge and consent of the Grand
Signior) and to the Pashaws of Aleppo, Erzirum and others near adjacent, to
prepare and assemble what Force was necessary to constrain the King of the
Curdi, to surrender Mortaza into their hands: But whilst these matters were in
agitation, some unexpected troubles in Georgia diverted their Arms, and held
them for some time in suspense, not knowing what the issue might be. The
Original and Ground thereof was this: The Provinces of Georgia in disturbance.
After Sultan Solomon had taken Erzirum, it was agreed in the Capitulations
between the Turks and Persians, that of the seven Provinces of Georgia
(anciently called Iberia, but now as supposed to have received the Denomination
from St. George, the Cappadocian Martyr, there had in great esteem and
reverence) three should be tributaries to the Turk, and three to the Persian,
all governed by Achic-bash as head and supreme Prince, to whom the Seventh
should also be subjested, without acknowledgment to either; in payment of which
Tribute, they continued most willingly, lest for default thereof, the
importation of Salt, of which their Provinces afford none, should I be hindered
either from the Turkish, or Persian Dominion. And now it happened that
Achic-bash dying, his Wife married again, who to gratify her new Lover, was
contented to have the eyes of her Son put out, who was the lawful Heir to the
Government. This Fact was so hainously received by the Princes of the three
Provinces under the Persian, that with common consent, they elected one to
succeed Achic-bash, and extorted the power out of the hands of the Amorous
Traitor. The Princes of the three Provinces under the Turk alarmed hereat, made
insurrection, resolving rather than any Foreigner, to set up one of the Kindred
of Achic-bash, which the Persian Provinces better understanding, approved
likewise, and for confirmation, and maintenance of their choice, assembled an
Army of Threescore thousand men. The Pashaws tending toward Curdi, were
surprised in their March with the news of these disturbances in Georgia, and
not rightly apprehending the causes of these sudden commotions, gave an arrest
to the progress of their Arms, inclining toward the parts of Georgia, to be in
a readiness to suppress all designs against the Ottoman Dominions, so that the
thoughts of War against the Curdi was for some time laid aside. The news of
these troubles did also alarm the Port, with which also came a report, That six
hundred Tents of the Kuzilbashees (which are the best sort of Persian Horsemen)
were pitched nigh the Confines of the Grand Signiors Territories; so that
Orders were dispatched to the aforesaid Pashaws to watch the motion and issue
of those Affairs, but those storms blowing over by the establishment of
Achic-bash, the Turkish Forces proceeded on their first design against Mortaza,
marching to the pass of the Country of the Curdi, which is very steep, asperous
and rough. The whole Kingdom being, as it were, one Mountain of dangerous and
difficult access, has hitherto preserved the Inhabitants from the Ottomon
Subjection. The entrance thereunto being strong by Nature, is also fortified
with several Castles, the chief of which, possessed by Mortaza, is called
Zizri, and the People there abouts Zezidi. The Turkish Army being arrived at
this pass, Mahomet, the Pasha of Darbiquier, appointed General, as we have said
before, ordered five hundred of his select men to enter within the pass, which
the Curdi perceiving, with little opposition, put to flight, being so commanded
by the General; the unadvised Curdi eagerly pursuing the enemy, left the pass
naked, and undefended, supposing their whole victory and success to consist in
the Rout of those few: Whereupon the Turkish Army wisely possessed the pass,
and got between the Curdi, The Turks Stratagem against the Curdi.
and their place of Retreat, and laying the Siege to the Castle, required them
either to surrender themselves, or else Mortaza and his Accomplices into their
hands.

The Curdi perceiving themselves thus hardly beset, and in a manner defrauded,
their Garrison which possessed the pass without the Confines, the Enemy gotten
possession of the Gate which opened to their Country, their Castles besieged,
and in danger to be gained, and an inlet made to an Inundation by their
Enemies, caused them to request a three days truce for Consultation, which
being granted, they began to consider, whether it were better to hazard the
welfare of their Country in a dangerous War, of which the Turks having already
compassed the passage, had made half the Conquest; or to surrender up Mortaza
to his own King, one in whom they had no part, no interest, nor relation. The
latter Counsel was most generally pleasing; wherefore they seized Mortaza,
promising at first to conduct him through the Mountains to the Persians; but
afterward being on Horseback, and about a Mile distant from the Camp, they
bound his hands behind him, and with his Steward, the Master of his Horse, and
a Page, delivered him into the hands of the Turks, The surrender of Mortaza
into the Turks hands, and his death.
who immediately str^ck off their heads, and sent them to Constantinople, where
for three or four days they lay before the Door of the Divan, with Inscriptions
on them whose they were, and afterward were thrown into the Sea. And thus
ended this famous Mortaza, who had in like cases, by order of this Viziers
Father, been an active Executioner of other Pashaws, and now included in the
same Fate, by means of the Son, being proscribed (as we have said before) by
Testament, and the most likely of any Pasha in the Empire to stand in
competition for the Office of Vizier.

The Vizier upon this success began to show a more cheerful Countenance than
formerly, suspecting less of danger upon removal of so suspicious an Enemy. And
truly it was now hard to say where in the whole Empire was a generous, bold, or
ambitious spirit remaining, who had Reputation and Authority enough to attempt
a priority, such havoc was made by this Viziers Father of all hopeful and
daring dispositions, and such an Addition made to the slaughter by this man in
present Office, that whether men's spirits were vanquished, and cowed with
former Examples, or that the Age really afforded not such Heroes, it is hard to
say: None now appearing other than obsequious to this Vizier, and to fear, and
court him.

The Vizier having thus successfully contrived his Establishment, and security
at home, had time to confirm it by his Wars abroad, well judging that foreign
Wars allay Civil Dissentions, and the Prosperity thereof does both produce
reputation and terror of his Person amongst his Enemies, as well as reconcile
affections, and increase Authority amongst his subjects at home. Wherefore he
meditated on a War against the Emperor, and was glad to embrace the occasion
from the late Disturbances made in Transylvania by Kemenius, as we have related
in the former Year. But yet like a crafty Politician, who looks one way, and
steers another; so the Vizier, that he might the better lull the Germans into a
sleep, and apprehensions of security, he dissembled his inclinations to Peace,
and to hearken to such propositions as were tendered him by the German
Resident, namely, that the Fort of Serini should be demolished; being built
against the intention, and without the knowledge or consent of his Imperial
Master; that the Garrisons of Zechelhid, Coloswar, and other places should be
removed, with other overtures, and the fairest Propositions imaginable, which
might give the Turks satisfaction, and by some means or other reconcile the
differences, if possible. The resolution of War uncertain.
To which counsel the Emperor was the rather inclinable, in regard that a
Treaty at that time was on foot between the French King, and the Duke of Lorain
for Alsatia, and that the result might prove prejudicial to the Empire, should
he at the same time be engaged in a War against the Turk, whilst as dangerous a
friend as the other was an Enemy, crept easily into a suspected Neighborhood.
But the other Christian Princes, especially Rome, and the Allies, engaged in
the Venetian Quarrel, perceiving the Emperor to detract from his resolutions of
War, upon this suspicion, endeavored to clear him from all jealousy in
reference to the French designs, and for better evidence thereof, had their own
engagements seconded by Protestations from that King, not only not to molest
the Empire during this War, but to afford him considerable aid and assistance
both in Men, and Money. These Negotiations and incitements to a War, encouraged
the Emperor, and the German Princes in that manner, that whilst the Turks
expected the return of the Currier from Vienna, as it were (...) an Oliver
Branch of Peace, and Confirmation of all Articles, which before were esteemed
to be concluded, and agreed; the Scene was wholly changed, and the Letters
contained new demands and propositions, and in fine, made all doubtful and
unsatisfactory. The Turks penetrating rightly into this Affair, pressed hard to
have a speedy Peace, or War; wherefore the Reis Effendi, or Secretary of State,
did at a private Conference with the German Minister in name of the G. Signior,
and in few words declare, That three months were allotted to demolish the Fort
built by the Count Serini, and for coming of an extraordinary Ambassador to
confirm the Articles: Notwithstanding which, the Grand Signior unmindful of the
time, and of the Conditions he had given, and prefixed for Peace, ordered the
Vizier immediately to prepare for the War, declaring that he would in Person
accompany him in part of his March, and remove his Court to Adrianople; for
this being a Country, champian, and plain, full of Game of all sorts, so drew
the heart and delight of the Grand Signior, that his Seraglio at Constantinople
seemed as a Cage, or Prison, in respect of those desired Plains of Thrace: His
Women were no pastime or recreation to him, in whose Apartments he spent little
time: For this excessive humor in Hunting made him daily to press the Vizier
to depart for Adrianople, not that he had so real a desire to the War, as he
had to his Game; which gave occasion to that ordinary Saying amongst the Turks,
That the Grand Signior had left some Hares behind him at Adrianople, and would
return to seek them. At length the Vizier not longer able to resist his
importunity without his displeasure, summoned a Council of all the Viziers of
the Bench, where also the Janisar Aga was present, to consult concerning the
time of their departure, at which they unanimously concluded, that for diverse
Reasons, it was most necessary to defer this expedition until the next Spring.
First, Because that three months time were already given to the Emperor for
sending his Extraordinary Ambassador. Secondly, The Reason why the Turks
deferred the War with the German.
Because in so short a time, Provisions could not be sent into those Parts for
relief of the Camp. Thirdly, Because the Soldiers which were abroad could not
have timely notice to repair to their Colors. Fourthly, Because many Soldiers
had begun to rebuild their houses destroyed by the late Fires, which by the
Spring they might see finished. And lastly, That the Summer being now almost
spent, was not so fit for action, as the Spring, which gives new life and blood
to men, as well as sap and moisture unto Vegetables. These Reasons being
represented with all humility to the Grand Signior, he seemed to rest
satisfied, and his heat of visiting Adrianople for the present allayed. And in
the mean time, that the design against Germany might be the more covertly
carried, it was given out that the preparations were intended against the
Venetian Territories in Dalmatia, (viz.) Zara, Sebenico, and Cataro, and
Proclamation was made that all Soldiers should prepare themselves for the Wars
against the next Spring. In which Interim no accident intervening which might
bring matters to an accommodation and better understanding, the daily
Skirmishes on the Frontiers made the Controversy every day more difficult to
be reconciled, and the breach the wider. The Count Serini also proceeded in
finishing the Fortification he had lately raised near Canisia; and the other
Commanders of the Cesarean Army seeing the great progress of the Turks in
Transylvania, secured Claudiopolis, Somoswar, Sechilhid, Clewar, alias
Coloswar, and Betlem, with some other Towns and Fortresses. The Turks on the
other side, The sad Condition of Transylvania.
under the Command of Ali Pasha, penetrate into the very Center of
Transylvania, and conceiving a jealousy of War from the passages before
mentioned, lost no time to take their advantages, so that the Pasha of Varadin
not contenting himself with that Country, and limits formerly prescribed for
maintenance of his Fortress, adjoined to his Jurisdiction what Villages and
Towns he thought fit, the whilst the poor Prince Michael Apafi, though made by
the Turks, durst not lift a hand, or interpose the least Obstacle or Impediment
to his quiet progress, or peaceable possession, which so harrassed the People
of the Country, and wrought that misery and destruction therein, that the
Prince, deprived of his power in Government, and disabled by oppression to pay
his Annual Tribute, had no hopes of redress, but from the assistance of Divine
Providence, governing the hearts of Christians and Turks to compassionate the
misery of his Country. Wherefore he craved the assistance of the Emperor, and
of the King of Poland, acquainting other Christian Princes more remote of the
sad estate of the Christian Cause; he sent also his Ambassadors to the Port
with most submissive Letters to the Vizier, complaining against the Pasha of
Varadin, and craving his Commands for retirement of his Army, within their due
and ancient bounds. Letters were also directed to the Public Representatives
of Christian Princes residing at Constantinople, one of which was directed to
the Earl of Winchelsea, his Majesty's Ambassador, which being that which may
conduce to the more full understanding of the present deplorable Condition of
Transylvania, I thought fit to be here mentioned.

Excellentissime Domine, and Amice observandissime,
AFflictiones Regni Transilvaniae quibus per complures annos justo Dei Judicio
castigatur, The Prince of Transilvania's Letter to His Majesty's Ambassador.
toti Orbi Christiano manifestae sunt, nec possumus non fateri, inter duos
Potentissimos Monarchas adeo indies hoc Regnum coangustari, ut nisi
extraordinaria Dei clementia aliquod subsequatur levamen, vix, immo ne vix
quidem, diu duraturum credamus. Sed ut ad rem proximius collimemus.
Potentissimus Imperator per Legatos Regni, and nostros nunc reduces
Clementissimum suum patrocinium pollicetur, interim autem Passa Varadinensis
non contentus Villis ac Pagis ad dictam Arcem pertinentibus, usque ad
meditullium plane Transilvaniae, metu Mortis, integras ad deditionem cogit
Regiones, quae nunquam eidem Arci applicatae fuerant, nec possible est
Principatum Transilvaniae iis ademptis, ulterius persistere, Tributumque annuum
persolvere posse. Qua de re tam Potentissimum Imperatorem quam Supremum
Vezirium denuo requirere cogimur, vestram quocirca Excellentissimam
Dominationem confidenter rogamus, eo quo convenientius putaverit modo continuo
nostro Oratori opitulari, eaque qua pollet Authoritate Causam promovere, ne
gravetur rem non saltem Transilvaniae, verum quoque Christianitati perutilem
factura, nosque ad vincula amicitiae arctissime devinctura, cui felicem vitam
precamur, and manemus indubitati.

Datum in Castris ad Pagum Koczard positis die 26 Septembris, An. Dom. 1662.
Excellentissimae Dominationis vestrae Amicus Benevolus, Michael Apafi.


In English thus.

Most Excellent Lord, and most worthy Friend,
THe Miseries of Transylvania, with which for many years, by the just Judgment
of God, we have been afflicted, are manifest to all the Christian World; nor
can we but confess, how between two most Potent Monarchs, our Principality is
so daily straightened, that unless through the extraordinary Mercy of God, we
obtain some relief, we believe not our selves longer able to subsist. But to
come nearer to our Business. The Most Potent Emperor, by his own Ambassadors,
and ours now lately returned, has promised us his most Gracious Protection;
yet notwithstanding, the Pasha of Varadin not content with the Towns and
Villages appropriated unto his Castle, has entered into the very middle of
Transylvania, and has compelled, for fear of death, those Provinces entirely
to yield themselves, which never before were belonging to his Fortresses, which
being taken away, it is impossible for the Principality of Transylvania longer
to subsist, and pay its annual Tribute; wherefore we are constrained again to
beseech the most Potent Emperor, and the Supreme Vizier, as also we confidently
desire your Excellency, in that manner which your Excellency judges most
convenient, to be assistant to our Agent, and with your Authority to
countenance our Cause, in which your Excelleney will not only perform a matter
beneficial to Transylvania, but to all Christendom, and oblige us for ever with
the Bonds of friendship; and praying for all happiness of Life and Prosperity
to your Excellency, we remain your undoubted Friend.

Given in our Camp at the Village Koczard the five and twentieth day of
September, 1662. Your Excellencies Loving Friend, Michael Apafi.


This Letter was received by His Majesty's Ambassador with that humanity as was
agreeable to his Noble Nature; and with that sense of the Christian Cause as
became a Religious Minister of the Faith's Defender, and an Answer returned
thereunto full of affectionate Piety and Compassion. But it was feared that the
time was elapsed, and the Disease proceeded too far to admit a gentle Cure; for
it could not probably be expected, that the Vizier should, upon fair words or
persuasions, or by the force of passionate and Rhetorical expressions, be
induced to let slip the fair opportunity of an entire and total subjection of
Transylvania. And the truth is, herein lay the ground of the great Quarral
between these two Emperors; for ever since the Defeat of Chimianus (or as the
Transilvanians call him Kemenius) the Turk swallowing in his thoughts the
entire subjection of that Country, designed to reduce it to the Government of a
Pasha, rather than of a Christian Prince, though elected at the Ottomon Port;
and in order thereunto, advanced beyond the Limits of the ancient bounds, and
pitched his Camp in the very Bowels of the Country. These proceedings giving
matter of jealousy to all the Captains of the bordering Christians; the Count
Serini first hastened the finishing of his fort, as much as was possible; and
next, according to his example, the Imperialists in all parts of the Borders
fortified their Towns and Castles, and reinforced their Garrisons; which was
answered by the Turks in the like preparations. And thus mutual fears and
jealousies effected that ill Correspondence, in which the State of Affairs then
remained.

And since Transylvania is the present Scene of Action, it will not be much
from our purpose to digress a little in declaring the state of that miserable
Principality, and by what ways and means the Turks increased their Tribute, and
encroached on their Liberties; the which Relation I received from one of the
Transilvanian Agents, to this effect.

In the time of Sultan Solomon, A History of Transilvanian Misery.
Transylvania was governed by her own Laws, and her natural Prince, paying then
only Thirty Thousand Dollars of yearly Tribute. After which Ali Pasha taking
Varadin on the Frontiers, had some part of the Country alloted him for
maintenance of his Garrison, and at that time solemnly swore, That beyond those
Limits allotted to Varadin, the Turks should not farther enter into
Transylvania, but that Oath being little regarded, they have since that time
possessed themselves of six Provinces, (viz.) Bichar, Doboka, Halnock, Colos,
in which is Claudiopolis, and of the best part of Zarand. Nor were the Turks
satisfied herewith, but in the year 1658. the Vizier Kuperlee entered
Transylvania, and by force of Arms took the strong Town of Janova, and demanded
the Surrender of Lugas and Karansebes into his hands. Nor could the allegations
of the Oath of Sultan Solomon, or of Ali Pasha, or any other persuasions or
submission induce him to moderate any part of his severe demands, until first
having miserably destroyed the whole Country, and satiated himself with blood,
he was contented, upon the sad and humble supplication of the ambassador from
that Prince, to withdraw his Army out of Transylvania, on condition that Fifty
thousand Dollars of yearly Tribute should be added to the former Thirty
thousand, and that Lugas and Karansebes should be wholly abandoned by the
native Inhabitants, and deliverd into possession of the Turk: And as a mark of
his absolute Dominion over that Country, he forced one Achacius Barcley,
employed before as Ambassador to him, to take on him the Government, threatening
that if he accepted not of the Charge, he would invest a Carter in the
Principality: Notwithstanding all this Treatment; and though the Transilvanians
complied with all the propositions offered them by the Turk, yet not long after
the Tartar Han passed twice through the Country, miserably harrassing,
spoiling, and killing, or making Captives all he met, whose departure also from
this Country was purchased with a considerable Sum of Money. And this was the
state of the misery of Transylvania, when the troubles raised by Ragotzki and
Kemenius added to the other discontents, and administered farther occasion to
the ensuing War.

But whilst the thoughts of the Ottoman Court were intent on their preparation
for the next years War in Hungary, advice came that the Turkish Fleet,
consisting of Seventeen Ships, and Thirty seven Saiques, lately departed from
Constantinople bound for Alexandria in Egypt, and convoyed by six Galleys,
which met them at Scio, very rich with Money, and other goods, (whose returns
are yearly for the most part made in Sugar, Coffee, Rice, and other
Commodities) were encountered near Rhodes by the Venetian Armata, and such ruin
and prize made of them, The Alexandrian Fleet encountered by the Venetians.
that of the Threescore Sail, Twenty eight Saiques, and 4 Ships were sunk and
taken: (viz.) 18 Saiques taken, and 10 burnt, 3 Ships taken, and one burnt, and
thereon Two hundred and seventy Slaves, among which there were of note, Arnout
Asan Aga, Eunuch of the Seraglio, Mahomet Aga, Bascut Agasey of Grand Cairo,
and Emin Reis, Captain of a Ship. When this news arrived, I happened to be at
the Viziers Court, and perceived a strange disturbance and alteration in the
faces of all then present; but more particularly the Grand Signior seemed to be
heated with fury, and present resolution of revenge; so that he had almost
forgotten his designs against the Emperor; and quitting his pastime in Hunting,
he began to talk of transporting his Arms into Dalmatia, and thereupon sent
Orders to one Beco a Begh of the Morea to cause a survey of the Highways,
Passages, and Bridges toward Dalmatia, as if he had intended immediately to
march, and either to defer his Hungarian War, or wage both at the same time.
But his graver, and more sober Council moderated his heat with Reason, knowing
that the designs of Princes, though never so absolute, must be subject to times
and seasons, until their Powers can extend to Omnipotency, which never yet
could exceed the abilities of a mortal man, though some have affected Divine
Honors, and by Flatterers have been ranked after death in the number of the
Gods. The Venetians lost Seventy men only, or thereabouts, and amongst them
Giacomo Semitecolo, a noble Venetian, with other Braves and Soldiers of
Fortune. The Turks horribly touched with this loss and disgrace, especially the
Grand Signior, who had an Interest in the Caravana, had a mind to vent some of
their fury on Signior Ballarino, the Venetian Minister to the Port, like those
(as we say) who cannot beat the Horse, will beat the Saddle; so that they
intended to imprison him again in some dark Cell, or obscure retirement, of
which, or of some other rigor Signior Ballarino was so sensible, that he wrote
this ensuing Letter to the Senator Nicolo Contarini, which may serve to explain
the anguish and sorrowful apprehensions of his Soul.

IF my Mind were capable of Comfort, I could not in the midst of so much
anguish entertain a more efficacious Motive thereunto, than those obliging
Expressions which your Excellency uses toward me, who like a Terrestrial Deity
is pleased to protect me. But alas, I am too much overwhelmed with Grief to
discover any Subject which may cause me to dry my Tears. I find no shelter
against that Storm which I foresaw. Nor is it sufficient for me to discover the
Tempest before it arrives: It is not sufficient in this darkness to lose my
Sleep, disturb my Quiet, tire my Body, debilitate my Health by a slender Diet,
whilst tossed in the Bosom of an inexorable Element, I am denied the enjoyment
of a ray of Light. I hold the Helm of the Ship as direct as I can, but the
adverse Waves of my Fortune drive me into the midst of those Storms where I
apprehend the greatest Dangers: I am here in the midst of the Sea, which is the
Nest of Extravagancies, the grand belief of unthought of Accidents, the
spacious Theater of Tragedies, a fierce Giant, a horrible Monster, who with
gentle Opiates endeavonrs to lull asleep, and lead those to Destruction who
have too great a confidence in their own Strength. I reproach my self for not
having been able to make it sufficiently understood, how one stroke of adverse
Fortune is capable to put all into Danger, who are embarked in the same Vessel;
And as little able am I to inculcate into the minds of Men, that whilst the
Waves of the vast Sea are smooth and calm, the nearer is the raging of the
Waters, and the fury of a Tempest. It was therefore necessary that there should
have been some more skilful Pilot than my self to conduct this Vessel. I was
long since acquainted with my Imperfections, and therefore called aloud for the
assistance of an abler Pilot, to direct me in this tempestuous Region; but
since I was not heard, I gloried at least to be alone in this Gulf, that being
swallowed up by a final Ruin, my Martyrdom may be a means to save the rest.
Rains and Lightnings do not affright me, but rather serve to quench that fire
of Disdain which I conceive against my self, for not knowing how to perform
better, and serve to enlighten me daily to find out that Compass or Cart which
may direct me to a course or path of Security. I fear Thunders and Tempests,
because the violence of one, and the hardness of the other is able to render a
cold Sweat mixed with Blood altogether unprofitable. This miserable School, tho
of eleven Tears continuance, constrains me to study the Disposition of the
Stars, the Signs in the Air, the Ebbings and Flowings of the Waters, concealed
Rocks, the Dangers of a long Voyage, and the necessity of recovering a Port. I
have studied indeed, but I fear I have not well learned this profound
Discipline; for where there is the greatest urgency, there I have gathered the
least Fruit; for since the Aspect of the Spheres are become more inauspicious,
I am doubtful that I shall see the Ship beaten with swelling Surges, and being
full of Water, it will be so far from being eased by those opportune Remedies
which I bring, that it will rather be increased by my Tears. God grant by his
miraculous Providence, the Tranquillity which we desire, and which by humune
means will be difficult to obtain. I had not the understanding to take
Opportunity by the Foretop when She presented her self unto me with gentle and
benign Appearance, showing me the means to save this floating Vessel, and spare
our insidious rewards. For this Reason my dejected, but not conquered mind,
makes my very Bowels feel an unusual anguish of an over-troubled Estate. May it
please the Divine pity, that these my Afflictions may prove the Offspring of
my own vileness, but not the means of my Ruin. I trust therein, I confess, and
yet frail hope, amidst this Gulf of Sin, induces me to expect doubtful
Successes; Yet certainly I will endeavor to avoid a shipwreck on those Rocks
of Despair; And so imploring the Patronage of your Excellency here on Earth, I
confirm my self.

From Pera of Constantinople the 19 of December, 1662.

This Letter seems to be wrote in the style of a despairing Person; yet if it
be well considered, the meaning is no other than what the Issue of Affairs some
years afterward did evidence; and his Intentions were no other than to
describe the ill nature of the Turkish Ministers, and their obstinacy of
continuing a War, until they had wearied out the Venetians into an Humor of
surrendering the whole Island of Candia unto them. I had the Honor to be well
acquainted with the Person of Signior Ballarino, and I always esteemed him in
his external Behavior accomplished with the Excesses of Italian Civility; he
was endued with great fluency of Language, both in Discourse and Writing; he
was Jealous, Acute and Wary; and in short, was a proper Minister for that
Republic, well practiced and versed in the manner of Treaty with the Turkish
Court. He at first was sent from Venice to Constantinople in quality of
Secretary to the Excellentissimo Capello, Procurator of St. Mark, a Person
eminent for his Office, and the several great employments which he had
exercised in that State; he was sincere, and of a generous Soul; his comely
Looks, and grave Habit spoke him to be a Gentleman, and a Senator. In short, he
was so well estemeed of at Venice, that he was thought worthy to be employed in
this Embassy to the Grand Signior, which is commonly granted to Persons after
they have run through all Services of the Commonwealth, as a Consummation of
their Honors and Richess. This Gentleman then had the misfortune to be
invested in this Honor in the worst of Times, when the War was broke forth,
and being thereby exposed to their cruelty, he was put into Prison, where
passing for some time a Life of Sorrow and Sadness, he fell into a Melancholy,
which represented all things to him in the blackest manner; so that, I know not
why his fancy suggested to him, that he was not only miserable in his
Imprisonment and Restraint amongst the Turks, but that he was fallen also into
disgrace, and displeasure of his Prince at home. I will not say that Signior
Ballarino did nourish the Operation of this black humor in him; but I have
heard that he did not administer that comfort to him, as might serve to dispel
the thickness of that Vapor which obscured the generous temper of his Soul. In
short, he gave such way to this melancholy, that he laid violent hands upon
himself (as we have said before); but afterward by the Care of his Friends and
Servants, being cured of his wounds, he lived some years after, by his Sorrows
and Repentance for it, to give Satisfaction to God and the World. Howsoever,
the Senate being informed thereof, and judging this Act to be the effect of a
violent Phrensy, appointed Ballarino to take on himself the entire management
of Affairs, reserving only the Title and Honor to Signior Capello. Ballarino
now manageing all Affairs, Capello looked on himself as neglected and laid
aside, howsoever comported his Condition with Submission and Gentleness, never
openly resenting the Honors of Ballarino, or to see him preferred before
himself; Howsoever, secretly nourishing an inward Discontent, his robustious
Nature, upwards of eighty years of Age, was forced to give way to its final
Dissolution; and falling Sick, he sent to the Earl of Winchelsea, then
Ambassador for his Majesty at Constantinople, to acquaint him of his Distemper,
desiring him to send me, who was then his Secretary, unto him. At these Summons
I was easily persuaded to go, having always had his Person in great Reverence;
and being come to his Bedside, he raised himself upon his Pillows, and
embracing me in his Arms, I fancied my self to receive the Benediction of one
of the Ancient Patriarchs. He began with a weak Voice to say to me, Sir, I am
near my end, expecting every Minute to render up my last Breath, and therefore
as a dying man, I desire of your Master, the Ambassador, that so soon as I am
dead, he would be pleased to deliver this poor Carcass of mine from under the
covering of this accursed Roof. For Answer whereunto I did not stand to
expostulate the Reasons with him, well knowing the cause of his discontent; but
that I would communicate his desires to my Lord Ambassador, and speedily return
with my Answer to him. Accordingly I departed from him, and quickly brought
from my Lord a Promise to endeavor his utmost to comply with his request; at
which he seemed to be much satisfied, and commanded his Servants then present,
especially one called Sig. Tomaso Gobbato, his great confident, to be Witnesses
thereof. The next day he expired his last Breath, and the day following his
Body being embalmed, his bowels were buried, and the Funeral Rites performed
with such order and decency as was seemly in a Country where he lived rather
like a Prisoner than an Ambassador. All things being thus prepared, the Earl of
Winchelsea, according to the Will of the Deceased, sent for his Body, already
embalmed, which was immediately without opposition or scruple sent to his
house; where it remained for some months, in expectation of a conveyance for
Venice. At length a Dutch ship, being bound from Constantinople thither, it was
designed that the Body should be thereon embarked; but I know not for what
reason, the Customer refused to suffer it to pass; though it may well and
rationally be conjectured, That Ballarino, who was sensibly touched to have the
care of the Body of his Master, his Countryman and Colleague taken from him,
did with Presents prevail with the Customer to put difficulties in the way
which he supposed might vex those who were thought worthy of this employment.
This opposition being made, and not to be overcome without much Money, it was
contrived that the Ship departing should attend the Corpse at Tenedos, which was
without the command of the Castles; and the body being divided from the Legs,
was packed up in a But of Cavear, and so sent down by a boat with License of
the Customer, as a parcel of Goods and Merchandice; and so safely arriving
aboard, the Corpse were separated from their adjuncts; and being laid decently
in a Coffin, covered with a Pall of black Velvet, with Scutcheons, and other
ornaments appertaining to the Funerals of such great Personages, it arrived
safely at Venice, where it was interred with the usual ceremonies, in the Tomb
of the Ancestors of that Ancient Family.

But the heads and thoughts of these Governors were not so employed in their
preparations of War, but that the Vizier could lend an ear to the suggestions
of some malicious Pharisees, who, under pretense of Religion, informed him,
That the Christian Churches, burnt down in Constantinople and Galata by those
dreadful Fires in the year 1660, were again re-edified against his command, and
the Law of the Turks, which allows the reparation of Churches, and continuance
of such which were found standing when Mohometanism was introduced; but not to
erect new, or rebuild what are either by time, fire, or other accidents fallen
to ruin. And being farther informed, The Vizier destroys the Christian
Churches rebuilt after the Fire.
that though those Churches were restored under the notion of Dwellings, or
Warehouses, yet secretly served for Celebration of Divine Service, and thereby
his Decrees and Edicts were frustrated and disappointed: Wherefore, furiously
transported with a Mohammedan Zeal, commanded immediately that the Authors of
those Buildings should be imprisoned, the Churches themselves levelled to the
Foundation, and the ground whereon they stood confiscated to the Grand Signior.
This action, though naturally agreeable to the disposition of the Vizier, who
was a perfect Turk, The Zeal of a Turkish Preacher.
zealous in execution of all points of the Mohammedan Law, being educated after
the severest sort of Professors, and one of those whom they called Softaes; yet
he was chiefly prompted unto this, and to a greater abhorrency of Christianity,
by one Vanni Effendi, a Shegh, or Preacher, one who was as inveterate and
malicious to the Christian Religion, as any Enthusiast or Fanatic is to the
Rites of our Church and Religion. And thus we may see how troublesome Hypocrisy
and Puritanism are in all places where they gain a Superiority; for this
Preacher not contented only to ruin the Christian Churches, but persuaded the
Vizier that the terrible Fires in Constantinople and Galata in the year 1660,
and the last years unparalled Pestilence, and the inconsiderable advance of
the Turks on the Christians for some years, were so many parts of Divine
Judgments thrown on the Mussulmen or Believers, in vengeance of their too much
License given to the Christian Religion, permitting Wine to be sold within the
Walls of Constantinople, which polluted the Imperial City, and ensnared the
faithful by temptation to what was unlawful: Wherefore a command was issued,
That no Wine should be henceforth sold within the Walls of the City. And it was
farther intended, that Greeks and Armenians, and all other Christians, who had
Dwellings or Possessions within the Walls of the City, should within Forty days
sell those habitations, and depart; which otherwise should be confiscated to
the Grand Signior; but God who supports the Faithful in Trials of Persecution,
moderated this Decree, and reserved still this Church in the midst of Infidels;
not suffering this City to lose the Name nor Religion of that holy Emperor, who
both erected, and christened it; as also to preserve most of the Churches, which
though again uncovered, yet were redeemed for Money from the possession of the
Turks. Nor was the Mohometan Zeal satisfied in Demolishment of the Churches
themselves, unless it vented part of its fury against the poor Workmen, which
for their hire and days Wages erected them; such as Greek Laborers, Masons,
and Carpenters, who were all beaten and imprisoned. But it happening at that
time that the Queen Mother building a sumptuous Mosch, and having occasion of
many Laborers and Artists to forward so vast a Work, sent to the Maimarbashee
(who is the Master workman, or Cape, over all such who are employed in
Building) to supply such a number of Carpenters, Masons, and others, as were
convenient to carry on that Fabric with expedition; who readily replied, That
he would provide all that was possible, but could not promise a sufficient
number, unless those Greeks were set at liberty, who were imprisoned by the
Grand Vizier for building the Christian Churches; which answer being reported
again to the Queen Mother, she interceded with the Vizier in their behalf, who
being glad of any occasion to gratify to great a Lady, immediately released
them, without any fine or reward, which he designed to obtain for their
liberty. Howsoever the Vizier not well brooking such an indignity (as he
supposed) put upon him by so mean a Slave, as the Maimarbashee, dealt with some
of the imprisoned Laborers to accuse him, as the Author and Licenser of
building the Christian Churches. The Greeks easily enough persuaded to please
so great a Personage, accused him accordingly, whose Evidence, though nor
passable against a Turk by the Mohammedan Law, yet served the Viziers revenge
for the present, who immediately commanded his head to be struck off, The
Viziers revenge on the Cape of the Builders.
and his Estate confiscated; which was reported to consist of Two thousand
Purses of Money, every Purse importing Five hundred Dollars, then found
actually in his House, which, if true, is a strange Wealth for so ordinary a
Person. But by this, and by many other instances, we may perceive that there is
no People in the World more covetous and desirous to amass Wealth than the
Turks, nor none more uncertain to enjoy it.

About this time the French Merchants in the Levant, having advised his most
Christian Majesty that the Turks were sensible that the affront to the Person
of Monsieur la Hay, his Ambassador, was contrary to the Law of Nations, and
such an injury as could not but provoke the Choler of so puissant a Prince to a
just revenge; and knowing that his Majesty being powerful at Sea, was able to
extend his Arms to the utmost Confines of his Empire, whilst the interposition
of other Countries limited the Turks march by Land, and their ignorance and
inability in Marine Affairs rendered them incapable to arrive those Banks of
France, which the Sea washes: These Considerations the French Merchants having
persuaded the King to be the thoughts of the Grand Signior, and that he desired
the continuance of the Peace and Traffic with France, and as an evidence of
his remorse and displeasure for the injury to Monsieur la Hay, the Father, his
Majesty was contented in satisfaction thereof to redress this injurious
transgression of the Law of Nations, by some extraordinary marks of favor and
honor to the Person of Monsieur la Hay the Son; that so exceeding the usual
method and rule of Ceremony toward this Ambassador at his arrival, the World
might be convinced of the real affection, and hearty desire the Grand Signior
had to renew his Peace, and preserve his Commerce with France. This is supposed
to be what the Merchants of Marseille and Lions, governed by the Interest of
their Trade, suggested to their King, to induce him to send an Ambassador to
Constantinople; for at this time Monsieur Roboli, a Merchant, Messengers from
France to introduce a new Ambassador.
remained only as Consul or Agent for the Affairs of Commerce. Things thus
represented at the French Court, the King dispatched away two Gentlemen to
Constantinople with Letters to the Grand Signior and Vizier, and one to the
Sieur Roboli, the Agent, declaring that if the Turk would make amends for the
last Affront done to the Ambassador, by some signal notes of Honor in the
abused Person of Monsieur la Hay, the Son, he would then condescend to confirm
the Ancient League and Amity. The Letters translated out of the French Tongue,
were as follows.

To Our Dear and Well Beloved le Sieur Roboli, Agent for Our Affairs at
Constantinople.
By the King.
Dear, and Well Beloved,
THe Inclination We have to continue that Amity with the Emperor of the Turks,
which has remained so long between Us, and Our Empires, and maintain the
ancient Alliances, has caused Us to write to Him, and his Great Vizier, to
know the Entertainment and Reception that they will give to the Sieur de la
Hay, the Son, in satisfaction of the violence exercised before on his own
Person, and the Person of the Sieur de la Hay, the Father, our Ambassador,
against the Law of Nations. We write to You this Letter, to give you Order to
conduct and present before the Vizier, the Secretaries du Pressoir, and
Fontain, which We have sent to carry him our Dispatches, and return with the
Answers, which you shall solicit without loss of time, the which you shall
bring your self, in case they be not agreeable to that resolution we have taken
not to receive any satisfaction, but in the Person of the said Sieur de la
Hay, the Son, which is due to Us, for that Insolency and Affront which has
been done them. Willing also notwithstanding, that before you depart, you
assemble the French Merchants in Constantinople together, that they may choose
amongst themselves one for their Chief; but if the Answers be such as We have
cause to expect, We approve that you remain in the Station where you are, in
Quality of Our Agent, until the arrival of the said Monsieur de la Hay, and
that you send them by the said Secretaries du Pressoir, and Fontain, of which
you shall not fail, for so is Our Pleasure.

Given at Paris the Twentieth of January, 1662. Signed, LOUIS. De Lomenie.


The King of France his Letter to the Great Vizier.
To the Most Illustrious and Magninificent Lord, the Chief Vizier of the
Sublime Port of the Grand Signior.
Most Illustrious and Magnificent Lord;
Although the Indignity offered to the Person of the Sieur de le Hay Venteley,
Our Ambassador, and to his Son, which We have designed to the same Charge, have
touched Us as far as becomes a victorious Prince, who holds the first rank over
Christian Kings, and who has under his Power one of the most warlike Nations
of the World; Notwithstanding after being informed, that the disgrace which the
said Gentlemen have incurred, has proceeded rather from malice, and the ill
Offices of some Persons, who have endeavored to disturb, by this ill Treatment
of them, the good Correspondence which has been between Us, than from any
design on the Grand Signiors part to offend Us; and that on the contrary, there
continues in His will an intention to maintain the Ancient Friendship which
remains between Our Estates and People after so many Ages. We being not
desirous to estrange Our selves, shall send an Ambassador in ordinary to his
high Port, and having cast our Eyes upon the said Sieur de la Hay, the Son, We
are much inclined to dispatch him for this employment; but as We desire to be
assured of the good reception that shall be made him, We give You advice of Our
intentions by this Letter; that according to the desire You have testified of
the continuance of Our friendship, and Our Ancient Alliances with His Highness,
shall pray God to have You, Most Illustrious and Magnificent Lord, in His holy
and worthy Protection.

Written at Paris the twelfth day of January, 1662. LOUIS. De Lomenie.


The King of France his Letter to the Grand Signior.
To the most High, most Excellent, most Puissant, most Magnanimous, and
Invincible Prince, the Great Emperor of the Mussulmans, Sultan Mahomet, in whom
all Honor and Virtue abound. Our most dear and perfect Friend.
MOst High, most Excellent, most Puissant, most Magnanimous, and Invincible
Prince, the Grand Signior, Emperor of the Mussulmans, Sultan Mahomet, in whom
all Honor and Virtue abound. Our most dear and perfect Friend. May God
increase Your Greatness and Majesty with a happy end. We have not known how to
impute the ill usage, which has been offered to the Person of the Sieur de la
Hay, our Ambassador, and to his Son, designed by Us to the same employment, to
any causes and motions in Your Highness, but rather to the Instigation of some
People which would trouble that good Correspondence, which has been so long
established between Us, and our Empires. And as we have cause to believe that
Your Highness desires much to continue this friendship and good understanding,
upon what has been wrote Us on Your Part; and to concur with You herein, we
desire much likewise to continue to maintain an Ambassador at Your High Port,
in place of the said Sieur de la Hay. And since We have none of Our People
that is more intelligent than the Sieur de la Hay, the Son, in what concerns
the Affairs and Functions of this Embassy; We have elected him for this
employment, to which we We shall willingly dispatch him, if We may be assured
of the good usage and kind reception which shall be given him. This is that
which We expect from Your Highness, reserving a more particular information to
be sent by the Sieur de la Hay, the Son, of the good Correspondence which We
desire always to have and maintain with You. And hereupon We pray God, That You
may be most High, etc. as above, in his Holy and Worthy Protection.

Written at Paris the twelfth day of January, 1662. Your true and perfect
Friend, LOVIS. De Lomenie.


The Viziers Answer to the foregoing Letters.
TO the most Glorious amongst the Sublime Christian Princes, chosen amongst the
Great and Sublime of the Religion of the Messiah, Mediator of the Affairs of
all the Nazarene Nation, Lord of Majesty and Reputation, Master of Greatness
and Power, Louis Emperor of France, the end of whose days be happy. The
Salutations which respect Friendship, and are desired from Love and Affection,
being premised. Your Majesty shall know that the Letter which was sent to Your
Friend, by the Honorable du Pressoir and Fountain has been delivered me by
the Sieur Roboli, Agent and Attorney of the Embassy, at the High and Imperial
Port; the Contents whereof We have apprehended to be as Your Majesty gives to
understanstand, touching the entire Amity and good Correspondence. Certainly
Your Majesty knows; that the Augmentation, and daily Increase of that Amity,
proceeds from the protection and honorable Observance of Conditions and
Capitulations between both Parties. By the Grace of the Most High GOD, the
Sublime and Imperial Port of the most Happy, most Puissant, most Valarous, most
Magnificent, and most Strong Emperor, Support of the Mussulmans, My Lord, whose
Arms God prosper with double Force, is always open for our Friends, and others,
without any Obstacle, as all the World knows, and particularly for Your
Majesty, Who is our Friend, and has been long in Amity with the most Serene
Ottoman Family, whom God establish until the day of the Balance. It being a
most certain Truth, that there has happened neither on one side or other any
Action contrary to the promised Faith.

And now, since Your Majesty desires for a new Ornament of the Ancient and Good
Correspondence, and to the end that the Agreement and Conditions thereof be
honored as they ought, that the considerable Person amongst the Nobles of the
Court of Your Majesty, the Sieur Denis de la Hay, Son of the late Ambassador,
a Subject of Reputation, Your Gentleman of Credit, whose Days may they conclude
in happiness, be sent to reside at this Happy and Imperial Port, for Your
Majesty, according to the ancient custom; to the end that the Intention of Your
Majesty may be performed, We have exposed it at the High Throne of the thrice
Happy, most Mysterious, and most Great Emperor, My Lord, Who with an Imperial
regard of courteous Demonstration, has accepted the said Demand with
willingness, and therefore in signification of his Pleasure, We write You this
Our present and friendly Letter; and if it please God, according to the ancient
Custom, when the said Ambassador shall arrive at this High Port with the
Letters of Friendship from four Majesty, he shall be honored on the Imperial
part, and entertained according to the ordinary custom, the Imperial
Capitulation shall be renewed, the Ornament of Affection on one side and the
other shall be confirmed; and for an efficacious Confirmation of a good Peace
between both Emperors, an Imperial Letter shall be sent to Your Majesty, whose
health be happy and prosperous.

From the Imperial City of Constantinople. The Poor Hamet Pasha.


In Answer to the Kings Letters, The Vizier styles himself, The Poor, in
respect to the Greatness of his Master.
the Grand Signior made no reply, but only by his Vizier, by reason that in all
the Ancient Turkish Registers and Archives, there was no example found, that
the Grand Signior ever wrote to any King; who had not an Ambassador actually
resident at his Port. But this Negotiation about a French Ambassador took not
effect, until some time after, in which other Letters and Messages intervened,
as will appear by the following Sequel of this History.

It was now toward the beginning of Winter, when the Season of the Year
compelled the Turkish Fleet of Galleys to return according to custom, The
return of the Turkish Armata to winter at Constantinople.
to the Port of Constantinople. The whole Summer before, they had for the most
part passed in some Harbor or Creek amongst the Greek Islands, having afforded
nothing of Convoy or succor toward the safe Conduct of the Fleet of Grand
Cairo, but suffered them to fall into the hands of the Enemy, as before
mentioned, and indeed for several years the Marine Affairs of the Turks have
always gone decaying in Fame and Force; and the preparations of the Armata
every Spring, have been of Form and Course, rather than with hopes of success
correspondent to the expense. In their return home, near Constantinople they
encountered a fierce storm, so that three Galleys were cast away at Ponte
Piccolo, (by the Turks called Cucuccheckmage, about four Leagues distant from
Constantinople.) Howsoever the Weather clearing, the remainder of the Fleet got
into Port, entering with Joy, with Vollies of great and small Shot, with
Streamers flying, Pipes sounding, and all other sorts of their Country Music,
bringing with great Ostentation a small Flyboat, which had been a ^^ornese Man
of War, taken by them as she was cruising singly in the Arches of Pelago; which
was brought in with so much Ceremony used in toaing her into Port, decking her
with Streamers and Pendants, with such signs of Victory and Triumph, as if they
had led Captive the whole Venetian Armata. The Slaves make an Insurrection in
one of the Beghs Galleys.
But I must not omit the relation of what besel one of the Beghs Galleys,
designed, with the rest, to rendezvous at Constantinople, whilst she loitered
amongst small Isles in the Gulf of Nicomedia. It was a Gally, the Commander of
which had newly received as the Portion of his Wite, being a Young man lately
married. who entertained great thoughts of raising his Fortunes by the spoils
and prize he was to make. At these sles several of the Officers, and The
Soldiers at Sea ^alled by that name
Levents went on shore; where whilst they entertained themselves with Wine and
merriment; the Slaves made an insurrection in the Gally, seized the Captain,
cut off his Head, and threw his Body into the Sea; and so becoming Masters of
the Vessel, weighed Anchor, and set sail. Those on the shore admiring at the
unexpected departure of the Gally, accompanied her with their Eyes and wonder
as far as they could perceive her in sight, but observing her to steer a
different course from the Port, to which they were designed, suspected much of
the truth of what had succeeded; wherefore taking their Boat immediately, they
ha^tned to Constantinople to give advice of what had passed, that (if possible)
Orders might timely arrive the Castles on the Hellespont, which might obstruct
their farther passage. But alas! the poor Slaves were so dismayed with their
own action, and so transported with a slavish fear and apprehension of what
might succed, should their escape not be effected; that they knew not what
course to steer: All things seemed to contradict their liberty, the Wind proved
contrary, their Spirits dejected, their understandings void of counsel and
contrivance; so that wand^ing three or four days in the Propentis, at last ran
their Gally ashore on the Asian side, near Palermo, from whence they were
brought back to Constantinople, and there, by sentence of the Captain Pasha,
fourteen of them had their Legs and Arms broken, and so suffered to die in that
torture, and afterward their Bodies were thrown into the Sea, to the terror
of all other Slaves, who prefer a miserable Life at the Oar, before the
torments of some hours in dying.

Though the Turks have their Affairs but ill managed at Sea, and their success
accordingly fortunate; yet their preparation for Land services are more
expedite, and executed with that secresy and speed, that oftentimes Armies are
brought into the Field, before it is so much as rumoured by common Mouths that
any designs are in agitation: For though it was now Winter, yet the design
against Germany went forward, Forces were daily sent to the Frontiers, Cannot,
and Ammunition for War, transported by way of the black Sea, and the Danube.
Orders issued out to the Princes of Moldavia and Valachia to repair their
Wharfs and Keys along the River, The Preparations for the German War.
for the more convenient landing of Men and Ammunition, and to rebuild their
Bridges for the more commodious passage of the Tartars; that Horses should be
provided against the next Spring, for drawing all Carriages of Ammunition, and
Provisions; their Magazines stored with quantities of Bread, and Rice, their
Fields well stocked with Sheep, and other Cattle, and that no necessaries be
wanting which concern the victualling, or sustenance of a Camp. The Tartars
were appointed to have in a readiness a Hundred thousand Horsemen, to make
Incursions on the Frontiers; likewise the Pashaws of Darbiquier, Aleppo,
Caramania, and Anatolia received their orders; and seven and twenty Letters,
accompanied with as many Vests, after the Turkish manner, were sent to as many
Pashaws of the Empire, to dispose the strength of their Countries in a Warlike
posture, so as to march when the Grand Signiors Commands should require them to
attend his designs: And that the occasion of the War might appear the more
justifiable, it was resolved, That no Acts of Hostility, or other Breaches of
Peace should be pretended, than the Fort built by the Count Serini, being a
matter really against the Articles of the last Peace; the Demolishment whereof,
the Ottomon Force intended to make the principal end of their first Enterprise,
in which if they encountered any opposition from the Emperor, the Cause of their
War would be then the more plausible; for as yet the Emperor had not fully
declared his approbation of that Work, raised by Serini, as agreeable to his
Assent, or Pleasure. On the other side with no less caution and labor did the
Christians endeavor to secure their Frontiers, by raising their Militia, and
reinforcing their Garrisons, and especially to perfect the new Fort near
Canisia, which, as it was thought so considerable, as to countervail the
inconveniences and miseries of a War, so the Turk thought it neither
honorable, nor secure, until he had seen it razed, and levelled with the
ground.

All things thus growing black and stormy round about, An Accident disposing
the Christian Affairs to a peace with the Turk.
that nothing seemed less probable, and it may be said, less possible, than an
accommodation; behold, on a sudden, an Accident fell out at Rome, from whence
this War with the Turks received its life and heat, which becalmed much of the
fury and storm on the Christian Confines, and inclined matters in Germany
toward propositions of Peace, fearing that Italy, who had begotten this War,
was not able (as things stood) to contribute toward its maintenance and
support. The occasion was this. It happened that in the streets of Rome the
French Ambassadors Coach was assaulted by the Corsi Natves of the Islle of
Corsica, which are of the Popes Guard, the Page killed at the Boot of the
Coach, and the Ambassadors Lady wounded; whether this barbarous act was
designed against the Person of the Ambassador by any Persons of Eminency, or
malice of the People, is little to the purpose I have now in hand; only the
King took this Affront so heinously, that for the present no acknowledgments or
satisfaction the Pope could make, could allay his just resentment, or any thing
be imagined possible to expiate this indignity, besides a War. This News of
this Division between the Son, and the spiritual Father, filled all the
Ministers of Constantinople with much Joy, and with subject of Laughter, and
expectation of the Event, judging now that their daily Prayers for the Discord
of the Christian Princes amongst themselves, were heard and granted, since they
had so far availed, as to disunite the very Economy of Christendom. And now
they imagined that this difference would have a forcible influence on their
Affairs in Hungary, and either incline the Emperor speedily to a Peace, or
otherwise to undertake a War on disadvantageous terms. Things had an issue
accordingly, for in a few Weeks after, advice came by Post from Ali Pasha, then
at Temiswar, that is Salam-Chaous, called Chusaein, who had long since been
sent to Vienna, with more distinct Demands of what the Turks proposed, and
being supposed, through his long stay, to be detained a Prisoner, The Baron of
Gowez sent to Ali Pasha.
was again returned, and with him had brought the Baron of Goez, as
Internuncio, sent to Ali Pasha, to receive a more particular Imformation of the
Turks propositions, for that the Emperor pretended, he was not as yet thoroughly
satisfied therein. And thus matters, beyond all expectation, began to incline
to an agreement, in regard that Rome being now in danger her self, not by the
Turks, but by the Christians, held her self incapable to administer that Fuel
to the Fire of War which she had promised; so that the League treated there
beginning to fail, the Emperor grew faint, and the Princes cold, in their
Preparations, wishing some Course could be effected, which might bring matters
to an accommodation. Such were the Discourses and imaginations of the Turks; in
which condition we leave the state of Affairs until the beginning of the next
year; and in the mean time it may not be from our purpose, nor tedious to the
Reader, to record what befell this year most remarkable to the English Nation,
and their Trade in Turkey, which also may be beneficial, by instruction of past
examples, to such who shall for the future be concerned in the Traffic and
Business of the Levant.

What Remarkable accidents befell the ENGLISH Nation, and their Trade this Year
in TURKEY.
THE Messengers from Algier, as before related, having promised better
Obedience for the future to the Commands of the Grand Signior, obtained a new
Pasha for their City, and Country thereunto belonging; who before his
departure, was enjoined by the Grand Signior to dispose Affairs with the Earl
of Winchelsea, his Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople, as might demonstrate
his dispositions toward a Peace, and his desire that the Algerines should do
the like, and accept of that Clause in the Articles, prohibiting the search of
English Ships, either for their own or Strangers Goods. The place appointed for
the meeting between the Ambassador and the Pasha, was a certain Chiosk, or
Garden house, belonging to an Eunuch, the Aga of a Seraglio at Pera; where both
parties being met, the Pasha declared that the Grand Signiors desires were,
That a Peace should be concluded on the Ancient Capitulations, and that by him
these Orders were to be carried unto Algier, from whence he was advised, that
the Algerines were ready to accept those Articles, if one of his Majesty's
Ships singly appeared about the Treaty; so that the World might not esteem
their condescension to proceed from Force and Compulsion. Hereof Advices being
sent into England, a Peace ensued in some Months after; but what faith these
Infidels kept will be related in the Sequel of this Story; the Memory of which
is engraven with the Point of a Diamond, and the Losses which ensued thereupon
to the Exchange at London, deserve a particular Treatise, which in the mean
time many Families retain in a sad remembrance.

In May, Advice was brought to the Lord Ambassador, how that the Ann, a Frigate
of his Majesty's Royal Navy, commanded by Captain Jonas Pool, which had
convoyed the general Ships to Symrna, in her passage homewards stopped at the
Morea, and came to an Anchor near a place in that Country, called the Black
Mountain, commodious to Wood and Water in; to which end were landed threescore
men, armed with Swords and Firelocks; these made havoc of the Woods on all
sides, loading their Boats away as fast as they could, and not only so, but set
great Frees on Fire which in that dry Season of the Year dispersed it self far
and wide; which being seen at a distance in the Night, alarmed the People of
the Country, so that the Begh; or Governor came down with some Force to
discover the matter, supposing that some Malteses, or Venetians might be
landed. At the approach of this Body of Turks, our Men quitted the Woods, and
shifted away as fast as they could to their Boats, of which Thirty eight
escaped, the rest falling short were intercepted by the Turks, and Eleven of
them were killed, and Eleven taken Captives; and of the Turks, two Aga's, and
Two or Three others had the fortune to fall by some Musketshot from our men,
whilst in this confusion they endeavored to defend themselves. On the news
hereof, our Lord Ambassador represented the whole matter to the Vizier,
declaring, That it was lawful according to our Capitulations, to take
refreshments, and supply our wants in any part of the Grand Signiors Dominions;
and that therefore he demanded Justice on the Begh of the Morea, and
restitution of the Captives. But the Vizier understanding that some Turks were
killed in the skirmish, lent not so ready an ear to these Complaints;
howsoever, to be acquitted of the Ambassadors solicitations, referred the
business to the Examination and Justice of the Captain Pasha: But it falling
out that at that time the Consul and Merchants at Smyrna had an unhappy
difference with the Captain Pasha, (which shall in the next place be related)
was the Cause that all Applications to his Favor and Justice were suspended,
and a slow progress made toward obtaining the liberty of those poor
unfortunate men. Howsoever, some months after it happened that the Begh of the
Morea being removed from that Government, and coming to Constantinople with his
whole Estate, brought with him the Eleven Englishmen, which he had taken, and
offered them to sale unto the Ambassador, who considering that they were
Englishmen, and such as had been enslaved in actual Service of their King, he
esteemed himself obliged both in Charity and Honor to redeem them. But the
Case appeared too foul to demand their Liberty by strength of the
Capitulations; for besides that, the cutting Wood in places inhabited without
permission, is a Robbery and a Crime in its self, not to be maintained by the
Law of Nations, the killing of a principal Aga, and wounding others, might
sufficiently warrant the Turks, without any Breach of Peace, to detain these
men as lawful Captives: Wherefore the Lord Ambassador deeming it unseemly, that
those who had served in his Majesty's Navy should be condemned to the Turkish
Galleys, disbursed Fourteen hundred Lion Dollars, which was demanded for them,
which was afterward repaid him by his Majesty; and having clothed, and
provided them with necessaries for their Voyage, conveyed them with the first
occasions into England.

The difference between the English Nation, and the Captain Pasha which impeded
the Liberty, for some time, of these Captives, had its Original at Smyrna,
where some English Merchants making Collation one Evening in a Garden were
assaulted and beaten by certain drunken Soldiers belonging to the Sea. The
Garden Avania.
Levents, belonging to a Gally then in Port, in whose Company was a Portuguez
Slave. The News hereof flying to the Frank Street, put all the Neighborhood
into an uproar, so that diverse People with such Weapons as came next to hand,
in a fury went in pursuit of the Levents, and unhappily meeting one, drew him
into the English Consuls house, where they treated him with such blows as
abated much of the heat and fumes of his Wine; during which disturbance and
confusion, the Portuguez Slave found an opportunity to make his escape. The
Consul knowing it some advantage in Turkey to complain first, sent to the Kadi,
giving him to understand the ill usage of Four of his Merchants (whose names he
gave in writing) by the unruly Levents, whilst they innocently, and without
injury to any, divertised themselves in a Garden; to which, for the present,
little more was given in answer, than that on a farther examination of the
Business, the Conful should receive Justice In the mean time the Turk, who had
been beaten in the Consuls House, resolved not to leave the Gate till he had
received satisfaction for his blows; and the others that were his Comrades
demanded their Slave from the English, which was lost, by whose means and
assistance (as they pretend) he had made his Escape. The matter came now to
high Demands on both sides, which the Kadi, either not being desirous, or not
of sufficient Authority to compound, the Gally departed without any agreement,
and the complaint was carried by the Turks to the Captain Pasha, who then being
with his Fleet at Mytiline, with little other thoughts or business, was glad of
this occasion to get Money, and therefore suddenly returned the Gally again,
with Orders to bring before him the Four Merchants, whose names he
particularized, to make answer to their accusation of having beaten his
Levents, and contrived the escape of the slave. The Consul and Merchants being
affrighted by this Message, and Command of so great a Personage, endeavored
with Money to accommodate the Business, by force of which it was at length
taken up, costing in all the sum of Two thousand seven hundred Dollars, or
thereabouts. The which passage may serve for an example to such as live in
Turkey, that all troubles of this nature are best compounded for at first; for
at the beginning nothing more was demanded than the price of the Slave, and of
the broken pate of the Levent: But being suffered to come under the Cognizance
of powerful and coverous Tyrants; as there is no fahtoming their unsatiable
desires, so there is no prospect into what inconvenient dangers such Affairs
will involve, and entagle themselves.

As Turkey has been seldom or never without having false Money current, so the
best sort of Silver has been so clipped by the Jews, Armenians, Merchants, and
others; that the Dollar was brought at Constantinople to six Drams, and at
Smyrna to seven, which made great confusion in the Trade of these Countries.
Wherefore the Vizier as he had already given proof and testimony to the World
of his strict observance, and adherence to the Mohammedan Law, so he was
desirous to appear highly careful and sensible of the Public Interest: And
therefore as the most necessary work, he began with the Dollars of six Drams,
proclaiming that they should no longer pass in payments, The Vizier's Edict,
against Dollars of six Drams.
and that those in whose hands they were found, delivering them into the Mint,
should receive a^ 80 in return of every such Dollar, by which means the Mint
would advance a Fourth on every Dollar, esteeming every Dram worth Fourteen
Aspers, and that for the present no Dollar being current under seven Drams, it
might afterward be brought to Lions, and Dollars of nine Drams; which
regulation, though at first grievous to some particular persons, would
afterward redound to the common advanrage and benefit of Trade. To forward
which Design the Grand Signior, and Queen Mother sent all their Dollars of six
Drams to be new coined into Aspers at the Mint, so likewise did the Vizier,
intending to be very strict in prohibition of that Money. But a while after it
happened that the Treasurer of the Viziers Steward having occasion to pay
Moneys, either for his own or his Masters account, forced some Bags of Six
Drams on those to whom payment was to be made; the Receivers denied to accept
them; but he being a powerful man, and very urgent, forced the Money upon them,
with which laden, as they had received them, they went directly to the Vizier,
acquainting him that they were desirous to obey his Commands, as to the six
Dram Dollars, but his Stewards Treasurer had forced on them that sort of Money,
which if it was his pleasure that they should still pass, they were contented
to receive; if not, they desired him to give Command for their payment in other
Money. The Vizier being highly enraged, that the first Violation of his
Commands should begin in his own Family, immediately ordered, without farther
proof or process, that the Offenders Head should be struck off, and his body
thrown into the Sea; which Sentence was executed in the same hour for example
and terror of others, and to expiate the crime, and take away the scandal from
the Fountain of Justice, whose streams can never be esteemed to run clear when
the source is corrupted. In like manner the Overseer of the Mint was strangled,
and Emir Pasha, formerly Pasha of Grand Cairo, was banished to the Isle of
Lemnos, for making the Coin of Aspers 5 per Cent. worse than their true value.

The Merchants at Aleppo, being far from the Court, Merchants Aleppo.
are more subject to troublesome Avanias than others, who are nearer to the Head
or Fountain, from whence Justice should proseed as may appear by many examples,
and particularly by an accident which fell out there this year. For it
happened, that a Janisary which served the English Nation, riding abroad with
some of the Merchants, for want of heed, or the unruliness of his Horse,
chanced to hurt a Youth playing in the streets. Whereupon the Merchants, and
the Janisary, not to suffer this business to come within the knowledge of the
Cities Officers, immediately for some Money quieted the complaints, and stopped
the farther demands of the Father; and to make the business more secure, caused
the Father to make Hoget before the Kadi, that he was well satisfied, and
remained without farther pretense, either on the Merchant, or the Janisary, for
the hurt which his Child had received. But the Pasha, who had for a long time
attentively watched an opportunity to extort Money from the English, was
resolved not to let pass this fair occasion; and therefore sent to demand from
the Consul those Merchants, which he called Accessories to this mischief, and
the Assassinates of a Mussulman. The Consul appearing in Person before the
Pasha, denied to deliver up the Merchants, being guiltless of any crime; and
that for hurt to the Child, the Father had received full satisfaction from the
Janisary, and given a discharge before the Kadi. Howsoever this reason would
not pacify the Pasha, who could acknowledge no other argument available than a
Sum of Money; and therefore in prosecution of his design produced Ten false
Witnesses, that the Child was dead of its hurt, and that English men had done
the mischief. The Consul had now no other answer than a flat denial; for the
Pasha had forced by threats the Hoget from the Janisary, and persisting with
constancy in defense of his Merchants, the Pasha confined him for an hours time
in a Chamber of his House, and beat, and imprisoned his Druggerman. The Consul
afterward returned home; and perceiving a difference between the Pasha and the
Mufti, purchased the favor of the Mufti on his side, and procured from him an
Hoget of the several proceedings in this business, which was dispatched away
with all expedition to Constantinople, that a redress of this injury might be
obtained from the Superior Power. Whilst the Lord Ambassador in due manner
resented this breach of Capitulations, and prepared to make his complaints to
the Vizier, it happened that certain Christians of Aleppo, from whom the Pasha
had forced 18000 Dollars by unjust extortion, were then at Court soliciting
the restoration of their right. The Ambassador judging this a convenient and
opportune preparation to prepossess the mind of the Vizier with a true
apprehension of the injustice of this Pasha, encouraged and pricked forward
these abused and oppressed Christians in their complaints; and the next day
presented his Memorial to the Vizier, containing all the particulars of the
late passages at Aleppo; Which with the other Crimes alleged the Day before,
so moved the mind of the Vizier, that he promised the Ambassador to send a
Kapugibashee of the Grand Signior to enquire into the Truth of these
Allegations; and that he might be satisfied of his real intentions to do him
justice, he advised him to send a Messenger in company with this Officer, who
might witness the reality of his proceedings. The Kapugibashee being in this
manner dispatched, and arriving at Aleppo, made the Pasha refund the Money he
had unjustly taken from the poor oppressed Christians of that Country; in which
good action my Lord Ambasador had been an useful instrument, having encouraged
the Agents of those Christians at Constantinople,counseled them what Course to
take, and introduced them by his Chief Interpreter to the Presence of the
Vizier, for which he received the thanks of the Greek and Armenian Patriarchs,
who gratefully acknowledged to the English Consul at Aleppo, how much they were
engaged to the charity and favor of the English ambassador: But whilst all
men's eyes were in expectation what farther proceedings were designed against
the Pasha in favor of the English, the Officer denied to have received any
instructions therein, and so returned to Constantinople without taking notice
of the English Concernment. The Ambassador judging himself herein slighted,
sent to the Viziers Kahya to know the mystery of this neglect; for the Vizier
and himself having pawned his word and promises to do him justice against the
Pasha of Aleppo, it seemed strange that his assurances should vanish into
nothing; and that he so meanly esteemed his Quality and Office, as to disparage
it with so much disrepute and contempt as must necessarily befall him, should
this Pasha escape without exemplary punishment; for then the World might with
reason believe his Applications of no prevalency, and his Merchants fear the
insufficiency of his protection. To which the Kahya answered, That it was true,
that the Kapugibashee was not instructed in the Concernments of the English, in
regard a more solemn and eminent piece of Justice was designed for the
Ambassador, than any that could be performed by the Kapugibashee, and that in
twenty or thirty days at farthest, the Pasha should be deprived of his Office.
The next day following the Kahya advised that the Hattesheriff, or Imperial
Command for deposing of the Pasha, was signed, and that old Mahomet Pasha of
Darbiquier was constituted in his place; which News was highly pleasing to the
Lord Ambassador, in regard he had been an ancient Friend to the English, under
whom he presaged to our Nation at Aleppo all security and contentment.
Reflections on the Premises.
By which Story it is observable, That though the Supreme Officers amongst the
Turks are willing to satisfy Christian Ambassadors resident with them, in the
Care they have of their Welfare, and maintenance of their Capitulations; yet
are not desirous to publish to their own People the punishment of their Grand
Officers, at the instigation or for the concernment of a Christian: And that
tho the Turks are apprehended amongst us for a People of great Morality, and
singleness in their Dealings; yet it is observable in this, as well as in other
their actions, that they have double Tongues and Faces, and know how to act
with as fine a Thread, and plausible pretenses, as are accustomary in the most
politic and refined Courts of Italy.

Anno Christi 1663. Hegeira 1074.
THE Baron of Goez, which at the end of the last Year arrived at Buda with
several overtures of Peace, had so far proceeded in his Treaty with Ali Pasha
of Buda, that all Articles seemed almost concluded, and scarce any difficulty
to remain, unless the Surrender of Zekelhyd on the Confines of Hungary; which
also was afterward accommodated by Agreement, That the City should be resigned
into the hands of the Prince of Transylvania, as the most equal Condition
between the Emperor and the Turk. So that, matters thus seeming to be composed,
all People talked of Peace with Germany, and that the force and miseries of
Wars were to be turned upon Dalmatia: And though the Turks had no design less
in their thoughts than this, or any intentions toward a Peace, as will be
proved by the Sequel; howsoever, the German Ministers, as men credulous of what
they desire, gave the Peace for certainly concluded, in which conceit the Turks
so humoured and indulged their fancy, that they persuaded Prince Portia, the
Chief Minister of State to the Emperor, in that manner of the reality of their
intentions, that he neglected the necessary Provisions and Preparations of War,
And though he was often advised by the Resident at the Ottomon Port, that all
these Demonstrations of Peace were only Artifices of the Turk, to delude the
Emperors Council; The Turks with words deceive the German Ministers.
yet so tenacious was he of this Opinion, that though it be but common reason,
and the vulgar Rule of Policy for a Prince to arm, and suspect his Neighbor,
who puts himself into a Warklike posture; yet this Great Personage, though in
other things profoundly wise, and circumspect, was so deluded, that he replied
to the Residents Advices to this effect, That it was the Office of a prudent
and experienced Minister to discover with diligence the resolution of the
Cabinet Councils of Princes, and not to give ear or credit to what is the
common Voice or vogue of the Vulgar.

The Spring drawing near, the Vizier prepared all things for action, nominating
and appointing such, who in his absence were to supply the Offices of State:
Ishmael Pasha, then Pasha of Buda, was designed for Chimacam, or Governor of
Constantinople, and Mustapha Pasha, Captain Pasha, Brother in Law to the Grand
Vizier by Marriage of his Sister (and now the present Vizier) was made Chimacam
at Adrianople, near the Person of the Grand Signior. All other preparations for
War went forwards, Thirty pieces of Cannon from Scutari, and fifty from the
Seraglio, most of a vast bigness and weight, which had served in the taking of
Babylon, with great store of Ammunition and Provisions of War, were transported
up the Danube to Belgrade, and the Princes of Moldavia, and Valachia, had now
Commands sent them to quicken their diligence in making their preparations of
War, and in providing Sheep, Beef, Rice, and all sorts of Victuals for supply
of the Camp; and general Proclamation was made in all places, That all
Soldiers, who received on Asper of pay from the Gr. Signior, were to prepare
themselves for the War.

About the middle of February the Horse Tail was set forth at the Viziers Gate;
(which is the usual signal of the Camps motion within the space of a Month) so
that none may excuse himself from the War for want of due and timely
intimation. And though the time for departure nearly approached, yet the Grand
Signior was so impatient, that he would scarce expect until the Equinoctial,
The Gr. Signior impatient to leave Constantinople.
which was the Term formerly appointed and published for this expedition;
resolving sometimes to proceed before, and leave the Vizier to follow him,
letting fall words often, That such as loved and honored him would keep him
company. But this hasty resolution, and eager desire of his Journey, the
Vizier, Multi, and others of his Counselors, did moderate, persuading him to
a little longer patience: to which, though with some difficulty, he assented;
yet he could not forbear from his Horses back, and constant exercises abroad,
nor could he be induced to take one Nights repose longer in his great Seraglio
at Constantinople, but lodged at Daout Pasha, a small Palace about four miles
distant from Constantinople. Which extravagant manner of living most People
attributed to his wandering humor, and delights in hunting, riding, and such
like exercises, having his sole pleasure in the Woods and Fields: But others,
who judged with better Foundation, did conceive, That the Grand Signiors choice
of other places of Residence rather than his Imperial Seraglio, proceeded not
so much from his own unsettled humor, and course of living, as from an
apprehension of some Designs, and mutinous Treasons of the Janisaries against
him: For to speak the truth, since the death of Kuperlee, the Militia began
again to be corrupted; and if we may believe the opinion of the most principal
Turks, the Vizier undertook this War to employ the busy spirits of the
Soldiery, which began to grow resty and insolent through idleness, and by that
means secure his own life, and establish his Condition and Fortune.

The Equinoctial being come, the Grand Signior would not have one days longer
patience; for though the Season was wet and rainny, yet the Tents were pitched;
and though the Wind was so violent and forcible as overturned almost the whole
Camp, yet no difficulties and inconveniences of Weather could give one hour of
intermission to the Sultans desires: Wherefore on the Ninth of this Month,
March.
the Grand Signior departed from Constantinople, attended with his Court, his
principal Officers of State, and with what part of his Army was then a in
readiness to march. The magnificence of the show they made, was according to
the usual Solemnity, yet worthy the sight of a Stranger, and perhaps not
incurious to the Reader in its Relation.

First, The Cavalcade which the Gr. Signior made when he departed from
Constantinople.
marched with a singular Gravity, the several and distinct Orders of Civil and
Military Officers in their proper Habits and Caparisons, the Santones in their
wild dress followed by the Emirs, or such as are of the Kindred of their false
Prophet; the Great Vizier and Musti rode in rank together, the Vizier on the
left hand, the most honorable place amongst the Soldiery, being the side to
which the Sword is girt, as the right is of greatest esteem amongst such as are
of the Law, being that hand which guides the Pen: The Trappings of the Viziers
Horse were plared with Gold, and before him were carried three Horse-tails,
called in Turkish (Tugh,) and behind him came about Three hundred and fifty
Pages, all Young men well mounted, and armed with Jacks and Coats of Male: Next
followed the Minions of the Court, or Seraglio, ( viz.) the Paicks with Caps of
beaten Gold, and embroidered Coats, the Solacks with Feathers, armed with Bows
and Arrows; these two last are of the highest degree of Lacqueys, which more
nearly attend the Person of the Grand Signior; these were followed by Nine led
Horses of the Grand Signior, richly adorned with precious Stones, and Bucklers
all covered with Jewels of an unknown value. Immediately before the Person of
the Grand Signior was led a Camel carrying the Alcoran in a Chest covered with
cloth of gold: The Gr. Signior himself was clothed in a Vest of cloth of gold
lined with a Sable incomparably black, held up from the sides of his Horse by
four Pages; his Person was followed with great numbers of Eunuchs, and Pages
with long red Caps wrought with Gold about the head, carrying Lances and Mails,
with two Locks, one on each side of their Head, which are worn by such only as
are of the Royal Chamber: After these crowded great numbers of Servants, with
the chief Comp. of Saphees, commanded by the Selictor Aga, in number about
1800. And in this manner and order they marched to their Tents.

The Tents were raised on a small Hill, as may be judged about Four Miles
distant from Constantinople, and about Two Thousand in number ranged at that
time without order, only the Grand Signior's seemed to be in the midst, and to
overtop all the rest, well worthy observation, costing (as was reported) One
hundred and eighty thousand Dollars, The richness of Turkish Tents.
richly embroidered in the inside with Gold, and supported by Pillars plated
with Gold. Within the In Turkish Perdeh.
Walls of this Tent (as I may so call them) were all sorts of Offices belonging
to the Seraglio, all Retirements and Apartments for the Pages, Chioskes or
Summer-houses for pleasure; and though I could not get admittance to view the
innermost Rooms and Chambers, yet by the outward and more common places of
resort, I could make a guess at the richess and greatness of the rest being
sumptuous beyond comparison of any in use amongst the Christian Princes. On the
right hand hereof was pithced the Grand Viziers Tent, exceedingly rich and
lofty; and had I not seen that of the Sultans before it, I should have judged
it the best that my eyes had seen. The ostentation and magnificence of this
Empire being evidenced in nothing more than in the richess of their Pavilions,
sumptuous beyond the fixed Palaces of Princes, erected with Marble and Mortar.

On the Sixteenth of this Month the Aga of the Janisaries first raised his
Tents, The Turks begin their March.
and began his march; the next day followed the Grand Signior, Vizier, and
other Officers, and Spahees. At which time all Asia was full of Soldiers
flocking from all parts of the East, as from Aleppo, Damascus, Arabia, Erzirum,
and Babylon: So that for a long time Boats and Barks were continually employed
to ferry the Soldiery from Scutari into Europe: And the Highways, Villages,
and all parts of the Road toward Adrianople were filled with Soldiers, as if
all Asia had issued out to devour and inhabit the German Possessions. And for
greater expedition in the march of the Army, Proclamation was made of a general
Rendezvous at Sophia at the The Turks Feast.
Biram, then within Three weeks time, where they designed to soil their Horse,
and refresh themselves before they fell in earnest to their business. But
before the Grand Vizier departed from Adrianople to prosecute a War in Hungary
against the Emperor, he called Signior Ballarino to his presence, as if he
would treat with him of matters tending to an adjustment with Venice; when at
the same time he had 20000 men in a readiness at Scutari to march into
Dalmatia, and to join with other Forces in Bosna and Croatia; but this
dissimulation and appearance of Treaty served only to discover on what Terms a
Peace might be obtained, in case Affairs in Hungary should be so pressing as to
require an application solely of Arms to that Country.

Not only had Signior Ballarino Affairs of public trouble, but likewise
something touched him of private concernment in his own Family; where the
Turks, I know not upon what information coming to fearch, found in his House
two figures, one of a man, and the other of a woman made of Linen cloth,
stuffed with Wool and Cotton; the which were interpreted by the Turks to be
Images of Sorcery and Enchantment; one representing the Grand Signior, and the
other his Mother, were designed in a secret manner, by thrusting Needles and
Pins into those parts, where the Heart and Liver is, to cause those whom they
represent to dye with macerations and consumptions, according to the
Enchantment of Medea. In jecur urget acus. And this suspicion was augmented by
the reports of the Neighborhood, who hearing the Priest often recite his
Litany, and sing Evening-song, avouched that they constantly overheard the
Charms muttered in such forms as are used by Magicians and Sorcerers: Wherefore
designing to take the Priest, who was the Father Provincial of St. Francis, and
punish him for his Witchcraft, the good man fairly fled, and kept himself out
of harms way, until Signior Ballarino could quiet the minds of the Turks by
some Art, which he more forcibly practiced upon them by a stronger charm of
Money and Presents than that which was the subject of their complaint.

In the mean time all fears and dangers of Candia vanished, because the Turks
bent their Forces and chief of their strength against their Enemies at Land: To
provide against which, the Senate of Venice sent into Dalmatia the Baron Spaar
for General, with many other Officers under him, namely the Marquess Maculani,
Count Ettore Albano, Carlo Martinengo, and Roverelli, Count of Caudes, the
Cavallier Grimaldi, Echenfelt, and others. Into Friuli, Francisco Morosini was
dispatched in quality of Proveditor General with supreme Power and Authority,
and in this manner all matters were as well provided and secured by Land, as
they were by Sea.

The Biram chanced to happen out this Year toward the end of April, by which
time the Vizier, and most of his Army, assembled according to Proclamation at
Sophia; where having continued some time, and consulted well in what manner to
put their designs in execution, they proceeded in their March toward Buda, and
the Confines of Hungary; but in the way the Vizier was encountered by a
Messenger from the Emperor, offering all reasonable Propositions of Peace, if
possibly a stop might be given to the farther progress of that vast and
formidable Army. All matter, were proposed which probably might give
satisfaction; the Fort of Count Serini (the grand Eyesore of the Turks) was
proffered to be demolished, with other Conditions which before the March of the
Army were never proposed or demanded. But the Vizier gave little ear to these
fair Overtures, but proceeded forwards in his Demands, as he did in his March:
Requiring now, not the demolishment of the Fort, but the Surrender of it
entirely with all the Strength, Artillery, and Ammunition into the hands of the
Grand Signior. Had this condition been granted, it is probable the desires and
pretensions of the Turks would not have stopped here, but have risen, as the
spirits of their Enemies had condescended, and exceeded all the hopes and
advantage which they imagined probable and feasible to be obtained by the War.
Wherefore this Message proving fruitless, the Bringer of it was permitted
License to return into Germany: But the Resident was refused dismission, being
detained in the Turkish Camp, as an Instrument to mediate a Peace, when both
sides should grow weary of the War.

About this time the Tartars were greatly infested by the Cossacks, who were
then very formidable and strong, The Cossacks infest the Tartars.
approaching near the City of Osac, the Key and chief Fortress of Tartary,
under the Commann of a Fisherman of the Boristhenes, who having had great
successes, and collected a considerable sum of Money, became a dangerous Enemy:
By Sea also they commanded absolutely, roving uncontrouled, having a Fleet of
Saykes and Galleys near an hundred and fifty Sail, against whom the Tartar Han
or King of Tartary craved of the Grand Signior forty sail of Galleys that year
to oppose them. But this Force of the Cossacks was soon abated; for it pleased
God, that passing out of the Palus Moeotis through the narrow passage of
Colchos into the Black Sea, the best part of this Fleet suffered shipwreck;
with which they were so dismayed, that the twelve sail of Galleys (which was
the whole Force the Turks could spare this year for that Sea) gave a check to
the remainder, and forced them again to the Banks of the Boristhenes. The rest
of the Turkish Fleet, consisting, together with the Beys Galleys, in all but of
thirty Sail, departed from Constantinople, with design rather to make some
appearance of a Fleet, and a noise amongst their own people, and collect the
Contributions of the Isles in the Archipelago, than out of hopes of effecting
any thing against the Venetians; and so it succeeded; for this Fleet remained
the whole Summer at Mytilene, not daring to appear abroad for fear of the Enemy.

Though the Tartars were so hardly beset by the Cossacks, yet their danger at
home was not a sufficient excuse to disingage them from their assistance in the
War of Hungary. For the Vizier marching toward the Frontiers, sent one
Messenger after the other to hasten the Tartar Han with all speed possible to
the Wars. But the Tartars seeming not so willing, or so ready as the Turks
expected, more positive commands, and severe threats, were dispatched than
before, that laying aside all excuses or delays, they should with all the Force
of their Country attend in this present War against the Emperor, The Tartar
unwilling to go to the War.
or otherwise the Tartar Han was to be deprived of his Government, and his Son
constituted in his place. These severe menaces reduced the Tartar to great
straits; fearful he was to displease the Sultan, not knowing what ill
consequences might proceed from thence; but more apprehensive he was of the
approaches of the Cossacks, and of the displeasure of his own People, who were
resolved to see this fire of War extinguished in their own homes, before they
would attend the designs, or satisfy the Lusts of a stranger Prince. In this
Dilemma the Tartar Han finding himself, made use of fair words and promises,
engaging his word. That after the harvest was past, no obstacle should prevent
his compliance with the Sultans expectations; for at present it was impossible,
in regard that should their People at this season be diverted from gathering
the harvest, the Corn and Fruit would remain on the ground, and so occasion a
Famine and destruction of their Country. And herein the Tartar had some reason;
for these People go not to the Wars, as other Nations, who leave a sufficient
number behind to cultivate their Country, and perform all other Offices and
Employments in a Commonwealth: But these making their chief livelihood and
subsistence on the prey and robberies they make on their Neighbors; The course
of life amongst the Tartars.
as many as resolve to eat Bread and live, who are men not old or impotent,
able to bear Arms, betake themselves to their Horse and Bow; so that when their
Army is abroad, their Towns and Villages are only inhabited, and defended by
their Women. But the Turk whose desires are never satisfied with reasons, or
withstood by words, or with any thing besides the execution of his Commands,
dispatched another Message more full of threats and resolution than formerly,
They are threatened again.
carried by the Embrahor, or Master of the G. Signiors Horse, menacing nothing
but Fire, and Sword, and Destruction to the Han and his Country, if he longer
delayed to perform his Duty. But by this time the Harvest being almost
gathered, and their fears against the Cossacks partly extinguished, the Tartar
promised with all expedition an Army of Seventy Thousand men, They send an Army
into Hagary.
under the Conduct of the Prince his eldest Son, who whilst they were putting
themselves in order, and assembling for the War; reports were murmured, as if
the Turks were in a Treaty of Peace with the Emperoor, and matters in a fair
likelihood of composure: At this news the common Soldiers amongst the Tartars
were not a little startled, fearing that they who are free Booters, and have no
other pay than their purchase, should by such a Treaty be forced to return
empty; and therefore before they would proceed, sent to advise the Sultan of
these their fears; supplicating him, that if he should think fit to conclude a
Peace, and so oblige them to return into their own Country, that he would not
take it amiss, if upon their march home, they should make themselves good upon
his Subjects of Moldavia and Valachia, whose persons and Estates they resolved
to carry with them, as a just prey and recompense for their loss of time and
labor. The Sultan who sets a small value on the Lives and Estates of his
Christian Subjects, judged this Proposition but reasonable, so long as upon
these terms he might obtain the benefit of the Tartars assistance, who are the
best Horse to forage, destroy, and make desolate a Country.

The Story of Asan Aga the Mosayp or Favorite, and other instances of the
uncertainty of the Turkish Richess, and Glory
THE Great Vizier being by this time arrived on the Frontiers with a very
considerable Army; the G. Signior at Adrianople continued his usual pleasures
in Hunting, Riding, throwing of the Gerit or Dart, and in other pastimes and
sports of this nature; at which time casting his Eves upon one Asan Aga, a
sprightly youth of his Seraglio, a Polonian by Nation, to be more forward and
active than any of his Court, took an affection to him, so sudden and violent,
as might be judged neither well founded, nor long durable; for the Grand
Signior having heard, that there were examples amongst the Emperors his
Predecessors, not only in the absence, but in the presence also of the Vizier,
of maintaining and constituting a Favorite, in Turkish called Mosayp, did own
publicly the Election of this person for his Friend and Companion; so that
this Minion was on a sudden so highly ingratiated in the favor of his Prince,
that he always rode equal with him; Clothed as rich, and mounted as well. as
the Sultan himself, as if he had been his Coadjutor, or Companion in the
Empire. The Queen Mother, the Kuzlier Aga, and other rich Eunuchs of the
Seraglio, the Chimacams of Adrianople, and Constantinople, with all the Great
Officers and principal Ministers, were commanded to make Presenr of Money,
Jewels, and other Sacrifices, to this rising Sun; whom now every one so courted
and adored, that he became the only talk and admiration of the whole Town; no
other discourse there was but of Asan Chelabei, Asan the fine accomplished
Gentleman, Asan the only Creature of Fortune, and Idol of the whole World. This
high and sudden promotion of this Youth, greatly displeased the Queen Mother,
Kuzlier Aga, who had Creatures of their own to perfer, and by their means
became the Envy and Emulation of the whole Court, so that there wanted not such
who posted the news to the Vizier, as him, on whom the growing greatness of
Asan might have the most dangerous reflection: But the Vizier duly considering,
that the deep impressions this Youth had made in the affections of his Master,
were not to be removed by plain dealing, but by some more occult Artifice and
dissimulation, took occasion to write to the Grand Signior, in favor of Asan
Aga, extolling the prudence of his choice of so complete and hopeful a Youth
for his Favorite; but that it was pity, so pregnant parts as those with which
Asan was endued, fit to promote his Masters Service and Interest, should be
Encloistred, and Buried in the softness and delights of his Seraglio; and
therefore his Counsel was, to have him preferred to some government, and degree
of a Pasha, to which his Abilities and Education, in the Nursery and Discipline
of the Court, had abundantly accomplished him. Pessimum genus inimicorum,
laudantes. Tacitus.
Nor were the Queen Mother, and Kuzlier Aga, all this time wanting in their
contrivance to undermine him, but not with a design spun with so fine a Thread,
prosessing themselves openly his Adversaries: For which Courtly Policy, the
Vizier only received a check, and some few verbal reproofs, for intermedling
with what so nearly concerned his Masters Fancy and Affection: But the Kuzlier
Aga, was by one word from Asan (whom he had discovered to be his Enemy)
deprived of his Office, The Kuzlier Aga banished to Cairo.
and had therewith lost his Life, had not the Queen Mother powerfully
interceded for him, and gained an exchange of his punishment from death to
banishment in Grand Cairo in Egypt. The Baltagibashee also (who is the Captain
of that part of the Grand Signiors Guard, As also the Baltagibashee.
who carry Hatchers, and are empyloyed in cutting Wood for the use of the
Seraglio) being discovered to be a Confederate in the same Plot against the
Favorite, was condemned to the same punishment, and immediately both of them
dispeeded away to the place, where they were to spend the remainder of their
days. Grand Cairo has always been the place of Banishment for unfortunate
Courtiers, or rather of such who have with much greatness, plenty, and
contentment sometimes enjoyed the Fruit of their great Richess, gained in the
Sunshine and summer of their Princes favor. To this City also was this Kuzlier
Aga exiled, who in the enjoyment of his Office for several years, had amassed a
most vast Wealth, incredible to be spoken, and much to be wondered, that a
Negro, whose hue and person is contemptible amongst all, whom God has created
of a Color different from those who partake more of Light, and are of nearer
similitude with the Sun, and Nature of an Angel; one whose Original was a
Slave, and his price never above a Hundred Pieces of Eight, should be loaded
with such Goods of Fortune, and enriched with the Treasury of a Prince: His
Retinue consisted of about 900 Horse, (besides Camels, and Mules for his
Baggage) amongst which a Hundred were led Horses, worth Seven or eight hundred
Dollars a Horse, and that he might still seem to live by his Princes Bounty, a
thousand Aspers a day was to be his constant pay, to be issued out of the G.
Signiors Revenue in Egypt; by which we may in part calculate the greatness of
this Empire, when so vast Richess is accounted but a reasonable proportion for
so vile and mean a Slave: Howsoever the Grand Signiors Treasury suffers little
hereby, for this wealth and pomp is but lent him to keep, and look on; he is
incapable to make a Testamen, or constitute an Heir; the Grand Signior himself
succeeding to all the Estate he has given him, and the improvement of it. This
Negro being proceeded as far as to Constantinople, had his Companion the
Balragibushee, recalled from him with design to be put to Death, but afterward
by mediation of some powerful Friends, who took advantage of the gentle and
benign humor of the Sultan, his pardon was obtained, and he preferred to a
small Government of a Pasha.
Pashalick in the lesser Asia. Howsoever the Eunuch proceeded in his Journey to
Grand Cairo, where being arrived, after three Days, was by the Imperial Command
stripped of all his wealth and greatness, which amounted unto Two Millions of
Dollars, to be restored again to their first Master, who uses to lend his
Slaves such gaieties and Ornaments, only to afford the World occasion to see
and admire the vastness of his Wealth, and contemplate the vanity and
unconstancy of Richess and Worldly glory. This poor Negro thus divested of all,
returned to his primary condition of a Slave, in which he was born, and for
many years had lived, and was now banished, forsaken, and disconsolate in the
upper Egypt; whither going scarce with sufficient to preserve him from Famine
and Beggary, the Beyes of Egypt, out of compassion, bestowed on him an Alms of
twelve Purses, being Eight Thousand four hundred Dollars, according to the
Account of Cairo, now the only support and sustenance of his Life.

This Victory gained over these great Personages, and foyl given to the Queen
Mother her self, was not carried by this young Favorite with that prudent
equality of mind as was decent; but being puffed up with pride and glory,
adventured to a judgment and censure of the deepest matters of State, which
touched not a little the jealousy and scorn of the Great Vizier, who therefore
wrote to all those grave Sages, to whose Counsel he conceived the Sultan gave
any ear or credit; representing with extraordinary passion and fervency the
dangers he apprehended might befall his Master, and his Empire, whilst both were
subject to the unexperienced Counsels of Asan, a Youth both in years and
knowledge. That it was much to the disparagement of the Supreme Office of
Vizier whilst was with Thousands of Turks on the Frontiers contending for the
Glory and Enlargement of the Ottoman Dominions, subjected to millions of
dangers and labors; to be supplanted by a Boy, fit only for an attendants in
his Masters Chamber; and to have the privacy of the Emperors State Counsels and
policy rifled by a Youth, whose years had not fitted him for the knowledge and
continence of an ordinary Secret. These reasonable Complaints of the Vizier's
were by some of his wise Friends, whose Age and Gravity had produced something
of Reverence toward their Persons, not without hazard and fear communicated
unto the Sultan, the violence of whose Love being with time moderated and
abated, he began to consider the reasonableness of this Discourse, and so on a
sudden, to the great admiration of all, cast off his Favorite, creating him a
Kapugibashee, or chief Porter, with a hundred and fifty Aspers a day Sallary.

The Ruin of Samozade, the Reis Effendi, or Chief Secretary of State to the
Great Vizier.
AND since we have related a Story which partly represents the unconstancy and
tyranny of the Turkish Greatness, it may yet please the Reader, should we add
another, though a little out of its due order, not less remarkable, and worthy of
Record, than the former.

When Newhausel was besieged, called by the Turks and Hungarians, Oyar, and
diverse attempts made on it in vain; Samozade the Reis Effendi, with less
caution and wisdom than he did usually practice in other matters, wrote a
Letter to the Chief Eunuch of the Women, then in the Seraglio at Adrianople, to
this effect. That if the Grand Signior desired to have that Fortress taken that
was then besieged, he should choose a more able Captain for his Army than the
present Vizier, a Person who had only been educated in a Tekeh, or College,
and studied in the speculations of Law, and not in the Oda's of the Janisaries,
or Customs and Exercises of the Camp: And therefore if his Majesty thought fit
to choose another General, he could not cast his eyes on any more able and
deserving than Ibrahim Pasha his Son in Law, a Person qualified for the Office
of Vizier, being skilful in all points both of War and Peace. This Eunuch being
the person that had succeeded to the former lately exiled, having received this
Letter, immediately without farther Art or Prologue, read it to the Grand
Signior, at which though at first he was startled, yet not as yet weary of the
Vizier, but ftill conserving a kindness and esteem for him, took the Letter
from the Eunuch, and sent it to the Vizier, permitting him to inflict what
punishment he judged most agreeable to his own preservation and vindication of
honor. The Vizier, having received this Letter, seemed not in the least to be
surprised with the perfidiousness of Samozade, but in a cool temper
recollecting all the Applications and Addresses (which we have mentioned
before) at his first entrance into this Supreme Office, and judging from
thence, that he was not a Person capable of friendship, or a steadiness to his
Interest, sent for him, and for Ibrahim Pasha his Son in Law to his presence,
and first having upbraided his Treachery, and want of Integrity, in return to
all the Caresses and Endeavors he had used to win his Faith, caused both their
heads to be struck off by the Executioner.

This Samozade was one of the most wise and best practiced Secretaries of State
that ever served the Ottoman Empire, and one whom our English much lamented,
being perfectly acquainted with the particulars of our Capitulations, and
Constitution of our Trade; and had not his extraordinary Covetousness blemished
his other moral Virtues, he might have been esteemed a man rare, and a Minister
not unworthy the greatest Monarch of the World. The Richess he had collected
during the time of his State-Negotiations were incredible and immense, for he
spared and lost no opportunity of gains, which rendered him the more liable and
obnoxious to the stroke of Justice. His Goods were now seized on for service of
the Sultan, his Master, as justly confiscated for Treason; his Estate was found
to amount unto three Millions of Pieces of Eight in ready Money; he had sixteen
hundred Camels, four Hundred Mules, Six hundred Horses of the best sort,
besides ordinary Horses of service proportionable to those of value. In his
Chests and Stores were found Four thousand Girdles, or Sashes, of the best sort
of Silver, never worn; Seven and twenty pounds weight of Pearl, three hundred
Daggers (or Turkish Hanjars) most set with Diamonds and Rubies, besides Ninety
Sable Vests, each whereof might be vauled at a Thousand Dollars; his Swords and
rich Furniture were without number, or account, with a Cart-Load of the best
and finest China; over and above all this, remained to his Son a Revenue of
about Ten pounds Sterling a day, who being condemned to the torture to confess
the hidden Riches of his Father, at his first examination discovered One
hundred and twenty five thousand Zaichins of Venetian Gold.

Of an Avania brought upon the Dutch Nation.
BEfore we proceed on with the Relation of the War in Hungary, where we for a
time shall leave the Great Vizier, it will not be from our purpose to digress a
little in recounting certain intermediate Accidents, which had reference to our
own and the Dutch Nations Interest at the Ottoman Court. And first I shall
begin with the Dutch, to whom a considerable trouble and misfortune besel, by
means of a Ship of their called the Emperor Octaviano, which designing to lade
Turks Goods at Alexandria for Constantinople, had her License and Dispatches
obtained by means of the Holland Resident, the Sieur Warnero. This Ship being
accordingly laden at Alexandria, whereon also the Grand Signior himself had
Thirty thousand Dollars Interest, and being ready to depart, was near the Port
surprised by the Venetian, and Maltese Corsairs, and so taken. This News was
posted over land from Grand Cairo, and the Cargo sent of the Goods, importing
Fourscore and four thousand Dollars, which in the Month of June arrived at
Constantinople. The persons interested in this loss being many, in the nature
of a Tumult applied themselves to the Grand Signior, and demanded sentence
against the Dutch Resident for reparation, alleging that he had recommended
the Ship, and Commander, who had combined with the Corsairs to surprise him,
and that the Resident had engaged for the faithfulness of the Captain, who had
betrayed their Goods, not endeavoring to defend himself so much as by the shot
of one Musket. The Grand Signior being likewise concerned herein himself, was
easily persuaded to grant his Order and Sentence, That the loss of all should
concern the Dutch Resident, and his Nation, requiring the Chimacam of
Constantinople to summon the Resident, and intimate his pleasure therein,
exacting a time limited for the payment. The Resident being called to several
Audiences thereupon, denied to have had any hand in the employment of this Ship
on the this Voyage, and that their Capitulations, to which the Grand Signior
had sworn, acquitted him from being responsible for the misdemeanors of any of
his Nation, for whose fidelity and good behavivour he had never personally
engaged, and thereupon positively refused to make himself liable for payment of
this Money, to which he was neither obliged by the Law of Nations, nor his own
private Act. Notwithstanding which, the Turks sentenced the Resident to be
liable to make satisfaction, in regard that when the Ship was first freighted,
he appeared before the Chimacam at Constantinople, and being asked whether the
Commander of this Ship was an honest man, and one who might be entrusted with
such a concernment of the Turks; his Answer was, That he believed he might, and
that he was always esteemed faithful and honest to his Trust: which in the
Turkish Law amounting to as much as if he had said, he would become his
security, the Grand Signior confirmed the former sentence against the Resident,
and with haste and fury dispatched a Kapugibashee to bring his Person to
Adrianople; where being arrived, and continuing as yet constant to his first
Answer, was committed to custody of the Chaousbashee, or Chief of the
Pursuivants, where they gave him time until after the Feast of the little
Biram, to consult his own good and security of his Nation within the Turkish
Dominions. The Feast was no sooner ended, but the Grand Signior sent
immediately to know his untimate resolution, declaring, That if he continued
still obstinate against his Power, he had commanded that he should be committed
to that Dungeon which had some few years before been the Lodging of other
Christian Ministers. The Resident terrified at the thoughts of such an
Imprisonment, declined from his former constancy, engaging to pay the Money in
an Hundred and five days time, for no longer would be granted; so violent and
unreasonable the Turks were in their demands, against the Law of Nations, the
particular Capitulations, and the common reason and justice of the World. This
Money was for the most part taken up by the Dutch Nation in Turkey at Interest,
and afterward the debt extinguished by Money lent them by the States, sor
payment of which a particular Imposition was granted on all Goods brought from
Turkey, until the Debt to them was cleared, with an Interest of one per cent.
for the year. By which it may be observed, how little are esteemed the Persons
of Christian Representatives in the Turkish Court; who having proved with what
tameness some Princes have taken the affronts offered to the Person of their
Ambassador in former times, and now observing with what patience the States of
Holland have sustained the like insolence and injury in their Resident, they
may possibly profess their Function sacred, but yet in matters of their own
interest will never be induced to vouchsafe them that respect or just treatment
which is due to them.

In what state the Affairs of England, in reference to the Turkish Court, stood
about this time with Algier, and other Parts of Barbary.
IN the preceding year we declared how a Peace was concluded between England
and Algier: For better confirmation whereof, and security of our Merchants
Estates in the Levant, upon occasion of a future breach, it was judged
necessary by His Majesty's Council, That the respective Articles last made and
concluded with Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli, should be distinctly described and
ratified by the Grand Signior, with this Clause at the Conclusion of each, viz.
That in case the foregoing Articles were not kept by these his Subjects
respectively, but should contrary to the meaning thereof through Piracy be
broken, that then it should be lawful for the King of England to chastise those
People by his own Arms and Force, without Impeachment or Breach of that good
Peace and Amity which Intervenes between His Majesty of Great Britain and the
Ottoman Emperor: And this was supposed might always be a Plea in defense of the
English Nation in Turkey, when at any time His Majesty provoked by the Injuries
of those faithless and piratical Nations, should take due Revenge upon them,
not only on the Seas, but also on the Land, subverting those very Cities and
Fortresses, which are the Nests of Piracies, and the common Chastisement and
Gaols of Christendom. When these Articles came to the hands of His Majesty's
Ambassador the Earl of Winchelsea, with Orders to have them ratified and
subscribed in the manner foregoing, the Turkish Court was then at Adrianople,
to which place on this occasion the Lord Ambassador made a Journey from his
usual Residence at Constantinople; and having acquainted the Chimacam with the
whole matter, and the Propositions rightly apprehended by him, they were
offered, and the next day communicated in behalf of the Ambassador to the Grand
Signior, who readily promised compliance with His Majesty's desires, ordering
the Articles and Conclusion of them, to be engrossed and prepared for the
Imperial Assent. Howsoever some considerable time ran on before they were
delivered out, in regard that being matters of State relating to War and Peace,
they could not be fully granted without Privity and Knowledge of the Grand
Vizier, who was the supreme Counselor, and therefore we were forced to attend
thirty five days before an Express could go and return from the Frontiers with
the Answer expected, which was as easily granted by the Vizier, as before it
was entertained by the Grand Signior. On August 5. the Confirmation of the
several aforesaid Articles were consigned unto my self in presence of our Lord
Ambassador by the hands of the Chimacam, being my self designed in Person to
deliver them; for which Service a Frigate of His Majesty's Navy attended at
Smyrna: so that very Evening I departed, and arrived at Smyrna: the 15th of
August.

In my Journey from Adrianople to Smyrna, omitting the Geography of the
Countries, and the pleasent view I had from the top of a Mountain between
Malagra and Gallipoli, from whence I could survey all the Hellespont, and at
the same time take a prospect of the Propontick and Ionian Seas, I shall only
relate two passages which befell me in this Journey, not unpleasant to be
remembered.

The first was at a small Village called Ishecle, at the foot of the Mountain
Ida, not far from the Ancient Iroy, now named by the Turks Kauzdog, which
signifies the Mountain of Geese; the People that inhabit here, are of a rude
Disposition, great Thieves, and of a wild and savage Nature; at my entry
thereupon I was advised by those that were with me, that it was necessary to
take Mules to carry my Baggage through the Mountains, and to press the People
to convoy me to the next Government by Virtue of a Command the Grand Signior
had granted me for the security of my Travels; so that arriving at this place
by break of day, I went directly with all my Attendance, being about eighteen
or nineteen Horse, to the Kadi's House, where knocking hard at the Door, a
Servant looked out at the Window, and spying so great a company, wholly
affrighted, ran to his Master, and awakening him with such dreadful news, he
had scarce any Soul or Life remaining to render an Answer; for he was one of
those, who three times a day was used to take his Dose of Opium, which gave him
a strange kind of Intoxication or Drunkenness; during the Operation of which,
men have their Spirits violently moved and agitated, that afterward it leaves
them so wearied and languid, that in the morning when they first awake, they
remain like dead Stocks, their Members are benumbed, and can scarce turn from
one side to the other. In this conidtion the News of new Guests surprised this
Kadi, when wholly feeble he called to his Servant to reach him his Box of
Opium, of which when he had taken his usual Propotion, and that it began to
work, his Life returned again to him and he began immediately to recover, so
that he had Courage to open his Gates and receive us in: when he had read the
Command, and found no hurt in it, the Man was transported with Joy and Opium,
and was so kind, cheerful, and of a good humor, that I could not but admire at
the change; he told me, that he lived in a barbarous Country, and was sorced to
use that for Divertisement and as a Remedy of his melancholy hours. I easily
perceived the effect it had upon him, for he seemed to me like a Bedlam; in
which humor he called all his Neighbors about him, and after a wise
Consultation, they provided me with two Mules, and five Men on foot with rusty
Muskets without Powder or Shot, to guide and guard me through the Mountains. I
had not traveled two Miles before all my Guard were stolen aside, and taking
advantage of the Woods and Mountains, were fled from me, so that I found my
self with no other than my own People, in an unbeaten Path, and a way
unfrequented; the man excepted who drove the Mules, who for sake of his Beasts
was obliged to a farther attendance. We traveled in this manner through the
Mountains about four hours, when near a Village called Suratnee, we met one of
the Principal men on Horseback, carrying a flead Mutton behind him, which upon
Examination we discovered to be carried for a Bribe to the Kadi of Isheclee,
that so he would be his Friend, and favor him in his Cause: And further upon
inquiry, finding that our Entertainment was likely to be mean at Suratnee, we
forced the Gentleman to return with us, and to sell us his Mutton at the
market-price, and so for that time we disappointed our Kadi of his Fee or
Reward: and being upon the rise of a Hill descending to Suratnee, so that the
People could see us at a distance, they like true Sons of Kauz-dog forsook
their Habitations, and fled, which we perceiving posted after them, and catched
two of their men, whom we brought under Shart, (or the Country-mans Oath, which
they account very sacred, and will by no means break) to be true and faithful
to us, to serve, and not leave us for so long time as we should remain in their
Village, and accordingly these men were not only serviceable, but diligent: so
soon as they discovered me to be one who would pay justly for what I took, and
was not a Turkish Aga, or Servant of Great men who harrass the People, and take
their Service and Meat on account of free Quarter, the whole Village returned
again from their places of Refuge amidst the Woods, so that I neither wanted
Provisions nor Attendance.

Another passage happened unto me of better Civility and Entertainment in the
Plains of Pergamus, where not many Miles from that Ancient City. I arrived
about six a Clock in the Evening at certain Tents or Cots of Shepherds, being
only Hurdles covered with Hair-cloth, lined within with a sort of loose Felt, a
sufficient defense against the Sun and Rain; the Turks call these People
Euruchs, and are Shepherds who with their Wives, Children and Cattle, Live and
Inhabit, where they most delight, or like the Shepherds of Ancient days, remove
their dwellings to those Places where they find most plenty of Water and
Pasture. Amongst these Cors so soon as I alighted from my Horse, I was received
and saluted by the Aga or Chief, with great Humanity and Kindness; for so soon
as he understood who I was, and that I was employed in public Affairs, he
presently places me under some neighboring Trces, and called for Carpets and
Cushions to sit on, which were more Fine and Rich, than agreed with the outward
appearance of Men wholly unaccustomed to a City-life. After some Discourse had
with me, which I remember to have been very Courteous and Inquisitive of my
Condition and Business, he provided Provender for our Horses, and in a short
time ordered Bread and Eggs to be brought for to stay my Stomach, supposing
that hard Travels had sharpened my Appetite. About an hour after that, he
invited all my Company, and then we fed very plentifully of several Dishes,
which the good Houswives had dressed within the Precincts of their poor Tents;
whilst the Shepherds had in the Field killed a lat Kid, and were then roasting
it whole at the suel of a Tree which they had felled; this Roast-meat they cut
into quarters, and with Bread and Salt put it into a Linen-cloth, delivering it
to one of my Servants for our Breakfast the next morning. Having thus well
refreshed my self with the Charity of these good Shepherds, I arose with the
Moon about eleven a Clock at Night; but before my Departure, I demanded what I
had to pay; to which the generous Shepherd replied, That my Acceptance was a
sufficient Payment, for that all Men were obliged to be Civil and Hospitable to
Men who traveled the World like me for public Service; and withal desired me
to speak well, wheresoever I came, of such poor Men who led their Lives in the
Fields, who were instructed in these Principles, viz. to hurt none, and to be
humane and helpful to all Mankind.

In a few days after my Arrival at Smyrna, I embarked on the Bonaventure
Frigate, Commanded by Capt. Berkeley, afterward Sir William Berkeley, and
shaping our course first for Tripoli in Barbary, Tripoli.
we came to Anchor before the Town the 29; and immediately going ashore, we
were conducted to the Presence of the Pasha of that Country, whom I acquainted
with the occasion of this Address, delivering into his hands two Copies of the
late Treaty of Peace, one confirmed by the Hand and Seal of His Majesty our
Gracious Sovereign, and the other of the Sultan; both which he received with
singular Respect and Reverence, promising to maintain the Peace sacred and
inviolable; and so being dismissed fairly from him, we speedily repaired on
Board, and setting Sail again that Night with a prosperous Gale, we anchored in
the Bay of Tunis on the second of September; Tunis.
and the next day being landed, we in the first place made our Addresses to the
Dey, who bears the Office of Prince or Governor in chief, tho in the Arabian
Language the word signifies as much as Uncle, to whom I tendered the
Confirmations of Peace in the same form and manner as before at Tripoli: the
Dey received them with Respect and Honor, promising to continue the Peace;
that part which was from our King, he received himself; but that which was from
the Grand Signior he advised me to deliver to the Pasha; for coming from his
Master, it might more nearly concern him than any other; the Pasha having seen
and read, the Hattesheriff returned it again to the Dey to be placed amongst
the Records and Registers of the Divan, and so making a Visit to all the great
Men in Power, giving them notice of our Business, that so none might take
Exceptions, or judge themselves neglected for want of Addresses; we the same
Night departed from Tunis, and proceeded forward in our Voyage to Algier. But
before we arrive there, I have time to acquaint the Reader of the Pestilential
Fever which then affected our whole Ship. When we departed from Smyrna, we had
fourteen Sick of the Autumnal Distemper, but before ten Days, we had ninety
five out of a hundred and sixty Men, which lay Sick on their Beds and Hamocks;
and we seared so general a Weakness, that we should not have had Strength
sufficient to have Sailed our Ship; for I think there was scarce any amongst us
in perfect Health. But God showed his Strength in our Weakness, so that in ten
Days, having buried nine of our Men, he was pleased with the change of our
Climate, to renew our Health, and in Answer to our Prayers, as it were by a
Miracle, to restore us to all the Health, and Strength, and Comfort, that we
could desire.

At Algier, that Den of Thieves, and Harbor of Faithless Men, and all Impiety,
we arrived the 10th of September, where immediately with assistance of the
Consul, we designed to tender the Confirmations of the Peace unto the Divan,
then the supreme and Absolute Power. But whilst we imagined the Peace firm, and
improbable that those Articles which were concluded and agreed but the last
Year, should so easily and soon be forgotten; we found the Scene of Affairs
greatly altered, and fears of an unexpected Rupture; for the Ships of Algier
roving in the Seas, had lately sent in nine small English Vessels without a
Pass from the Duke of York, for want of which, they pretended by a new
Agreement they ought to be prize; of which, six by means of the Consul being
released, three only remained under Detention at our Arrival; when immediately
we applied our selves to Shaban Aga, a Spanish Renegado, then Cape or Chief of
their confused Divan; to him we first disclosed the import of our Message, and
showed the Confirmations of our Peace subscribed by the King of England, and
the Grand Signior. After he had read them, a Divan was called, and the
Confirmations openly published; at which time it was assented and agreed, that
the Articles ought to be maintained, and the Peace continued; but to have this
established by firm Authority, it was farther referred to the Great Divan,
which is a Grand Assembly of the People, who usually meet together every
Saturday of the Week. In the mean time, having had an Acquaintance formerly
with the Pasha of this Place, sent hither by the Grand Signior, we were
desirous to make him a Visit, the better to discover in what nature they Honor
and own the Ottoman Port; but before we could be admitted to his Presence, we
were obliged to demand License of the Divan, which they granted with some
unwillingness, and with the caution of two or three Witnesses of our Discourse.
We were scarce welcomed into the Room, and the usual Salutations passed, before
we were interrupted by the Officers, and not suffered to proceed; so little
esteem they made of the Pasha, to whom notwitstanding they allowed twelve
thousand Dollars a Year for his Maintenance, so as to carry the fair and
specious outside at the Ottoman Court, of receiving a Pasha from thence; but
were so far from permitting him to intermeddle in the Government that they
confined him like a Prisoner not suffering him to stir Abroad without
Permission and Consent of the Divan, and that very seldom, tho he often pleaded
his Health was much impaired by his Restraint, and craved Enlargement, rather
for necessity than his Pleasure.

The Day of the great Divans Assembly being come, the Confirmations of the
Peace was again read, and well approved, and so laid up in the Repository of
their Writings; and promise made us for Releasement of our Ships. But let us
now observe the levity and unsteadiness of this popular Government; for being
the day following appointed to receive our dispatches, The unconstancy of the
popular Government at Algier.
and discharge of the three Ships; there arose unexpectedly at the Divan,
certain Scruples and Jealousies amongst them, which immediately quashed all our
Negotiations, and instead of confirming the Peace, produced a War. For the
Divan being met, they were afraid to release the Ships, lest the Soldiers who
had sent them in, being then abroad, should call them to question for it at
their return; and not to release them, might be an occasion of a War; which not
succeeding according to their desire, the causers thereof might be called into
question, and punished for it; of which still remained the fresh memory of late
Examples. In this Dilemma of their Affairs, they resolved to make the Act
herein, to be of general and public Assent; and to that end they Assembled a
Grand Divan, calling the Captains of Ships and Galleys, then in Fort, unto
their Council; who without Hesitation, or questioning other Matters, declared,
that the three English Ships were lawful Prize; and that it was no longer
requisite to maintain the second Article of freeing Strangers Goods on English
Vessels; it neither being the design nor interest of Algier, to benefit all
Christendom by their Peace with England: this Sentence was followed by the
whole Rabble of the Divan, with cry and noise; to which the wiser sort,
notwithstanding our Plea, and Reasons to the contrary, which lasted for full
two hours, were forced to condescend, and concur in the same Vote. Howsoever by
Importunity, and something of the force of Reason, which in the most blind and
obscure minds of Men, has something of forcible Violence; we obtained the
release of the three Ships, upon discharge of the Strangers Goods, and payment
of their Freight. But the second Article of Peace, forbidding the search of
English Ships for Strangers Estates, or their Persons, was declared null, and
no longer to be maintained; nor the Peace likewise, unless His Majesty would
accept it upon that Condition, to which end, they wrote this following Letter.

The Letter of the Government of Algier to His Majesty.
GReat and Christian Prince, King of England. After Health and Peace, etc.
Since we have made Peace with You, unto this day there have no Injuries nor
Damages been offered by Us. Your Ships that have been as Prizes, for Your sake
we have let free, not offering them the least Injury, nor diminishing any thing
from them in the least, until such time as Your Consul gave Us Counter-passes,
that what Ships were found with them, to be let free, and those that are
without them, to be brought in: And we have found diverse without them, which
for Friendship sake which is between Us, We have let go free. Now from
henceforth, if that we find any of our Enemies Goods or Men in Your Ships, we
shall take the Goods and Men, paying the Freight to their Port. And we shall
desire you, as soon as you shall receive this our Letter, that you will send
your answer hereunto, for we shall think it long until we receive it from You;
and for the future, what Ships shall be brought in without a Passport, we
shall take them, and detain them here, until such time as we have an answer
from You; which pray send without delay. The end of the Month Sefar, 1074.
which was then in the Month of September, 1633.

In this manner a second War broke forth in the space of two Years, by which a
Person may judge of the inconstancy and unsteady humor of this People; who but
three days before, gave us all the evidence of fair Correspondence and
Friendship; and it is probable, that when they entered the Divan, they came not
with Resolutions or Thoughts of War; however accidents and occasional
Discourses each with other, following the cry and humor of some rude Savage
Person, which leads the rest, carried all things with Violence toward a
Breach: So that by what preceded, and from these following Reasons, it may be
concluded impossible to maintain a firm and lasting Peace with this People.

First, Because these People are composed of the worst Sort or Scum of the
Turks, and worst of Christians, which are Renegadoes, who have renounced God
and their Country, and a Generation of People who have no Religion, nor Honor;
Peace cannot be longer expected or maintained, than fear or interest enjoins
them to compliance.

Secondly, The Government of Algier being popular, and in the hands of a vile
Commonalty, who are ignorant Persons, guided by no Rules or Principales;
unsteady in all their Councils, not resolving or consulting any thing before
they enter the Divan, do commonly follow that Resolution, which they perceive
to be carried on with the greatest noise; and therefore are a People not
capable of Peace or Friendship.

Thirdly, This irrational Commonalty is overawed by a heady Soldiery, who are
only then affrighted into a Peace, whilst a stronger force compels them into
good Manners. But when that Power and Punishment is withdrawn, they again
harden their hearts like Pharaoh, and then when the Temptation of rich
Merchantmen presents it self, their natural Inclination to Piracy returns, and
their Covetousness again prevails, an then they curse the Peace, and the makers
of it, and without remorse break their Articles, and their Faith, having
neither Honor nor Conscience to restrain them. Wherefore unless the Heads of
the chief Causers of the War he given in satisfaction, or Money paid for the
expense, and Hostages given for security of it, it can never be expected that a
lasting Peace should be maintained with this People; the Proof of which, has
been made appear by the sequel of affairs, and by those Wars which have ensued
since this time. And now let us return to the Wars in Hungary, and become
Spectators of those Transactions, which were then the general Concernment of
the Eastern and Western World.

The Proceedings of the War in HUNGARY.
WE lest the Grand Vizier on his March toward the parts of Hungary, with an
Army, as computed, to consist of Eighty Thousand fighting men, and of about
Seventy Thousand designed for Pioniers and other necessary services of the
Army. In this march the Vizier out of design to slacken the warlike
Preparations of the Christians, The Vizier desires a Treaty to amuse the
Christians.
and to discover the inclinations of the Emperor to Peace, desired a Treaty,
that if possible, matters might be reduced to terms of accommodation. The
Resident of Germany, was then in the Army, but he, not being empowered singly
for any such Treaty, the Baron of Goez, then with Ali Pasha at Temeswar, was
sent for, and being arrived, were both called into the Viziers Tent at
Belgrade, to whom it was proposed, That in Case the Emperor desired a Peace, he
should resign into the hands and possession of the Sultan Zekelhyd, Zatmar,
Clausenburg, alias Colosvar, with the late built Fort of Count Serini, without
which, no Sacrifice could appease the anger, and give a stop to the progress of
the Ottomon Arms. Whilst these Propositions by Post were dispatched to Vienna,
the Vizier proceeded in his Journey to Strigonium, now called Gran, to which
placer, after sixteen Days time, the Messenger returned with an Answer from the
Emperor, which showed an inclination toward an acceptance of Peace on the
terms proposed, but with instructions to his Ministers to moderate by their
discreet management (what was possible) the rigor of the demands. For by
reason of the disaffection of the Hungarians, whom the Emperor had lately
disgusted by demolishing several of their Churches, and discountenancing the
Protestant Religion which they professed; and by reason of the Phlegm of the
Princes of Germany, whom different interests made slow and unactive in their
preparations against the common Enemy; the Emperor was wholly unprovided to
oppose the viloence of this overflowing Torrent, and became an unequal match
for the Ottoman Force. The Turks perceiving that the Germans began to
condescend, and yield to any conditions, which might purchase their quiet, This
Tribute was paid by the Emperor to Sultan So lyman.
started a farther demand of Fifty thousand Florins of Yearly Tribute, and two
Millions of Crowns for expense of the War, to be paid by the Emperor to the
Sultan. These proud and unexped Proposals startled not a little the Baron of
Goez, who readily made answer, that he clearly perceived now, that there were
no intentions to a Peace, since the Vizier was pleased to make the matter so
difficult and impossible, for that it were as easy to bring Heaven and Earth to
meet, as his Master to meet the G Signior in the Concession of this particular.
These extravagant demands a wakened the Imperial Court, who now observing the
Turks without their Vizard, to march hastily to surprise them, vigorously
roused themselves to make that convenient provision and defense by War, which
the straitness of time permitted them: So that in the first place they
Assembled a Diet at Ratisbonne, where it was resolved to raise four Armies, the
first for the Guard and defense of Moravia and Silesia, under the Command of
Count Susa, a Native of Rochel. The second under the Command of Count Raimond
Monteculi, for safety of Raab, Newhausel, and Komorra, and the Frontiers of
Hungary. The third under Command of Count Nicholas Serini for defense of
Croatia. The fourth composed solely of Hungarians, commanded by the Palatine of
that Country, which they reported to consist of Thirty thousand fighting men.
Fifthly, It was ordered that all Garrisons should be well provided of Victuals
and Ammunition; and that the Inhabitants of Vienna should take into every House
a provision for a years maintenance, and such as were not able at their own
Cost, were to abandon their Dwellings. And in the mean time the Villages round
about were demolished, to the great amazement and confusion of the People.

The Turks now bearing in their thoughts nothing but War, began to design and
chalk out the best order and method for its prosecution. The principal places
then in eye of the Vizier, were Raab, and Komorra, Fortresses of considerable
strength, maintained and defended by Soldiers of known prowess and conduct,
and provided equally with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, agreeable to
such considerable Bulwarks and Walls, not only of the German Empire but (I may
say) of all Christendom Raab. called by the Italians, Raab.
Javarin, and by the Turk, Yanick, is situated in a plain, level, and Champion
Country; the Town it self very regular and compact, the Fortifications most
exact according to the new model. and much improved in its strength since the
recovery of it from the hands of the Turk, by whom it was once taken, in the
year 1594. it has its name from the River Rab, on which it is seated just on
the meeting of the Danube. Komorra.
Komorra is a stronger Fortress, erected in an Island of the River Danube,
called after the same name, which has often been attempted by the Turks, but
with ill success; at both which places I have personally been, and viewed them
with much delight. Wherefore the Vizier considering the strength. and
difficulty of these places, resolved to take due and mature consideration
before he engaged himself in any enterprise, and to that end assembled together
in Consultation with him the most ancient and grave men, that were Natives of
the Country; some of these being such who had lived in Rab, been Slaves there,
The Turks deliberate of the method to be used in War.
and had well marked and observed the strength of that Fortress both as to
Nature and Art, assured the Vizier, That the Work was immense, difficult, and
dangerous, and not to be accomplished in the space of one Summer; and that the
Winters in that Country were very cold and rigid, and ill agreeing with the
temperament of the Asiatick Soldiery. The Vizier, though the farther
considered that his Soldiers were as yet young and unexperienced, and that a
foyl encountered at the first Enterprise, might be a discouragement from
following the continued Tract and Course of this War, which must be sustained
with labor and patience, and that to withdraw his Forces in the Winter would
be a dishonor to the Ottoman Arms, a blemish in the beginning to his own
Reputation, and an encouragement of the Enemy: Howsoever, having a violent
Ambition and Desire to become Master of Rab, he could not rest satisfied in
this Counsel before he had consulted with Ali Pasha, and other Pashaws of the
Frontier Countries, who duly considering the matter as it stood, concurred in
the same judgment that was formerly made of the difficulty of this design; and
herein they were the more strongly confirmed, by the report of certain
Hungarians, whom some parties of Horse, under the Command of Ali Pasha, roving
and sallying out near the Walls of Rab, had surprised and taken, who being
brought bound before the Vizier, related, That the Town was well provided with
all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, and the Garrison reinforced by Count
Montecuculi with supply of four Thousand men, and in this manner reported the
Work as difficult as the Turks of the Country had formerly signified. This
relation confirmed by so many hands, diverted the Viz er from this Design: for
before that time imagining it a place which might easily be subdued, he
proposed to himself, without any interruption, a clear and undisturbed March to
the Gates of Vienna, which he swallowing also in his thoughts, hoped by his own
success to repair the shame of Solyman's flight from the Walls of that City,
and besides the glory of forcing the Emperor from his Imperial Seat, he should
atone for the sin of the Ottomon Cowardice, and be the first who undertook to
mend the actions, and outvie the prowess of the most magnificent, and most
successful of their Sultans. But the Ambition of this grand design giving way
to necessity, and to those other impediments which obstructed it, Newhausel
after due and mature Consultation, Newhausel, called by the Hungariaus Oywar,
was fixed upon as the place to be first attempted, and held up to the eye of
the Soldiery, as the reward and prize of their valor and hazard. Wherefore
Boats were provided, and Planks, and Timbers for a Bridge to pass the Danube,
which the Turks in a few days, according to their usual expeditions, had
raised; so that the Army both Horse and Foot began to transport themselves as
fast as was possible to the other side, but the multitudes crowded over in that
disorder and haste, that Three or four Thousand men had scarce passed the River
before the Bridge was so broken and shattered that some time was necessarily
required to repair it, before the rest of the Army durst adventure to follow
their Companions. The Approach of the Turkish Army alarmed all that side of
Hungary, but especially the Inhabitants of Newhausel; who observing the Turks
to bend their Course that way, plainly foresaw the Storm of War to be
breaking on them: The News also of the fall of the Bridge, and thereby the
Separation of about Four thousand Turks from the Body of the Army, Forcatz the
Governor of Newhausel, ill advises a Sally.
was brought in by the Country people, who forsaking their Villages, fled for
succor to the stronger Fortress of Newhausel. Hereupon Forcatz, the Governor
of Newhausel, a valiant and experienced Soldier, though esteemed by the Turks
unfortunate, taking this Alarm, judged that this occasion of cutting off that
part of the Turkish Army which had past the River, was in no wise to be
omitted, and therefore assembled a Council of War, which consisted of all the
principal Officers and Commanders of the Garrison; (amongst which was Colonel
Volter, that commanded the Four thousand men, lately sent to reinforce the
Town) he declared that his Opinion was, immediately to make a Sally on that
part of the Turkish Army, which had already passed the River, before the Bridge
was repaired for Transportation of the others; which endeavors, by God's
Assistance, succeeding well, might not only discourage the Enemy, but be a
means to divert them from their present design upon their City. This Advice,
thought he pressed with heat of Argument, and violence of Speech, yet could it
not prevail with the rest of the Council, which seemed wholly averse thereunto,
especially Volter, who declared, That his Commission was not to fight in the
Field, but to conserve himself within the Walls, for maintenance of his
Garrison: Some days passed in this Dispute, whilst Forcatz growing more eager
and hot on this design, used opprobrious Terms, and expressions of infamy
toward the other Officers, accusing all such of Cowardice and Treason, who
refused to concur with him in this Enterprise and advantage on the Enemy, which
Heaven seemed to reach out to them for their Deliverance, if their wisdom and
courage afforded them only will and grace to lay hold on the opportunity. These
sharp words and resolution of the Governor provoked the minds of the Officers
to a condescension, and thereupon about Eight thousand men of Choice, and
approved Soldiers, well armed with strout hearts, and hard Jron; not suffering
themselves to be upbraided with such reproach, in the silence of the Night,
under the Conduct of Forcatz, (their own Commander, Volter remaining in the
Town) took their way toward the Turkish Camp, and being armed with Firelocks,
marched with all privacy, without lighted Matches, or sound of Drum or Trumpet.
But whilst the forgoing Dispute lasted, the Turks had transported the gross of
their Army over the River, and then lay on her Banks, Fortcatz surprises the
Turkish Camp.
resting securely undre their Pavillions. The Christians approaching near the
Turkish Camp, with the first twilight, and dawnign of the Morning, (perceiving
the Enemy unprovided, but not discovering their Force) dealt at first onset,
their shot most plentifully amongst them, and proceeding amidst the thickest,
cutting, shooting, killing, and making havoc of all before them. The amazed
Turks having many of their Companions brought to their last sleep, before
themselves were thoroughly awake, and some flying before they discovered the
reason or the danger, an Alarm was given by the confused murmur of Allah,
Allah, and that the Christians were upon them, reached the farthest Quarters of
the Turkish Army, which immediately put themselves into Battalia, and order of
fighting, whilst this handful of Germans proceeded forwards, dealing their
blows amongst their Enemies, cutting the Cords of the Tents, and destroying all
before them. But by this time the Turks having put themselves into a posture of
Defense, the Horse and Foot came marching in a Body, extending their Wings in
the from of a half Moon, so as to enclose this small number, The Germans are
routed, and fly.
and on all sides to assail them. The Germans seeing this formidable sight
approach, and no safety in flight, encouraged each other to sell their Lives at
as dear a rate as they could; all hopes of escape seeming desperate, they
sought with that courage and obstinacy as amazed the Turks, and yielded not
until their Spirits fainted with labor, and their Swords were blunted by the
Bodies of their Enemies. The Count Forcatz hardly escaped, but by the help of
his Horse, with some few others, fled to Newhausel, which unwillingly received
him, wishing that the rashness of his Counsels had only proved his own
destruction, and not involved so many brave and innocent Souldieres, who were
only unfortunate for being overpowered by his command and persuasions: The
rest overwhelmed with multitudes, yielded; for though they behaved themselves
beyong the power and courage of men, yet the numbers of the Enemy prevailed at
length over these Christian Champions, whose Gallantry was more eminent and
conspicuous in being subdued, than the Glory of their Enemies in the Victory.
In this Skirmish few escaped, amongst which Four hundred Gentlemen were slain,
and about eighteen hundred Prisoners reported to be taken, a bad Omen at the
beginning of this War. This Rout being given, the Turks triumphed in Blood, The
Vizier deals not like a So^^dier with his Prisoners of War.
and success and returned with their Captives, and Trophies back to
Strigonioum, where the Vizier mounting a Throne of State and Majesty, treated
these valiant Soldiers, not like men of War, or Captives takrn in open Field,
but as a Judge condemned them to dye by the hand of the Hangman or Executioner,
passing a formal Sentence of Death upon them, as if they had been Thieves or
Assassinates arrested by the hand of Justice. The Sentence being passed, and
the Turkish Army drawn up, these valiant Christian; were ranked in order and
file to dye, who had so lately with Swords in their hands, ranged themselves in
Battle against their Enemy; and so soon as the Executioners sell to their work,
and the horrid Massacre was begun, the Guns were fired, and the whoule Camp
resounded with barbarous Music and shouts. In the mean while the most
superstitious amongst them triumphed, that God was now destroying the Infidels,
manifesting the truth of their Prophet, and doing his own work; not unlike the
assertions and doctrines of those pretenders to Religion, who have always
hallowed and excused their cruelties with the Name of God, and sanctified the
blood they have shed by making their Enemies Amalekites, and by pretense of
false Lights and Prophecies countenanced their most impious Sacrilege in God's
Churches, and Invasions of their Neighbors Rights. The merciless Executioners
had proceeded to bereave of life about Thirteen or Fourteen hundred persons,
the Vizier standing a Spectator with zeal to his Sect and Prophet, until the
Turkish Soldiery who inhabit the Borders, glutted with so much cruelty toward
their Neighbors, began to murmur, and at length to speak aloud, That to
destroy Captives in cold Blood was an action against the Law of Arms, and might
be revenged by their Enemies with like examples of cruelty, since none there
present, being all Soldiers, were secure from the misfortunes and mutabilities
of War. The Vizier over-hearing these whispers of the Soldiery, gave a stop to
the cruelty of the Executioners, and sent such as survived to different Prisons
in Buda, Ad^ianople, and Constantinople. I have seen not far from Strigonium
the heads of these Wretches thus miserably butchered, thrown up into a heap,
the Beards and Hair of those that lay undermost still growing; the Earth which
sucked in their blood, became thence stenched up and barren, and the white
bones and carcasses of their bodies lay dispersed and scattered in a large
Field; so that I could not but call to mind the massacred Legions under the
Conduct of Quintilius Varus in Germany; and those albentiaossa, and the
barbarous Altars flowing with the Roman blood; and I could as passionately
fancy to have seen the angry Germans return to appease the Ghost; of their
Countrymen with decent Burial, as I was sensible of Germanicus in zeal, when
he adventured to contaminate his Augurs Office by his too forward Humanity and
Religion toward his Country and Parentage. But this cruelty of the Vizier was
recompensed by Count Serini not long after, who having had some success against
Arnaut Pasha and his Army, of whom he had slain six hundred men, and such as he
took alive, in cold blood he dismebred and tortured, and having of some cut off
their hands, and plucked out their eyes, sent them to report the reason of this
inhumane and merciless usage to the Vizier.

In the mean time Forcatz advised General Montecuculi the Governor of Rab of
this defeat, and how the flower and strength of his Garrison was destroyed; and
that if he were not immediately supplied, he should be forced to abandon his
Fort, and leave all to the fury and mercy of the Enemy. The Turks approach to
Newhausel.
Hereupon a Thousand Germans were sent for succor with all sorts of
Ammuninition and Provisions requisite; but the Turks after their Triumph before
Strigonium, returned and marched on so fast toward Newhausel, having passed
the Danube, that certainly they had intercepted this Recruit, had not Forcatz
amused their minds, and for a while stopped their hasty approach, by advancing
a white Flag to the top of the Walls, as if he had had a design of Treaty and
Surrender of the Town upon Conditions: So that here the Turkish Army made a
halt, and for Three or Four hours time remained with expectation when
Conditions for the Surrender should come; every one wondering to see the Flag
of Truce erected, and so much silence in the Fort, and yet no appearance of a
Message. In this interval and breathing of time, the Succor safely arriving
within the Town, the white Flag was changed to colors of defiance, to the
great astonishment and anger of the Turks: Whereupon the Vizier drawing
somewhat nearer, began to entrench and begirt the Town on the 4th of August,
which was defended by three principal Officers, viz Count Adam Forcatz, the
Marquess Pio an Italian, and one Lucatelli an old and experienced Soldier. But
the Vizier, before he would offer any violence to the Town, The Turks Summons.
thought fit to summon them in this style: That through the Grace of God and
the Miracles of our Prophet, who is a Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is
Happiness and Glory, I that am the first of the Council, and General of the
mest Mighty Emperor of the Turks, that is the King of all Kings on the Earth,
To you Adam Forcatz that are the Chief among all the Nobility of Hungary, do
make known, That through the Command of my most Gracious Lord, the most
terrible, the most puissant, and most mysterious Emperor, I am come with his
Forces before Newhausel to reduce it to his Obedience. Wherefore if you shall
deliver up the place to Us, you shall have liberty to march out with what
belongs unto you from the highest to the lowest, and he that would rather stay
shall keep his Goods and Estate: But if you will not yield, we will take it by
force, and every man of you, from the highest to the lowest, shall be put to
the Sword. If the Hungarians did but know the good intentions of the mighty
Emperor, they and their childrian would bless God for him. Peace be to the
Obedient. The Christians not submitting to these Summons, the Turks continued
to make their nearer approaches, and being now at a convenient distance, raised
two great Batteries, on which they mounted a Hundred Pieces of Cannon, and from
thence made such constant shot as shaked the Churches, and almost levelled the
most lofty Buildings with their Foundations. The 14th. of August was designed
for a general storm, so that before break of day Faggots and Rubbish were
brought to fill the Ditches, and scaling Ladders to ascend the Wails; but
though the Ottoman Forces were puissant, The Turks storm the Town.
and their Assault they made fierce and brisk, yet they were received with that
gallantry by the Defendants, that the Trenches early in the Morning were filled
with the Carcasses of the Dead, and at last the Turks forced to give over the
Assault, with the loss of great numbers of their men.

The Siege still continuing, and the Turks angry, and inflamed with the
disgrace of their late foil, endeavored to redeem their Honor by their
Attempts, filling up the Ditches with Rubbish, serving themselves therein of
the Christian Captives lately taken: The Defendants on the other side, by the
dictates of Nature and Reason, were directed to maintain their Houses, Wives,
and Children from rapine and violence of an unjust Enemy; so that both Parties
moving from different Principles, used all the Art and Valor possible for
destruction each of other: The noise of Cannon from the Forts raised by the
Turks, resounded continually in the Air, and from the Town the shot were often
so fortunately placed, that daily, besides great numbers of ordinary Soldiers,
many Persons of Note and Quality amongst the Turks were slain.

But the Turks having before this Town a greater number of Soldiers than either
could come to fight, or what was thought necessary to subdue it the Vizier
selected from his Army a very considerable Force to enter and spoil Moravia and
Austria; The Turks enter Moravia and Austria.
of these were Six hundred Tartars joined to a strong Force of Turks, who by
the guidance of the Natives passing the River Waegh. spoiled and destroyed all
the Country round about, carrying men, women, and children into slavery,
leaving what was not conveniently portable, in ashes. But in passing the River,
they incountred a considerable Body of Germa^s, both Horse and Foot, and being
opposed by them, were at first forced to retreat again over the River with the
loss of about Eight hundred Janisaries; but the next Day renewing the F^ght
with better courage and success, passed the River in despite of the
Imperialists, whom they pursued almost as far as Presburg. ^hese Turks were
seconded by a greater Body of Tartars, every one after the manner of his
Country, leading one or two spare Horses, made Inroads within five miles of
Vienna, destroying and laying in ashes all places before them; things there
resembling Doomsday, consumed with fire, and not so much almost lest as marks
or appearance of habitation.

These Troubles and Confusions in Hungary were the talk and amazement of all
Christendom, The confusion of the German Councils.
and indeed little more they were than talk; for the Christian Princes farther
distant, as less concerned stood at a gaze, expecting the issue of that Treaty
which was between the King of France, and the Pope; and the Princes of Germany
(whatsoever was resolved at the Diet) like men surprised, knew not what
Succors to afford: Some thought it now time to treat with the Emperor, and
recover the Rights and Privileges they thought their due, and to condescend to
no Terms of confedera e assistance against the common Enemy, unless with
advantageous considerations to their State; and all in general acted with that
negligence and coldness, as if only the State of Austria, and not the common
Cause of Germany had been concerned The Election of a General for the Imperial
Army admitting long debate, was another retardment to the Preparations for the
War; the Duke of Brandenburg was nominated, and solicited to accept the
supreme Command; but the Title of being General of the Empire, or the Imperial
Army, was a dispute undeterminable, and a difficulty not to be overcome: And
though the Enemy had passed their Frontiers, and triumphed in their
Possessions, and threatened the subve^sion of all Christendom, Vet Jealousies,
Niceties, and aerie Formalities took up all the time; so that at length their
Councils had no other reasult than an increase of Animosities and Difficulties
amongst themselves. The Emperor removes to Lintz.
The Emperor also terrified with the Siege of Newhausel, and the near
Incursions of the Turks, abandoned his City of Vienna, carrying with him the
Records and greatest o^ his Richess to Lintz, to the greater apprehension,
discouragement, and fear of the whole Country in general, and was an act which
might have produced very fatal effects had not the Winter approached, and the
progress of the Infidels been interrupted by the Valor, Vigilance, good
Fortune, and Conduct of Count Serini, who in requital of those Incursions the
Turks made into the Christian Territories, en^^ed the Turkish Borders near
Komorra, and there with Fire and Sword destroyed all before him, defeated a
Party of about Three thousan Janisaries, taking from them a good Booty of money
and Provisions designed lor Relief of the Leagure before Newhausel.

During these varieties of success, the Turks still continued the Siege, and
having now made a breach, and almost filled the graft with rubbish, Faggots and
other implements, attempted a second storm on the 28th and 29th of August, but
were repulsed with an extraordinary loss, by the courageous Gallantry of the
Defendants: The Turks make another assault on the Town.
On the 9th of September was given another more furious Assault, every Pasha
leading his men in the Front, so that the Action this Day was so violently and
courageously performed, that the Turkish Ensign was advanced to the top of the
Rampire of the Fort Frederick, where both sides coming to handy blows, the
dispute continued a long time, but the courage of the Defendants at length
prevailing, the Turks were driven headlong rom the Walls, and their Colors
wrested from them with the loss of about Five thousand men, and Four hundred
Christians. Though the Turks were much abated in their courage by this days
work, yet the Vizier obstinately continued the Siege, preparing speedily for
another storm, in which he hoped to force the Christians to a Surrender. In the
mean time, to facilitate the design of the Tu^ks, on the 15th of September the
chief Magazin of Powder (none knows how) took fi^e, and blew into the Air, by
which blow fifty Soldiers and several Officers were slain, but the worst was,
that the besieged were deprived of all their Powder, unless what remained in
private houses, which so dismayed the Inhabitants, that immediately with one
voice they demanded a parley: The Women also began a confused tumult, crying out
for a Surrender, in which they were so impe^uous and violent, that they threw
stones from their windows on the Soldiers. Amidst of this confusion the Turks
disposing their Companies to make another storm, the Officers resolved upon a
Treaty, which concluded with these following Conditions.

First, Newhausel yielded.
That the Commanders and Garrison should march out on the Seventeenth of
September, with bag and Baggage, and have safe conduct as far as Komorra. And
that for a convenience of the Sick and Wounded, the Vizier should be obliged to
provide Four hundred Carts and more, if there should be occasion.

Secondly, That as such as desire to abandon their dwellings, may have liberty
to depart, so such as desire to abide may continue their habitations: And that
the Religious and Ecclesiastical persons may perform their Functions as in
former times.

Thirdly, That upon the Surrender of the principal Works, no Turk shall enter
within the Town, until all such as intend to depart have quitted their stations.

Fourthly, That for performance of Articles, two Aga's should be given for
Hostages; and that until the foregoing Articles were fully accomplished, all
acts of Hostility should cease.

Fifthly, That the Garrison might not be necessitated to march through the
Turkish Camp, the Turks themselves were obliged to make them a new Bridge, or
repair the old to pass the Niter.

These Articles, though punctually observed by the Turks, yet the Tartars, who
are of a faithless and barbarous nature, upon certain pretenses assaulted the
Garrison, as they marched out, and had doubtless moved the rest of the Camp
Rabble to imitate their example; had not many of the Pashaws at the Head of
their Troops, killed the most forward in this Rebellious attempt, whose
perfidious insolence and riot could not yet have been restrained, had not the
Garrison quickened their pace, more like a flight than an orderly March. But the
Vizier on the contrary, distributed Money to the Garrison, and especially to the
Hungarians, with design (as is supposed) to allure and attract their minds to a
belief of the gentleness of the Turkish Y^ke; as if he compassionated the
miseries of that Country, which was the Stage whereon the Tragedies of so many
miseries and slaughters were acted. This Siege continued about the pace of
Forty three Days; of the Garrison marched out Three thousand five hundred sound
men, and about Five hundred wounded; those Inhabitants who would remain, had
protection and liberty. The Army which besieged the Town, consisted of Fifty
thousand men, In the Town were found Sixty pieces of Brass Cannon, but most
broken and unserviceable, with little Ammunition, but with great provision of
Hungarian Wines. The loss the Turks might receive, is computed to have been of
about fifteen thousand men, amongst which was sl^in, the Spaheelar Agasee, or
General of the Horse, Beco Pasha, Beg^erbeg of Romalia, Usaff, Pasha of
Anatolia, and Ibrahim Pasha of Seyda, with sixteen Captains belonging to Buda,
and nine to Constantinople.

The loss of Newhausel affected the Austrian Court with so dreadful
apprehensions of the Ottoman Fortune and Fury, that they hastened the finishing
of the Works, and Fortifications of Vienna; cutting down all the Woods and
Boscage there abouts, which might benefit or shelter the Enemy; and so great an
impression did the fear of the Turks prevalency and power work on the minds of
the Germans, that they not only Fortified the Frontiers, but secured the
innermost parts of Austria, which extend along the River, as far as within
three Miles of Lin^z.

But above all, Possonium, which was upon the Frontiers, Possonium gari^oned.
though not an open Town, yet of no strength or resistance was not neglected,
but reinforced with a considerable Garrison, and the Works restored and
repaired, with as many additional Fortifications as time would admit but the
Inhabitants had lost so much of their Spirit and Courage, by the melancholy
relation of the fate of Newhausel, and the apprehension of the dreadful advance
of the whole Turkish Force, that their constancy to the Emperor began to waver,
and to entertain some thoughts of submitting to the mercy and clemency of the
Turks, who had newly declared, that such as voluntarily submitted to the
Ottoman Obedience, should for Three years be exempted from all Tribute or
Taxes. This consideration adjoined to fear, so prevailed on those of Possonium,
that they shut the Gates against the Garrison which was sent to recruit and
defend them; some publicly declaring the extremity of their affairs had no
other satety than in a surrender of themselves to the mercy and protection of
the Vizier. Howsoever the Count Strozzi. Count Strozzi.
with his Italian Artifices, so wheedled the grosser humor of the Hungarians,
that they were persuaded to admit him and his Regiment within the Town, where
he disposed all things with that Conduct, and built those Forts and in a short
time so apparently rendered the Town tenable that the Inhabitants taking
Courage resolved to defend themselves, in obedience to their Prince, to the
ultimate point of Estates and Loves. Leventz taken by the Turks.
In the mean time the Turks made themselves Masters of Leventz, a Town, though
renable and not contemptible for its strength, yet was by the Peoples fears,
and allurements of the V^z ers promises and fair Propositions, committed to the
mercy of the Turks, and swore in Fealty to them the 23d day of September.

By this time the news of the taking of Newhausel, Festivals for Victory
amongst the Turks.
was arrived at the Ottoman Court, where it was entertained with so much joy,
that a Dunelma, or Festival, was appointed for the space of seven days through
the whole Empire; which according to the fashion of the Turks, is Celebrated by
adorning the Gates, and outward Walls of their Houses, so soon as it begins to
be dark, with grate store of Lamps and Candles, during which time the Nights
are spent with Music and Banquets, as the Days are with Visits and Presents,
and Corban, (which is an Alms which rich men make in flesh to the poor sort,
and is given either at the little Biram, which is called the Feast of Corban,
or upon some public Thanksgiving, which is performed in this manner.) The
manner of Corban.
He that makes the Corban, first lays his hand upon the head of the Sheep or
Lamb, makes a short Prayer, and then in the Name of God cuts the throat, the
Butcher afterward fleying off the skin, the Corbanist divides the flesh into
small pieces, to as many poor as flock to receive it. In the heat of these
Revels and Banquets, every one spoke high in praise of their fortunate Arms,
and Congratulated each with other, the prosperous beginnings of this War,
promising to themselves the following year, rather a time of Peregrination or
Travel through the pleasant Countries and Cities of the Christians, than blood
and sweat in obtaining the possession of their Enemies. Nor were such
imaginations vain or absurd for the Commonalty to entertain; in regard it was
vident to the World, in what manner the Ottoman Arms roved through Hungary
uncontrouled, without an appearance of any consideraable Force to give them the
least stop or interruption; so that under the very Walls of Rab and Presburg,
and on the Banks of the Danube near Komarra, Incursions and depredation were
made, and great numbers of People of both Sexes, and of all Ages, were carried
into slavery, the Country all round laid waste, the Corn and Hay burnt; with
all other miserable effects and Concomitants of War.

In this manner all places seemed to fall down and yield at the very rumor of
the Turks approach; for not only Leventz surrendered it self, but likewise
Nitra, though over-topped by a strong and an impregnable Castle, was by the
Cowardice of the Commander betrayed at the first Summons of the Turks; for
which action, the Captain afterward, by express Command of the Emperor,
suffered Death.

After all these successes, though no opposition appeared in the Field, to
obstruct the luxuriant and wanton march of the victorious Squadrons of the
Ottoman Army; and not only Hungary, but Austria, and the lower Germany was
Alarmed and terrified with the rumor of the Turkish numbers; and though the
Vizier (as it is said) began this War with the ambitious thoughts of possessing
Vienna it self, and out-vying the Acts of Solomon the Magnificent: Yet it
seemed strange, that being come thus far, and almost in prospect of his hopes,
that he should give a check to his Fortunes, and not advance toward Vienna, to
which now the passage seemed wide and open; but it was almost a miracle, that
he should not make a Visit to Possonium, before which, had he only displaid his
dreadful Arms, it had surrendered at his first Summons and Apearance. Instead
whereof he attempted Schinta, The Vizier assaults Schinta, but beaten off.
the Magazine of the Emperors Arms and Artillery, but found not the same easy
entrance as he did with the Governor of Nitra; but instead thereof, being
stoutly repulsed after several Assaults, concluded the enterprise too
difficult, and requiring more time and blood than could be countervailed by the
acquisition of that place. Wherefore raising his Camp, he employed a
considerable Party to take Novigrade, a Castle situated on a high Rock,
encompassed with a Ditch of 34 Foot deep, Novigrade taken by the Turks.
Garisoned with Six hundred Soldiers, and provided sufficiently with Victuals
and Ammunition; howsoever by ill fortune, and worse Conduct, this place also
was resigned into the hands of the Turks.

By this time the Winter approaching, The Vizier retreats to his Winter
Quarters.
and the season of the Year beginning to be unfit for action, the Great Vizier
retreated as far as Belgrade, to take up his Winter Quarters with the gross of
his Army: Where remaining with full satisfaction and glory, contemplating the
successes of the past Year, and promising to himself greater renown, and
exaltation of his mighty acts, for that ensuing; he so contemned the Force of
his Enemies, that he Licensed great numbers of the Asian Spahees, who came as
far as from Baylon and Grand Cairo, to return home to their own possessions.
Howsoever, to vex the Christians with continual Alarms, the Vizier ordered a
flying Body of Turks and Tartars, to the number of 30000. under the Command of
Pasha of Temiswar.
Chengiogli, to pass into Stiria and Craotin, the Country of Count Serini, and
there to burn, lay waste, and depopulate all before them. Count Serini was now
newly returned from Hungary, and supposing the season for action finished, had
lodged the greatest part of his Forces within their Winter Quarters, and
securely laid himself to repose; when an Alarm came of the approach of Thirty
thousand Horse; the Count rowsing his great Spirit from its ease, collected as
many of his People into a Body, as the shortness of time would permit, which
were not above 480 men; and with these he betook himself to the River Muer, to
give a stop (if possible) to the passage of the Enemy, placing Sentinels in all
places where the River was fordable. On the Seventeenth of November, the
Christians espied the Turks Encamped on the other side, and at the same time
discovered Two thousand of them to have passed the River; on which, Count
Serini overthrows a Party of Turks and Tartars.
Serini immediately made that furious Assault, assisted with the Courage of
Captain Chirfaleas (a Person who had oftentimes given glorious proofs of his
valor against the Turks) that he soon put them to open flight and they seeking
to pass the River, and missing the place where the River was fordable, threw
themselves headlong into the Water where the most part of those perished who
escaped the Sword. The Turks on the other side were so amazed at this
stupendous Valor of Serini, that their Courages failing them, they desisted
from their farther attempt upon Croatia; so that this poor Country seemed as it
were for the present, to be reprieved, by Miracle, from a total destruction.

THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.
The Third BOOK
Anno Christi, 1664. Hegeira, 1075.
THE Month of January was now well entered with its rigid Frosts, when Apafi
Prince of Transylvania, beholding his Soldiers in their Winter Quarters, and
all things quiet and still about him, judged it seasonable for his
establishment to discover himself with some luster to the World, seated in the
usual Throne of the Transilvanian Princes; which sight appeared so universally
grateful to the People, that they began to be enamoured of their Prince, and to
applaud his Person, his Prowess and Virtues, and to cast an ill and envious Eye
on those Cities which were Garrisoned with German Soldiers. About which time
the Fortress of Zechelhyd revolted from Obedience of the Emperor unto Apafi the
Prince: Zechlhyd revolts to Apafi.
For the Soldiery of that Garrison having long Arrears of pay due to them,
made a Mutiny, and expelled their Colonel Dempenbal from his Office, and
pillaged his House, placing the Quartermaster of Strozzi's Regiment in his
stead. The news of this Sedition flew quickly to Vienna, from whence
immediately a Messenger was dispatched with an Act of Pardon from the Emperor,
upon submission, and proffers of full satisfaction of all Arrears: but the
Soldiery finding themselves only paid with words, hearkened to the more
effectual Propositions of Apafi, who taking hold of this opportunity, sent
every Soldier ten Dollars with a Suit of Clothes, promising larger and more
constant Pay than they received from the Emperor, with which the Garrison being
satisfied, surrendered up their City on the 20th of January. But whilst other
Armies remained in their Quarters, and other Commanders gave themselves up to
ease, and drowned themselves in Wine and Banquets; and whilst Jealousies,
Envies, and Ceremonies, disturbed and confused the resolves of Diets and
private Councils; the generous and vigilant Serini, having received advices
from Adrianople, that the Turks design in the next Campagna, was to convert the
whole heat and fury of the War upon Croatia, and through that Country to open a
passage unto Friuli; his active spirit conceived that heat and flame, that the
Winters cold could not chill his hot and eager desires from entering into the
open Field, and commencing some attempt and enterprise on his Enemy. Wherefore
on the 16th of January, he began his march from Serinswar, with an Army of
about 25000 men; and in the first place, marching along the Banks of the
Dravus, showed himself before Berzenche; which upon conditions of marching away
with Arms, Bag, and Baggage, was surrendered to him. Bakockza was likewise
yielded, and a Palancha on the River quitted upon report of the Counts
approach, leaving behind them Eight brass Guns in the Fort. From hence he
marched toward Esseck, otherwise called Oseck, which is the only pass from the
upper to the lower Hungary, having a Bridge of Wood over a Moor or Fen, about
six or seven miles in length, which once I remember, with my Horse, I was an
Hour and three quarters in passing (as I observed by my Watch), and reported to
have been six years in building. This Bridge Serini resolved to burn, Oseck.
which cost the Turks 300000. Dollars, and six years time to build; imagining
that to rebuild it again, was a Work of that time, as could not be repaired in
one Summer, and that by this means the Turks would be disappointed of all
Action the following Year, The Bridge burned.
and the Empire have time to breathe, and assemble the utmost of their Strength
and Force together; wherefore taking opportunity of the hard Winter, when the
Marsh was frozen, and a strong Wind to carry the Flame; he sent before him
2000. Dragoons, and 3000. Croats, which encountering 6000. Turks at the foot of
the Bridge, set for Guard of that place, were so ill treated by them, that they
had been wholly cut off, had not a considerable Force of Horse and Dragoons
come in to their assistance, by whose Resolution they not only routed the Turk,
but took the Palancha, which was the Defense of the Bridge, and having gained it
in hot Blood, put all to Fire and Sword; after which, Fire being set to the
Bridge in diverse places, in a short time it was consumed, and remained in Ashes.
The news of this Exploit was received at Vienna with great Joy; believing that
for the following Year, they had disappointed the Turks of a Passage; but by
the sequel it will appear, how much they erred in the account made of the
Diligence of the Turks, who in forty days repaired that which they esteemed a
work of some Years; and as I observed, it was all built of new Timber, and on
another Foundation different from the old. From this place Serini marched to
Quinque Ecclesiae, Quinq* Ecclesiae taken by Serini.
or Five Kirk, at whose near approach, the Turks set out a white Flag on one of
the Towers, signifying a desire of Parley, as if they had had intentions to
surrender on Terms and Articles of Agreement; the Christians with this
Confidence marched near the Walls, where the Turks espying their Advantage on
their Enemies now under command of their Guns, fired upon them, and did severe
Execution, killing amongst others, several principal Officers, of which were
General Hammerling, and Count Harberstein; which perfidious Action so
transported Serini, that he resolved on a furious Assault, and performed it
with that Gallantry, that on the 5th of February he took the Town by Storm and
Force of Arms, and in Recompense of their treacherous Stratagem, put all the
Inhabitants to the Sword, and gave up the Town to the Pillage and Plunder of
the Soldiery, and aftewards setting it on Fire, rendered it the most horrid
Spectacle of Fire and Sword that had as yet been seen or known in this present
War.

These Successes of Serini gained him the Reputation of a valiant and fortunate
Prince, and his liberal hand in frankly bestowing the Booty and Pillages
amongst the Soldiery, invited great numbers to follow his Banner. His active
Spirit and Vigilance gained him likewise a Reputation amongst the Turks, that
their principal Fear and Dread was of Serin-Ogli, as of a watchful and politic
Enemy; for in every place he made great Havoc and Spoil, being reported to
have laden two thousand five hundred Carts with Slaves, Goods and Ammunition,
and to carry with him an hundred fifty five Pieces of Cannon taken out of small
Forts and Palancha's, and to have laid waste all the Country between the Dravus
and the Danube. In these Incursions, and victorious and dreadful Travels
through the Enemies Country, the valiant Serini at length arrived at Sigeth,
Sigeth Besieged.
a Fortress consisting of a new and old Town conjoined by a Bridge which crosses
a famous Marsh or Fen, ennobled by the Attempt made thereon by Solomon the
Magnificent in the year 1565. with an Army of six hundred thousand Men; in
defense of which Nicholas Serini, the great Grandfather of the present Count,
immortalized his Fame and Memory with the loss of his Life, and renowned the
Place it self by his Feats at Arms. At this place Serini was resolved to
revenge the Blood of his Ancestors, and sacrifice great numbers to the Ghost of
his Grandfather; to which end he sent the Count Olack before him with part of
his Army, to Summon the Enemy, and prepare the way to his own more effectual
Force; Olack had ordered all things accordingly, when Serini full of Glory and
Spoils arrived him in his Leagure, and joining together, appointed a day for a
general Storm; but whilst these things were meditating, and that Sigeth was
reduced almost to the last Extremity, advice came of the near approach of a
Body of twelve thousand Turks and Tartars; The Siege raised.
to encounter which, the Attempt was accounted difficult, considering the loss
and diminution of the Christian Forces, which by continual Actions, and the
bitter Sufferings of the Winter Season, were reduced to a number inferior to
that of their Enemies; and wanting all sorts of Provision and Ammunition, it
was resolved, as most expedient, to raise the Siege, which was the next day
performed, and the Sold^ery taken into Garrisons to Repose and Recruit
themselves. But whilst by the active and zealous Spirit of this great Champion,
most matters proceeded succesfully on the side of Croatia, the Christian
Affairs on the other side, by the negligence of some Ministers, ran into
evident Ruin and Disorder. For Claudiopolis, Claudiopolis yields it self to
Apafi.
which not many years past had defended it self so valiantly against the Turks
under the Command of the Governor Retani, did now, wanting pay, (the Sinew and
Life of the Soldiery) follow the late Example of Zechelhyd, and surrendered it
self into the hands of Apafi; and tho the Complaints and Murmurings of the
Soldiers gave a sufficient time of warning to make due Provisions against a
Misfortune so imminent and plainly appearing; yet the want of Expedition at
Vienna, and the unprofitable Application only of empty Words and Air to feed
the penury, and satisfy the Appetite of starving Men, was a Remedy so little
available, that the Garrison submitted to Apafi, and yielded to Conditions
whereby they might Eat and Live: the Story of which Place, compared with that
of Zechelhyd, was so shameful and pungent to Men capable of any impressions of
Honor or Duty, that at length it awakened the Germans, and admonished them to
provide better for Zacmar and Tockey, and other Frontier Garrisons, lest they
also should incur the like Fate and Misfortune with the two former.

By this time the Actions of Serini were rumoured in the Grand Signiors
Seraglio, and the report of them became common in the mouths of the Vulgar;
wherefore full of Anger and Disdain, the Sultan wrote severely to his Vizier,
reproving him of negligence for suffering Serini so freely to Range his
Countries without control, to the great Dishonor of his Empire, and Damage of
his People: whereupon the Vizier not as yet having received his Recruits, nor
prepared so early for the March of the gross of his Army, dispatched
notwithstanding a considerable Force to precede him, with Orders either by
stealth to surprise Serinswar, or else to lay Siege unto it. This Army marching
by the way of Bosna, the news thereof was brought to Count Peter Serini,
appointed by his Brother to stand Centinal on the Guard of his Country, Count
Peter Serini defeats the Turks in the Streights of Morlac.
whilst he in Person was busied in Hungary, who immediately thereupon, with
what Force he could collect, ambushed himself at the narrow Pass of a Mountain
called the Morlac, where he had not long attended, before the Turks, without
order or care, entered with their whole Body; but being on a sudden surprised by
the Count, were wholly defeated, leaving two thousand dead on the place, with
many Prisoners.

The Month of March being now well entered, the Frosts began to thaw, and the
Air become more mild and moderate, when Count Nicholas Serini entertained
thoughts of laying Siege to Kanisia: But to lay the Foundation of this Design
with the better Judgment, it was thought first necessary to view the State and
Situation of the Place; The danger of Serini.
wherefore the Count in Person, accompanied with about fourteen Officers, went
one day to take a survey thereof; but he was not so private in his Design, but
that it was known to the Turks, who secretly laid five hundred Men in wait to
take him, and upon the near approach of Serini, started from their Holes with
Shouts and Out-crys; but the Count was so well mounted on his Croatian Courser,
that he out-ran them all, and got Refuge in the Thickets of a neighboring
Wood, where three hundred of his own Horse alarmed at a distance by the Echo's
of the cry, came in to his Succor, and making Head against the Turks, routed
and defeated them, killing and taking many Prisoners; amongst the Slain was
found one armed Cap-ape, with a silk Twist, or Cord of diverse Colors about his
Waste, who was, as reported by the Captives, to have been one who resolved to
have taken Serini, and with that Cord to have brought him bound to the Feet of
the Vizier. Serini having thus escaped, resolved to Revenge himself of the
Affront, and therefore made most dreadful Spoils and Confusion in all Places
round Kanisia; so that the People flying thither for Sanctuary, were refused
Entertainment by the Pasha, who at that time laboring with scarcity, and
expecting a Siege, had no need of unnecessary Guests.

Serini having now fully resolved to lay Siege to Kanisia, thought fit first to
signify the Design to his Imperial Majesty; for which purpose he dispatched
away the Engineer General with Letters to the Council of War of the Lower
Hungary, Serini makes known to the Emperor his design against Kanisia.
containing a perfect Relation of the Success and Progress of his Arms in that
Winter, and how he had laid waste and desolate all that circumference of Land
which lies between the River Dravus and Serinswar, by which means Kanisia was
already straightened with Famine, and that now was the only Season to recover that
Fortress, if the Design were put into immediate Execution, before the Turks
arose from their Winter Quarters, or had time to afford a powerful Relief. The
Resolution of Serini was so well pleasing to the Council, that by the same
Messenger they signified their Approbation thereof to the Emperor, then at the
Diet at Ratisbone, humbly desiring, that this Design might proceed, which would
undoubtedly take effect, if the Count were provided only with thirteen thousand
Foot, and seven thousand Horse; but then the Siege was to be laid before the
beginning of April, lest the early motion of the Turkish Camp should blast and
defeat the too late beginning of this Action. The particular Journal of
Serini's Success was not less pleasing to his Caesarean Majesty, than his
present Heroical Resolution against Kanisia; who thereupon gave Orders to the
General Council to supply him with all Provisions, Ammunition and Men which
were requisite for this Siege, and was graciously pleased himself to express in
a Letter to the Count, the Sense he had of his Merits and Valor, which he
applauded and extolled in the Words following.

POstquam mihi Architectus Militaris de Vassemboij eximios Vestros progressus
famosique Pontis Essolciensis exustionem, and caetera a Vobis edita Virtutis
Militaris singularia specimina longa serie exposuisset, supervenerunt Vestrae
de 19. Februarii, and omnia breviori, quam tantorum gestorum magnitudo capit,
enarratione confirmantes. Posuit fortunatus iste progressus labescenti rei
Hungariae firmum adminiculum, erexit consternatos meorum fidelium animos, and
futurorum foelicium successuum non exiguum jecit fundamentum. Proinde haec
Vestra egregia facta non minus mihi grata and accepta accidunt, quam in Nominis
Vestri perennitatem, and augendam apud Posteros memoriam redundant. Spero
omnino per Divinam assistentiam, virtutemque, and experientiam Vestram ejusmodi
ultiores foelices successus, atque hostilium armorum debellationem.

According to this Order of the Emperor, the Resolution of the Council of War
was established on the 10th of March, and Serini published, That on the 8th of
April he would begin the Siege; but in regard the Germans in Stiria, Kanisia
besieged.
and the Forces of the Rhyne, by reason of the Absence of their General, the
Count Olack, could not be so soon ready, the time of the Siege was deferred
until the 30th of April, on which, or the first of May, the Town was formally
beleagured, not so much with hopes of Success, as with Design to maintain the
Reputation of the Imperial Arms, and to divert the gross of the Enemies force
from the more easy and delightful Plains of Hungary, or the plenteous Confines
of Vienna, to a Country less happy or fruitful, encompassed with Fens and
Marshes, poisoned with bad Airs and Vapors, and made more miserable already by
the Desolations of War. But let us leave Serini at his Siege before Kanisia,
and travel a while with our thoughts to the Diet at Ratisbone, The Diet at
Ratisbone
and understand what is there forming and designing toward Preservation of the
Commonweal of the Empire. The taking of Newhausel, and the Progress of the
Ottoman Arms, had awakened the German Princes with that Sense of the common
Danger, that a Diet was assembled at Ratisbone to consult of the most effectual
means that might give a stop to the uncontrouled Incursions of the Turk. And
not to trouble the Reader with the Names of all those Princes and Ambassadors
which there appeared, it will be sufficient to signify, That besides his
Cesarean Majesty, there were present, as his Plenipotentiaries, the Elector of
Mentz, and Archbishop of Saltzburgh: And tho many Princes showed themselves
with Glory and Splendour; yet none appeared with that Pomp and Magnificence as
the Elector of Bavaria, who for number of Coaches, richness of his Liveries,
and complete Government of his Retinue, was so neat and polite, that he seemed
not only to exceed every Court in particular, but in Elegance and Magnificence
to equalize them all together. Upon Debate of matters in reference to this War,
the Count of Olack was unanimously chosen General for the Confederates of the
Rhine, but the more hot disputes between the Protestants and Papists about
Election of other Generals kept matters in longer suspense; yet at length the
Marquess of Baden was chosen Marshal General in behalf of the League, the
Marquess of Durlach, and the Bishop of Munster his Councillors, and Director;
of the War; The strength of the Christian Army.
and Count Francis Fucher, General of the Ordnance. But in the Levies of their
Forces they concurred more freely and willingly; for besides the Imperial
Forces, which consisted of 41600 Foot, and 13900 Horse, the Allies and
Confederates furnished 13850 Foot, and 3350 Horse; the Auxiliaries of the
Empire made up a Body of 16991 Foot and 4037 Horse, besides the Forces of
Saxony, and Brandenburgh, and the Succors of France; so that, by Gods
Providence, the Christian Army was this year esteemed equal, if not more
numerous than the multitudes of their Enemies.

The next matter under consideration was the nomination of Ministers to be sent
abroad to implore assistance from Christian Princes more remote; Italy.
the Count Piccolomini was to negotiate in the Courts of Italy; but having
taken a Distemper in his Journeys, died after a short sickness at Milan.

Also the Count Colalto, England.
sent to his Majesty of Great Britain, died in his Journey before he arrived at
London; notwithstanding which the generous Piety of His Majesty was not wanting
with a liberal Hand to contribute toward the Promotion of the Christian
Interest.

From Poland nothing more could be obtained than Terms of Courtesy, Poland.
and Demonstrations of Good Will and ^esires, for that their Forces being
employed against the Moscovite to recover the lost Countries of Lituania, could
not possibly attend the Service and Command of his Imperial Majesty, tho they
could not but at the same time reflect on their Premures and Necessities with
Shame and Confusion which disabled them from answering with like returns the
grateful Memory they still retained of the assistance against Sweden.

To his Most Christian Majesty Count Strozzi was employed, France.
before whose Arrival at Paris the common Report and Vogue was, That that King
resolved to contribute an effectual Assistance to the Christian Cause in that
present Conjuncture; which pious Disposition Strozzi so happily improved, that
he obtained from his Majesty a Grant and Promise of four thousand Foot, and two
thousand Horse, raised and paid at his own Charge, to be united with the
Troops of the Rhinish League: And farther, His Majesty was so gracious herein,
that he published a Declaration, That what Person soever would serve the
Emperor against the Turk, his Resolution and Action therein should be accepted
by him, in the same manner as if the Service were immediately tendered to
himself. Upon which many Persons of Quality resolved upon this Expedition,
amongst which was the Duke of Buglion, the Marquis de Villeroy, the Abbot of
Richelieu, and many other Heroes, and Persons of Bravery, who ventured their
Lives with no other Consideration than that of Honor and Religion. But before
I pass from this Emb^ssy, give me leave to report a Complement which Count
Strozzi passed upon this King, which some say did savor a little too much of
Flattery and Affectation. The matter was this: Count Strozzi being admitted to
his Audience, Count Strozzi's Speech to the French King.
so soon as he entered into the Chamber, I know not whether it was feigned or
real, he seemed to be struck with such an Amazement and Fear, that for a while
he was not able to pronounce a word Articulate or Intelligible; but at length
recollecting himself, he began with a trembling Voice to excuse this Hesitation
of his Speech, having his Senses dissipated, and his Eyes dazzled with the Rays
and Splendour of so much Majesty; and with that, as in a Rapture or Ecstasie
broke out into an Admiration of the French Monarchy, the report of whose
Greatness and Glory, tho arrived to the utmost Confines of the Universe, came
yet far short of that real Majesty which he saw and admired, whose dreadful and
mysterious Throne was sufficient to revive the dead Ashes of the Sabean Queen
to prostrare her self before this new Solomon, much excelling the Wisdom, the
Richess, the Virtue, and Happiness of the former. And thence descending with
the like sagacious Obsequiousness, to confute the malicious Reports of
malignant Tongues, who, envious of the harmony of Christian Spirits,
represented His Majesty as ill-affected to the Austrian Family; whereas to the
contrary, he could testify to have found that excess of Affection, and
admirable Disposition in His Majesty toward the Emperor his Ally, as rendered
his Embassy abundantly happy and successful, which joined to the Zeal His
Majesty had toward the Christian Cause, was like Friendship united to Charity,
and moral Virtues made perfect by spiritual Qualifications. In fine, he
compared his Christian Majesty to that Glorious Sun, which communicating his
light to the Christian World, affords the most benign Influence to the
Catholic Climate; with much better reason therefore ought Germany to
participate so great a Circle of those Rays, as may serve wholly to obscure and
darken the dim and barbarous Light of the Ottoman Moon. In sum, Strozzi knew so
well how to manage his Discourse, and play the Orator, that he obtained
considerable Assistances, and returned to his Master the Emperor with full
Demonstrations of all obliging Terms, and courteous Tre^^ments. And having thus
understood what Preparations are making in Christendom, let us pass over into
the Turks Quarters, and see what is in the mean time tr^nsacting in those
Dominions.

At this time the Rumor of a Rebellion and Mutiny amongst the Great Beghs at
Grand Cairo in Egypt, Rebellion of the Beghs in Egypt.
afforded matter for Trouble and Consultation at the Ottoman Court; for that
those Beghs who have great Possessions and Power in that Country, made Seizure
of Ibrahim Pasha, and imprisoned him, being about the Expiration of his three
years commonly allotted to that Government; and therefore near upon departure.
The demands they had upon him was for no less than three thousand Purses of
Money, which according to the Cairo Account, are reckoned seven hundred and
fifty Dollars a Purse, and pretended to be taken from them against Law and
Justice; and that without Restitution thereof they resolved not to restore him
his Liberty. This Insolence against so ^minent a Pasha, qualified with such
absolute Power in his Government, and one related to the Grand Signior by
Marriage of his Sister, compared with the late neglects and disobedience of
that People who for some years had failed in the full payment of their Tribute,
were interpreted as evident Symptoms of Disaffection and Malignancy, which that
People entertained against the Ottoman Subjection. Wherefore the Sultan
immediately dispatched away the Master of his Horse to Cairo, with full Power
to apease this Rebellion, and with Lenitives to moderate the Fury of the
People, who seemed to be too Licentious and Unbridled to be governed by a
Musselim or Deputy: Wherefore the Selictar Aga was elected Pasha, and to depart
with all Expedition. In the mean time this Messenger, to make greater haste,
took post through Asia with thirty in his Company, and in a short time arrived
at Grand Cairo, where, with fair terms, and Restitution of some Money from the
Pasha, all matters were reduced to an amicable composure, only the punishment
of the chief Mutiners, with a fair Coutenance, deferred for a Season, was
afterward according to the Turkish Fashion, when time and opportunity
presented, remunerated to those factious Spirits with a severe Interest, and
Satisfaction to Justice.

Not long after, Ibrahim Pasha having obtained his Liberty, returned from his
Government of Cairo to Constantinople, where refreshing himself some time with
the Embraces of his young Sultana, an Imperial Command for immediate payment of
four hundred Purses of Money to the Grand Signiors Treasury, disturbed his
delightful quiet. Ibrahim Pasha fined.
The Pasha made a present payment of one half, but desired time for the
Remainder, either for want of that instant supply, or else in hopes of ease of
his Fine. But the Sultan, who is impatient of any delay in his Slaves, which
savours of obstinacy or disobedience, tho never so reasonable, dispatched
another Command, enjoining present Compliance, and as a Penalty for the late
Neglect, raised the Demand from four hundred to six hundred Purses, which if
not as readily paid as required, the Kimacham of Constantinople was empowered
to commit him Prisoner within the four Gates of the Seraglio, the fatal Prison,
from whence few find other Release than by Death. The Pasha not being able to
comply, was there restrained of his Liberty; and imprisoned
and yet had the good fortune in a few days to obtain his freedom, by the
endeavors (as some suppose) to the Great V^zier, who having by this Act
weakened his Power and Treasure, did afterward as an instrument of his
Deliverance, conserve his Life, and obtain for him the Government of
Darbiquier, where being remote and obscure at so far a distance, could never be
capable to shadow, or by his great popularity and affable comportment endanger
the present happy state of the V^ziers Office.

Matters growing now toward Action, by return of the Spring, the Grand
Signior, to encourage his Vizier in a continuance of his duty, sent him a Horse
and a Sword as a Testimony of his favor and good esteem of his Person; and
Orders were issued out through all the Empire for public Prayers to be made
some days before the Vizier began his March toward the Enemy. This appointment
of public Devotions occasioned matter of argument and dispute between the
Mufti, and a Shegh or Preacher, one that was always near the Grand Signiors
Person, and therefore on Confidence of his familiar Access to the Presence of
the Sultan, and on Presumption of his Sanctity and Privilege of his Office,
took Liberty to oppose and contradict the Oracle of the Ottoman Law. A Dispute
between the Mufti and a Shegh.
The Problem in question was, Whether Prayers appointed for success of the
Ottoman Arms, according to the Law of their Prophet, were to be made privately,
and in every Mosch or Oratory apart, or in a general Assembly of the whole
City. The Mufti maintained the last Position, citing in favor of his Opinion
the Testimony of diverse Arabic Doctors, and the customs of the present and
past times. The Shegh on the contrary was for Devotions to be performed in
every Mosch, declaring. That the Assembly of all the People of a City into one
Body did nothing avail or enforce the Power of Prayer; for they being true
believers, were all illuminated, and had no need of helps to make their Prayers
more fervent or more acceptable. The Argument was hot on both sides; and tho
the Mufti had got another Shegh on his part, who might pretend to as much of
Illumination as the other, and j^yned to the Mufti's Opinion, who is the Mo^th
and undoubted Interpreter of the Law, might seem able not only to resolve the
knottiest difficulties, but to impose an Assent on them with greater Authority;
yet the Shegh having the Grand Signor on his side. presently got most of
Reason, and forced the Mufti to recant his former Opinion as Erroneous, and to
banish the other Shegh his Companion, pretending that he was now convinced, and
had sooner discovered the truth, had not the Imp^st^r, the false Preacher
deceived him by his ^e gned Illuminations. This Victory gained the Shegh much
applause and esteem with the Grand Signior, so that he vented what Doctrine he
pleased and all he said was taken for Divine Ruies and Precepts. He was born
about Van on the Confi es of Persia, so that he is called Vanni Efendi, and is
of the A^m^nian Race: he preached every Friday at Adrianople in one Mosch or
other. where the Grand Signior was for the most part present; and tho the
greatest part of his Sermons were stuffed up with Praises of the M^bomeian
Religion, and Invectives against Christians, sentencing all polluted and
profane who ass^ciate with them, and exclaiming against the Abomination of
Wine; yet it is confidently reported, that he is no strict Observer of the Law
he pro^esses, the which his Disciples and Familiars are ready to excuse in him,
saying, That it may be lawful for him to dispense with such matters, in regard
his Illuminations and high Prerogatives of Sanctity have infranchised him from
observance of the meaner and less substantial points of their Law.

The Turks, Predictions amongst the Turks.
who are as much given to Predictions and Interpretations of old Prophecies, as
ever the Egyptians were, busied themselves this year more than ever, to know
the Event of this War. Some, who had studied ancient Arabic Predictions, had
extracted certain Astrological Figures, and from thence framed strange Fancies,
according to the humor or melancholy of the Astrologer; one whereof coming to
the Grand Signiors ears, mentioning diverse things obscurely, and in general of
the great Effusion of Blood, but that at last the Advantage and Victory should
remain to the Tu^k, and that the Grand Signior himself should shortly make a
Journey; the Grand Signior troubled here^t as much as ever Pharaoh was about
the Interpretation of his ^ream, sent for one of the Chief Just ces of the Law,
called the Kadilescher, and with him con^eried concerning this Prediction: all
things Pleased him well; but only the latter part of making a Journey. Whither
that Journey should be, he could not imagine his Arms were so prosperous in
Hungary, that he conceived the Vizier had no need of his Presence either to
animate or recruit his Army; and to any other part, he knew not what could move
him from his delightful and beloved City of Adrianople. I he Kadilescher
supposing that he might put that Interpretation thereon which might not be
ungrateful, replied, Perhaps, O Emperor, he may mean that you shall again
return to your sublime and happy Port of Constantinople. The Grand Signior
suddenly touched herewith, The Grand Signiors aversion to Constantinople.
burst into choler: How, said he, to Constantinople! what joy, what comfort can
I have there? Has not that place been fatal to my Father? What benefit had my
Uncle from thence? or any of my Race? Have not all my Princes Ancestors been
subject to a thousand mutinies and Rebellions in that place? I shall sooner
than return thither, set fire to it with my own hands, and rejoice to see that
City with my Seraglio brought to ashes. And that we may farther discover the
strange aversion the Sultan had to Constantinople, and his resolution to change
the Seat of his Empire, it is observable, that he built a small Seraglio not
far from Adrianople, in imitation of that near Constantinople, A small Seraglio
by that name near Constantinople.
called Odout Pasha; the place to which he most frequently resorted after that
City fell under his dislike and hatred. The Village where his Palace was built
was called Chiomlichoi, or the Village of Pots where earthen Vessels were made:
but the Grand Signior changed the name, and called it Odout Pasha, with which
name before the People were well acquainted, and that it was accustomed to
their mouths, two poor silly Country men mistaking, and calling it simply by
the former name, were apprehended by some of the Bostangees, and brought before
the Grand Signior as contemners of the Imperial Command, and by his immediate
Sentence were put to death.

About the end of May the Grand Signior had a Son born to him of one of his
Women, A Son born to the Grand Signior.
for joy of which seven days of Dunalma, or rejoicing were appointed through
all the Ottoman Dominions; but especially at Adrianople the Solemnity was
greatest, all sorts of Artisans endeavoring to outvy each other in their Shows
and Pastimes to entertain the City. At the Gate of the Seraglio was erected a
magnificent Pavilion for the Grand Signior, before whom were shown rare
artificial Fireworks invented by the most ingenious Masters thereof amongst
the Jews; one of which firing a Rocket, which not ascending with usual
strength, unhappily fell on the Vest of the Grand Signiors Favorite, standing
at the door of the ^ent; at which the young Man being surprised, sent to find
out him who fired it, which happening to be a poor Jew, was condemned
immediately by the Grand Signiors Sentence to receive eighty Blows on the Soals
of his Feet; but as report went, this young Favorite not appeased with this
slender Punishment, obtained the Sultans command to put him to Death.

But to return to the Turkish Camp. The Vizier was astonished to understand
that Kanisia was besieged, and wondered much at the rashness of Serini, in
attempting a Work so difficult without probability of success; The Siege of
Kanisia.
howsoever being advised, that the Garrison was ill provided of Victuals and
Ammunition, he gave order for its supply. In order to which eighty Carts laden
with Provisions convoyed by a considerable number of Turks, were conducted by
way of Sigeth; but being interrupted in their passage by Serini's Soldiers,
were routed, put to flight, and their Provisions taken. In the mean time the
Besieged made many vigorous Sallies, and some not without loss to the
Christians; and to defend themselves the better, uncovered the tops of their
Houses, and made their Lodgings under ground, secure from Grenades, or shot of
the Enemies Batteries. On the other side the Ammunition and Arti^^ery from the
Emperor came not so timely as was expected; nor were the Bom^oes and Grenades
so artificially made, but that many of them spent themselves in vain: the
Succors likewise of men fell very short of the numbers promised; and Soldiery
being drawn from their Winter Quarters before the colds were past, or the
pasture grown, began to murmur; but nothing discontented them so much as want
of Pay, the just complaint of Soldiers, which discouraged them more than the
difficulty of their adventure: against all which Serini provided as much as he
was able out of his own Purse, continuing the Siege more out of reputation than
probable hopes of success; for his Army was at least diminished two thousand in
its number, of which four hundred Hungars, and two hundred Germans were lost in
the first Assaults made upon the Suburbs, and he rest perished by sickness, and
the vigorous and frequent Sallies of the Enemy. Howsoever Serini seemed not to
doubt of the success, if he could but be for some time secured from the advance
of the Vizier, who now began to draw his gross and numerous Army out of their
Winter Quarters into the open field; and therefore with the other Officers
before Kanisia, signified their advice to the Emperor and General Council of
War, That it was necessary that the Imperial Army should be as early in the
Field as the Ottoman; and for the more methodical government of Affairs, that
the Army should be divided into three Bodies, one to recruit the Forces before
the Town, a second to march to Osek, and hinder the Enemies passage over the
Dravus, and a third to take the Field, and apply assistance where it was judged
most useful. This counsel being well accepted by the Emperor, Orders were
immediately issued forth to General Montecuculi to begin his March, with design
to obstruct the Turks passage over the Dravus; for that the success against
Kanisia was of that high importance, as might justly require the employment of
all the Christian Forces in its concernment. Wherefore one Post was dispatched
after the other to Montecuculi to solicit his speedy March, and to give a
stop to the Viziers Progress. But he answered, That he attended General Sporch,
whom he every day expected to join with him; but this Answer proving by the
effect to be nothing more than a present excuse, gave occasion of suspicion,
and produced that discontent in the minds of the most zealous, as spread a
rumor through all Germany much to the disreputation of Montecuculi. Time thus
being protracted, and no Forces appearing to recruit the Leagure, at length
advice came to the Generals, when they were just going to dinner, that the
Vizier with a most numerous Army was within Fifteen English Miles.
three Leagues of the Town. For the Bridge of Osek was against the common
opinion again rebuilt, planked, and completed with new Timbers in the space of
forty days, many hands making light work; which when first founded, was the
work of six years: which Expedition was the more remarkable, in regard that
this Bridge was not formed out of the Ruins of the old, nor founded on the
same ground, but new framed out of the Woods with as much comeliness and order
as befits a Bridge of that nature and length, passing over a wild Marsh or Fen.
The news of the Viziers so near approach was strange to Serini, who by the
calculation made of his March, did not yet expect him for several days, but the
Vizier apprehending the straitness in which Kanisia might be, leaving the gross
of his Army, made more expidite Journeys with a Body of twenty thousand Horse,
which not being unknown to Serini, his daring spirit was once resolved to give
him Battle, in which opinion was also Count Strozzi; but Olach dissenting and
refusing to engage his Forces, the Siege was raised, and all the Forces with
good order retreated to Serinswar, The Siege of Kmisia raised.
where they arrived the day following, leaving to the Enemy a great quantity of
Powder, Match, Shovels, 20 Carts of Meal, and Two Iron Guns broken.

No Pilgrim ever followed his way with more devotion to the sacred Shrine, The
Turks pursue the Christian Army.
than the Vizier was willingly led in pursuit of his Enemy to the Walls of
Serinswar, being the place to which his intentions inclined, as the beginning
and consummation of the War. Over against this envied Fort there is a little
Hill strong by Nature, encompassed with a narrow Ditch, yet not so narrow, as
that a Horse can leap over it, nor yet so shallow as to ^e forded. This Hill
Serini proposed to the rest of his Colleagues or Coadjutors, viz. Olach and
Spaar, as a place commodious to incamp their Army, because lying open to the
River, could easily be relieved, and would serve as a Redoubt or Out-word to
the Fort, in which upon all extremities they might find Sanctuary and resuge:
But the apprehension of the Viziers Numbers, and his near approach had made
that impression of fear in their minds, that no safety seemed to remain, unless
they could see the River Mura between them and their Enemy. Nor was Serini more
sucessful in his persuasions to assault the Enemy, whilst they were wearied
with their March, and busied in extending their Tents, the other Generals being
of opinion, that it was too great a hazard for them alone to venture their
Forces in so unequal a Combat, by they ought rather to expect Montecuculi, by
the addition of whose Forces the lot of War would be less hazardous, if not
wholly certain. In this manner great Enterprises have been disappointed, which
have wanted only resolution to make them successful, Fortune being commonly
favorable, if not a Servant, to bold and daring Spirits; the disunion also of
Generals has been the overthrow of the wisest Counsels, and Wars have been
ovserved never to have thrived where the Heads of Armies have been of
dissenting humors or different interests.

This timidity on the Christian part raised in that manner the spirits of the
Turks, The Turks intr^heh (...) Serinswar.
that without stop or opposition passing the River Muer, they arrived at
Serinswar, where they immediately fell to their Mattock and Spade, breaking
ground for their Trenches, which by continued labor they so diligently
attended, that in Seventeen days they arrived at the very Ditch of the Fort:
Only whilst the Turks were transporting their Numbers over the River, the
generous spirit of Strozzi not enduring to see their passage so easy and open,
valiantly opposed himself and his small Force against the greater power of the
Enemy, and so resolutely performed the Action, that he killed Five hundred upon
the place, Count Strozzi slain.
till at length being unfortunately shot by a Musketbullet in the Forehead, he
gloriously, together with one Chisfareas, a renowned Croatian Captain, ended
his days in defense of his Country and the Christian Cause.

In this interim General Montecuculi arrived with his Army, and was received by
Count Serini with all evidences and demonstrations of respect and hearty
welcome, and between both passed an appearance at least of friendly
correspondence. But as to the present Engagement, Montecuculi was of opinion.
That the opportunity was over slipped, which should at first have been performed,
rather by way of surprise than open Battle, before the Ottoman Army had arrived
to its full numbers, consisting now of an hundred thousand fighting men. To
which reasons Serini replied, That the Christian Cause, Serini's Reasons to
fight with the Turks.
and the States and Confines of the Empire were not to be maintained by men
that carry their thumbs at their girdles, or by Armies made resty with ease,
and wanton with luxury. That those Armies were raise not to consume and exhaust
the Revenues of their Princes, and Exchequers of their States, without making
satisfactory amends by a valiant defense of that Interest which they owned.
That the Enemy had not been before that time attempted, was no fault or neglect
of his, who under the very Walls of Kanisia resolved to give them Battle; but
that the other Generals supposed it more prudence and caution to protract the
Engagement till his Arrival, who being now happily conjoined with them, nothing
ought to deter them from a glorious Attempt on the Turks, who not consisting of
above Thirty thousand men, ill disciplined, and worse armed, were not able to
withstand the prowess of their Veterane Army, which far exceeded them in
number, discipline, and courage. These or such like expressions Serini used;
and to prove what he averred, he dispatched a confident Person of his own, who
spoke naturally the Turkish Language, with a Letter to the German Resident,
then entertained under custody in the Turkish Camp, to know of him the true
state and number of the Turks, which Messenger soon after returned with this
short account.

Nisi memortuum velis, amplius non rescribas, hic vix sunt triginta millia, nec
illa satis electa, The German Residents Letter to Count Serini.
quid vos a pugna deterret? Tormenta Arcis nimis in altum exploduntur. Which in
English is thus. Unless you desire my death, write not back to me again, here
are scarce Thirty thousand men, and these ill provided, what then should deter
you from an Engagement? The Cannon in the Castle are too high mounted, or shoot
over. Serini gave this Letter to Montecuculi, who replied, That so soon as
General Sporch came up with his Forces, Montecuculi contrary to the opinion of
Serini declines the Battle with the Turks.
he would immediately draw up the Army into Batalia; Sporch being arrived, he
then resolved to expect Marquess Baden, and so deferred the Battle from time to
time, until the Turks advantaging themselves by these delays, had worked
themselves under ground to the very Walls of the Castle. At length Montecuculi
entering into Serini's Fort (it is not known upon what reasons of jealousy, or
discontent) cleared Serini's Forces of the Garrison, and dispossessed the
Governor; which when Serini perceived, full of anger and displeasure, he
quitted the Camp, and retired himself to his Residence at Chiacaturno, Serini
retires from the Wars.
with intent to make his just Appeal and Complaint to the Emperor's Court.

The Turks availing themselves of these delays and discontents, proceeded
forward in their work, so that having Mined to very Walls, on the 9th of June,
they blew up one of the half Moons, at which the Defendants were so terrified,
that with amazement they left open one of their Sally Ports, at which the Turks
entering, put the whole Garrison into disorder, consisting of 1900 fighting men;
so that now no sasety remaining, but in flight, they forsook their Fort, and
crouding over the Bridge in confused heaps, broke it down with the
over-pressure of its burden; by fall of which, many perished in the Waters, and
about Three hundred and fifty which remained, were cut off by the Sword; this
was the fate of Serini's Fort, built with Art, Serinswar taken.
and lost by Cowardice and ill Conduct, which the Year before, only with Twenty
Germans, and One hundred and fifty Hungurians, withstood a most impetuous and
fierce storm of the Enemy, but now was less tenable than a Palancha, the
Garisoned with 1900 Men, of whom in this last Assault one alone had Courage to
fire his Musket, but none adventured to draw a Sword; unless certain
Vol^^tiers, and French Officers, whose Courage only renowned their own Deaths,
and served to up^raid the Cowardice of their Companions. In the Fort were only
found five small Field Pieces, one whole Cannon, a great Mortar Piece, and two
small ones belonging to Count Serini; there were also one Mortar Piece, and two
small Field Pieces, like to those of Serini, belonging to the Emperor; tho
other Guns of weight or value were carried out of the Fort, as being judged not
long tenable, and decreed to be abandoned to the Enemy. Serinswar being thus
taken was immediately demolished by the Vizier, and razed to the Ground; either
because he would seem to maintain his Word or Vow he had made; or because he
would not multiply Garrisons, when the present Occasions required rather the
active Force of a moving Army.

But before we proveed farther, Reflections on the disgrace of Serini.
it seems pertinent to our purpos, to declare the Reasons and Grounds of the
preceding neglects and discountenance passed upon Serini by the Grandees of the
Imperial Army, which not being vindicated by the Emperor, seem to have been
cast upon him by his express Order or at least to have been willing for some
private respect, to have the Person of Serini abased, and his Actions obsc^red.
It is therefore to be noted (what before has been said) That the first
pretense the Turks made for this War, was this Fort of Serinswar, raised
against the Capitulations and Articles of the last Peace, for which, tho the
Violence against Va^adin may be pleaded as equal, if not exceeding the present
Breach, to which this was only subsequent, and seemed to be but a just
Recompense or Effect thereof; yet because it was that stone of Scandal and
Offense, which drew after it that deadly War, in which the Emperor unwillingly
engaged against the Ottoman Power, and caused him freely to intimate unto
Serini, his desire rather to see that Fort demolished, than the Peace
interrupted; to which Serini yielding no Ear, drew upon himself the deserved
displeasure of his most gracious Prince, who permitted the act of his Obstinacy
and Disobedience, to become a just Snare to his own Folly. But perhaps, that
Displeasure which was Justice in the Emperor, might be Envy, and Emulation in
his Ministers, who beholding with jealous Eyes his Actions and Successes the
Winter before, which enraged his Enemies, and exalted his Name to that Glory in
all the Courts of Christian Princes, that the Pope honored him with Medals of
Gold; the King of Spain, with the Order of the Golden Fleece; the French King
as a Demonstration of his Esteem, with a Token of ten thousand Crowns; and
Cardinal Francis Barberini, with a Pension of eight hundred Crowns a Month; and
all other European Princes, at least made the most part Applications to him by
Congratulatory Letters, admiring his Virtues, and applauding his Successes;
permitting their Gazets and Diurnals, Weekly to divulge and publish his
Praises. From whence may rationally be collected, the true occasion of that
Envy, which by cold assistances, and slow succors, obstructed as well the
taking of Kanisia, as the valiant defense of Serinswar, which was decryed, not
only as a Fort erected without due and matue Consideration, but without art, or
regular Proportions, which might render it tenable; accusing at the same time
as well the Rashness and Temerity of Serini's Counsels, as his want of Judgment
and Experience in Military Affairs.

But to leave now the sad subject of the Christian misfortunes, occasioned by
their own quarrels and dissentions, which the Grand Enemy of Gods Church always
endeavored to sow for advancement of his own Kingdom: Let us cast our Eyes on
the other parts of unhappy Hungary. The Siege of Kanisia being raised, and
Serinswar taken and demolished, success had swelled and puffed up the minds of
the Turks to a height that nothing seemed difficult or impossible to their
desires. On the other side, controversies and delays gave that advantage to the
Enemy, that nothing could be expected, but losses, slaughter, and in the end, a
total-ruin. But God who pitied the miseries of poor Christendom, cast his Eyes
of mercy on the Frontiers of the upper Hungary, granting some more happy
sucesses to the Christian Arms, conducted by the Valor and Fortune of Count
Soise, a French Gentlelman, who having the Command of an Army distinct from
that of Montecuculi, began his first attempt and enterprise upon Nitra, where
several Persons of Quality, Nitra taken by the Christians.
and Officers of the Turkish Army, were assembled to consider of the Affairs of
War. Soise having taken his convenient measures, and made his due approaches,
began to batter the Walls, a great part of which in a short time he shook so
shroadly, that he opened a very wide Breach, and continually plying Grenades
into the Town, so affrighted the besieged, that immediately they offered a
Parley, which Soise accepted, (and the rather, upon advice, that Varadin,
Solnoc, Temiswar, and the places adjacent, were collecting Forces to raise the
Siege, and relieve the Town) entered into Treaty, and concluding upon
Conditions, the Town surrendered, and the Turks marched out with the Colors
folded, and Muskets under their Arms, leading their Horses, had Convoy as far
as Chomar.

Soise having obtained this success, entered into Consultation about recovery
of Newhausel, but having not Forces judged sufficient to attempt the difficulty
of that place, he turned his endeavors and designs upon Lewa or Leventz; but
in the way thither, he was casually engaged with a Body of fourteen thousand
Turks and Tartars, who were marching to the relief Nitra, The Turks assault
Soise.
and fell in unawares upon his Rereguard; whereupon Soise commanded the
Regiments of hsi Major General Guarnicri, and of the Colonels Caprara and
Zeitsch, and the Horse and Dragoons of Brandenburgh, then marching in the Van,
to face about, and Charge the Enemy, which they performed with that Courage and
Vigor, that they routed and pursued them as far as the River Giava. At which
place Soise Encamped with his Army, and in an advantageous Situation made a
line of Circumvallation about his Camp, strengthening it with some Pieces of
Cannon. The Turks having recovered a convenient Retreat upon the River,
remained opposite to the Christians, and having there reinforced themselves
with additional Recruits, returned again to give them Battle, and in three
places with extremity of Fury and Despair. assaulted the Christian Camp:
Fortune for a long time remained doubtful on both sides, till at length the
admirable Resolution of the Christians overcame, leaving a thousand Turks
extended on the place; many were drowned and the rest fled, leaving a rich
Booty for reward to the Conq^^rors.

The Christans in this manner being successful, resolved not to check the
current of their Fortune, but without delay, Lewa taken.
proceeded to Lewa, which having been for some time battered with great Guns,
surrendered it self to the merev of the Conqueror; in which was found a
considerable quantity of Meal, and twenty great pieces of Artillery.

In the mean time, the difference between the King of France and the Pope (on
occasion of the insult offered at Rome by the Corsi, to the Ambassadors House
and Person) being this Year composed; those Forces of the French being in all
about 3000. Horse, sent first into Italy to avenge this Affront, under the
Command of the Count Coligni, were ordered to pass into Hungary, by way of
Venice, to the Assistance of the Emperor; to which, several Gentlemen,
Volunteers of the same Nation, joining themselves, formed a Body of 4000. Horse
well appointed, Valiant and desirous of Action. The Pope also, whose words
expressed and breathed out nothing but holy Zeal against the common Enemy,
promised a supply of 10000. Foot, and 3000. Horse, which were to pass by way of
Trieste into Croatia, according to the Promise and Assurance of the Nuntio at
Vienna: for acknowledgment of which religious and considerable Succor, Count
Leisle was dispatched from the Imperial Court, in a private Character, to pass
those Offices of grateful Acceptance, as were due to so high a Merit and Sense
of the Christian Cause. But scarce was Leisle arrived at Venice, before he
understood (to his great Admiration) that the holy Army was by Order of the
Pope disbanded, The Pope recals his Forces from assistance of the Emperor.
for which no other Cause was assigned, than only, that at Rome it was
seriously debated, and in the end, it was concluded, that the Expense was to
great to be charged on the Ecclesiastical State; and that the Sold^ery also
were themselves unwilling to be so far separated from their own Country; all
which at Vienna were understood to be frivolous Pretenses, and the causes
thereof attributed to the sinister Offices of a Person ill affected to the
Emperors Interest, by which the Pope and Don Mario his General, falling from
their Resolutions and Promises, Count Leisle was revoked from his Employment,
and the Imperial Interest, and hopes disappointed of so considerable a Succor.

Howsoever, that the Pastoral care might not seem to be altogether dormant and
careless of the Universal Flock, the Pope having disbanded his Army, The Pope
supplies the, Emperor with Money, but not with men.
could not do less than to supply the defect thereof with Money; for raising of
which, he charged the Ecclesiastical State through all Italy (the Dominions of
Venice only excepted, whose Wars already with the Turks exempted them from
farther Taxes) with an Imposition of 6 per Cent. of their yearly Revenue, under
the notion of Tenths or Tithes, which in all amounted to the sum of 700.
thousand Dollars, which by Bills of Exchange, was remitted by way of Venice to
the Imperial Court. In the mean time, the French Troops were arrived in
Hungary, under the Command of the Count Coligni, which joining themselves with
the General Montecuculi, followed the motion of the Viziers Army. The Turks
designed to pass the Danube, for recovery of Lewa or Leventz, and in their way
to destroy and lay desolate the Country of Count Badian, and in virtue and
strength of that and former Successes, to pass forward to the Subjection of
Possonium and Vienna. But God who disposes the Affairs of this World, and gives
Laws and ^ounds to the Licentiousness and unlimited Pride and Avarice of
Mankind, took off the Wheels of the Turkish Chariots, and caused them to move
slowly and warily, having an Eye always barckwards to the Forces of
Montecuculi, who attended them along the Banks of the River Muer, of Mura.

But whilst these two great Armies marched in view of each other, the Walachian
and Moldavian Forces joining with a considerable number of Turks and Tartars,
under the Command of Chusaein Pasha, resolved to assault, and again to recover
Leventz, which tho scarce settled, being so lately taken by the Christians, yet
valiantly repulsed two fierce Assaults of the Enemy, with that Courage and
Bravery, that 2000 were Slain under the very Walls. By which time, Count Soise
marches to raise the Siege of Leventz.
it being the 5/15 of July, Count Soise passed the Nitra with his Horse and
Foot, and thence hastening his March with all Expedition, he first Encamped at
the Foot of a Hill called St. B^net, from whence he discovered the Enemies Body
from the Top of a Mountain, and thence approaching nearer, threw up some Earth
and Works by the Banks of the River Grava; the next day having found a fordable
place of the Water, Soise in less than two hours passed the gross of his Army;
which the Enemy observing, left their Siege, abandoned their Trenches, and
displaid their Army in open Field, which consisting of 25. or 30. thousand
fighting Men, appeared much more numerous than the Christians. For to these
Forces, under the Conduct of Husaein Pasha of Buda, were joined the Pasha of
Anatolia and Cidizade, the Pasha of Temeswar, four Boluchees of Spahees, and a
good Force of Tartars, together with the Militia of Moldavia and Valachia, The
Turks before Lewa.
under their respective Princes, which composed an Army, as was computed, of
above 25000. Men. Upon approach of Husaein pasha, the Christians gave way, and
retreated, intending to receive their Enemies in a larger Field, and afford an
occasion to the^ of greater Confidence in Execution of the Design they came to
Act. The Turks supposing the Christians to be fled for fear, with more boldness
marched forward. And believing this Retreat to proceed rather of Fear than
Policy, continued to contemn the Pusillanimity of the Christians; and lest it
should argue too much regard and esteem of their Force, vouchsafed not to send
Scouts abroad, either to view their Camp, or to prevent surprisal; but some of
their Officers wisely considering, that a Soldier ought never to despise his
Enemy, they were persuaded to send a considerable Body of Horse, to view and
discover the Enemies Force, who in the way, meeting with a party of the
Christians, after a small Skirmish put them to Flight, and taking some
Prisoners, brought them before the General; the Prisoners upon Examination
confessed, that Count Susa was fully resolved the next Morning to give them
Battle, and declared the number and courage of his Army to be such, as altered
the Opinion Husaein had conceived of the Cowardice and Weakness of the
Christians power; so that that whole Night the Turks past with watchful and
vigilant Guards, their Arms ready, and the whole Camp in a posture of Defense.

The next Morning being the 9th of July, The Christian Army put themselves into
Battalia.
the day breaking discovered the Christian Army at so near a distance, as that
their several Motions might be discerned; and putting themselves in Array for
the Battle, made two Wings of Horse; each Wing consisting of 3000. Horse the
most armed Cap-a-pe, and well provided; the Foot marched in the Body of the
Army, well appointed and fitted with all sorts of Ammunition and Arms, and so
raised with cheerful Courages, as rendered them in appearance to the Turks, a
Warlike and formidable Army. The Turks likewise drew themselves into Battalia,
desirous to try the fortune of the day; the right Wing was Commanded by the
Prince of Valachia, and the left by the Prince of Moldavia. The Body of the
Army was composed of Turks and Tartars, almost all Horse, except 2 or 3000.
Janissaries, sent as an Auxiliary Force from Newhausel and Strigonium. These two
Armies thus ranged in a Posture of Defiance, stood in view each of other, until
Husaein Commanded his Men to pass the Marsh or Fen, which was between them and
the Christians: but several would have persuaded him the contrary, lest the
success of the day not proving to Expectation, the Marsh should be a
disadvantage to their Flight, and an occasion of greater Slaughter in the
pursuit; to which Husaein Courageously answered, That Men who would Conquer
were to look forward, and not behind them; those that would save their Lives by
flight, were fit to perish in it; and that for his part, he was resolved to cut
off all hopes of safety from his Army, but what consisted in their Swords and
Victory over their Enemies. The Turks having thus passed the Marsh, made a halt
and faced the Christians until Noon; who moved not a foot from their ground,
that so they might obtain the advantage of the Sun; which in the Morning being
in their Faces, would upon declining be an offense unto the Turks. In the mean
time, no question but both Generals made their Orations to their Soldiers,
encouraging them to Fight in Defense of their Faith and Religion; of their
Countries Glory and Sasety; suggested with those Arguments and Rhetoric, as
was agreeable to the Principles and Condition of both Parties; and which we may
well suppose according to the License of Historians, to have been in these
words, or to this effect.

The Speech of Count Susa to his Army.
WHen I see, and consider before us (Fellow Soldiers) those Enemies who are the
object of our Fury and Rage, I conceive words more necessary to moderate the
heat of your Anger, so as to Fight with Discretion, rather than to raise your
Spirits to that height of Warlike Courage, in which consists the safety and
glory of this days Fortune. For these are they, who lately in cool Blood
against the Laws of Arms and Nations, unhumanely butchered our Countrymen and
Kindred, and made no difference between Captives of War, and Malefactors; but
like Thieves and Murderers, sentenced brave Men to Death, who had no other
crime, than that they unhappily fought in defense of their Country. These are
they, who in the very times of Peace, consume your Borders, and rob your
Markets; and whose Capitulations of Peace, make yet all acts of hostolity
lawful: These are the grand Enemies and Despisers of the Cross of Christ;
against whom whosoever dies, is both a Conqueror and a Martyr. This Army before
your Eyes, consists in part of Moldavian, and Valachian Christians, forced to
this War by compulsion, not of choice; the rest are either Turks educated in
the softness of Asia, or Tartars who never made advantage by Battle, but by
flight these are they with whom you have this day to contend before the Walls
of Lewa, where many of your Wives, and Children, and Friends, are immured, and
are Spectators of your Virtue and Courage: Let us therefore valiantly address
our selves to this Battle, on the success of which the fortune of Hungary and
Germany depends.

The Speech of Husaein Pasha to his Soldiers.
WHilst our General the Grand Vizier is so successful in his Arms abroad,
having subdued the strong Fortresses of Oywar and Serinswar, and struck a
Terror and Amazement to all the Enemies of our formidable Emperor; let not us
be unactive, or want our share in the renown and same of Triumph and Victory. I
shall not need to put you in mind of the glorious Exploits of your Ancestors,
whose Valor and Virtue, which formed this vast Empire round about us, you
ought now to imitate, and give the World new proofs, how emulous you are to
exceed the Courage and Bravery of former times. The other Divisions of the
Ottoman Power have contended hitherto with their Enemies on unequal terms, and
droven them forth from their shelters of Trenches and Bulwarks; but here you
have an open Field to fight, nothing between you and the naked Breasts of your
Enemies; we stand in equal unmbers and terms with them; nothing can win the day
but only Valor; and nothing lose it but mere Cowardice. These are the
shattered Companies we have expelled last Year from Oywar, and the Companions
of those, whose Bodies and Heads we have heaped before Strigonium: should we
submit to be subdued by these whom our Osmanlees have so often Conquered; we
should not only stain our selves with the highest infamy and shame, but give a
turn to the Universal Fortune of the Ottoman Arms.

By this time it was Noon, and the Sun turning it self from the Christian to
the Turkish Army, a warning Piece was fired from the Christian Camp, at which
sign their whole Army began to advance, and with cheerfulness to approach the
Turks, who stood ready to receive them. Husaein Pasha ^ routed and fled.
At the first onset the Christians poured a plentiful Volly of shot on the
Turks and Tartars, which composed the main Body; at which immediately they put
themselves to Flight, leaving the two Wings to an unequal Battle, who resisted
not long before they followed the Example of their Companions, leaving their
Baggage and Cannon, with the Honor of the day, unto the Christians; who in the
pursuit slew the Turks without Compassion or Resistance; filling the Fields
with dead Bodies, and the Rivers with Blood, until Night, which is the shelter
of the distressed, gave a stop to their farther Slaughter: Refuge denied them
at Strigonium.
such as escaped betook themselves to Strigonium, where they were refused
either passage over the Water or Provisions, or any other Refuge or
Entertainment after their wearisome Flight; for Strigonium it self was judged
now in Danger, and the next attempt after the foregoing Victory; and therefore
there was no Reason or Policy to unfurnish themselves of necessary provisions
to supply or relieve a discouraged and cowed Army. The Moldavians and
Valachians return home.
Whereupon the Moldavians, and Valachians, finding themselves half famished,
forced their Princes to return home, being glad of the occasion to acquit
themselves of the Turkish Wars, in which they were used more like Slaves than
Soldiers. The Princes though sensible of the danger this unlicensed departure,
and desertion of the Wars might bring upon their persons, were yet necessitated
to yield to the violence and mutiny of their Soldiery: In their march homewards
they encountered no difficulties or opposition, unless at the Tibiscus, where a
small number of Turks would have denied them passage, but were soon dispersed
by the Sword of the resolved Soldeiry, who having conducted their Princes to
their usual Courts, made an end betimes of this years Campagna. Husaein Pasha
in the mean time, being denied entrance at Strigonium, fled to Newhausel, where
his presence was most acceptable for reinforcement of that Garrison, which now
was in some danger of being recovered by the Christians. Of the Turks were
killed in this Fight 6000, of the Christians 150; none of Quality, excepting
one Kovari, a worthy and stout Hungarian Captain; 4000 Carts were taken, laden
with all sorts of Provision and Ammunition for War; about 100 Colors, and a
great number of Tents, and Arms of all sorts; twelve pieces of Cannon, about
1000 Horse, and 140 Camels, straying in the Fields, without care of Keepres, or
Riders, with great Droves of Cattle of all sorts, and other good booty and
spoil, which remained as a reward to the Conqueror. The number of Prisoners was
not great, by reason that the Soldiery, in heat of the Pursuit, and in revenge
of the Turks Cruelty toward the Garrison of Komar the less, who lately in a
barbarous Cruelty they had put to the Sword, were wholly inclined to slaughter
and destruction, only about 700 Moldavians, and Valachians, were spared until
they came in sight of Strigonium, where they erected several Gibbets, and
hanged them thereupon, with their Muskets about their Necks, requiting (as they
supposed) part of the Viziers Cruelty, and executing part of God's Justice upon
those who profess the Name of Christ, and yet fight under the Banner of Mahomet.

Soise animated with the foregoing success, Soise assaults Barcan.
designed to attempt Barcan, a Palancha opposite on the other side of the
Danube to Strigonium, and to that end embarked Ten thousand five hundred of his
men on Four Galleys, and Forty Galliots, carrying the Teutonick Colors, in
regard that religious Order had amply contributed toward the building of those
Vessels, when they were on the Stocks in the Arsenal of Vienna. The Soldiers
were so fleshed with the former Victory, that nothing seemed difficult or
hazardous; so that that Count Marfet, without Orders of the General, rashly in
a Bravado fell in upon the Town, without any advantage of Earth, or other
shelter, but with open Breasts exposed himself and Soldiers to all dangers; but
the attempt being too difficult, he was, in sine, shot through both the Cheeks,
and forced to retire with loss and disreputation: This attempt was seconded by
the Duke of Holsatia, and his Infantry, who bringing some small pieces of
Cannon to the very Palizadoes, began to batter the houses, during which about a
Hundred and fifty Janisaries made a vigorous Sally, but were repulsed with a
sufficient loss, so that the Christians making good their ground, brought up
and planted four Cannons, and two Mortar Pieces, and firing at the same time
some Grenades, so plied their work, that the Inhabitants looking on their
condition as desperate, gave fire themselves to their Wooden Buildings, passed
the Bridge, and recovered Strigonium. The Town thus abandoned, the Christians
had no difficulty to get possession, but entering quietly in, seized what was
remaining of value, and adding to the flames, by other fires, in a few hours
reduced all to Ashes; which being done, Barcan burnt.
Soise marched back to Komorra, to resresh his men, and take Counsel what ought
to be the next design and enterprise to be taken in hand. And here for a while
was a pause, or full point of the actions of Soise, who not wanting Adversaries
in the Imperial Court, emulous of his happiness and fortune, instilled such
suspicions and scruples into the mind of the Emperor and Council, as caused
Soise to give up his Commission, that he might seek a life private, and free
from the evil Tongues of the envious, until afterward his Virtues dispersing
those malignant Clouds, he was restored to the good Opinion of his Cesarean
Majesty, and honored with the Charge and Command of the strong Fortress of
Komorra, where I my self had once the honor to make him a Visit, and was
courteously received by him. This ill success of the Pasha of Buda arrived the
Viziers ears, whilst he was attempting to pass the River Rab, in which were
many difficulties, in regard the Banks were defendedby the Christian
Palancha's, which in every adventure cut off considerable numbers of men. At
which loss of men, and time, and the ill success near Lewa, the Vizier being
greatly moved, made another attempt on the 27th of July; advancing with the
Gross of his Army as far as Kemend, where the River runs narrow and shallow,
but by the valor of the Hungarians, Germans, and French conducted by General
Montecuculi, an Italian Born, were repulsed with some Slaughter.

On the first of August, The Turk, with part of their Army pass the Rab.
the Turks made another considerable attempt, having planted Guns on the Banks
of the River, which shot into the Christian Camp, and passed over in one place
Six thousand Janisaries and Albanians, and near a Village called Chiesfalo,
where the Water was narrow and shallow, very considerable numbers of Horse
crowded over. At which formidable sight, the Christians collecting their Forces
together, retreated to a more spacious place, where might be open Field
sufficient for both Armies to draw up and join Battle. About half the Army
having now passed the Water, the other part, in which was the Vizier, remained
still on the other side, intending the next Morning to follow and advance to
the Body, which was gone before; but it happened, by God's Providence, that
that very Night there sell such a Deluge of Rain, The Rab swells with
immoderate Rains.
as immediately made the River to swell above its Banks, and become altogether
unpassable without a Bridge or Floats; so that the Turkish Army being now
divided by the Waters, were incapable of yielding any sudden assistance each to
the other. Howsoever, the Vizier judging that that part of his Army which had
already passed, was an equal Match for the Christians, entertained not the
least diffidence of good success, at least supposed they might be able to
decline a Battle, until by abatement of the Waters (which could not be long at
that Season of the Year) he were enabled to pass, and join his main Body with
them; and therefore full of hope and confidence, having at first discomfited
the forlorn hope of the Christians, which consisted of a thousand men,
dispatched immediately Messengers to acquaint the Grand Signior of his success
and passage, which News he knew would be the more grateful, because the Grand
Signior by daily Letters and Commands urged him to proceed in his March, and
not to suffer the impediment of a narrow Ditch to be an interruption to the
whole Ottoman Force, which in former times was not restrained by the depth or
breadth of the Ocean. The Grand Signior having received this Intelligence, as
if the entire Victory and Triumph over the World consisted in the passage over
the Rab, was transported with such an extraordinary joy and assurance of
Victory, that to anticipate the good News a solemn Festival was ordained for
the space of seven days, and seven nights, called by the Turks, Dunalma; in
which time the whole nights were made light with Lamps and Candles, The Turks
vain joy.
and made cheerful with great Guns, Vollies of Muskets, Sound of Drums and
Trumpets, revellings and what other Solemnities might testify joy and triumph.
But scarce three Nights of this vain Dream had passed, before the Grand Signior
awaked by intelligence, contrary to his assured expectation, of the Defeat and
Destruction of a considerable part of the Viziers Army, shamefully commanded
the Lights to be extinguished, and the remaining four Nights designed for Joy,
to be converted to Melancholy and Darkness: And though the rashness and vain
sancy of the Governors was the sole cause of this precipitate mirth, yet as
great men love always to charge their errors and follies on the shoulders of
others, so the Sultan accused the Chimacham, through false Information, to have
been the Author of this shameful Decree; and in that fury, calling the
Executioner, had certainly taken off his head, had not his young Minion or
Favorite, now called Kul Ogli (promoted to the Perferment of Asan, Signisies
the Son of a Kul, or Slave.
before mentioned) with much earnestness and Prayers interceded for his Life.

And indeed this Joy and Triumph was so much more ridiculous and shameful, by
how much more fatal and destructive was the ensuing Event. For the Turks being
now got over the River, had not, at first, time enough given them to cast up
Earth, but were sorced by the Christians to an Engagement; for the Christian
Army was drawn into Batalia to receive them. The right Wing consisted of the
Austrian Forces, commanded by Montecuculi himself; the Left was formed of the
Confederates of the Rhine, commanded by Count Olac, to which was adjoined Forty
Troops of the French Cavalry, conducted by Monsieur Coligni, and the main Body
was commanded by the Marshal General Marquis Bada, which composed a very
formidably Body, and assailed the Turks with extraordinary Valor; the Fight
was very furious, and began about Nine a Clock in the morning on the third of
August, and continued till Four in the Afternoon with variable fortune; during
which time the Waters being abated, the Spahees passed over in several places,
and charged the left. Wing of the Christians, and in other places they made
attempts, only to divert the Army, whilst the Janisaries threw up Earth to
secure a passage for the rest; which when the Christians espied, they at first
resolved to sound a Retreat, but afterward perceiving that the Trench was but
newly begun, Montecuculi drawing up the Body of the Army into a half Moon,
attacked the Janisaries on all sides with that fury, ordering the Bodies of
Horse to contend with the Spahees; that the Turks now faintly fighting began to
give ground to their Enemies, at which instant turn of Fortune, an outcry was
heard, That Serini on the other side had set on the Viziers Camp; which so
animated the Christians, and terrified the Turks, that the latter began to give
back, and put themselves to shameful flight, leaving dead upon the Place Eight
thousand of their Companions, and the Glory of the Day to the Christians. The
Turks, who always fly disorderly, not knowing the Art of a handsome Retreat,
The defeat given the Turkish Army by the River Rab.
crowded in heaps to pass the River, the Horse trampling over the Foot, and the
Foot throwing themselves headlong into the Water, without consideration of the
depth, or choice of Places fordable; those sinking catching hold on others who
could swim, sunk down, and perished together; others were carried away by the
rapidness of the Stream, and both Men and Horse were carried down the River,
and swallowed up in deeper places: The Water was died with Blood, and the whole
face of the River was covered with Men, Horse, Garments, all swimming
promiscuously together; no difference was here between the valiant and the
Cowardly, the Foolish and the Wise, Counsel and Chance, all being involved in
the same violence of Calamity, Tac. lib. 1.
Non vox and mutui hortatus juvabant adversante unda, nihil strcnuus ab ignavo,
sapiens a prudenti, consilia a casu differ, cuncta pari violentia
involvebantur; so that the Waters devoured a far greater number than the Sword,
whilst the Vizier standing on the other side of the River, was able to afford
no kind of help or relief, but as one void of Counsel and Reason, knew not how,
nor where to apply a remedy. This defeat though in Christendom not greatly
boasted, by reason that the destruction of the Turks, which was most
considerable by the Water, was partly concealed to them, yet the Turks
acknowledge that Ruin and Slaughter to have been of a far greater number than
what the Christian Diaries relate, confessing that since the time that the
Ottoman Empire arrived to this greatness, no Stories make mention of any
Slaughter or Disgrace it has suffered to be equal unto the calamity and
dishonor of this. On the Turks side were slain that day, Ishmael the late
Pasha of Buda, and Kimacham of Constantinople, by a shot from the Enemy passing
the Water; the Spaheelar Agasee, or General of the Spahees; the Janisar Aga,
the younger Son of the Tartar Han, and several oaths Pashaws; Alibegh, The
slain on the Turks side.
General of Bosna, Thirty Capugibashees, Five and thirty Pages of the Vizier's,
and Three hundred of his Guard, Five thousand Janisaries, Three thousand
Spahees, Fifteen hundred Bosnacks, Eight hundred Albanians, Six hundred Croats
and Hungarians of the Turks Subjects, Two hundred and fifty Valachians and
Moldavians, Six hundred Tartars, of Anatolia fifteen hundred, and about Four
thousand other Asiaticks, from the farthest parts of the Turks Dominions,
Eastward; so that in all we may account Seventeen thousand slain on the Turks
side; besides which were taken Sixteen pieces of Cannon, a Hundred and twenty
six Colors, with the Standard of the Viziers Guard, Five thousand Cemiters,
most of which were embossed with Silver, and some beset with Jewels, with many
Horses, of which six were sent as a Present to the Vizier. Of the Christians
were slain near Three thousand Men; those of note were, The Count Nassau, Count
Charles of Bracondorf, Captain of the Guards to Count Montecuculi, Count
Fuchier General of the Artillery of the Empire, Colonel Pleiter, with his
Lieutenant Colonel and Sergeant Major, and with many other Gentlemen of the
French Nation, who deserve for ever to be chronicled for their Virtue and
Valor. For herein the French Nation ought not to lose their just praise,
having made proofs of their Valor, as well in this, as in other Battles; it
being reported, That Monsieur Coligni their General, killed Thirty Turks with
his own hand.

The News of this Victory being posted to Vienna, it is wonderful to consider
with what Applauses, with what Honors, with what Encomiums the Fame of
Montecuculi was celebrated; for besides the Triumphs, with Fires, sounding of
Bells, Banquets, ^^d other demonstrations of solemn Joy; the Glory of
Montecuculi was the Theme of every Ballad sung in the corners of streets; which
Honors of the Commonalty were seconded by greater and more substantial of the
Imperial Court, who conferred upon him the Title of Lieutenant General of the
whole Army, a Dignity so eminent as is inferior to none, except the Emperor,
in order of the Militia; and was not without some scruple granted to the
Archduke Leopold by his Brother Ferdinand the Third; and withheld from
Piccolomini Duke of Amalfi, until he had highly merited it, and made his way to
it through bloody fields, where Providence first crowned him with Laurels of
Success and Victory.

And here is just occasion for us to doubt, why Montecuculi should be thus
admired and loaded with Honors, whilst the services of Serini and Soise were
so far from being taken notice of, that they seemed to effect the disgrace and
ruin of these Worthies, rather than to produce the favor of their Prince, and
the applause of their Country, the natural Rewards of Valor and Virtue. And
indeed I cannot but confess, I my self have wondered, when in the Court of
Vienna, I have heard the Actions and Zeal of Serini so slightly spoken of, or
contemned, when a Stranger took the liberty but to descant on his actions, and
to vent any thing which but savoured of his commendations. The reason of which,
I adventure to assign unto two causes. The first is, that Antipathy or natural
aversion the Germans have to the Hungarians and Croatians, Reasons why the
Services of Montecuculi were accepted better than those of Serini.
these endeavoring to maintain the Privileges of a People, who have a free
liberty of the Election of their Prince; whilst the others desirous to take
occasion to weaken and impoverish them, would necessitate them to yield their
Kingdom to the Emperor by an hereditary Right. The second is, the fury of
Serini and Soise, whose zeal without consideration of irritating the Turk, or
fear of moving the passion of the Lion beyond the terms of an easy
pacification, transported them to commit all damage and ruin, which are the
just concomitants of War; which rage seemed over violent to the Court at
Vienna, and not to suit with the present Policy of the War, which was designed
to be carried on rather in a defensive than in an offensive posture; imagining
perhaps, that the good nature of the Turk might be complemented into Peace, and
that gentleness and generosiry might have the same effect upon them, as it had
upon Saul, when David had his life at his mercy, and yet spared him: according
to which counsels of the Court, Montecuculi, squaring every particular of his
motion, and thereunto adding success, mounted on the wings of Fame, and had his
Glory celebrated without diminutions; but the hot and zealous temper of Serini,
which Souldier-like understood nothing but downright blows, knew not how to
use that moderation and caution, which the Imperial Court judged an ingredient
so requisite to the prudent management of the present War, that he was esteemed
incapable of command, who had not discretion enough to practice it: And this
was the true reason that Serini was discountenanced, and that his Command was
taken from him, and that his Appeal to the Court was without redress: Howsoever
in regard that the Fame he had won carried him high in the esteem of all
Christendom, he was entertained with hopes and fair promises; and even after
the very Sattel of Rab, nothing was more commonly discoursed than the giving
Nicholas Ser^^^ (...) command independent of any other General. But in the end
it proved nothing but vai^ P^^^osals to humor the fancy of Serini himself and
to satisfy the World, which admi^^l (...) Person so qualified and deserving as
he, (...) be made a subject of so much disgrace and (...).

With this News the Turk^ (...) greatly ashamed and dejected, having but two
days before demonstrated excesses of joy, congratulated the happy News one to
the other, (...) ^^^er their manner sent Presents abroad, derided the
Christians upon the News, exprobriated them with a Thousand injuries, and
applauded their own Virtue, Valor, and the righteousness of their Cause and
Religion: But on a sudden Intelligence coming contrary to their expectations,
such a dampness fell upon their spirits, that for some days there was a deep
silence of all News at Constantinople; they that the Day before sought for
Christians to communicate to them the Miracles of their Victory, now avoided
their Company, ashamed of their too forward joy, and the liberty they had taken
to contemn and deride the low condition of the Christian Camp And now the ill
News not being able longer to be concealed, Prayers and Humiliation were
appointed publicly to be made at all the great Mo^chs of Constantinople and
Adrianople, where all Ema^ms with their young Scholars were commanded to
resort, and sing certain Prayers appointed for such occasions.

The minds of the Soldiery after this defeat were very much discomposed,
Sedition in the Turkish Camp.
tending more to sedition than obedience. Every one took license to speak
loudly and openly his opinion, that the War was commenced upon unjust and
unlawful grounds. That the total Eclipse of the Moon, which portends always
misfortunes to the Turks, should have caused more caution in the Commanders in
engaging the Armies this year, until the malignancy of that Influence had been
overpassed. All generally accused the first Vizier as the Author and ill
Manager of the War, Tac in Vita Agricol^.
Iniquissima bellorum conditio est, prospera omnes sibi vendicant, adversa uni
imputantur, and calling to mind the solemn Oath with which Sultan Solomon
confirmed his Capitulations with the Emperor, particularly vowing never to pass
the Rab, or place where the Turks received their defeat, without a solid and
reasonable ground of War, concluded that this Invasion was a violation of the
Vow, and an injury to the sacred Memory of that fortunate Sultan; and therefore
that all Enterprises and Attempts of this War would be fatal and destructive to
the Mussulmen or Believers, and the end dishonorable to the Empire.

This opinion was rooted with much superstition and strength of fancy in the
minds of the Vulgar: And the rumors in the Camp that the Vizier upon a false
Alarm of the approach of the Enemy toward his Quarters, had commanded the Army
to retreat, administered fury and courage to the Christians, and fear and
amazement to his own; from which error and timidity was occasioned that
slaughter which ensued; on which discourses and reports dangerous discontents
daily increasing in the hearts of the soldiery, it is thought they would have
vented their passion and revenge on their General, had he not at a public
Assembly of all the Heads and Commanders of the Army cleared himself freely, by
charging the miscarriage of all upon the Grand Signior, having acted nothing
but with Authority of the Imperial Command; promising with as much speed as
honor and safety would permit, by agreement and composition of Peace, to bring
the War to a conclusion. And this contrivance and art was that (as is supposed)
which for the present secured his life; for the Soldiery were greatly terrified
and possessed with a dread of the Christians, and amazement upon every Alarm.
For the old and experienced Commanders and Veterane Soldiers were either
destroyed by the secret Proscriptions of the Vizier Kuperlee, or slain in the
Engagements of this Year; and the Asian Spahees and other Soldiers having Wives
and Children, and Possessions to look after, were grown poor, and desired
nothing more than in peace and quietness to return to their homes: So that
nothing could come more grateful to this Camp, no largesses or donatives could
pacify the minds of the Soldiery more than the promises and expectations of a
Peace.

The Sultan during these disturbances and misfortunes was preparing for a
hunting Journey to an obscure Village called Yamboli, The Grand Signiors
hunting at Yamboli.
about three or four days travel from Adrianople, designing to drive all those
vast Woods along the Black Sea for Game, where he had a small ruinous Seraglio.
The Queen Mother, the Chimacam, with all the Court, were to accompany him. The
Equipage and Pomp he went in, persuaded many, that the design of that Journey
was grounded on other causes of Policy, than what were generally penetrated:
Some conceived, that the Vizier contrived his Journey thither, to divert him
from opportunities of receiving intelligence from Spahees, and others of the
true state of the Camp, and management of Affairs: Others judged it might be to
avoid in that obscure place the mutinous seditions of the Soldiery. On what
consideration soever it might be, the Grand Signior having spent some time
abroad, returned again to Adrianople with all his Retinue, without doing any
thing more important than killing great numbers of wild Beasts, and ennobling
those Wildernesses and Woods about Yamboli with the fame of his renowned
Hunting. Keblelee Pasha being slain (as we have said) before Serinswar, who was
Husband to the Viziers Sister, the Vizier bestowed the Widow on Husaein Pasha
of Silistria. And much about the same time the Grand Signior considering that
his own Sister, by the death of her old Husband Ishmael Pasha, slain in the
last Battle, led a single life, conferred her in Marriage upon the old Mahomet
Pasha, whom before we have related to have been Kahya to the Vizier, late Pasha
of Darbiquier, and now of Aleppo, who as an Honor charged with a weight of
troubles and other inconveniences, seemed thankfully to receive her; and though
he was a man of Ninety years of age, and had long since forgot the solaces of
the bridal Bed, yet according to the custom of Marriage with a Sultana, he was
engaged to divorce his former Wife, with whom he had past the Summer and Winter
of his age, and as a constant Husband, was still uxorious in his love. So that
in the midst of Wars, where some found Graves, others found Marriage-beds, and
reason of State found a Vacation to conjoyn Mars and Venus without interruption
of ruder Enterprises.

The Great Vizier after his defear marched to Stultweissenburg or Alba Regalis,
to recruit and refresh his Army, and expect the Recruit of the Pasha of Aleppo,
who was said to bring with him about Eight thousand Soldiers.

From Sultweissenburg the Turks, with the gross of their Army, returned to
Strigonium; Vizier sends for the Princes of Moldavia and Valachia.
and here the Vizier not unmindful of the shameful flight, and rebellious
return of the Princes of Moldavia and Valachia to their own Countries without
his order or permission, sent one Messenger after the other in great haste and
fury, after the Turkish manner, to recall those Princes to the War; and that
laying aside all excuses whatsoever, they should immediately, with what Forces
they could collect, repair again to the Camp. The Princes of Moldavia and
Valachia recalled to the Wars.
The Princes weary of the War, and fearful of the Viziers evil intentions to
take away their lives, endeavored to excuse their flight, alleging, that
their People would not obey, or follow them to the Wars in any considerable
numbers, and that now it being the end of the Summer, new Levies would be of
great expense, and of little benefit, and disenable them from paying their
yearly Tribute; of which (notwithstanding their consumption of Treasure in the
last Expedition) they were like to find no ease or relaxation, though a burden
too great for their harassed and impoverished Country to support. But these
excuses were no arguments to resolved Turks; so that Commands came doubled and
trebled one after the other full of threats and menaces, to march forward with
what Forces they could collect, the Messengers assuring them, That there was no
design prepared against them by the Vizier, but what was friendly and of good
intention. At length the Princes not able to remain longer without a censure of
Rebellion to the Port, with heavy Hearts and light Purses set forwards with
about fifteen hundred men a piece, sending before such sums of Money and
Presents, as they hoped might mollify and prepare their access to the Vizier,
whilst they themselves marched slowly, to afford longer time to the Operation
of this Physic. The Prince of Valachia had entrusted about Forty thousand
Zaichins to an Officer of his called his Vestiario, or Master of his Wardrobe,
whom he had sent before him, therewith to make his access ^asie and safe to the
Vizier: Of whose faith that he might assure himself the better, he made him
swear before the Holy Altar, and take the Communion thereupon, that he would be
faithful and active in this Negotiation. The Vestiario thus departing, Fides
Graeca, or the honesty of a Greek.
added to his religious Vows, common promises and protestations; but no shoner
was he a few Miles distant from his Master, before he tired in his Vows, and
altered his road from the Vizier, to the way leading to Constantinople,
declaring as he went, That his Prince was become Rebel, and was fled, and that
he, not to be Partner in his perfidiousness, was hasting to Constantinople,
there to give evidence of his faith and submission to the Turks. This
unexpected news coming to the Prince, caused him to despair of all security and
reconciliation with the Vizier, and force him by flight to make good the words
of his treacherous Servant; so that taking with him his Wifeand remainder of
his Wealth, passed through Transylvania with much difficulty, and at length
arrived within the Emperors Territories, resolving to exchange an inconstant
and dangerous Principality for a more secure and private course of life. But
this impious Greek did not rest quiet with his ill acquired Estate without
receiving disturbance from the Boiars or Nobles of the Country; and Stridia Bei
the new-made Prince, justly accusing him for having robbed the Public
Treasury, extorted from him the Sum of 150000 Dollars toward his Investment in
the Principality, and ease of the Country, which was now wracked for payment of
old debts, and the growing charges of the new Prince. And thus much of the
Princes of Moldavia and Valachia.

At Strigonium great were the Consultations, what course was to be taken: The
Christians were now Masters of the Field, and the Turks discouraged, and now
the Summer was so far spent, that it was too late to think of recovering their
reputation that year with the hazard of a Battle. So that at length it was
resolved to unite the shattered Forces of Chusaein Pasha, lately defeated by
Count Susa, to the Army of the Vizier, and attend to secure Oywar or Newhausel
with Provisions, Ammunition, and Reinforcement of that Garrison, whereby this
War might conclude with some Trophies of advance, and enlargement of the
Ottoman Borders, which in all their Wars is the design and Maxim of the Turks.
So that marching thither, they gathered and collected all the Provisions
possible, and having supplied the Garrison, they returned again to Strigonium
with all expedition, retaining still impressions of terror from the late ill
success. And that they might march with less impediment, they sent their
Artillery and heavy Baggage down the Danube: Such was the fear of the Turkish
Army at present, that it is supposed, had the Christians eagerly pursued their
Victory, they had not only defeated the whole Turkish Force with little
opposition, but also without any impediment marched to the very Walls of Buda.

But what infatuation soever blinded the Christian Counsels, little or no
advantage was taken, as if the design of the Emperor had only been to repel the
Enemy from his Borders, or that he feared to irritate the Turks with a too
inveterate and pertinacious prosecution of his Victories-Instead of which, the
Vizier making some Overtures of Peace, and evidencing the realty of his
intentions by his Presents of a Vest of Sables, and a Horse richly furnished,
with which he flattered and caressed the German Resident, the Articles were
accepted and embraced at Vienna with much greediness, and the Peace almost
wholly concluded and clapped up in a moment, to the astonishment of the whole
World. The reasons which inclined both Partles to Peace.
But as matters of this nature cannot succeed without just and due
considerations, so on both sides certain causes concurred which inclined and
disposed things to an accommodation. For on the Turks part there wanted not
such in the Ottoman Court, who emulous of the Grand Viziers fortune and charge,
endeavored to remove him from the favor of his Prince, by accusing him in
many particulars of negligence, and imprudence in the conduct of his Affairs.
To answer which, his return with the Olive Branch of Peace in his mouth, and
yet the Laurels of Conquest on his head, having added so considerable a
Fortress as Newhausel to the Dominions of the Empire, and demolishment
Serinswar, the Original cause of the War, were a sufficient conviction of the
evil accusations of his Adversaries, and an argument irresistible, when
enforced by the Authority of his own Presence. On the Emperors side, the demand
of the City of Erfurt by the Elector of M^ntz, situated on his Confines, at a
time of so much exigency as this, and seconded by hopes of assistance from
France, and the Hans Towns on the Rhyne, whereby it was probable great
turbulences might result, inclined the Emperor with much reason to Proposals of
Peace; instructions for which, being conveyed to the Resident then in the
Turkish Camp, from the Caesarean Court, after a short Treaty the Articles were
agreed and concluded, as follows.

First, That Transylvania remain with its ancient Limits and Privileges under
the Command of Prince Michael Apafi. Secondly, That the Emperor of Germany have
liberty to fortify both Gutta and Nitra. Thirdly, That the Turks shall not
alter or innovate any thing on the Confines of Hungary, or any other part
bordering on the Emperor. Fourthly, That Apafi pay Six hundred thousand Dollars
to the Ottoman Port for expenses of the War. Fifthly, That all acts of
Hostility between the Emperor, and the Grand Signior, and their Subjects, for
ever cease. Sixthly, That the two Provinces of Zatmar and Zaboli, granted to
Ragotzki by his Imperial Majesty during life, return again to the Emperor, to
which neither the Prince of Transylvania, much less the Ottoman Port, shall
ever pretend. Seventhly, That the strong Castle of Zechelhyd, which revolted
from the Emperor, be demolished, in regard neither Party will relinquish his
Right thereunto. Eighthly, That Varadin and Newhausel remain to the Turk,
having conquered them by force of their own Arms. Ninthly, That for
confirmation of this Peace, Ambassadors be interchangeably sent with Presents
of equal value.
On these Terms (of which none seems disadvantageous to the Christian Interest,
unless the fourth Article, the dishonor of which seems to be covered with the
name of Apafi, though the score was paid by the Emperor) the Peace was
established, and the Vizier, as a beginning thereof, gave liberty to many
Christian Captives; some whereof were of Quality, and Proclamation was made
through all the Confines for a Cessation of Arms. Howsoever, some petty matters
remained undecided, which were deferred until the Arrival of an extraordinary
Ambassador, who was to exchange with the Turks another Ambassador in the
Month of May following; and in the mean time suspension of Arms, and all other
Hostilities was confirmed. At which News all sorts of People amongst the Turks
were greatly rejoiced, and the Publication thereof the more welcome, by how
much the more unexpected. Whereby we may observe the alteration of that ancient
Martial disposition, which was natural to this Empire, which whilst it was
exercised in War, grew hardy, active and inured to warlike exercise, but now
through idleness and want of War (except the Venetian, which affords the
Soldiery no considerable employment) their minds became resty, wearied with one
year and a halfs labor, and dejected with the unprosperous success of one
Summer.

But what Considerations soever the Emperor might have to conclude this Peace,
The Hungarians oppose the Peace.
the Hungarians were highly dissatisfied with it, because it was founded on
their proper loss; and that Newhausel was given for a price of the common
quiet, which none but themselves paid and yet all Germany enjoyed the benefit.
That that Town was an appendage to the Kingdom of Hungary, and to which the
Emperor having only the claim (as they pretended) of an Elective Prince, could
not dismember any part without consent of the States thereof; and this position
they maintained with that heat and fury, that they declared themselves
disobliged from observation of the Articles, resolving to vindicate their own
right in despite of all opposition whatsoever; and that since the Emperor had
undertaken their Protection, he was bound to assert their freedom, and defend
their Cities, even with the expense of his own Treasury, and at the hazard of
his own hereditary Possessions. But to these exorbitant Demands, the Emperors
Council replied with these following reasons and moderation; That they
themselves were the first Beginners and Promoters of this War; That His Majesty
at their instance and request condescended to protect them as Subjects, not
only with draining of his own Exchequer, and Blood of his Patrimonial
Dominions, but with the charge of hired and mercenary Strangers. In the mean
time what assistance had the Hungarians brought to this War, or to their own
defense? What Contributions did they ever make? What Forces did they ever unite
in the Field by a general assent of their whole Kingdom? Notwithstanding his
Majesty was ready to continue the War, could they themselves propose either a
safe way for the maintenance of it, or that the present Conjuncture did not
offer honorable Conditions of a happy Composure. Moreover, The Emperors
Reasons for a Peace.
That the King of Spain, his Uncle, and Father in Law, being aged and decrepit,
leaving no other Heir than an infirm and sickly Child, to support the charge
and weight of all his Kingdoms, it was requisite that at such a time as this,
he should be free from all encumbrances, either to assist the Infant in
Administration of the Government, or to assert his own Rights (if so it should
please God) in the Succession. And that now, since a Treaty was on foot for
Election of a Successor to the Kingdom of Poland, it was necessary for his
Imperial Majesty to bear his part in that Transaction; but above all, it was
considerable, That the common Enemy being Rich and Powerful, God had seemed to
put his Victory into their Hands to no other end than to improve it unto a
Peace, which being at this time neglected, the best that could ensue would be
the miseries of War, which turning on the inconstant Wheel of Fortune with
variety of successes, is always attended with Slaughter, Captivity, Fire,
Sword, and a thousand other Calamities. These, and such like reasons, moderated
and mollified the exasperate spirits of the Hungarians, so that they seemed to
aquiesce and be satisfied, and making a Virtue of Necessity, had patience where
there was no other remedy.

The sudden News of this unexpected Peace did in like manner affect the French
King, and the States of the Empire, judging it unreasonable for them to be
interessed in the War, and yet unconcerned in the Conclusion of the Peace.
Howsoever, things being well represented, and as well received and understood;
his Most Christian Majesty accepted of the Reasons as just and satisfactory. In
the mean time the French had a free liberty to make choice of their Winter
Quarters, The French Army march homeward.
which they fixed upon in Bohemia; but their King being unwilling to burden the
Country with his Soldiers for a longer time than they were serviceable to
them, he ordered them to march, and quarter in Alsatia; but before their
departure the Emperor honored Monsieur de Coligni with his Picture incircled
with Diamonds, and the other Officers with Gold Chains and Medals; ordering the
Troops not to march above ten miles a day, and every Third to be a Day of
repose, and to be entertained all the way at sree Quarter, so as to return into
France jocund and healthy, as they departed thence. But before they would bid
adieu to those Countries, the General and Officers paid their Visit to Count
Nicholas Serini, presenting him with a Horse, Furniture, and Pistols, as a
small Tribute to that Great Captain, whose Fame was celebrated through the
whole World; ingenuously confessing, That the rumor of his name struck more
amazement and terror in the Enemy, than the Armies that actually faced them,
and was more instrumental in obtaining the Victory on the Banks of Rab, than
their weapons or courage which fought against them. But not long after this
worthy Hero Serini hunting one day separated from the rest of his Attendants
in the Thickets of a Wood, behold, on a sudden was surprised by the rushing
forth of a wild Boar, which raging, and made furious by some Wounds he had
received, first struck him in the Knee, with which falling to the ground, the
fierce Beast not giving him leisure to recover himself, ganched him again in
the head with his broad Tusk, Serini's Death.
which proved so mortal, that in a short time he expired in the Arms of one of
his Pages. This was the end of this valiant Captain, who unconquered in many
and redoubled Conflicts of his Enemies, was made the prey of an ignoble Beast.
Such are the secret and occult Providence of Heaven, which men interpret or
reflect on as they are governed by prejudice or interest. And so did the Turks
attribute the Fall of this their Grand Adversary to the righteousness of their
Religion, and justness of their Cause; as if he had been a Person unworthy to
dye by the hand of a man, was condemned to be executed by that Beast, which is
most abominated and detested by the Turkish Rites. The Character of Sirini.
He was a Person as mortal an Enemy to the Turks, as ever Hannibal was to the
Romans; in Dangers most courageous, in War valiant, and patient of labor; in
Peace courteous, and moderate in his pleasures; his Diet was natural, rather
than artificial; in Banquets, or Drinking Meetings, after the fashion of that
Country, was sparing in Wine, and rather abstemious than intemperate; Music
and Dances were the Entertainment of the softer and effeminate part of his
Court, rather than his own Pastimes, whose Recreations were chiefly in the
Woods, and in such Huntings as had something in them of similitude with Martial
Exercises; his Judgment was profound and deep, and yet his familiar Discourse
facetious; his Conversation obliging, his humor affable, and yet severe and
majestic; he spoke much, and yet well; his disposition was liberal and
generous, especially to his Soldiers, whom he never restrained or defrauded of
their Booty and Prey, but contented every one with a just and exact Division.
In short, he was one of those zealous Champions of the Christian Cause, who in
the Chronicles of past Ages ought to be placed and numbered amongst the
worthiest Heroes.

The Winter now approaching, and a conclusion in all appearance made of the
War, the Vizier returned to Belgrade, The Vizier sends for his Mother to
Belgrade.
designing to remain there until the German Ambassador had entered the Turkish
borders, and in the mean time sent for his Mother thither, pretending that in
an uncertain and changeable estate the Maternal Blessing is of highest
Consolation, it being esteemed pious amongst the Turks for a man to dye at the
Feet of his Mother. This Mother of his was esteemed a cunning or wise Woman, by
whose Charms and Incantations his Father and he were supposed long to have
conserved the Office of Vizier; and as my own Ears can witness, the common
Soldiers Discourse, That his Mothers Art consisted much in Philtrums and
Charms, reconciling affection and friendship, and had a power over the Grand
Signiors Inclinations and Understanding, rendering all things and actions the
Vizier had performed in this War full of merit and admiration. This I say was
the Discourse of some common Soldiers.

In the Month of December, The Blazing Star.
that Blazing-star which appeared formidably to most parts of the known World,
was also seen within the Turkish Empire, not without a general terror of all,
as prognosticating disasters of Sword, Pestilence, and Famine; and set the
Turkish Astrologers at work to find out the mystery it portended: from whose
Art most commonly was divined the death of some great Person in the Empire,
which some would have to be the Grand Signior, oaths the Vizier; others both,
as they desired alteration and change of Government.

The Grand Signior continued all this time at Adrianople, The Sultans hatred to
Constantinople increases.
taken up with an extraordinary delight and pleasure in his Court there, with
which his aversion to Constantinople so much increased, that he could not
endure so much as the name of the place: and if accidentally in his Hunting (as
it reported) he chanced to fall into the road which led thither, and remembering
himself thereof, would immediately turn thence, as one that corrects himself of
some desperate error, or avoids a path which tends to an evitable destruction.
The Kadelescher and the other grave Judges of the Law observing this
unreasonable hatred of their Prince to his Imperial Seat, considered how
prejudicial it was to him and his People to have a City of that renown,
antiquity, and commodiousness of living, despised and abandoned: and that
perhaps the Soldiery now upon their March from the War, might be impatient of
returning home, as all the Dependants on the Divan, and Personages of great
Quality, desired to enjoy their Habitations and Gardens at Constantinople; from
which discontents on all sides it was concluded, That there might result
dangerous Seditions and Mutinies, and therefore resolved (and as some say also
at the instigation of the Vizier) to prostrate themselves before the Grand
Signior, and tender him their opinions and sense in that particular, which they
accordingly performing and assigning the Kadelescher, or the Chief Justice with
all humility to be their Mouth in this Petition, their counsel was received
with that indignation, that they were chased from the Grand Signiors presence
with fury and high displeasure, and the Kadelescher at that moment deprived of
his Office.

To these other extravagances the Grand Signior would have added another of a
higher nature and cruelty, by causelessly putting to death his Brother Solomon,
The Sultan seeks to destroy his Brother.
whom all the time of his Reign, together with another Brother, he had kept
Prisoner in the Seraglio: for now having a Son of his own, he conceived it more
secure to remove all competition that might be for the Government, according to
the example and custom of the Ottoman Princes; but suffering some remorse of
conscience in the thoughts of imbruing his hands in the blood of his guiltless
Brother, conceived it more justifiable to perform the Fact by process of Law,
and to that end sent to the Mufti for his Fetfa or Sentence, viz. That in such
a case, where there is a sufficient provision for continuance of the true
Lineage of the Ottoman Family, whether it may be lawful, according to their Law
and ancient Presidents, to take off some as superfluous Suckers, that draw not
only nourishment from the root, but endanger also the life of the Tree. But the
Mufti was not so cruel or unjust as to pass this Sentence, but rather
supplicated the Grand Signior to deser this resolution; for having but one Son,
and that a Child, which was subject to the common chances of mortality, the
Ottoman Family was not so sufficiently provided of Heirs, that he could pass
his Sentence for taking away one, who was so necessary a reserve and member of
it; with which reply the Grand Signior suffered himself to be overcome, having
some touches of Conscience, and perhaps, not being naturally cruel, some sense
of compassion toward his innocent Brother.

But returning now to the Great Vizier, we find him in his Winter quarters at
Belgrade, where having taken an affection to the elder Son of the Tartar Chan,
or else having conceived some hatred or displeasure against the Father, The
Vizier offers to depose the Tartar Chan.
frankly proffered to depose the Father, and confer the Government upon him who
was the Son. But it seems this young Tartar, though barbarous, had yet so much
of filial obedience and reverence instamped on him by nature, that he modestly
refused the proffer, and immediately dispatched a Messenger with secret Advices
to his Father. The Tartar Chan received this Intelligence with great
indignation, and purposing to play that game in reallity with the Vizier, which
he had passed on him only by way of overture, wrote a Letter to the Pasha of
Buda, a man of great abilities and courage, advertising him, that hearing a
true and worthy character of his prowess and wisdom, he could not but desire to
be his friend; and that he might make demonstrations of his being such, he
proffered all the interest he had at the Ottoman Court to promote him to the
supreme Office of first Vizier. What Fate soever accompanied this matter,
either from the Confidents of the Tartars, or of the Pasha, the substance of
the Message came to the knowledge of the Vizier, who obtaining a private
Commission immediately from the Grand Signior therein, sent for the Pasha, and
without farther process, or evidence of proof, or accusation, struck off his
Head.

Anno Christi 1665. Hegeira 1076.
THE Peace thus happily concluded with Germany, was a subject of singular
contentment to the People, and not less readily embraced by the Grandees, who
hastened so much the consummation thereof, that in the beginning of January one
Mahomet Beigh, The Turkish Ambassador departs.
of the Order of the Mutafaracaes (who are those that attend the Services of
the Divan, and are of a Degree somewhat above the Chaouses) a man of
considerable Richess, was designed Ambassador for Vienna, and qualified with
the Title of the Pasha of Romelia. In the Month following, being February, this
Ambassador having received his Presents and Instructions, departed, with
Orders to remain on the Frontiers, until the Emperors Ambassador met him at
the place of Exchange, where according to custom at the same time that one
enters into the Dominions of the Emperor, the other passes into those of the
Grand Signior. The Presents that one Emperor sends to the other are according
to the ancient Canon, and are to be of equal value, and are commonly estimated
to be an Hundred thousand Dollars. Those sent by the Grand Signior to the
Emperor, were: Three Horses with their Furniture adorned with precious Stones.
Twelve other led Horses of great price. A Royal Tent with all the Apartments,
valued at Eighty thousand Dollars. A Royal Feather set with Jewels. Ambergreese
of a considerable value. Bezor-stones. Twenty Cods of Musk. Seventy Coftans or
Vests of Three sorts. Six Persian Carpets.


Forty very fine Turbants, with other Persian Commodities of diverse sorts of
Linen.

The Spring being now well forward, the time of action, and the Summer at hand,
the Turks remained with great expectation of the German Ambassador; and with
greater impatience, in regard that their Ambassador had for some time
continued upon the Frontiers. It was now May, and yet no news from Germany; so
that many began to doubt the reality of the Peace, others reflected on the
dishonor of the Grand Signior, in having his Ambassador so long on the
Frontiers, as if the Peace had been precarious, and desired by the Turks: Some
considered the present ill consequences, in case the War should break out
again; for that license was given to the greatest part of the Army to return
home, and all such as came as far as from Babylon, Damascus, and Egypt, to the
Frontiers in Hungary were departed; Rumors of the People on occasion of stay
of the German Ambassador.
and to recall these again, and other Zaims and Timariots from remote parts,
required a considerable time, of which their distress would not admit, should
the Christians prove deceitful in their Treaty. Besides which, reports were
spread abroad, that the French had intercepted the Ambassador in his passage
about Komorra, and had given an interruption to the Peace. Others reported,
that the Ambassador was dead in his Journey, and that the Hungarians were
again in Arms, as wholly dissatisfied with the Peace. These rumors flying
about, all People blamed the facility of the Great Vizier in being too
credulous and confident of the Faith and Morality of the Christians; and the
Enemies of the Vizier more boldly adventured to accuse his ill management of
Affairs, which did not a little tickle the ambition of Mustapha Pasha, then
Captain Pasha, and Chimacam of Adrianople, supposing that all the disgraces and
ill successes of the Vizier prepared a way for his ascent unto that Office. And
to become more popular, being a man naturally of an affable and plausible
carriage, insinuated himself into the favor and good opinion of the Great men
and principal Favorites of the Seraglio, over-acting his part in some measure
by condescensions unbeseeming the degree and dignity of a Chimacam, Mustapha
Pasha's affectation and popularity.
being observed one day to kiss the Vest of the Kuzlir-Aga, too apparent a
piece of adulation and meanness in so great a Subject, who in those parts
represents the Person of his Master. These passages were not altogether unknown
to the Vizier; and though at a distance he could not perfectly view, and
discover particularly the comportment of this Chimacam, yet being by
conversation well acquainted with his subtle disposition, guessed at his
thoughts, and the rest of his actions, and to deal with him in the same terms,
wrote a Letter to the Grand Signior, bewailing the ill success of the War
against Venice, and the ill estate and condition of the Fleet; to repair which,
and to give courage to their men, and restore the Discipline in Marine Affairs,
the presence of the Captain-pasha was necessary in the Fleet, who had now for
Two years enjoyed the benefit and the title without personal attendance on that
important Charge. The Grand Signior having received this Letter, concurred in
the same opinion with his Vizier, and gave Orders to the Chimacam to prepare
himself to serve that Summer at Sea; for that now it was necessary he should be
in Person there, and less requisite his presence in the City, where his Office
would speedily be made void by return of the Vizier. The Chimacam immediately
in obedience to his great Masters command, put himself in a posture for his
Voyage, and in the first place sent away his Women to Constantinople, and
appointed the Fleet not to depart until his farther order: Yet in the mean time
so secretly and underhand made use of the friendship of the Court-Favourites,
representing as from themselves, how useful the service and attendance of the
Chimacam was as yet in the City, by reason that the delays of the German
Ambassador made the Viziers return uncertain, and that this Office would ill
be supplied by any another; they obtained license for his continuance in
Office, and disappointed the intentions and designs of the Vizier.

About the end of May, after long expectation arrived the German Ambassador at
Buda, to the great joy of the Turkish Camp. I then was there my self, and
observed the general satisfaction at this news: so that now the Ambassador
being entered the Frontiers, and his arrival secured, on the Twenty ninth of
May, the Vizier began his March from Belgrade with the whole Army, and I kept
company with them for thirteen days. On the last of June the Vizier arrived
within six hours Journey of Adrianople, intending in Two or Three days to
prepare for his solemn Entrance. But it is reported, That the Viziers Mother
had by her Art so affected the heart of the Grand Signior toward her Son, that
he could not longer want his presence, and therefore in the way dispatched
frequent Messages to him to hasten him as fast as his convenience would permit.
And better to assure him of his grace and favor, sent his young Favorite, a
handsome Youth of about Twenty years of age, to meet him with a Present of five
Horses richly adorned and furnished, and to feast him plentifully on the way:
And being come within a few hours Journey, the Grand Signior could not contain
his desire of seeing him, until the day of his Entry; but ordered him
immediately to come to him, being impatient of a private Conference. The Vizier
accordingly obeying, and being come to the Royal Presence, the Grand Signior
kissed him on the shoulder, and honored him with a It is in the fashion of a
Mace, which the Turks wear at their Saddles.
Topoose of Gold studded with precious Stones, with a Sword, a Dagger, and a
Horse richly furnished, with which Regal Munificence he returned triumphing to
his Tents, being now fully assured of the real grace and constant favor of his
Master. The second of July the Vizier made his Entrance with solemn Pomp and
Glory through part of the City, passing again into the Field to remain under
Tents with the whole Camp, being so ordered by the Grand Signior, in regard the
City was neither capable to contain so great a number without dispossessing the
greatest part of the Inhabitants of their Houses, nor in this hot season of the
Year was it so wholesome and cool as the open air of the Country. Besides,
matters would be in a far greater readiness for a departure toward
Constantinople, to which place the Vizier had persuaded the Grand Signior to
make a Visit after Audience given to the German Ambassador, whom the People
now expected with wonderful impatience.

Not many days after arrived Count Lesly the Ambassador Extraordinary from his
Caesarean Majesty to the Grand Signior, who made a solemn Entrance into the
City, passing first through the Turkish Camp, where the Grand Signior remained,
and thence to the House furnished and appointed for him at the expense of the
Sultan. The Cavalcade was as follows: In the Front of all were the Ten
Chaouses which had attended the Ambassador through the whole Journey, The
German Ambassadors Entrance.
these were followed by an Hundred fifty five other Chaouses with Muzevege,
with some Captains over the Janisaries* The Ambassador had of his own Retinue
about a Hundred and fifty Persons on Horseback, well mounted, and clothed
after the Hungarian fashion; his proper Guard consisted of Four and twenty
Persons armed with Partisans; before him went his Trumpets, and Kettle Drums,
but not sounding, with Two Banners of spread Eagles flying, one of them richly
embroidered, carried by a Count of the Empire. The Ambassador himself was
clothed with a Cloth of Silver Vest, lined with Sables, on his Cap he wore a
Feather after the Turkish fashion, adorned with Jewels, which they call
(Sargouch) and is only used by the Grand Signior, and his principal Vizier;
before him went Eight led Horses richly furnished; immediately after him
followed the Pages and Servants of the Spaheelar Agasee, and of the Aga which
conducted him from the Frontiers. Next came his Litter covered with Violet
colored Velvet, and carried by Mules; then his three Coaches with six Horses a
piece, one of which being richly gilded, and made cheerful with Glass Windows
after the new mode, the Grand Signior became much pleased with it, and at his
request it was presented to him: after these followed four or five other
Coaches of Four Horses, in which were Churchmen and unfirm persons; and last of
all came the German Wagons, and other Carts with those of the Country with
Baggage.

This Ambassador was not long arrived before he was admitted to Audience with
the Prime Vizier, Audience given to the German Ambassador.
who bestowed on him a Vest of Sables, with a Horse and Furniture of
considerable value, and a Hundred of his Retinue were vested with Coftans,
which amongst the Turks are testimonies of favor and acceptance. About Four
days after, the Ambassador had Audience with the Grand Signior himself, at
which were only Forty Coftans given out, which coming from so Grand a
Personage, were in value multiplied much above the number given by the Vizier.

The Presents brought hy the Amdassadour were as follows: A Looking Glass of
about a man's height, in a silver Frame, standing on a pedestal of Silver,
turning round on every side. Two great Basins of Silver, supported with three
Pillars at three Corners, a man's Body and a half high, adorned with several
Figures; at one Pillar was fastened a gilded Basin, over which was a Fountain
Cock for the Water to run through. Two great gilded Basins full of holes at the
Bottom to make a Passage for the Water. Twelve Silver Candlesticks, every one
about Two Else high. Six Silver Flower-Pots. Twelve gilded Ewers for sweet
Waters. Twelve Silver Dishes with Covers made after the form of Turkish
Turbants, al^ gilded within side. Twelve gilded Dishes for Confects, set upon
Pedestals of Silver. One round Table of Silver upon a Pedestal of about half an
Ell, after the manner of the Turkish Tables, with many Devices. Four Guns with
Silver Stocks, and one Cutlash of Silver. Two great Writing Desks of
Jaspar-Stone, with Prospectives within. Two other of Ebony Wood, and Tortoise
shell, in laid with Gold and Silver. One great Ice Vessel, and one great
Drinking Pot of Silver. Four Pieces of Spanish Tapestry wrought with Silver.
Fourteen Clocks with Turkish and Christian Figures. A Grota with a Clock in it,
and a Case of Virginals which sound with the motion of Water that runs through
it. A Cupboard an Ell high adorned with Bosses of Silver, in which was a
Salt-box, Candlesticks, and other appurtenances thereunto. A large Chest with
Figures of Silver gilded. A high Writing Desk of Silver gilded, with many Boxes
and Drawers, which for the Art and Invention is not to be described. Presents
to the Valede or Queen Mother. An embroidered Cushinet to sow upon, in which
was a Looking-Glass, and a Virginal sounding of it self. A large Looking-Glass
in a Silver Frame. Two Silver Candlesticks of an Ell and half high. A Basket of
Silver rarely worked and engraven. Four great Cups.


To the Great Vizier.
Twelve Silver Platters with Covers. Two Silver Candlesticks of an Ell high.
Twelve Silver Plates handsomely worked for Confects. One Basket of Silver
engraven. Fourteen very large Silver Cups.


For other Ministers to be bestowed as occasion was.
Thirty two Clocks of several sorts, some with Turkish, and others with
Christian Figures. Twenty one Watches gilded. Seven gilded Basins and Ewers.


The Weight of the Silver all together amounted unto Three thousand five
hundred pound weight. These were the Parriculars of the Presents sent from the
Emperor to the Grand Signior, from whom he received the live value by the
Ottoman Ambassador. And though this Relation may seem impertinent to the
Weight of History, yet in regard on such minute things many times greater
matters depend, and thereby the curiosity of the Reader satisfied, I thought it
not from our purpose to insert a List thereof.

This year gave the first Beginning to trade between the Ottoman Dominions, and
that of Genoua. For in Company of the German Ambassador, in condition of a
private Person, came the Marquess Durazzo a Nobleman of Genoua, The Genoese
make Peace with the Turk.
with Letters from that Republic to the Grand Signior, and Great Vizier,
importing their desire of friendship and commerce with the Ottoman Port. This
design of opening a door to a new Trade was commenced and carried on wholly by
the contrivance and power of the Family of the Durrazzo's, falsely founded on
the course allay of Money, then current in the Turkish Territories, which
proved not long durable, as will appear by the Sequel. This Marquess being
arrived at Constantinople, declared his Message, which if favorably accepted,
an Ambassador or Resident with Merchants should be sent to hold a Trade in the
Turkish Dominions. In answer whereunto the Vizier replied according to the
usual complement, That the Arms of the Port are always open to those who desire
to entertain a friendship and correspondence with it. But because in former
days Ambassadors from Spain and Genoua having like promises of admission, were
notwithstanding through the union of the English, and French and Venetians,
obstructed in their passage, and forced to return home, though one of them as
far as Scio in his way, and the other as Ragusa; therefore this Marquess in
remembrance hereof pressed the Vizier farther in his promise, desiring him to
give him the assurance, that what opposition might be made to the contrary by
other Ministers, he would yet keep firm to that word he had given to his
Republic: The Vizier constantly promised that he would; and if any other
Ambassadors were not pleased with the friendship and Treaty of that day, they
might seek their remedy as they pleased, and if they pleased might have liberty
to depart. The Marquess being satisfied with this assurance, took Letters to
his Republic in assurance thereof, and Articles were given, and Privileges
for Trade signed according to the Tenor of other Capitulations: And being
herewith dispatched, The Genoese received.
he returned home by Land, and the next year appeared again himself in the
Person of Ambassador Extraordinary to the Ottoman Court; where after high and
considerable Presents and great Expenses made, chiefly supported by the House
of Durazzo, a Resident was seated at Constantinople, and a Consul at Smyrna,
where we will leave them for a while, and some years after (God willing) take
an account of the profit and loss this progging Nation had made by this Embassy
and Trade. But before we leave this point, it will be worth our noting, how
hainously the French Ambassador Monsieur La Hay took this entertainment of
the Genoese, in regard he was so concerned against his admission, that he
declared to the chief Ministers of State, how he had received Orders to oppose
the entrance of the Genoese Nation, as highly prejudicial and obstructive to
their Trade; and in sine, to acquaint the Grand Signior, that in case he
resolved to entertain them, his Master would withdraw his Ambassador and
Nation; and therefore they ought to consider, whether a new Friend and an
inconsiderable Republic ought to be perferred before the Known and approved
acquaintance of the powerful Empire of France. But whatsoever the French
Ministers were able to act to the contrary, the Genoeses kept their stations,
in which they were the better secured by those frequent occasions of disgust
his most Christian Majesty in defense of the Christian Cause, had given to
these Enemies of the Christian Faith

The Great Vizier and the German Ambassador being now both at the Ottoman
Port, the Wars were concluded, and every one began to dispose his affairs to a
quiet and a reposed life. But this Empire being still by God's Providence in a
condition of growth and augmentation, could not remain long in Peace, nor long
in health without exercise and action. Wherefore no sooner was Germany at ease,
than the Vizier began to move the prosecution of the War in Candia, desiring to
obtain the glory of subjecting totally that Island, The Turks resolve to
prosecute the War in Candia.
which for the space of Twenty five years had been the principal subject of the
Ottoman design and exercise, and acquire to himself the Fame in History of
being Conqueror of Candia, and Concluder of the Venetian War. Wherefore the
Vizier with several other principal Persons, assembled in a Garden near the
City of Adrianople, sent for the Signior Ballarino Representative for the
Republik of Venice; where being come, at the first word demanded of him the
Surrender of the whole Island of Candia. To which he modestly replied, That so
great a gift was not in his power to give, and that his office was only to be
assistant to that happy hour, wherein all matters might concur toward Peace,
and that his Mediation might contribute toward a conclusion of this long and
tedious War. In the mean time he should acquaint his Prince with the demand the
Vizier was pleased to make. To which the Turks added menaces, with high and
insolent words, designing to bend their whole force and power against Candia,
the effect of which will hereafter be a material subject of our History. And
thus much, to my best remembrance, I received from the mouth of that Venetian
Minister.

In the mean time the Grand Signior, though he continued his Sports and
Hunting, without regard to the violent heats of the Summer; yet he began to
entertain something more of warm affection toward his Women, and to be
reconciled to that Sex, in contemplation of his little Son, who beginning now
to play and prattle, afforded him matter of entertainment in the Apartments of
his Women; so that he affectionately doting on his Queen, gave order for
increase of her Revenue and Attendance, The G. Signior passionately loves his
Queen.
and appointed the best Artisans of Adrianople to make her a Crown studded with
very precious Stones to adorn her Head, of which he was so impatient, that he
ordered the Goldsmiths to work in the Seraglio, permitting them scarce time to
eat or sleep until it was finished. In recompense of which affection of her
Sultan, this Lady so corresponded, that she appeared passionately in love,
practicing certain pretty tricks of swooning and of an uneasy condition in his
absence, which so endeared him in all respects to her, that it was said the
Sultan kept himself constant to this Queen only, and contrary to the custom of
other Emperors, and permission of the Turkish Laws, made use of the multitude
of his other Women only for Slaves, or Attendants to the greater state and
adoration of his beloved Queen.

And now the Grand Signior, at the persuasion of the Vizier and others of his
Council, resolving to winter at Constantinople, certain Women of the lower rank
were dispatched before, as forerunners of the removal of the Court: And being
in the Seraglio at large without observance and awe of their usual Spies, two
of the boldest Wenches finding a Cradle, wherein the Royal Infants were usually
laid, adventured to pick out the best Jewels, of which some were very good
Stones, and afterward laid it up again in a private place, where it was not
easily found. Not many days after the Queen Mother wanting the Cradle of so
much value and antiquity, where many of the young Sultans had lain, sent to the
Seraglio at Constantinople to fetch it thence. But it not being found,
inquisition was made into all secret corners, the Wardrobes were searched, but
nothing appeared, to the great fear of those to whose care it was committed,
one accusing the other to acquit himself. In fine, the matter was so traced,
that some whispers there were concerning those in whose hands the Cradle not
long before was seen to remain. The Women having guilty consciences were amazed
in being so closely followed, and fearing the matter should be per e^tly
discovered, entered into consultation what course they should take to save their
lives and their honor. In fine, they both concluded, that in such an extremity
desperate remedies ought to be used, than which none was better than to set
fire to the Seraglio, The Seraglio at Constantinople set on fire.
by which means, either the thing sought for, would be esteemed for burnt and
consumed by the fire, or in so great a loss it might be hoped that matters of
smaller moment would not be remembered. Wherefore the bold Wenches without other
consideration gave fire with their Candle to the roof of Cedar, of which wood
most of the Women's rooms in the Seraglio are made, which in a moment made such
a flame, as with the help of a little wind, was carried through all the
quarters of the Women's Apartments, and thence took its way to the Divan
Chamber, and other considerable parts of the Court, where many Records and
Registers of Law were consumed to ashes, together with one of the lesser
Treasuries, where much richess, which endured not the test of fire, perished:
And the whole Seraglio had run an evident hazard, had not the Bostangees and
other Servants of the Court ventured far into the flames, in which many of them
miserably perished. The fire being quenched, and the Women afterward (I know
not how) detected to have been the Authors thereof, were sent to Adrianople,
and being there accused, were strangled by the immediate order of the Grand
Signior.

But the destruction of that considerable part of the Seraglio was no
impediment to the Grand Signiors return to Constantinople, being rebuilt with
that speed and industry, equal or excelling the magnificence of the former,
that the day prefixed for the Journey thither was not prolonged by reason
thereof. Howsoever the Grand Signiors aversion to the place made the wheels of
his Chariots move slow, and the quickness of his Attendants grew slack and
cold, observing so much displeasure in their Emperor to the place designed. For
though he was pressed by the Vizier to begin his Journey, and could not
handsomely refuse to comply with the time appointed; yet to defer this
resolution as long as was possible; he contrived a long way of Meander toward
Constantinople, forming his Journey in Company with the Great Vizier by way of
the Dardanelli upon the Hellespont, on pretense of viewing the Fortifications
of the new Forts raised at the entrance of that Straight, and sending some
Provisions from thence for Relief of Candia; wherefore the Captain-Pasha was
commanded to Sea with three galleys, and at Gallipoli to attend the Grand
Signiors arrival, being to transport him thence to the Castles, and back again.
And the design being now resolved, and hot to prosecute the War in Candia; for
transporting thither a numerous Army, it was concluded, That the Captain-Pasha
should propose to the English Ambassador the Grand Signiors desire of Fifteen
Sail of Ships, with consent of our King, for this Service, the Turks paying
what reasonable Rates should be demanded. But the Earl of Winchelsea then Lord
Ambassador, modestly replied, That though His Majesty of England did always
entertain a good affection and a zealous disposition toward the Affairs of the
Grand Signior; yet at present the War with Holland, and ill understanding with
France, made his occasions for his own Shipping more urgent than usual, and the
time most unseasonable to press his Majesty in this particular: by which reply
and several other excuses of the Ambassador, the Captain-Pasha perceiving an
aversness to the Proposition, and that Christians unwillingly arm Turks against
the Cross, gave an account of this discourse to the Grand Signior and Vizier,
who immediately gave order for the building of sixty Galleys against the next
Spring, which with what they had before would make up above an Hundred Sail.
The Rendezvous of this Fleet, together with Saykes and other Turkish Vessels,
The Turks prepare for a War on Candia.
from thence to transport the Vizier and his Army for Candia, was appointed to
be made at Malvoisia of the success of which we shall have occasion (God
willing) to discourse in the following Year, which gave a beginning (as we may
say) to the total loss of that Country, and to that famous Siege, which in
History will bear the Fame of one of the most memorable in the World. And as a
preparation thereunto, and as a supply of the present urgent necessities, three
Ships, viz. one English, another French, and a third Dutch were laden with
Corn, and thirty Sail of Beys Galleys, with all sorts of Arms and Ammunition,
with a Recruit of a thousand Janisaries, were dispeeded from Constantinople for
Reinforcement and Succor of that Island.

And now at length the Grand Signior after his long circuit arrived at
Constantinople, where he made his solemn Entry the Third of October, but not
with that Joy and Pomp, which usually attended other Sultans in their return
from the Wars and labors to their Imperial City; but all things seemed like
the Sultans humor, sullen and displeased; for he seldom lodged in his
Seraglio, or slept there, but at a small Palace called Daout-Pasha, The G.
Signior arrives at Constantinople.
where he for the most part made his abode; only sometimes in the day he passed
a few hours at his Seraglio, but rested not there in the Night: The reasons
hereof some attributed to the remembrance of those dangers and troubles which
he had seen in that Court, and which made so deep an impression on his fancy,
that he could never enter within those Gates without some sense of terror for
the late disorders.

The German War being thus concluded, the Sultan returned to Constantinople,
and Affairs disposing themselves to spend their fury against Candia, all things
growing black and tempestuous toward that Coast, the Venetians prudently
provided to oppose the storm. And as an able General, Marquess Villa received
into service of the Venetians.
and wise and experienced Captains are the supports of an Army; and that the
success of War depends much on Martial Discipline, and on the vigilance and
wisdom of the Commanders, the Senate gave order to their Ambassador at Turen,
called Catarin Belegno, to offer unto Marquess Ghiron Francesco Villa, a Native
of that Country, the honorable charge of General of the Foot, with a stipend
of 12000 Crowns of yearly Pay; the said Marquess obliging himself to bring with
him Four Captains, and two Lieutenant-Generals, for entertainment of whom the
Republic allowed Five thousand Ducats, besides Seventy Ducats a Month pay to
an Engineer. To this Marquess Villa a power was given to command in chief over
all, without subjection to any other than to the Captain General, and to the
Proveditor General in Dalmatia, when he waged War in that Province: And in
short, his actions were not to be questioned or examined by any other than the
Senate it self, to whom he was immediately subjected, and a Gally was to be
allotted purposely to transport him and his Family to Candia. Upon these
conditions agreed at Turen, Marquess Villa took his Journey to Venice about the
beginning of April, being accompanied with his Kinsman Francesco Villa, his
Nephew Benedetto Count of Lagnasco, Count Lodovico Saluzza, and Count
Bernardino Barretta, which Four served in quality of Captains, together with
Gio. Francesco Pusserla, and Alessandro Negri, who were Lieutenant-Generals,
and Gio. Girolamo Quadruplano Engineer. With these Companions and several other
Volunteers, Gentlemen of Quality, the Marquess Villa was received with much
honor by the Nobility and People of Venice; and being introduced into the
College, with a singular grace and fluency of Language he began to speak in
this manner.

IF thanks, most Serene Prince, and most Excellent Sirs, The Speech of Marquis
Villa to the Senate.
ought to be equivalent to the benefits we receive, I must of necessity (not to
appear ungrateful) refuse those favors, which this most Serene Republic is
pleased to confer upon me; or resolve to appear ungrateful, because I am unable
to make a compensation. But I satisfy my self in this, That as the mind which
receives favors, and returns thanks is the same; so that mind which makes
acknowledgments with a due sense of them, does in some measure equal the
benefit, though it prove defective in expressions to declare it. I do therefore
confess and acknowledge, that the Election you have been pleased to make of me
amongst so many conspicuous Persons, unto a Charge graced by most renowned
Predecessors, and in it self most honorable, is a most singular favor, and
an effect of your immense Bounty to me; which though it be limited with some
subordination, yet it may serve for the ultimate Goal to a glorious Course of
Military labors. I must also farther acknowledge, That as it is the property
of this most Serene Republic to receive momentary Services, and to render them
Eternal by Records in History; so they have been pleased to adjoyn unto my mean
deserts a remembrance of the humble devotion which my Ancestors professed
toward them: I mean Alfonso Villa my great Grandfather, who in that most
glorious Fleet at Lepanto, whose Sails were the wings of Victory, evidenced his
Christian Zeal against that People, which issuing from the bowels of
Sea Monsters, continue to vent their ancient rage against your most Serene
Highness. Nor with less promptness of mind, had my Grandfather Francesco Villa,
and my Father Guido Villa, consecrated their Powers to your Command: but that
the unparalled Equity of this most Serene Republic gave permission, that one
of them should take the charge of General of the Artillery of the Holy Church
under the Pope his Supreme Lord, preferring a natural duty before a voluntary
service; and that the other being entertained in service of the most Invincible
Charles Emanuel in Piedmont, you were pleased to judge, That the service done
to a Prince your Confederate, and Son of this Republic, was a service and duty
rendered to your selves: so that this Election made of me by this most Serene
Republic, and approved by the singular goodness of that Charles Emanuel, who
now reigns, evidences the Destiny of my Family, and obliges me to satissie that
hereditary debt by performances, which my Ancestors entertained only in their
wishes. Hence it is, that to this my Election some celestial influence has
concurred, by which I am clearly assured, that your more than humane Power is
desirous to imitate the Divine, which oftentimes makes use of weak means to
operate miraculous effects, that to you only the success may be acknowledged,
and to you only the thanks be returned: That if the Providence of your
Serenity, and of this most Serene Republic will be pleased (as I am assured
you will) to imitate the Divine Providence, which co-operates with means, the
number and quality of your Troops and plenty of your Provisions, which are the
Nerves of War, are those means which correspond with the ends you design: And
therefore I dare presage, that I shall not only see the threatening horns of the
changeable Ottoman Planet precipitated into the Sea by the Venetian horn of
strength; but those glorious Conquests renewed, which rendered your Name more
bright and resplendent than the Sun it self in his Oriental parts. With these
auspicious Presages, I seel already in my breast an impatient heat to sacrifice
my life in so worthy a Cause, fancying that I serve the Universe, whilst I am
engaged in the service of the greatest of Republics, which communicates
delicious Fruit to all People, gathered from those triumphant Palms, which were
planted and watered with her own sweat and labors; and resembles her own
generous Lion, which continually stands on the Guard in opposition to the
common Enemy, that all other People may rest quiet, and repose secure. And thus
much, Most Serene Prince, and Most Excellent Sirs, shall suffice to have been
spoken by a Soldier, not acquainted with Eloquence, to whom Courage is more
requisite than Words, and to fight well with the hand, is more laudable than to
utter florid Speeches with the Tongue.

According to the preceding counsel and desire of Marquess Villa, the Senate
sent by diverse Convoys great plenty of Provision and Ammunition to Candia, and
fitted their Fleet with all things necessary; and strengthened their Forts both
with Horse and Foot drawn out of their Garrisons on the Terra Firma, being
assisted with Men and Money from other Princes and States. The Pope gave them
liberty to levy Four thousand men out of his Countries, the Emperor also
furnished them with a considerable Force, to which were made Additions from
other parts of Germany.

In this manner the prudent Care of the Venetians provided for their own
safety: But at Constantinople things were more quiet, for it being Winter, the
Turks made Entertainments for the German Ambassador, who was first seasted by
the Chimacham, and twice afterward, with much Magnificence, by the Great
Vizier at his own Garden, seated on the Bosphorus, all difficulties being
before overcome, and agreed, unless the deliverance of the poor Captives from
the Prison and the Oar, who continued in the torment of expectation between
hope and fear, either of liberty or perpetual slavery. Which Treaty though it
properly belonged to the Vizier, to whom the absolute power is derived, yet in
formality it was reserved for matter of the last Audience with the Grand
Signior, who being desirous to attend his Hunting and Pastime abroad, was in
pain, until he had complied with his Office toward this Ambassador, whose
departure though not some time after designed, yet being often called upon to
receive his Dispatch from the Grand Signior, was admitted on the 31th of
October to his Audience with the same formality and feasting as is common to
all other Ambassadors in the Divan, or place of Judicature, and received three
and forty Coftans bestowed on himself and his retinue, and thence being
conducted to the Chamber of Audience, with some of the principal Noblemen of
his Company, they presented themselves on their Knees, with their Faces on the
Ground, according to the Custom of the Eastern Courts; with which occasion the
Here Reningen, who had for sixteen or seventeen years been Resident for the
Emperor, The German Ambassadors last Audience with the Grand Signior
a person grown infirm with Age and the Gout, and his Knees not so active and
pliable as the younger sort, coming also to take his turn in this prostrate
manner of Worship, was so rudely handled by the kapugibashees, who assisted on
each Arm at the Ceremony, that he not being able to bow his head so easily as
others, was thrust down by them with so little consideration or respect, that
his Brows and Forehead were broken on the Flour; which mischance so disordered
him, as put him besides that Speech which he had premediated in Turkish to
address to the Grand Signior; and though he curbed what was possible his
passion, whilst he remained in the Royal Presence, yet in vain afterward he
vented his Choler with words against those unmannerly Officers without other
remedy or satisfaction. The Demands of the Ambassador were in writing read
before the Grand Signior, according to the custom of the Court, and principally
concerned the freedom of the Slaves, some of which were then in the Galleys,
and Banniard, and others of the most principal in the seven Towers. Other
Demands there were in relation to the State of Transylvania, that for the
future it might be free from Incursions, in which particular the Turks had
already violated the Peace; and that a more orderly Government of Affairs might
be observed on the Frontiers, than usually had passed, as agreed by the last
Capitulations. To which the Grand Signior gave no Answer, referring all to the
Vizier, only told the Ambassador in short, That he should counsel his Master
to beware of invading the Ottoman Dominions, or acting any thing in prejudice
of the Peace.

The Articles of Peace made between the Two Emperors were for the most part a
confirmation of the ancient Agreement, only it was provided as a new Addition.
That the Armies should depart from the Confines of Transylvania. Secondly, That
the Castles and Forts garisoned with German Soldiers in that Country should be
resigned into the hands of the Prince. And Thirdly, There were other
particulars added in reference to Newhausel, and the Countries adjacent lately
conquered, and the Limits of both Emperors, as before declared.

But whilst these things were in agitation, and Ambassadors interchangeably at
either Court, the Turks of Varadin and Janoua made frequent incursions into
Transylvania, destroying the Villages, and carrying away great numbers of
Captives; and so lately, as about the beginning of August last, those of
Varadin conveyed themselves privately under the Castle Cseh, and robbed the
Horses belonging to that Garrison, killed some, and carried others into slavery;
at which time also Two thousand Turks besieged the Castle Valko, which they
took, and razed to the ground; which Complaints of their Countries Aggrievances
the Transilvanians intimated to the German Ambassador, as matters already
acted contrary to the late Articles of Peace, requesting farther to interpose
for a moderation and abatement of their Tribute, which Kuperlee had, contrary
to Oath and reason, unjustly augmented. But the Ambassador seemed so coldly to
interpose in this behalf, as taught the Turks to deny his Requests, acquiescing
with this Answer, That it was no breach of Peace then to make incursions on the
Frontiers, as also without Cannon to rob, and spoil, and skirmish, not
exceeding Five thousand men in number. For it appeared that the Ambssadour was
most desirous to secure the main points of the Peace, The Reasons why the
German Ambassador interposed not in behalf of Transylvania.
which concerned most the Interest of the Empire, and not hazard it for such
like Concernments of Transylvania; for though it seemed strange to the World to
see a Peace hastily clapped up with disadvantageous Terms on the Emperors side,
whilst he was victorious and fortunate in several Enterprises; yet they that
penetrated farther into the State and Condition of the Empire, report, That
there was a necessity of making a moderate use of these successes by a fair
accommodation, rather than to tempt Providence by a too eager and continued
prosecution of the War. For it was observed that the Designs of making the Duke
of Anguien, Son to the Prince of Conde, King of Poland, proceeded forward; and
that there was a Combination of a dangerous League amongst the Princes of the
Rhine. The Divisions between the Germans and the Hungarians increased; the
latter of which are known to be an obstinate sort of People. The Army also of
the French was feared in the Bowels of the Empire, under the Command of
Monsieur la Feuvillade, who under pretense of applying themselves to the
assistance of Christendom, were suspected to come with intentions to advance
the interest of their King, and force the next Diet to elect him King of the
Romans; in order whereunto, and in consideration of farther assistance, they
demanded several Towns in Hungary to be delivered into their hands, and made
extravagant Propositions for Winter Quarters; all which considered, made the
German Ambassador more tender how he entered into Disputes with the Turk, which
might prejudice the essential points of the Peace, or occasion a new War more
destructive to Germany through the dangers before intimated, than by the Arms
and Hostility of the common Enemy. The German Ambassador's Audience with the
Vizier.
These Considerations made the Ambassador less zealous in the matter of
Transylvania, and in all others which were not really conducing to his Masters
immediate service; so that having no other difficulty remaining, than the
liberty of the Captives, on the day of his last Audience with the Vizier, being
the 8th of November, he urged with more earnestness their Release, which was in
part granted; those of the Galleys were delivered from their Chains and Oars;
but such as were of greater Quality in the seven Towers were detained, until
the Emperor had on his part released the Turks of Quality in like manner; and
though it was agreed in the Article, That Captives should on both sides be
released, yet the Vizier interpreted it to be in respect to Number and Quality,
of which I remember to have heard often Complaints, and especially of those
poor Gentlemen, then under Irons and restraint, who though afterward received
their freedom, yet for the present endured more torment in their minds, than if
they had never been put in expectation to enjoy their hopes. At the end of the
Audience the Ambassador proposed something in behalf of the Religious of
Jerusalem, That certain places of Devotion might be restored them, which were
injuriously taken from them by the Greeks; and also that License might be
granted for re-edification of some Churches, and Monasteries destroyed in
Galata by the late Fire: To the first of which, the Vizier answered, That the
Franks with the Greeks of Jerusalem should have a fair and equal Trial at Law
about the possession of those places in difference, and Justice and Right
should be done unto the injured; but the latter Proposition he positively
denied, for being a matter contrary to their Law and Religion, was not
dispensable by his Power, nor ought he to expect a Complement from him, or
Gratuity of that nature, which was Inconsistent with the honor and conscience
of the Donor; but that in any thing else he was ready to yield to his Desires,
whereby he might understand the value he put upon his Person; using this
Expression, That he was more satisfied that the Emperor had designed so
illustrious and worthy a person to this Embassy, than if he had sent him a
Hundred thousand Dollars more of Present, and at the Conclusion of the
Audience, vested both the Ambassador and Resident with Sables, which ended
with all imaginable satisfaction, and mutual contentment.

On the 21th of the Month of November arrived ar Constantinople Monsieur De
Ventelay, Ambassador from the French King to the Grand Signior, An Ambassador
arrives from France.
who was Son to the Sieur De la Hay, the former Ambassador, a Person much
talked of before he arrived; a generous and an accomplished Gentleman, and one
well practiced in the Affairs of that Country. To understand which story the
better we must look back to the former Year, at the beginning of which during
the German War, and that the Vizier remained in his Winter Quarters at
Belgrade, a Courier with Letters from his most Christian Majesty to the First
Vizier arrived, who concealed not the occasion of his coming, nor the contents
of his Letters with that secrecy, but that those who were employed in the
Translation of the Papers into Turkish, made it publicly known to be no other
than a recital of the many provocations his most Christian Majesty had received
from the Pirates of Barbary, containing a List of the Ships, Men, and Goods
they had from time to time seized and made Prize: in vindication of which
indignities to his Honor, and in protection of his People, he could not do
less than make a War upon those Pirates (for as yet the advice was not come,
that the French had deserted Gigeri) in which for the foregoing reasons the
Grand Signior ought not to judge himself concerned. And for the Succor given
the Emperor, it was not afforded as King of France, but as one of the Princes
of the Empire, in which capacity, by virtue of his Tenure, he was obliged to
contribute such Forces on the like emergencies and distresses of the Empire.
And if the foregoing reasons were available with the Sultan to induce him (as
in reason he ought) to believe he continued in perfect friendship with him,
without breach of Articles, he was then ready to send his Ambassador to reside
at the Port, provided it might be Monsieur De Ventelay, Son to Monsieur De la
Hay late Ambassador there, who was the Person that had some time since
received indignities from the Vizier Kuperlee, that so his Majesty might
receive satisfaction, by having the very Person of Monsieur De Ventelay,
honored by extraordinary demonstrations of respect, in reparation of the
former affronts. This Messenger having translated his Papers, obtained license
to ride Post to the Vizier, and in the frosts and extremities of the weather in
January set forward on his Journey; but in his passage through Adrianople,
visiting the Chimacam, and desiring his license in like manner to ride Post to
the Vizier on public affairs, received such a lesson of scorn and disdain,
vented with the extremity of choler against the French Nation in public Divan,
with terms undecent to be repeated: And that in farther resentment, if he were
First Vizier, he would refuse to accept any friendship or alliance with them;
but since he was inferior to the Great Vizier, he would dispeed him to the
Camp, and grant him a Command for his Post. But it seems this Courier being
arrived at Belgrade, was received with better terms, and more courtesy by the
Vizier, who had learned by experience of the late Christian Wars, and proof of
the Valor of the French Nation, that the Propositions of that King were not
lightly to be contemned. And therefore consented that Monsieur De Ventelay
might freely come (using their common expression) that the Arms of the Port are
always open to receive the addresses of Friends, Allies, and Confederates. With
this Message and Letters the Courier was dispatched by way of Rag^si with safe
conduct, and what else was requisite for his securer passage. No doubt but his
most Christian Majesty was the more urgent, that the Person of Monsieur De
Ventelay (who was the subject on whom formerly the Turks had exercised such
injurious violence) should be accepted for Ambassador, and resolved,
Reflections of the Turks on the Embassy of Monsieur De Ventelay
unless they received him, he would send no other, that so his Honor which
suffered before in this Person, might be repaired again by the respect and
reverence they were to show to him as Ambassador, as (...) in repentance of
their former unkindness, they should now strive to make amends by extraordinary
demonstrations of honor to this Representative. For it was judged in France,
and there concluded, That there was no other means to repair the Kings Honor
than by the Embassy of Monsieur De Ventelay; to which that a greater reputation
might be added, he was transported in one of the Kings Ships called the Caesar,
accompanied with a Fire-ship, and a small Patach for a Victualler, and for his
better Equipage was attended by four or five Marquesses and ^ersons of Quality.
Being arrived at the farther part of the City called the Seven Towers, the
Ships came to an Anchor, from whence the Ambassador sent to advise the Vizier
of his arrival, desiring as one mark of the extraordinary honor promised him,
that a return might be made to the Salute of his Ship from the Seraglio, by the
Cannon which lay under the Wall, a Ceremony before never demanded, or practiced
with respect to any Christian or Turkish Vessel; and that his landing might be
honored with a more than usual reception by the attendance of Officers, or at
least equalled to the Formalities of the late English Ambassador. But the
Vizier it seems judged, that the reception of the English, strained on a
particular occasion, was not to be brought into example, and that a Salute from
the Seraglio was so besides the ordinary custom, that he esteemed the demand to
be extravagant, and that such a President would be dishonorable to his Master.
And therefore resolving not to exceed the perticulars of former customs,
offered at his landing to have him accompanied to his House with ten Chaouses,
only the Ambassador not accepting hereof, in a discontented manner entered with
his Ship the day following, and giving the usual Salutes to the Seraglio,
landed at Topenau, a place near to his own Dwelling, from whence with no other
attendance than his own Company, privately walked up, and with no farther
ceremony took possession of the place of Residence of former Ambassadors from
France.

Notwithstanding this slight treatment, the Ambassador was not so much
mortified, but he conceived hopes, that the Turks would at length in
contemplation of his Masters greatness, gratify him with some signal
demonstrations of extraordinary honor, by concessions of unusual Privileges,
and greater facility in his Negotiations: and therefore was induced, though as
yet he had not had a personal Audience of the Vizier, to desire a revocation of
the Agreement made with the Genoese, (the Marquess Durazzo, of whom we have
spoken before, being just upon his departure) protesting against it with all
earnestness, as a matter so prejudicial to the French Traffic and Commerce in
those Dominions, that if admission were given to the Genoese, they must expect
to lose friendship and commerce with France. But notwithstanding this heat and
other protestations against it, the Vizier who inherited his Fathers spirit,
little regarded the discontent of the French, but calmly answered, That the
Grand Signior was Master of himself and Country, and might make Peace or War at
his own pleasure without license or permission of the French king; and that
such as were envious, or discontented at the Peace, had free liberty to depart
and take their remedy as they esteemed most beneficial.

In this manner matters passed between the time of this Ambassadors Arrival
and his Audience. A strange accident befallen the French Captain of the Man of
War.
In which interim the curiosity of Monsieur Abermont, Captain of the French Man
of War, had like to have proved fatal to him; for whilst he viewed from the
Gallery of his Ship the pleasant situation of the Seraglio, and the Prospect of
the Bosphorus, behold at a distance appeared certain Galleys gently gliding
down the stream, dressed up with Flags and Streamers, which all Ships and
Saykes saluted with their Guns as they passed. This Captain being informed that
the Grand Signior was there in person, and returned from his Hunting, which he
had made in certain Woods not far from the City, saluted him also as he passed
with twenty five Guns; but being not able to discover his person, presently
fitted his Boat and followed him, hoping to receive that satisfaction at his
landing; fot conceiving, that access to the Ottoman and Eastern Princes is as
facile and grateful, as it is to those of Christendom, with all confidence
endeavored to accost the Person of the Grand Signior as near as was possible.
The Grand Signior turning his eyes, and seeing a man habited (as he conceived)
in a barbarous and extravagant dress, apprehended the Majesty of his Person
violated by so near and bold an approach of the curious Stranger; and
thereupon, without farther inquiry, being moved with scorn and indignation,
called for the Executioner, who is ever ready at his hand; but some persons
then present, especially the Bostangibashee, being of more moderation,
beseeched the Grand Signior to have a little patience, and to enquire of the
Ghaur or Infidel (as they called him) the cause of this his boldness: with
which the Grand Signior suppressing a little his passion, and having patience
until one was sent to expostulate with the Captain, who all this while, though
he perceived some disturbance, was yet ignorant that the matter so dangerously
concerned himself; and not being able to understand the Messenger, nor to be
understood by him, rendered the business more confused, and less understood:
which the Messenger observing, and knowing the danger of this worthy and
innocent Gentleman, being perhaps of a compassionate nature, and prudent,
framed this excuse to the Grand Signior, That he did not well understand the
Infidels language, but what he conjectured was, That he being Captain of that
Vessel, which had newly saluted his Majesty as he passed with twenty five Guns,
was now come in confidence of his Royal bounty and clemency to receive a
Coftan, as a sign of his Majesty's favor, and reward of his own respect. The
Grand Signior having by this time his choler somewhat abated, was better
pacified with these gentle words; the Bostangibashee also interceding at the
same time in his behalf, that he was a stranger, and ignorant of the customs of
their Court, and that if he deserved punishment, he might be remitted to the
examination of the Vizier, who might chastise him, as he found it reasonable.
The Grand Signior contented herewith, the rude Bostangees seized the Captain
and hurried him to the Vizier, who all this time was ignorant of his error or
his danger, more than that he perceived by accent of their words, and by their
gestures, that something was amiss, and debated in reference unto him. The
Drugger-men, or Interpreters of the French Nation being sent for, and the
Vizier and the Captain both understanding the matter, the crime appeared only
to be an absurdity committed through ignorance: yet to please the Grand
Signior, and to make an appearance, as if something were done in chastisement
of this bold curiosity, the Vizier ordered, that the Captain should be
conducted by two Chaouses to the Ambassador, there to be put in Chains and in
Prison, until satisfaction was made for his fault. The Captain being thus
brought before the Ambassador, this honest Gentleman was punished in the same
manner as we do those in Christendom, who crowd to see their Prince.

The Ambassador had his first Audience with the Vizier on the 7th of December,
which being insignificant to any other business more than to the delivery of
his Masters Letters, and other matters of Form and Ceremony, we shall need to
insist the less upon it.

His second Audience before that of the Grand Signior, The French Ambassadors
second Audience.
was in the beginning of January, at which time the Ambassador began to
declare what he had in Commission from his King, which principally related
toward a satisfaction for those Affronts formerly offered him in the person of
his Father, and himself inculcating into the Vizier a true apprehension of the
greatness of his Master, his force by Land, his powerful Fleet which should
that following year be set sorth in the Mediterranean Seas, with other
arguments which might challenge due respect and honor to so great a Prince.
These Proposals and Discourses, though the Vizer seemed not to entertain with
that benign and flexible ear as was expected or thought satisfactory, and
thereupon several disgusts did afterward succeed; howsoever in the end all
matters cleared up again, and his Excellency was permitted to return to his own
House with all imaginatble satisfaction, as he was pleased to intimate to the
Ambassador for his Majesty of great Britain. Soon after followed his Audience
with the Grand Signior according to the usual Ceremonies, so that all things
run smoothly with the French for several years after. And here by the way it is
observable, That an English Ambassador once arguing hotly with the Vizier on
some points of the Capitulations, in which judging himself wronged, threw the
Capitulations to the Vizier, telling him, that he might keep the Writing and
Paper, since he resolved not to obey the Letter. The Vizier hereupon calmly
took the Capitulations, and laid them behind his Cushion, which the Ambassador
in a more considerate temper could not again recover under an expense of
fifteen hundred Pieces of Eight.

During the time of these Negotiations the Grand Signior wholly employed his
time and thoughts in Hunting, ranging all the Woods for several days journies
round Constantinople, in which Exercise twenty or thirty thousand men were
employed, collected from the Cities and Villages round about, all which were
paid at the public expense and charge of Housekeepers both Turks and
Chrstians; The Grand Signiors Huntings.
which in one hunt might amount to thirty or forty thousand Dollars. With this
burden the people being often opppressed, and many perishing in the Woods with
cold and hunger, began to murmur at the excess of Tyranny, cursing their
Princes madness and folly, maintained with the life and ruin of his Subjects.
But notwithstanding all these whispered curses and secret menaces the Grand
Signior followed his delights with such frequency, and with that heat and
eagerness, that the people perceiving no end of their misery, began to speak
loudly and plainly, and by some principal Persons gave the Vizier to
understand, That the people would not longer endure the extravagant Vagaries of
their Prince at so dear a rate, of which he thar was his chief Counselor
ought to inform and advise him. The Vizier, who was before sensible of the
excess of his Masters humor in this particular, and that immoderation, even in
lawful and innocent exercises, may become a Vice, and when acted with
oppression of the Subject as dangerous as other terms which sound more of
Tyranny and Violence, resolved with courage and humility to represent to his
Master the danger of such expensive Huntings, especially when over frequent;
and therefore assured those who made their Complaints, That for the future all
matters should be redressed, and the Grand Signior should not be so prodigal in
his Huntings on the Purse of his Subjects. And so sensible was the Vizier of
the disorders which might arise from hence, if some remedy were not speedily
applied, that he immediately departed Constantinople to find out the Grand
Signior, who was lodged in some retired cool place, environed with Woods and
Mountains; leaving Solomon Pasha for Chimacham, or Deputy, in his place, in
whose former Government many terrible Fires had happened in Constantinaple.

About this time Advice came to Constantinople of certain Addresses the Nogay
Tartar had made to the Pasha of Silistria to obtain a Country to live in
between the Rivers of Boristhenese and the Danube; for that their own Country
being full, The Nogay Tartar desires Lands of the Grand Signior.
they were forced to abandon and empty it of forty of fifty thousand Families,
who lived in Wagons, and had about a hundred thousand head of Cattle, all
which with their substance, they proffered for Subjects to the Grand Signior,
if he pleased to afford them protection, and Land for Pasture and habitation.
The Pasha approving hereof, gave them assurance of security under the shadow of
his Masters favors, sending information thereof to the Port, who willingly
embraced these new-come Guests, and entered into consultation what Country and
limits should be assigned them. In the mean time the Krim Tartar jealous of
this people, and not knowing what inconvenience such Neighborhood might
produce, fell upon them, and cut off a great number of them, forcing the rest
to reurn into their own Country, which though ill taken at first by the Turks,
was yet afterward excused by the Tartar, and dissembled by the Port.

Though all things appeared quiet at Constantinople after the Peace concluded
with the Emperor, and that the German Ambassador was returned back to his
Master; yet the Turks prosecuted their designs against Venice, aad made great
preparations in the Provinces of Albania, Bossena, and Licca, which confine on
the Venetian Territories; and though in reality those Forces were not intended
against those parts, but in order to a more warm prosecution of the War in
Candia, whether the Vizier intended to transport himself in Person; yet the
Venetian State not fully penetrating the Design, took the Alarm chiefly in
Dalmatia, and reinforced their Garrisons of Cataro and other Fortresses. And
that matters there might be well provided, and all things acted with due
circumspection; Marquess Villa was ordered to visit those Garrisons in his
Voyage to Candia; Marquess Villa surveys the Forts in Dalmatia.
so that departing from Venice attended with two Galleys, he arrived in a few
days at Zara, and thence proceeding to Spalato, where the Proveditor General,
Catarin Cornaro, made at that time his residence; they both joined together to
survey the most important places of that Province. They began with the City of
Spalato, Spalato.
which rather seems a place intended by Nature for a Palace of delights, than a
Garrison of Arms; being the Seat which Dioclesian (who was born at Salona, six
miles distance from thence) chose for his Garden of retirement, after he had
renounced the Empire, and is now turned into a ruder shape of War, since the
invasion of the Turk made it necessary to be fortified for security of it self,
and the parts circumjacent. Spalato is now very strong, being secured by diverse
Redoubts; the chief of which is situated on a little rising, called Grippe,
distant about a Musket Shot from the Town, is strengthened with four Royal
Bastions, and with good Artillery, there is also a new Line of Fortification
drawn round the Town, which renders it the strongest, and most considerable of
all Dalmatia: But to make this place the more impregnable, these Generals laid
the foundation for another Bulwark; and as an evidence of their Union, they
cast a Medal with a stamp on one side of Cornaro, and on the other of Marquis
Villa, and so rendering thanks to God, the Service ended with firing all the
Guns of the Town.

Afterward both the Generals Embarking, passed that Night to Curzola, Curzola.
anciently called Corsina Negra, which is one of the greatest and best of the
Isles of this Gulf; Thence passing by Ragusi, where the Deputies of that
Government, in recognition of that Sovereignty which the Venetians have over
the Adriatic Seas, presented the usual refreshments to the General of the
Province; and in a particular manner treated Marquis Villa with a Present in
name of their Republic. That Night they arrived at the Entrance of the Channel
of Cataro, Cataro and Perasto.
and taking Perasto in their way (which is a strong Fortification about six
miles distant from Cataro) they were received there with firing all the Guns of
the Town, which were doubly multiplied by an Echo returned from the sound of
the neighboring Mountains. Thence they proceeded to visit Budua, a place well
fortified, as also Fort St. George in the Island Liesina, which is the usual
Rendezvous of Brigantines, and armed Barques; at length they went to Almissa,
where they made a general Muster of all the Forces of the Province; in all
which places having viewed and amended the defects in Fortification, and given
order for supplying them with Ammunition and Provisions necessary; they
returned back to see the famous Fortress of Clissa, Clissa.
the Situation of which seems to have been planted when Nature desired to
sport, and be wanton; for it issues, as it were, out of the Bosom of two
Mountains, which are at an equal distance from the Town, and then drawing
themselves at each end into the fashion of a Bow, seem to form a Triumphal
Arch. The passage through these Mountains is so narrow and crooked, that it
appears like a Labyrinth; and being supplied with plenty of Fountains and
Cisterns both within and without the Fortress, the Suburbs demol shed, and no
encumbrances to cloy and weaken its strength, is certainly more obliged to
Nature for its defense than to Art. From hence they proceeded to view Sebenico,
Sebenico.
which is another strong Fortress, situated on a rising Hill, and overviews a
spacious Port, the entrance to which is secured by the Fort St. Nicholas; and
the City it self, besides its own Walls, is guarded by a Citadel, and by the
new works of St. John, situated on two Hills: From hence the Generals returning
to Zara, the Capital City of the Province which being encompassed by the Sea,
annexed to the Land only by a Bridge, which is also defended by a Fort, is
rendered the strongest and most impregnable of all the Fortresses. And here
having made a general Muster of all the Forces, and visited the Country of
Novigrade, and Possidaria, the habitations of the Morlach Militia, the Marquis
returned again to Venice, being called thither by the Senate; for the Year
being now well spent, and the Winter approaching too near to admit of any
considerable action; the time grew seasonable for Counsels, in which manner the
Affairs of Wars might best and most advantageously be directed for the
succeeding year. Yet in regard Advices were come from Candia, That the Turks
were much afflicted with the Pestilence, and scarcity of all Provisions; it was
judged requisite to prosecute the War the more eagerly against them, before the
Great Vizier arrived there with such an Army as commonly attends his Person; it
being advised from Count Leslie, the Emperors Ambassador at Constantinople,
that the whole force of the Ottoman Arms was to refund it self speedily on
that Island. This Intelligence hastened the departure of Marquis Villa from
Venice, with such Force as was then in a readiness, being directed with
necessary Instructions of what he ought to act in Candia. In his Voyage thither
he touched at Corfu, Cefalonia, and Zant, and afterward happily arrived on the
sixth of December at the Isle of Paros or Paresi in the Archipelago, where he
met with the Captain General, and other Chief Commanders of the Fleet, together
with Vuertmiller the Lieutenant General of the Ordnance; and here the Marquis
reforming several Companies, which were much diminished in their numbers, a
general Muster was made of all the Forces, which being ranged in form of
Battle, they were accounted to amount unto eighteen hundred Horse, and eight
thousand two hundred ninety five Foot. This Army had some want of Firearms,
and other Necessaries, of which the Senate being advised, they promised to
supply all by a Convoy, then preparing; and congratulating in their Letters to
Marquis Villa the good News of his happy Arrival at Paros, raised and prompted
him to Achievements worthy his Courage and Grandeur; for being a Person now
elevated on the Bulwarks of Candia, he seemed to stand on that Theater, where
he had all Europe for his Spectators.

The Troubles which the English Trade found this Year in Turkey.
THE Current of our Negotiations ran smoothly this year without any
considerable interruption in all parts of Turkey, unless at Aleppo, where the
Emim, or Customer, according to his usual practice, began a new pretense, not
only against former Presidents, but also against the very Letter of
Capitulations, demanding 2 per Cent. Custom at Scanderoon, and 3 at Aleppo; a
matter against which our Articles of Peace and Commerce have made many and
sundry Provisions: Notwithstanding the Customer (like others of his
Predecessors, who have ever at Aleppo made Disputes about their Customs,
without being restrained by the most strict Imperial Commands, and plainest
Decisions of the Law) resolved to make good his pretense by a sequestration on
the whole Cargo of two general Ships then under his Custody in the
Custom-house. The Consul hereupon had recourse to the Justice of the Kadi, and
there produced the Capitulations, the Hattesheriff, or Royal Signature, under
the hand of Sultan Ibrahim, wherein the particulars of Custom were regulated, a
Command from the present Vizier, and his Father, and other Commands from
Adrianople and Constantinople, all of the same tenor. The Emim on the other
side, had no other Argument than his Baratz or Patent from the Tefterdar or
Lord Treasurer, which was so prevalent, and of that force with the Kadi, joined
with the fear and favor he bore toward the Emim; that it was judged by him to
stand in balance with all the other Imperial Signatures; and therefore left
the business (which was as much as the Customer desired) undecided, making a
Declaration, that the reasons on both sides were so forcible, and the arguments
so equal, that he concluded it more proper, that a matter of so great
importance should be reserved for the determination of more powerful and
eminent Officers. The matter standing thus doubtfully, the Emim conceiving it
too great a pawn to detain so great a quantity of Cloth for a difference only
in the Custom, delivered to every man his consignation, reserving only fifty
Bales to make himself good on the judgment and commands he expected shortly in
his favor. The difference being now referred up to the Court, the Lord
Ambassador received the just complaints of the Consul and Merchants; for
redress of which abuses, his Excellency dispatched my self, then his Secretary
and Druggerman, to the Vizier at Belgrade, attending the advice of the German
Ambassadors entrance into the Frontiers. The Vizier having heard the
difference, was ready to have passed sentence in our favor, had not the
Tefterdar, the only Advocate for the Customer, from whom the Original of our
Evils was derived, put an unhappy obstacle in the course of our Negotiations,
pretending that there were ancient Tefters or accounts amongst his Books, which
mentioned two and a half per Cent. at Scanderoon, and three at Aleppo; and
though it was urged to the contrary, that we never had to do with the Registers
of the Treasurers, nor had managed any Apalto, or Farm of the Grand Signior;
but our Capitulations are our Law and Rule, and our Commands Registered in the
Reis Efendi's, or Secretaries Office, than which we never had, nor could ever
acknowledge any other Canon: yet the Vizier overruled our reasons, and we were
forced to submit, until the Tefterdar took his leisure to examine and consult
his Books.

The Vizier and his Army being then upon their return, we found no opportunity
to renew our solicitations, until we came to Nissa, where the Army had two
days of repose, and there again as in other places before, we urged the
Tefterdar so importunately, that at length we compelled him to acknowledge to
the Vizier, that our affairs were not Registered in his Office. So that now we
took liberty to declare our Reasons to the Vizier; which we drew from our
Capitulations, the ancient Hattesheriff of Aleppo, the Vizier and his Father's
own Commands, and Copies of others of the like tenor, not omitting other
Arguments and Evidences, which rendered the business not a little clear and
apparent to the capacity of the Vizier: who thereupon reprehended the
Tefterdar, for seeking by his Command to introduce an innovation contrary to
our Capitulations, and promised us Commands in our favor; but we replied, that
we had already Commands, and the Grand Signiors own Royal Signature on our
side, and that our Ambassador had not sent us so many days Journey to seek
another, which perhaps would as ill be observed as the former; But it was the
punishment of the Customer which the Ambassador expected, who against so many
clear Evidences, durst proceed to the violation of them all Many other words
were added pertinent and forcible to the present purpose. To which the Vizier
answered, that he was now upon his Journey, where business of this nature was
ill dispatched. And therefore ordered us to proceed to Adrianople, where he
should have more leisure to consider what was fit to be done in order to
justice and satisfaction of the Ambassador. Hereupon I left the Army, wherein I
was much incommoded, and proceeded with all haste to Adrianople, where the
Great Vizier in some days after me arrived, and there we renewed our wonted
endeavors, and solicitations, that we might come to an end of this business,
and that justice might be done us: But the Vizier willing to gratify the
Tefterdar, was not forward to pass his Sentence, but put us again off to
Constantinople, where the Books should be perused, that were laid up amongst
the Registers of the Divan: For that this matter was a concernment of the Grand
Signiors, in determination of which, he ought to be tender and considerate.
That for sending for Ibrahim Aga, the Customer (which was one of the principal
of our demands) to answer for the injuries he had done our Nation, he was
already ordered to appear at Court, where he should be ready to stand to
judgment for what the Ambassador should object against him: and this had been
the answer which was contrived to be given to the Ambassador himself, in case
he had (as once he designed) appeared at Adrianople in person on this occasion.

The Vizier arriving at Constantinople some few Months after; the Lord
Ambassador obtained Audience of him on the 15th. of October, pressing still for
justice against the Customer of Aleppo: but nothing thereof could be procured,
besides a Command for restitution of the fifty Bales of Cloth, detained in the
hands of the Emim, upon the pretense before related, and that the payment of
Customs should be regulated after the rate of three per Cent. according to the
ancient usance. For putting this Command in execution, an Aga was ordered to be
dispatched, for whose service herein the Vizier allotted a thousand Dollars
should be paid him, which though an extravagant reward, yet to put an honor
and authority on the business, and not to displease the Vizier, it was granted
to him, and so he was dispatched the 25th. for Aleppo. But the troubles of our
Merchants at Aleppo ended not here: For the Tefterdar greatly enraged to see
his designs against us to have no better issue, thought to trouble us by a new
invention of prohibiting the Scale of Scanderoon to all English, and other
Christian Vessels, and that the Factories should be transferred again over to
Tripoli in Soria; a place formerly frequented by our Merchants, but by reason
of the danger and inconvenience of that Port, the Trade was transported to the
Scale of Scanderoon. This alteration the Tefterdar pretended to have been
granted to the Merchants at their earnest Petition, and promise to the Grand
Signior, of payment of 13000 Dollars Yearly, for discharge and maintenance of
those Guards which were requisite in that place for safety of the Coast, and
defense of the Caravans which pass with Merchants goods to Aleppo; but time and
corruption of the Ministers had deprived the Grand Signior of the benefit of
that duty. And this he urged with the greater instance and eagerness, knowing
that the Scale of Scanderoon being prohibited, the Hattesheriff whereon
consisted the privilege of the Merchants, and their sole security must
consequently fall, and they forced to a new agreement. On this occasion our
Lord Ambassador had Audience with the Vizier, and insisted on that point of our
Capitulations, which gives us liberty to Trade in any part of the Grand
Signiors Dominions; and therefore to consent to be restrained, or confined to
any particular place, was to assent to a breach of the Capitulations, which was
out of his power, and only to be dispensed with by his Master the King of
England, and the Grand Signior, by whom they were established; and to connive
or assent to the breach of one particular clause, was to hazard the loss and
breach of the whole: for that our Capitulations (to use the Turks saying) are
like a string of Berds, of which, when one link is broken, the others drop off.
To which the Vizier replied, that the Scale of Scandroon was open, and clear as
before for the English Trade; but because the Testerdar, and Customer,
pretended that the Grand Signior was put to great expenses for maintenance of a
Watch and Guard at that Port, which was only in respect to the security of the
Merchants Goods; Orders should be given for taking away those Officers, as
unnecessary and insignificant to the public Service; no Guards having ever
been in that place, the Ambassador judged his business to be granted, and so
thanked the Vizier and departed. But not many days after the Testerdar procured
a Command for shutting the Scale of Scanderoon, and transporting the Factory to
Trip^li: which Command was rather intended to affright our Nation into some
composition, than really to be put in execution, as appeared by the sequel; for
the Testerdar better considered than to bring so great an Odium upon himself
from the whole Country and City of Aleppo, and to enforce the Ambassador to
have recourse to the Grand Signiors own person, for redress of an abuse of so
high a nature, in derogation of his Imperial Capitulations. Howsoever it is
observable in the transaction of all this business, that it is diccicult to
bring a corrupt Turkish Minister to Justice or punishment, merely for breach of
our Capitulations, or in respect to any difference or abuse offered to
Christians, unless the complaint be accompanied with Presents or Money, which
are most prevalent Arguments in the Turkish Court; and in this case I really
believe, that had three or four thousand Dollars been offered as a reward for
bringing the Customer to capital punishment, the complaint had found
acceptance, and honorable success: for default of which, the Cause was
starved, and naked, and carried no fire or heat in those aggravations with
which it was represented. It is likewise observable, that business in the
Turkish Court does not always find that dispatch, or expedition, as is
generally believed in Christendom, unless it come accompanied with the interest
of the Ministers themselves, and then it is transacted in a moment, which
otherwise languished with delays, and will never want excuses to deser it.

Anno 1666. Hegeira 1077.
WE shall begin this Year with the strange rumor and disturbance of the Jews,
concerning Sabatai Sevi, their pretended Messiah, which for being most
principally acted in Turkey, may properly belong to the History of this time
and place; which therefore for delight of the Readers, I shall here insert: for
though it may have been elsewhere published, yet being an issue of my Pen, I
may lawfully now own it, and annex it to this History, in respect of that near
coherence it may have therewith; and that many other particulars have been
added thereunto, which succeeded until the Death of this Sabatai.

According to the Predictions of several Christian Writers, especially of such
who comment upon the Apocalypie or Revelations, this year of 1666. was to prove
a year of Wonders, of strange Revolutions in the World, and particularly, of
blessing to the Jews, either in respect of their Conversion to the Christian
Faith. or of their Restoration to their Temporal Kingdom. This opinion was so
dilated and fixed in the Countries of the Reformed Religion, and in the heads of
Fanatical Enthusiasts, who dreamed of Fifth Monarchies, the down fall of the
hope and Antichrist, and the greatness of the Jews, insomuch, that this subtle
people judged this Year the time to stir, and to fit their Motion according to
the season of the Modern Prophecies. Whereupon strange reports flew from place
to place, of the March of multitudes of People from unknown parts into the
remote deserts of Arabia, supposed to be the Ten Tribes and a half, lost for so
many Ages. That a Ship was arrived in the Northern parts of Scotland, with her
Sails and Cordage of Silk, navigated by Mariners who spoke nothing but Hebrew,
and with this Motto on their Sails, The Twelve Tribes of Israel. These reports
agreeing thus near to former Predictions, put the wild sort of the World into
an expectation of strange accidents this Year should produce in reference to
the Jewish Monarchy.

In this manner Millions of people were possessed when Sabatai Sevi first
appeared at Smyrna, and published himself to the Jews for their Messiah,
relating the greatness of their approaching Kingdom, the strong hand whereby
God was about to deliver them from Bondage, and gather them from all the parts
of the World. It was strange to see how this fancy took, and how fast the
report of Sabatai, and his Doctrine flew through all parts where Jews
inhabited, and so deeply possessed them with a belief of their new Kingdom and
Riches; and many of them with promotion to Offices of Government, renown and
greatness; that in all places from Constantinople to Buda (which it was my
fortune that Year to travel) I perceived a strange transport in the Jews, none
of them attending to any business, unless to wind up former Negotiations, and
to prepare themselves and Families for a Journey to Jerusalem; all their
Discourses, their Dreams, and disposal of their affairs, tended to no other
design but a re-establishment in the Land of Promise, to Greatness and Glory,
Wisdom and Doctrine of the Messiah, whose Original, Birth and Education is
first to be recounted.

Sabatai Sevi was Son of Mordecai Sevi, an Inhabitant and Natural of Smyrna,
who gained his Livelihood by being Broker to an English Merchant in that place;
a person who before his Death was very decrepit in his Body, and full of the
Gout and other infirmities: But his Son Sabatai Sevi addicting himself to study
and learning, became a notable Proficient in the Hebrew and Arabic Languages;
and especially in Divinity and Metaphysics, he was so cunning a Sophister,
that he vented a new Doctrine in their Law, and drew to the profession of it so
many Disciples, as raised one day a tumult in the Synagogue; for which
afterward he was by censure of the Kockhams (who are the Expounders of the
Law) banished out of the City.

During the time of his Exile he traveled to Thessalonica, now called
Salonica, where he married a very handsome Woman; but either not having that
part of Economy as to govern a Wife, or being impotent as to Women, as was
pretended, or that she sound not favor in his eyes, she was divorced from him.
Again, he took a second Wife more beautiful than the former; but the same
causes of discontent raising a difference between them, he obtained another
Divorce from this Wife also. And being now free from the encumbrances of a
Family, his wandering head moved him to travel through the Morea, thence to
Tripoli in Syria, Gaza and Jerusalem, and by the way picked up a Ligornese
Lady, whom he made his third Wife, the Daughter of some Polonian or German, her
Original and Country not being very well known. And being now at Jerusalem, he
began to reform their Law, and to abolish the Fast of Tamuz, (which they keep
in the month of June) and meeting there with a certain Jew called Nathan, a
proper Instrument to promote his design, he communicated to him his condition,
his course of life, and intentions to declare himself the Messiah of the World,
so long expected and desired by the Jews. This design took wonderfully with
Nathan; and because it was thought necessary, according to Scripture and
ancient Prophecies, that Elias was to precede the Messiah, as St. John Baptist
was the Forerunner of Christ, Nathan thought no man so proper to act the part
of the Prophet as himself; and so no sooner had Sabatai declared himself the
Messiah, but Nathan discovers himself to be his Prophet, forbidding all the
Fasts of the Jews in Jerusalem, and declaring that the Bridegroom being come,
nothing but joy and triumph ought to dwell in their habitations; writing to all
the Assemblies of the Jews to persuade them to the same belief. And now the
Schism being begun, and many Jews really believing what they so much desired,
Nathan took the courage and boldness to prophecy, That one year from the 27th
of June.
Kislau, which is the Month of July, the Messiah was to appear before the Grand
Signior, and to take from (...) his Crown, and lead him in chains like a
Captive: Sabatai also at Gaza preached Repentance to the Jews, and Obedience to
himself and Doctrine, for that the Coming of the Messiah was at hand. Which
novelties so affected the Jews, Inhabitants of those parts, that they gave up
themselves wholly to their Prayers, Alms, and Devotions; and to confirm this
belief the more, it happened that at the same time that news hereof with all
particulars were dispatched from Gaza, to acquaint the Brethren in foreign
parts; the rumor of the Messiah had flown so swift, and gained such reception,
that Intelligence came from all Countries, where the Jews sojourn, by Letters
to Gaza and Jerusalem, congratulating the happiness of their deliverance, and
expiration of their time of servitude by the appearance of the Messiah. To
which they adjoined other Prophecies relating to that Dominion the Messiah was
to have over all the World, that for nine Months after he was to disappear;
during which time the Jews were to suffer, and several of them to undergo
Martyrdom; but then returning again mounted on a Celestial Lion, with his
Bridle made of Serpents with seven heads, accompanied with his Brethren the
Jews, who inhabited on the other side of the River Sabation, he should be
acknowledged for the sole Monarch of the Universe, and then the Holy Temple
should descend from Heaven already built, framed, and beautified, wherein they
should offer Sacrifices for ever. And here I leave the Reader to consider, how
strangely this deceived People was amused, when these confident and vain
reports and dreams of Power and Kingdoms had wholly transported them from the
ordinary course of their trade and interest.

This noise and rumor of the Messiah having begun to fill all places, Sabatai
Sevi resolved to travel toward Smyrna, the Country of his Nativity, and thence
to Constantinople, the capital City, where the principal work of preaching was
to be performed: Nathan thought it not fit to be long after him, and therefore
travels by way of Damascus, where resolving to continue some time for better
propagation of this new Doctrine, in the mean while writes this Letter to
Sabatai Sevi, as follows.

22. Kesvan of this Year.
TO the King our King, Lord of our Lords, who gathers the dispersed of Israel,
who redeems our Captivity, the Man elevated to the height of all sublimity, the
Messiah of the God of Jacob, the true Messiah, the Celestial Lion, Sabatai
Sevi, whose Honor be exalted, and his Dominion raised in a short time, and for
ever, Amen. After having kissed your hands, and swept the dust from your feet,
as my duty is to the King of Kings, whose Majesty be exalted, and his Empire
enlarged; These are to make known to the Supreme Excellency of that place,
which is adorned with the beauty of your anctity, that the Word of the King and
of his Law has enlightened our faces, that day has been a solemn day unto
Israel, and a day of light unto our Rulers, for immediately we applied our
selves to perform your Command, as our duty is. And though we have heard of
many strange things, yet we are courageous, and our heart is as the heart of a
Lion, nor ought we to inquire a reason of your doings, for your works are
mavelous and past finding out, and we are confirmed in our fidelity without
all exception, resigning up our very Souls for the Holiness of your Name. And
now we are come as far as Damascus, intending shortly to proceed in our Journey
to Scanderoon, according as you have commanded us, that so we may ascend and
see the face of God in light, as the light of the face of the King of life: and
we servants of your servants shall cleanse the dust from your feet, beseeching
the Majesty of your Excellency and Glory, to vouchsafe from your habitation to
have a care of us, and help us with the force of your right hand of strength,
and shorten our way which is before us. And we have our eyes toward Jah, Jah,
who will make haste to help us and save us, that the children of iniquity shall
not hurt us, and toward whom our hearts pant, and are consumed within us, who
shall give us talons of Iron to be worthy to stand under the shadow of your
Ass. These are the words of the servant of your servants, who prostrates
himself to be trod on by the soals of your feet.

Nathan Benjamin.


And that he might publish this Doctrine of the Messiah and himself more
plainly, he wrote from Damascus this following Letter to the Jews at Aleppo,
and parts thereabouts.

TO the Residue or remnant of the Israelites, Peace without end. These my words
are to give you notice, how that I am arrived in peace at Damascus, and behold
I go to meet the face of our Lord, whose Majesty be exalted; for he is the
Sovereign of the King of Kings, whose Empire be enlarged. Sabatai wrote a
Letter to elect one man out of every Tribe.
According as he has commanded us and the Twelve Tribes to elect unto him
twelve men, so have we done: and we now go to Scanderone by his Command to show
our faces together with part of the principal of those particular friends to
whom he has given license to assemble in that said place.

And now I come to make known unto you, That tho you have heard strange things
of our Lord, yet let not your hearts faint or fear, but rather fortify your
selves in your faith, because all his actions are miraculous and secret, which
humane understanding cannot comprehend; and who can penetrate into the depth of
them? In a short time all things shall be manifested clearly unto you in their
purity, and you shall know and consider, and be instructed by the Inventor
himself, and blessed is he who can expect and arrive to the Salvation of the
true Messiah; who will speedily publish his Authority and Empire over us now
and for ever.

Nathan.


And now all the Cities of Turkey, where the Jews inhabited, were full of the
expectation of the Messiah, no Trade or course of gain was followed; every one
imagined, that daily Provisions, Riches, Honors, and Government were to
descend upon him by some unknown and miraculous manner. An Example of which is
most observable in the Jews at Thessalonica, who now full of assurance, that
the restoration of their Kingdom, and the accomplishment of the times for the
Coming of the Messiah was at hand, judged themselves obliged to double their
Devotions, and purify their Consciences from all sins and enormities; which
might be observed by the scrutiny of him who was now come to penetrate into the
very thoughts and imaginations of Mankind. For which work, certain Kochams were
appointed to direct the people in the regulation of their Prayers, Devotions,
and Fastings: but so forward was every one now in his acts of Penance, that
they stayed not for the sentence of the Kocham, or Prescriptions or Rules, but
applied themselves immediately to Fastings, and some in that manner beyond the
abilities of Nature, that having for the space of seven days taken no
sustenance, were famished: others buried themselves in their Gardens, covering
their naked bodies with earth, their heads only excepted, remained in those
beds of dirt, until their bodies were stiffned with the cold and moisture:
others would endure to have melted wax dropped upon their shoulders: others to
roll themselves in snow, and throw their bodies in the coldest season of the
winter into the Sea, or frozen waters. But the most common manner of
Mortification was first to prick their backs and sides with thorns, and then to
give themselves thirty nine lashes. All business was laid aside, none worked or
opened shop, unless to clear his Ware-hose of Merchandise at any price: who had
superfluity in Household Stuff sold it for what he could, but yet not to Jews,
who were interdicted from all bargains or sales under pain of Excommunication,
pecuniary mulcts, or corporal punishment; for their comportment as to business
and employment was esteemed the test or touch-store of their says. It being
the general Tenent, That in the days that the Messiah appeared, the Jews should
become Masters of the Estates and Inheritance of Infidels; until when, they
ought to content themselves with matters only necessary to maintain and support
life. But because that every one was not Master of that Provision and Fortune
as to live without daily labor; therefore to quiet the clamours of the poor,
and prevent the enormous lives of some, who upon these occasions would become
vagabonds, and desert their Cities, due order was taken to make collections,
which were so liberally bestowed, that in Thessalonica only four hundred poor
were supported by the mere charity of the richer. And as they endeavored to
purge their consciences of sin, and to apply themselves to good works, that the
Messiah might find the City prepared for his reception; so lest he should
accuse them of any omssion in their Law, and particularly in their neglect of
that ancient Prcept of Increase and multiply, they married children together of
ten years of age, and some under, without respect to richess or poverty,
condition or quality; but being promiscuously joined to the number of six or
seven hundred couple, upon better and cooler thoughts, after the deceit of the
false Messiah was discovered, or the expectation of his Coming grew cold, were
divorced, or by consent separated from each other.

In the heat of all this talk and rumor came Sabatai Sevi to Smyrna, the City
of his Nativiry, infinitely desired there by the common Jews, but by the
Kochams or Doctors of their Law, who gave little or no credence to what he
pretended, was ill received, not knowing what mischief or ruin this Doctrine
and Prophecy of a new Kingdom might produce. Yet Sabatai bringing with him
Testimonials of his Sanctity, holy Life, Wisdom, and gift of Prophecy so deeply
fixed himself in the heart of the generality, both as being holy and wise, that
thereupon he took courage and boldness to enter into dispute with the Grand
Kocham (who is the head or chief Expositor of their Law, and Superintendent of
their civil Government) between whom the arguments grew so high, and language
so hot, that the Jews who favored the Doctrine of Sabatai, and feared the
Authority of the Kocham, doubtful what might be the issue of the contest,
appeared in great numbers before the Kaddee of Smyrna, in justification of
their new Prophet, before so much as any accusation came against him; the
Kaddee according to the custom of the Turks swallowed money on both sides, and
afterward remitted them to the determination of their own Justice: In this
manner Sabatai gained ground daily; and the Grand Kocham with his Party, losing
both the affection and obedience of his People, was displaced from his Office,
and another constituted more affectionate and agreeable to the new Prophet,
whose Power daily increased by those confident reports of his Enemies being
struck with frenzy and madness, until being restored to their former temper
and wits by him, became his Friends, Admirers, and Disciples. No invitation was
now made in Smyrna by the Jews, nor Marriage, or Circumcision held, where
Sabatai was not present, accompanied to the solemnities with multitudes of his
Followers, and the streets covered with Carpets or fine Cloth for him to tread
on; but the humility of this Pharisee appeared such, that he would stoop and
turn them aside, and so pass. And having thus fixed himself in the opinion and
admiration of the people, he began to take on himself the Title of Messiah, and
the Son of God, and to make this following Declaration to all the Nations of
the Jews, which being wrote Originally in Hebrew, was translated for me
faithfully into Italian in this manner.

L'Vnico Figliolo e Primogenito di Dio Sabatai Sevi, il Messiah e Salvatore
d'Israel,
a tutti li Figlioli d'Israel eletti di Dio, Pace.
Essendo cho set fatti degni di veder quel gran giorno della deliberatione e
salvatione di Israel, e consummatione delle Parole di Dio promise per li suoi
Profeti, e Padri nostri, per il suo diletto Figlio di Israel. Ogni vostra
amaritudine si converta in allegrezza, e li vostri digiugni si faccino feste,
per che non piangerete, O miei Figlioli di Israel, havendosi dato iddio la
consolatione innarabile festegiateri con Timpani, Organi, e Musiche,
ringratiando quello chi ha adempito il promessa dalli secoli, facendo ogni
giorno quelle cose che solete sare nelle Calende, e quel giorn^ dedicato all
afflittione e mestitia, convertite lo in giorno giocondo pro la mia comparsa. E
non spaventateri niente, per che haverete Dominio sopra le Genti, non solamente
di quelle, che si vedono in Terra ma quella che sono in fondi del Mare. Il
tutto pro vostra consolatione e allegrezza.

Which translated into English runs thus.

THE only and firstborn Son of God Sabatai Sevi, the Messiah and Savior of
Israel,
to all the Sons of Israel, Peace.
Since that you are made worthy to see that great day of Deliverance and
Salvation unto Israel, and accomplishment of the Word of God promised by his
Prophets and our Forefathers, and by his beloved Son of Israel, let your bitter
sorrows be turned into Joy, and your fast into Festivals, for you shall weep no
more, O my Sons of Israel; for God having given you this unspeakable comfort,
rejoice with Drums, Organs, and Music, giving thanks to him for performing his
promises from all Ages doing that every day which is usual for you to do upon
the Calends, and that day dedicated to affliction and sorrow, convert you unto
a day of mirth for my appearance. And fear you nothing, for you shall have
Dominion over the nations, and not only over those who are on Earth, but over
those creatures also which are in the depth of the Sea. All which is for your
consolation and rejoicing.

Sabatai Sevi.

Notwithstanding the Disciples of Sabatai Sevi, were not so numerous, but many
opposed his Doctrine, publicly avouching, that he was an Impostor, and
deceiver of the People, amongst which was one Samuel Pennia, a man of good
Estate and reputation in Smyrna; who arguing in the Synagogue, that the present
signs of the Coming of the Messiah were not apparent, either according to
Scripture, or the Doctrine of Rabbis, raised such a Sedition and Tamult
amongst the Jews, as not only prevailed against his arguments, but had also
against his life, had he not timely conveyed himself out of the Synagogue, and
so escaped the hands of the Multitude, who now could more easily endure
Blasphemy against the Law of Moses, and Profanation of the Sanctuary, than
contradiction or misbelief of the Doctrine of Sabatai. But howsoever it fell
out, Pennia in a short time became a Convert, and Preacher up of Sabatai for
the Son of God, and Deliverer of the Jews; and not only he, but his whole
Family, his Daughters Prophecy, and fall into strange ecstasies: and not only
this house, but above four hundred men and women Prophecy of the growing
Kingdom of Sabatai, and young Infants who could scarce yet stammer out a
syllable to their Mothers, repeat and pronounce clearly the Name of Sabatai the
Messiah and Son of God. For thus far had God permitted the ^evil to delud^ this
people, that their very children were for a time posessed, and voices heard to
found from their stomachs and entrails: those of riper years fell first into a
Trance, foamed at the mouth, and recounted the future prosperity and
deliverance of the Israelites, their Visions of the Lion of Judah, and the
Triumphs of Sabatai All which were certainly true, being effects of Drabolical
delusions, as the Jews themselves since have confessed to me.

With these concomitant accidents and successes Sabatai Sevi growing more
presumptuous, that he might correspond with the Prophecies of Greatness and
Dominion of the Messiah, proceeded to Election of those Princes which were to
govern the Israelites in their March toward the Holy Land, and to dispense
Judgment and Justice after their Restoration.

In this manner things ran to a strange height of madness amongst the Jews at
Smyrna, when appeared such Pageantry of Greatness, that no Comedy could equal
the mock-shows they represented. And though none durst openly confess any
scruple or doubt of this common received Belief, yet for confirmation of the
Jews in their Faith, and astonishment of the Gentiles, (...) was judged no less
than necessary, that Sabatai should show some Miracles, whereby to evince all
the World that he was the Messiah. And as the present occasion seemed to
require an evidence and conviction infallible of this truth, so it was daily
exe^ected by the Vulgar with an impatience ^^table to humors disposed to
Novelty, who out of every action and motion of their Prophet, began to fancy
something extraordinary and supernatural. Sabatai was now horribly puzzled for
a Miracle, though the imagination of the people was so vitiated, that any
legerdemain or flight of hand would have passed more easily with them for a
Wonder, than Moses striking the Rock for water, or dividing the Red Sea. And an
occasion happening, that Sabatai was in behalf of his Subjects to appear before
the Kaddee or Judge of the City, to demand ease and relief of some oppressions
which aggrieved them; it was thought necessary a Miracle should be worked now
or never, when Sabatai appearing with a formal and Pharisaical gravity which he
had starched on, some on a sudden avouched to see a Pillar of Fire between him
and the Kaddee, which report presently was heard through the whole room, filled
with Jews that accompanied Sabatai. Some of w^om, who strongly fancied it,
vowed and swore they saw it; others in the outwrad Yard, or that could not come
near to hear or see for the crowd, as speedily took the Alarm, and the rumor
ran, and belief received by the Women and Children at home in a moment. So that
Sabatai Sevi returned to his house triumphant, fixed in the hearts of his
People, who now needed no farther Miracles to confirm them in their Faith. And
thus was Sabatai exalted, when no man was thought worthy of communication, who
did not believe him for the Messiah: others were called Kophrim, Infidels, or
Heretics, subjected to the Censure of Excommunication, with whom it was not
lawful so much as to eat. Every man produced his Treasure, his Gold, and
Jewels, offering them at the feet of Sabatai; so that he could have commanded
all the Wealth of Smyrna; but he was too subtle to accept their money, lest he
should render his design suspected by any acts of covetousness.

Sabatai Sevi having thus fully fixed himself in Smyrna, and filled other
places with the rumors of him, declared that he was called by God to visit
Canstantinople, where the greatest part of his work was to be accomplished; in
order whereunto he privately shipped himself with some few Attendants on a
Turkish Saike in the month of January 1665, lest the crowd of his Disciples,
and such who would press to follow him, should endanger him in the eyes of the
Turks, who already began to be scardalized at the Reports and Prophecies
concerning his Person But though Sabatai took few into the Vessel with him, yet
multitudes of Jews traveled over land to meet him again at Constantinople, on
whom all their Eyes and expectations were intent. The Wind proving Northerly,
as commonly it is in the Hellespont and Propontis, Sabatai was thirty nine days
in his Voyage, and yet the Vessel not arrived: So little power had this Messiah
over the Sea and Winds. In which time the News fore-running to Constantinople
that the Jews Messiah was near, all that people prepared to receive him with
the same joy and impatience as was expressed in other parts where he arrived.
The Great Vizier then also at Constantinople, (being not yet departed on his
expedition for Gandia) having heard some rumors of this Man, and the disorder
and madness he had raised amongst the Jews, sent two Boats, whilst the Saik was
detained by contrary Winds, with Commands to bring him up Prisoner to the Port,
where accordingly Sabatai being come, was committed to the most loathsome and
darkest Dungeon in the Town, there to remain in farther expectation of the
Viziers Sentence. The Jews were not at all discouraged at this ill Treatment of
their Prophet, but rather confirmed in their belief of him, as being an
accomplishment of the Prophecy of those things which ought to precede his Glory
and Dominion; which Consideration induced the Chiefest Persons amongst the Jews
to make their Visits and Addresses to him with the same Ceremony and Respect in
the Dungeon, as they would have done, had he then sat exalted on the sublime
Throne of Judah. Several of them, with one Anacago by name, a Man of great
esteem amongst the Jews, attended a whole day before him, with their Eyes cast
down, their Bodies bending forward, and hands crossed before them; (which are
postures of humllity and service in the Eastern Parts) the undecency of the
place, and present subjection, not having in the least abated their high
thoughts and reverence toward his person.

For the Jews in Constantinople were become as mad and distracted, as they were
in other places, all Trade and Traffic forbidden, and those who owed Money, in
no manner careful how to satisfy it; amongst which wild Crew, some were
indebted to our Merchants at Galata, who not knowing the way to receive their
Money, partly for their interest, and partly for curiosity, thought fit to
visit this Sabatai, complaining, That such particular Jews, upon his Coming,
took upon them the boldness to defraud them of their right, and desired he
would be pleased to signify to those his Subjects, his pleasure to have
satisfaction given.

Whereupon Sabatai, with much affectation, took Pen and Paper, and wrote to
this effect.

To you of the Nation of the Jews, who expect the appearance of the Messiah,
and the Salvation of Israel, Peace without end. Whereas we are informed, That
you -- are indebted to several of the English Nation, It seems right to us to
enorder you to make satisfaction to these your just Debts: which if you refuse
to do, and not obey us herein; know you that then you are not to enter with us
into our Joys and Dominions.


In this manner Sabatai Sevi remained a Prisoner at Constantinople for the
space of two Months; at the end of which the Vizier having designed his
expedition for Candia, and considering the rumor and disturbance the Presence
of Sabatai had made already at Constantinople, thought it not secure to suffer
him to remain in the imperial City, whilst both the Grand Signior and himself
were absent; and therefore changed his Prison to the Dardanelli, otherwise
called the Castle of Abydos, being on the Europe side of the Hellespont,
opposite to Sestos, places famous in Greek Poetry. This removal of Sabatai from
a worse Prison, to one of a better Air, confirmed the Jews with greater
confidence of his being the Messiah, supposing that had it been in the power of
the Vizier, or other Officers of the Turks, to have destroyed his Person, they
would never have permitted him to live unto that time, in regard their Maxims
enforce them to quit all jealousies and suspicions of ruin to their State by
the death of the Party feared; which much rather they ought to execute on
Sabatai, who had not only declared himself the King of Israel, but also by
Prophecies published fatal things to the Grand Signior and his Kingdoms.

With this Consideration, and others preceding, the Jews flocked in great
numbers to the Castle, where he was imprisoned, not only from the Neighboring
parts, but also from Poland, Germany, Ligorn, Venice, Amsterdam, and other
places, where the Jews reside; on all whom, as a reward of the expense and
labors of their Pilgrimage, Sabatai bestowed plenty of his Benedictions,
promising increase of their Store, and enlargement of possessions in the Holy
Land. So great was the confluence of the Jews to this place, that the Turks
thought it requisite to make their advantage thereof, and so not only raised
the price of their Provisions, Lodgings, and other necessaries, but also denied
to admit any to the presence of Sabatai, unless for Money, setting the price
sometimes at Five, sometimes at ten Dollars, or more or less, according as they
guessed at the abilities and zeal of the Person; by which gain and advantage to
the Turks, no Complaints or Advices were carried to Adrianople, either of the
Concourse or Arguments amongst the Jews in that place, but rather all
Civilities and Liberties indulged unto them, which served as a farther Argument
to ensnare this poor People in the belief of their Messiah.

During this time of Confinement Sabatai had leisure to compose and institure a
New Method of Worship for the Jews, and principally the manner of the
Celebration of the Day of his Nativity, which he prescribed in this manner.

BRethren, and my People, Men of my Religion, inhabiting the City of Smyrna the
Renowned, where live Men, and Women, and Families; much Peace be unto You from
the Lord of Peace, and from Me his beloved Son King Solomon. I command you,
That the Ninth of the Month of Ab (which according to our account answered that
Year to the Month of June) next to come, you make a Day of Invitation, and of
great Joy, celebrating it with choice Meats, and pleasing Drinks, with many
Candles and Lamps, with Music and Songs; because it is the day of the Birth of
Sabatai Sevi the High King, above all the Kings of the Earth. And as to matters
of labor, and other things of like nature, do as becomes you upon a day of
Festival, adorned with your finest Garments. As to your Prayers, let the same
Order be used as upon Festivals. To converse with Christians on that day is
unlawful, though your Discourse be of matters indifferent; all labor is
forbidden, but to sound Instrument is lawful.

This shall be the method of your Prayers on this day of Festival. After you
have said, Blessed be thou, O Holy God; then proceed, and say: Thou have chosen
us before all People, and have loved us, and have been delighted with us, and
have humbled us more than all other Nations, and have sanctified us with thy
Precepts, and have brought us near to thy Service, and the Service of our King.
Thy Holy, Great, and Terrible Name thou have published amongst us; And have
given us, O Lord God, according to thy love, times of Joy, of Festivals, and
times of Mirth, and this Day of Consolation, for a solemn Convocation of
Holiness, for the Birth of our King the Messiah Sabatai Sevi, thy Servant, and
firstborn Son in love, through whom we commemorate our coming out of Egypt.
And then you shall read for your Lesson the first, second, and third Chapters
of Deuteronomy to the Seven-teenth Verse; appointing for the reading thereof
Five men, in a perfect and uncorrupted Bible; adding thereunto the Blessings of
the Morning, as are prescribed for Days of Festivals. And for the Lesson out of
the Prophets, usually read in the Synagogue every Sabbath you shall repeat the
Thirty first Chapter of Jeremiah to your Prayer called the Mussaf (used in the
Synagogue every Sabbath and sOlemn Festival.) Instead of the Sacrifice of
Addition at the returning of the Bible to its place, you shall read with an
audible Voice, and clear Sound, and with holy Harmony, the Ninty fifth Psalm.
And at the first Praises in the Morning, after you have sung Psalm Ninty one,
and just before you sing Psalm Ninety eight, you shall repeat Psalm One hundred
thirty two; but in the last Verse where it is said, As for his enemies I shall
clothe them with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish; in the place
of [upon himself] you shall read, Upon the Most High; after which shall follow
the One hundred twenty sixth Psalm, and then the One hundred and thirteenth, to
the One hundred and Nineteenth.

At the Consecration of the Wine upon the Vigil, or Even, you shall make
mention of the Feast of Consolation, which is the Day of the Birth of our King
the Messiah Sabatai Sevi, thy Servant, and firstborn Son; giving the Blessing
as follows. Blessed be thou, our God, King of the World, who have made us to
live, and have maintained us, and have kept us alive unto this time. Upon the
Eve of this Day you shall also read the Eighty one Psalm, as also the One
hundred thirty two, and One hundred twenty sixth Psalms, which are appointed
for the Morning Praises. And this Day shall be unto you for a remembranee of a
solemn Day unto eternal Ages, and a perpetual Testimony between me, and the
Sons of Israel.

Audite audiendo, and manducate bonum.
Besides which Order and Method of Liturgy for Solemnization of his Birth, he
prescribed other Rules for Divine Service, and particularly published the same
Indulgence and privilege to every one who should pray at the Tomb of his
Mother, as if he had taken on him a Pilgrimage to pray and sacrifice at
Jerusalem. The Devotion of the Jews toward this pretended Messiah, increased
still more and more; so that not only the chief of the City went to attend and
proffer their service toward him in the time of his Imprisonment, but likewise
decked their Synagogue with S. S. in Letters of Gold, making for him on the
Wall a Crown, in the Circle of which was wrote the Ninety one Psalm at length,
in a fair and legible Character; attributing the same Titles to Sabatai, and
expounding the Scriptures in the same manner in favor of his appearance, as we
do of our Savior.

Howsoever some of the Jews remained in their Wits all this time, amongst which
was a certain Cocham at Smyrna, one zealous of his Law, and of the good and
safety of his Nation; and observing in what a wild manner the whole People of
the Jews was transported with the gronndless belief of a Messiah, leaving not
only their Trades, and course of Living, but publishing Prophecies of a speedy
Kingdom, of rescue from the tyranny of the Turk, and leading the Grand Signior
himself captive in Chains; matters so dangerous, and obnoxious to the State
wherein they lived, as might justly convict them of Treason and Rebellion, and
leave them to the mercy of that Justice, which on the least jealousy and
suspicion of matters of this nature, uses to extirpate Families, and subvert
the Mansion houses of their own People, much rather of the Jews, on whom the
Turks would gladly take this occasion to despoil them of their Estates, and
condemn the whole Nation to perpetual Slavery. And indeed it would have been a
greater wonder than ever Sabatai showed, that the Turks took not advantage from
all these extravagancies to drain the Jews of a considerable Sum of Money, and
set their whole Race in Turkey at a Ransom, had not these passages yielded them
matter of pastime, and been the subject of the Turks laughter and scorn,
supposing it a disparagement to the greatness of the Ottoman Empire, to be
concerned for the rumors and combustions of this despised People. With these
Considerations this Cocham, that he might clear himself of the blood and guilt
of his Countrymen, and unconcerned in the common destruction, went before the
Kaddee, and there protested against the present Doctrine, declaring, That he
had no hand in setting up of Sabatai, but was an enemy both to him and his
whole Sect. This freedom of the Cocham so enraged and scandalized the Jews,
that they judged no Condemnation or Punishment too severe against such an
Offender, and Blasphemer of their Law, and Holiness of the Messiah, and
therefore with Money and presents to the Kaddee, accusing him as disobedient in
a Capital nature to their Government, obtained sentence against him to shave
his Beard, and commit him to the Galleys.

There wanted nothing now to the appearance of the Messiah, and the Solemnity
of his Coming, but the presence of Elias, which the Jews began to expect
hourly, and with that attention and earnestness, that a Dream or Phantasm to
every weak Head was judged to be Elias, it being taught and averred, that he
was seen in diverse Forms and Shapes, not to be certainly discovered or known
before the Coming of the Messiah. For this Superistition is so far fixed
amongst them, that generally in their Families they spread a Table for Elias
the Prophet to which they make an invitation of poor People, leaving the chief
place for the Lord Elias, whom they believe to be invisibly present at the
Entertainment, and there to eat and drink without diminution either of the
Dishes or the Cup. One Person amongst the Jews commanded his Wife, after a
Supper of this kind, to leave the Cup filled with Wine, and the Meat standing
all Night for Elias to feast and rejoice alone, and in the Morning arising
early, affirmed, That Elias took this Banquet so kindly, that in token of
gratitude and acceptance, he had replenished the Cup with Oil instead of Wine.
It is a custom amongst the Jews on the Evening of the Sabbath to repeat certain
praises of God. (Haudola) which signifies a distinction or separation of the
Sabbath from the profane days (as they call them;) which praises or blessing
they observe to perform in this manner. One takes a Cup filled with Wine, and
drops it through the whole House in the name of Elias, saying, Elias the
Prophet, Elias the Prophet, come quickly to us with the Messiah the Son of
David. And this, they affirm, is so acceptable to Elias, that he never fails to
preserve that Family so devoted to him, and augment it with the Blessings of
increase. Many other things the Jews avouch of Elias, so ridiculous, as are not
necessary to be declared, amongst which this one is not from our purpose, That
at the Circumcision there is always a Chair set for Elias. And Sabatai Sevi
being once invited at Smyrna to the Circumcision of the first born Son of one
Abraham Gutiere, a Kinsman of Sabatai, and all things ready for the Ceremony;
Sabatai Sevi exhorted the Parents of the Child to expect a while until his
farther order. After a good half hour Sabatai ordered them to proceed, and cut
the Prepucee of the Child, which was instantly performed with all joy and
satisfaction to the Parents: and being afterward demanded, wherefore he
retarded the performance of that Function; his answer was, That Elias had not
as yet taken his Seat, whom as soon as he saw pla^^d, he ordered them to
proceed: and that now shortly Elias would discover himself openly, and proclaim
the news of their general Redemption. This being the common opinion of the
Jews, and that Sabatai Sevi was the Messiah, being become an Article of Faith,
it was not hard to persuade them that Elias was come already, that they met him
in their dishes, in the dark, in their Bed-chambers, or any where else
invisible, in the same manner as our common People believe of Hobgoblins and
Faries. For so it was, when one Solomon Cremona, an Inhabitant of Smyrna,
making a great Feast, to which the principal Jews of that City were invited,
after they had eaten and drank freely, one started from his seat, and avouched
that he saw Elias upon the Wall, and with that bows to him, and complements
him with all reverence and humility: some others having in like manner their
fancies already prepossessed, and their eyes with the fume of Wine ill
prepared to distinguish shadows, immediately agreed upon the object, and then
there was not one in the Company who would say, he did not see him; at which
surprise every one was struck with reverence and awe, and the most eloquent
amongst them having their tongues loosed with Joy and Wine, directed Orations,
Encomiums, and acts of thankfulness to him, courting and complementing Elias,
as distracted Lovers do the supposed presence of their Mistresses.

Another Jew at Constantinople reported, That he met Elias in the streets,
habited like a Turk, with whom he had a long communication, and that he
enjoined the observation of many neglected Ceremonies, and particularly the
Zezit, Lev 15.38. Speak unto the Children of Israel and bid them, that they
make fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and
that they put upon the fringe of the border a Ribband of Blue. Also the Peotz,
Levit. 19.27. Ye shall not round the corners of your Head, nor mar the corner
of your Beard. This apparition of Elias being published, and as soon believed,
every one began to obey the Vision, by fringing their garments; and for their
heads, though always shaved according to the Turkish and Eastern fashion, and
that the suffering hair to grow, to men not accustomed, was heavy and
incommodions for their health and heads; yet to begin again to renew, as far as
was possible, the ancient Ceremonies, every one nourished a Lock of hair on
each side, which was visible beneath their Caps, which soon after began to
become a sign of distinction between the Believers and the Koparims, a name of
dishonor, signifying as much as Unbelievers or Heretic, given to those who
confessed not Sabatai to be the Messiah. Which particulars, if not observed,
it was declared as a menace of Elias, That the People of the Jews who came from
the River Sabation, as is specified in the 2. Esdras Cap. 13. shall take
vengeance of those who are guilty of these omissions.

But to return again to Sabatai Sevi himself, we find him still remaining a
Prisoner in the Castle of Abydos upon the Hellespont, admired and adored by his
Brethren with more honor than before, and visited by Pilgrims from all parts,
where the Fame of the Coming of the Messiah had arrived: Amongst which one from
Poland named Nehemiah Cohen was of special note and renown, learned in the
Hebrew, Syriack, and Chaldee, and versed in the Doctrine and Kabala of the
Rabbis, as well as Sabatai himself One (of whom it was said) had not this Sevi
anticipated the design, esteemed himself as able a Fellow for to act a Messiah
as the other. Howsoever it being now too late to publish any such pretense,
Sabatai having already prepossessed the office, and with that the hearts and
belief of the Jews, Nehemiah was contented with some small appendage or
relation to a Messiah; and therefore to lay his design the better, desired a
private Conference with Sabatai. These two great Rabbis being together, a hot
Dispute arose between them. For Cohen alleged, That according to Scripture and
Exposition of the Learned thereupon, there were to be two Messiahs, one called
Bon Ephraim, and the other Ben David: The first was to be a Preacher of the
Law, poor and despised, and a Servant to the second, and his Forerunner; the
other was to be great and rich, to restore the Jews to Jerusalem, to sit upon
the Throne of David, and to perform and act all those Triumphs and Conquests,
which were expected from Sabatai. Nehemiah was contented to be Ben Ephraim, the
afflicted and poor Messiah, and Sabatai was well enough contented he should be
so; but that Nehemiah accused him for being too forward in publishing himself
the latter Messiah, before Ben Ephraim had first been known to the World.
Sabatai took this reprehension so ill, either out of pride and thoughts of his
own Infallibility, or that he suspected Nehemiah being once admitted for Ben
Ephraim, would quickly, being a subtle and learned Person, persuade the World
that he was Ben David, would by no means understand or admit of this Doctrine,
or of Ben Ephraim for a necessary Officer: And thereupon the Dispute grew so
hot, and the Controversy so irreconcilable, as was taken notice of by the
Jews, and controverted amongst them as every one fancied; but Sabatai being of
greater Authority, his Sentence prevailed, and Nehemiah was rejected as
Schismatical, and an Enemy to the Messiah, which afterward proved the ruin
and downfall of this Imposture. For Nehemiah being thus baffled, and being a
Person of Authority, and a haughty Spirit, meditated nothing but revenge; to
execute which to the full, he took a Journey to Adrianople, and there informed
the chief Ministers of State and Officers of the Court, who (by reason of the
gain the Turks made of their Prisoner at the Castle on the Hellespont) heard
nothing of all this concourse of People, and Prophecies of the Revolt of the
Jews from their obedience to the Grand Signior. And taking likewise to his
Counsel some certain discontented and unbelieving Cochams, who being zealous
for their Nation, and jealous of the ill consequences of this long continued
and increasing madness, took liberty to inform the Chimacam (who was Deputy of
the Great Vizier then at Candia) that the Jew, Prisoner at the Castle, called
Sabatai Sevi was a lewd person, and one who endeavored to debauch the minds of
the Jews, and divert them from their honest course of livelihood, and obedience
to the Grand Signior and that therefore it was necessary to clear the World of
so factious and dangerous a Spirit. The Chimacam being thus informed could do
no less than acquaint the Gr. Signior with all the particulars of this man's
condition, course of life, and Doctrine; which were no sooner understood, but a
Chaouse or Messenger was immediately dispatched to bring up Sabatai Sevi to
Adrianople. The Chaouse executed his Commission after the Turkish fashion in
haste, bringing Sabatai in a few days to Adrianople, without farther excuse or
ceremony, not affording him an hours Space to take a solemn farewell of his
Followers and Adorers, who now were come to the vertical point of all their
hopes and expectations.

The Grand Signior having by this time received diverse informations of the
madess of the Jews, and the pretenses of Sabatai, grew big with desire and
expectation to see him; so that he no sooner arrived at Adrianople, but the
same hour he was brought before the Grand Signior. Sabatai appeared much
dejected, and failing of that courage which he showed in the Synagogue. And
being demanded several questions in Turkish by the Grand Signior, he would not
trust so far to the virtue of his Messiahship, as to deliver himself in the
Turkish Language, but desired a Doctor of Physic (who had from a Jew turned
Turk) to be his Interpreter, which was granted to him, but not without
reffection of the standers-by, that had he been the Messiah and Son of God, as
he formerly pretended, his Tongue would have been loosed into Eloquence and
perfection of Languages. But the Grand Signior would not be put off without a
Miracle, and it must be one or his own choosing; which was, that Sabatai should
be stripped naked, and set as a mark to his dextrous Archets; if the arrows
passed not his body, but that his flesh and skin was proof, like Armor, then
he would believe him to be the Messiah, and the Person whom God had designed to
those Dominions and Greatness he pretended. But now Sabatai not having Faith
enough to stand to so sharp a trial, renounced all his Title to Kingdoms and
Governments, alleging that he was an ordinary Cocham and Jew, as others were,
and had nothing of privilege and virtue above the rest. The Grand Signior
notwithstanding, not wholly satisfied with this plain confession, declared,
That having given public scandal to the Professors of the Mohammedan Religion
and done dishonor to his Sovereign Authority, by pretending to withdraw from
him so considerable a portion as the Land of Palestine, his Treason and Crime
could not be expiated without becoming a Mohammedan Convert: Which if he refused
to do, the Stake was ready at the Gate of the Seraglio to impale him. Sabatai
being now reduced to his last game and extremity, not being in the least
doubtful what to do, for to dye for what he was assured was false was against
Nature, and the death of a mad man: Replied with much cheerfulness, that he was
contented to turn Turk, and that it was not of force, but of choice, having
been a long time desirous of so glorious a profession, he esteemed himself much
honored, that he had an opportunity to own it first in the presence of the
Grand Signior. And here was the Non plus ultra of all the bluster and noise of
this vain Impostour. And now the Reader may pause a while, and contemplate the
strange point of consternation, shame, and silence, to which the Jews were
reduced, when they understood how speedily their hopes were vanished, and how
poorly and ignominiously all their fancies and promises of a new Kingdom, their
Pageantry and Offices for Devotion were past like a tale, or a midnights dream.
And all this was concluded, and the Jews sunk on a sudden and fallen flat in
their hopes, without so much as a line of comfort or excuse from Sabatai, more
than in general to all the Brethren, that now they should apply themselves to
their callings and services of God, as formerly; for that matters relating to
him were finished, and the sentence past.

The News of Sabatai turning Turk, and of the Messiah to a Mohammedan, quickly
filled all parts of Turkey; the Jews were strangely surprised at it, and ashamed
of their easiness of belief, of the arguments with which they had persuaded
others, and of the Proselytes they had made in their own Families. Abroad they
became the common derision of the Towns where they inhabited, the Boys houted
after them, coining a new word at Smyrna (Pouftai) which every one seeing a
Jew, with a singer pointed out, would pronounce with scorn and contempt; so
that this deceived People for a long time after remained with confusion,
silence, and dejection of spirit. And yet most of them affirm, That Sabatai is
not turned Turk, but his shadow only remains on Earth, and walks with a white
head, and in the habit of a Mohammedan; but that his Body and Soul are taken
into Heaven, there to reside until the time appointed for accomplishment of
these Wonders: And this opinion began so commonly to take place, as if this
People resolved never to be undeceived, using the Forms and Rules for Devotion
prescribed them by their Mohammedan Messiah. Insomuch that the Cochams of
Constantenople fearing the danger of this Error might creep up and equal the
former, condemned the belief of Sabatai being Messiah as damnable, and enjoined
them to return to the ancient Method and Service of God, upon pain of
Excommunication. The Style and Tenor of their Letter was as follows.

TO you who have the power of Priesthood, and are the knowing, learned, and
magnanimous Governors and Princes residing in the City of Smyrna, may the
Almighty protect you, Amen, for so is his will.

These our Letters which we send in the midst of your Habitations, are upon
occasion of certain Rumors and Tumults come to our ears from that City of your
Holinesses. For there is a sort of men amongst you who fortify themselves in
their Error, and say, Let such an one our King live, and bless him in their
public Synagogues every Sabbath day; and also adjoyn Psalms and Hymns invented
by that man for certain days, with Rules and Methods for Prayer, which ought
not to be done, and yet they still remain obstinate therein. And now behold it
is known unto you, how many swelling waters have passed over our Souls for his
sake; for had it not been for the mercies of God which are without end, and the
merit of our Forefathers which has assisted us, the foot of Israel had been
rased out by their enemies. And yet still you continue obstinate in things
which do not help, The Jews scruple to say the head of Israel.
but rather do mischief, which God avert. Turn you therefore, for this is not
the true way, but restore the Crown to the ancient custom and use of your
Forefathers, and the Law, and from thence do not move.

We command you, That with your Authority, under pain of Excommunication and
other Penalties, all those Ordinances and Prayers, as well those delivered by
the mouth of that man, as those which he enjoined by the mouth of others, be
all abolished and made void, and to be found no more, and that they never enter
more into your hearts; but (...) according to the ancient Commandment of your
Forefathers, repeating the same Lessons and Prayers every Sabbath as has been
accustomary; as also the Collects for Kings, Potentates, and Anointed, etc. and
bless the King Sultan Mahomet; for in his days has great Salvation been
wrought for Israel, and become not Rebels to his Kingdom, which God forbid. For
after all this which is past, the least motion will be a cause of jealousy, and
you will bring ruin upon your own persons, and upon all which is near and dear
to you; wherefore abstain from this man, and let not so much as his name
proceed out of your mouths. For know, if you will not obey us herein, which
will be known who, and what those men are who refuse to conform unto us, we are
resolved to prosecute them, as our duty is. He that does hear and obey us, may
the blessing of God rest upon him. These are the words of those, who seek your
peace and good, having in Constantinople, on Sunday the 5th of the month Sevat,
under-wrote their names.

Joam Tob, Son of Hanania Ben Jacar. Isaac Alnacagua. Joseph Kazabi. Menasse
Barudo. Kaleb Son of Samuel. Eliezer Casti. Eliezer Gherson. Joseph Accohen.
Eliezer Aluff.



During the time of all these transactions and passages at Constantinople,
Smyrna, Abydos upon the Hellespont, and Adrianople; the Jews leaving their
mercantile course and advices what prices Commodities bore, and matters of
Traffic, stuffed their Letters for Italy and other parts with nothing but
wonders and miracles wrought by their Messiah. As that, when the Grand Signior
sent to take him, he caused all the messengers immediately to die; upon which,
other Janissaries being again sent, they all fell dead with a word only from his
mouth; and being desired to revive them again, he immediately recalled them to
life, but of them only such, who were true Turks, and not those who had denied
that Faith in which they were born, and had professed. After this they added,
that he went voluntarily to Prison, and though the Gates were barred, and shut
with strong Locks of Iron, yet that Sabatai was seen to walk through the
streets with a numerous attendance; and when they laid shackles on his Neck and
Feet, they not only fell from him, but were converted into Gold, with which he
gratified his true and faithful Believers and disciples. Some Miracles also
were reported of Nathan, that only at the reading of the name of any particular
Man or Woman, he could immediately recount the story of his or her Life, their
sins or defaults, and accordingly impose just correction and penance for them.
These strong reports coming thus confidently into Italy, and all parts, the
Jews of Casal di Monferrato resolved to send Three persons in behalf of their
Society, in the nature of extraordinary Legates, to Smyrna, to make enquiry
after the truth of all these rumors, who accordingly arriving in Smyrna, full
of expectation and hopes, intending to present themselves with great humility
and submission before their Messiah, and his Prophet Nathan, were entertained
with the sad news, that Sabatai was turned Turk; by which information, the
Character of their Embassy in a manner ceasing, every one of them laying aside
the formality of his Function, endeavored to lodge himself best to his own
convenience. But that they might return to their Brethren at home with the
certain particulars of the success of these affairs, they made a visit to the
Brother of Sabatai, who still continued to persuade them, that Sabatai was
notwithstanding the true Messiah; that it was not he who had taken upon him the
hahit and form of a Turk, but his Angel or Spirit, his Body being ascended into
Heaven, until God shall again see the season and time to restore it; adding
farther, that an effect hereof they should see by the Prophet Nathan verifyed,
now every day expected, who having wrought Miracles in many places, would also
for their consolation, reveal hidden secrets unto them, with which they should
not only remain satisfied but astonished: with this only hope of Nathan, these
Legates were a little comforted, resolving to attend his arrival, in regard
they had a Letter to consign into his hands, and according to their
instructions, were to demand of him the grounds he had for his Prophecies, and
what assurance he had that he was divinely inspired, and how those things were
revealed unto him, which he had committed to Paper, and dispersed to all parts
of the World.

At length Nathan arrived near Smyrna, 1666/7.
on Friday the 3d of March, toward the Evening, and on Sunday these Legates
made their visit to him, but Nathan upon the news of what success his Messiah
met with, began to grow sullen and reserved, so that the Legates could scarce
procure admittance to him; all that they could do, was to inform him, that they
had a Letter to him from the Brotherhood of Italy, and Commission to confer
with him concerning the ground and foundation of his Prophecies: But Nathan
refused to take the Letter, ordering Kaim Abolafio, a Cocham of the City of
Smyrna, to receive it; so that the Legates returned little contented, but yet
with hopes at Nathans arrival at Smyrna, to receive better satisfaction.

But whilst Nathan intended to enter into Smyrna, the Cochams of
Constantinople, being before advised of his resolution to take a Journey into
their parts, not knowing by which way he might come, sent their Letters and
orders to Smyrna, Prussia, and every way round, to hinder his passage, and
interrupt his Journey, fearing that things beginning now to compose, the Turks
appeased for the former disorders, and the minds of the Jews in some manner
settled, might be moved, and combustions burst out afresh by the appearance of
this new Impostor, and therefore dispatched this Letter as follows.

TO you who are the Shepherds of Israel, and Rulers, who reside for the Great
God of the whole World in the City of Smyrna, which is a Mother in Israel, to
her Princes, her Priests, her Judges, and especially to the perfect wise men,
and of greatest experience; may the Lord God cause you to live before him, and
delight in the multitude of Peace, Amen. So be the will of the Lord.

These our Letters are dispatched unto you, to let you understand, that in the
place of your Holiness, we have heard, that the learned man which was in Gaza,
called Nathan Benjamin, has published vain Doctrines, and made the World
tremble at his words and inventions. At this time we have received advice, that
this man some days since departed from Gaza, and took his Journey by the way of
Scanderone, intending there to Embark for Smyrna. and thence to go to
Constantinople, or Adrianople. And though it seems a strange thing unto us,
that any man should have a desire to throw himself into a place of flames and
fire, and into the sparks of Hell: Notwithstanding, we ought to fear and
suspect it, Arab. Prove.
for the feet of man always guide him to the worst. Wherefore, we underwritten,
do advertise you, that this Man coming within the Compass of your Jurisdiction,
you give a stop to his Journey, and not suffer him to proceed farther, but
presently to return back. For we would have you know, That at his Coming he
will begin again to move those tumults, which have been caused through Dreams
of a new Kingdom, Arab. Prove.
And that miracles are not wrought every day. God forbid, that by his Coming,
the People of God should be destroyed in all places where they are, of which he
will be the first, whose blood be upon his own head; for in this Conjuncture
every little error or fault is made Capital; you may remember the danger of
the first Combustion, and it is very probable, that he will be an occasion of
greater, which the Tongue is not able to express with words. And therefore, by
virtue of ours, and your own Authority, you are to hinder him from proceeding
farther in his journey, upon pain of all those Excommunications, which our Law
can impose, and to force him to return back again, both he and his Company. But
if he shall in any manner oppose you, and rebel against your word, your
Endeavors and Law are sufficient to hinder him, for it will be well for him,
and for all Israel.

For the love of God, let these words enter into your ears, since they are not
vain things, for the lives of all the Jews, and his also consist therein. And
the Lord God behold from Heaven, and have pity upon his People Israel. Amen. So
be his holy will written by those who seek your Peace.

Joam Tob Son of Chanania Jacar. Moise Benveniste, Isaac Alnacagua, Joseph
Kizbi, Samuel Acazsina, Kaleb Son of Cocham, Samuel deceased, Moise Barudo,
Elihezer Aluf. Jehousual Raphael Benveniste.



By these means Nathan being disappointed of his wandering progress, and partly
ashamed of the Events contrary to his Prophecies, was resolved, without entering
Smyrna, to depart thence; howsoever he obtained leave to visit the Sepulcher of
his Mother, and there to receive pardon of his sins (according to the
institution of Sabatai before mentioned;) but first washed himself in the Sea,
in manner of purification, and said his Tevila, or Prayers, at the Fountain,
called by us the Fountain of Santa Veneranda, which is near the Coemetery of
the Jews, and then departed for Xio with two Companions, a Servant and three
Turks to conduct him, without admitting the Legates to audience, or answering
the Letter which was sent him from all the Communities of the Jews in Italy.
And thus the Embassy of these Legates was concluded, and they returned from
the place to whence they came, and the Jews again to their Wits, following
their Trade and Profession of Brokage, as formerly, with more quiet and
advantage than the means of regaining their possessions in the Land of Promise
And thus ended this mad frenzy amongst the Jews, which might have cost them
dear, had not Sabatai renounced his Messiahship at the Feet of Mahomet. These
matters were transacted in the Years 1665 and 1666; since which Sabatai has
passed his time devoutly in the Ottomon Court, educated at the Feet of the
learned Gamaliel of the Turkish Law, (viz) Vanni Effendi, Preacher to the
Seraglio, or as we may so term him, Chaplain to the Sultan, one so literate as
to be esteemed the Grand Oracle of their Religion; so precise, and conceited of
his own Sanctity as a Pharisee, and so superstitious, that nothing seemed more
to unhallow his Worship than the touch or approach of a Christian. The course
of life which Sabatai led after he turned Mohammedan.
To this Master, Sabatai was a most docil Scholar, and profited, as we may
imagine, beyond measure in the Turkish Doctrine; so that in exchange of such
impressions Vanni thought it no disparagement, from so great a Rabbin as his
new Disciple, to learn something of the Jewish Rites, and rectify those crude
Notions he had conceived of the Mosaical Law. In this manner Sabati passed his
days in the Turkish Court, as some time Moses did in that of the Egyptians; and
perhaps in imitation of him, cast his eyes often on the Afflictions of his
Brethren, of whom, during his life, he continued to profess himself a
Deliverer, but with that care and caution of giving scandal to the Turks, that
he declared, Unless their Nation became like him, that is, renounce the
Shadows, and imperfect Elements of the Mosaical Law, which will be completed
by adherence to the Mohammedan, and such other Additions as his inspired Wisdom
should suggest, he should never be able to prevail with God for them, or
conduct them to the Holy Land of their Forefathers. Hereupon many Jews flocked
in, some as far as from Babylon, Jerusalem, and other remote places, and
casting their Caps on the ground, in presence of the Grand Signior, voluntarily
professed themselves Mahometans. Sabatai himself by these Proselytes gaining
ground in the esteem of the Turks, had privilege granted him to visit
familiarly his Brethren, which he employed in Circumcising their Children the
Eighth day, according to the Precept of Moses, preaching his new Doctrines, by
which he has confirmed many in their Faith of his being the Messiah, and
startled all with expectation of what these strange ways of Enthusiasm may
produce; but none durst publicly own him, lest they should displease the
Turks, and the Jews, and incur the danger of Excommunication from one, and the
Gallows from the other.

Howsoever in January 1671/2 appeared another bold Impostor amongst the Jews in
Smyrna from the Morea, as it was said, or not known from whence, who in
despite of Sabatai, and his own Governors, pretended to be Messiah; but with
so inconsiderable and petty a Deluder as this, the Jews thought to make quick
work; but being ashamed at first to bring another Messiah on the Stage, by help
of money they accused him of Adultery, and procured a Sentence from the Kadi,
condemning him to the Galleys; in order unto which, and in proof of his good
behavior he remained some time in Prison, in which Interim he found means to
clear himself of that Crime by open evidence to the contrary, and had for the
present escaped out of the power of the Synagogue, had not their Authority and
money prevailed more than the Friends or Disciples of this Impostor; whom we
will leave in prison, and Sabatai in the house of Pharaoh; where he continued
until the Year 1676, and then died. And so we return to more important matters
of the Turkish Affairs.

Since that we have so long insisted on the frenzy of the Jews, let us return
to matters of greater consequence, and more general concernment; and look back
to Count Leslie the Emperors Ambassador, who having departed from
Constantinople the 11th of December. of the last Year, we find on the 10th of
March of this year on the Frontiers ready to make exchange with the Turkish
Ambassador. The night before, Count Leslie was lodged at a Village called
Elmas, where the Inhabitants, as in the most parts of upper Hungary, are
Calvinists in Religion; and though the live between two Swords, The manner of
exchange of the Emperors and Turks Ambassador.
do yet in time of War, by paying a Tribute to both Parties, and providing
Forage for both, remain more secure than in the Villages subjected to either;
which are often burnt, or in some other manner miserably destroyed. The next
day the Emperors Ambassador, conducted by the Pasha of Quinque Ecclesiae, with
about three hundred Horse, arrived at the place for many years observed for
exchange of Ambassadors, which is about an hour and halfs Journey, or five
miles (as we may so say) distant from this Village, where in open Fields upon
the Brink of the Danube, are set three Posts; the two Ambassadors meeting at
that in the middle, after some Complements, take their leaves each of other,
and so exchange. The German Ambassador that day arrived near his Post about
seven a Clock in the morning, but the Turkish, not being as yet come from
Komara, he could not proceed farther. After some expectation here, advice came,
That the Turkish Ambassador was resolved not to depart from Komara until he was
satisfied for the allowance of eighteen days, at a hundred Dollars for every
day, which he had spent at his entrance into Christendom, between the frontiers
and the City of Vienna. But to this was replied, That it had never been the
custom to allow the Turkish Ambassador money for his daily provisions, until he
entered the Emperors Court; and in the mean time the expenses and charge of his
journey were to be defrayed by the Imperial Officers, who had performed the
same in a most ample and plentiful manner: But the Turk was resolved not to be
so satisfied, and therefore declared he would not depart without full payment;
hoping the more easily to prevail, in regard the German Ambassador was already
in the Field, exposed to the cold and sharp weather, without provisions either
for himself, Attendance, or Horses, whilst the Turk remained warm in his Boat,
accommodated with his Stove, and wrapped in his Furs, so that he hoped there
might be a necessity of granting what he reserved for the rear-guard of his
pretensions. The matter seemed unreasonable to the German Ambassador, as also
to the Turks that attended him, who being in the open and cold Air, judged it
in an unseemly time to capitulate. But in fine, the German gave him this
Answer. That an Ambassador ought to be contented with that hospitality and
entertainment which was accustomary, as he himself had done; for that since his
departure from Buda, which was then seven days, he had not received one Asper
of allowance, resting satisfied with the Pasha's word, that from Buda homewards
it was not accustomary to receive a farther treatment; so that if he insisted
on the first, he was to be allowed the latter, since both Ambassadors are to
be used with terms of equality; and therefore to find an expedient to give him
satisfaction, he was contented resign his seven days allowance from the Grand
Signior; and if any thing farther was really owing he would engage his parole
of honor for the payment. And farther he added. That none but a corrupt
Minister would make his private Interest to stand in Competition with a public
Design, and make the pretense of a few Dollars an interruption and impediment
to the progreess of the great Affairs of the Two Empires, professing that he
would have quitted all his right, rather than the least concernment of his
Master should have received a prejudice, on confidence of whose gracious favor
he depended for reparation of whatsoever he suffered for his service. He
thanked God that he had happily managed his Embassy to the satisfaction of the
Grand Signior, and the approbation of his Master, and was now ready to perform
the last office and ceremony, in which if he did fail, or was impeded, the
fault was not his, being ready to return to Buda, so the other in like manner
did to Vienna, there to remain until this difference was decided by their
Masters. The Turkish Ambassadour's Kahya or Steward who was present, and heard
all this discourse, seeming not pleased to hear of a return to Vienna,
immediately replied, That he conceived his Master would not remove from Komara;
to which it was answered, That a man who so little understood the office of an
Ambassador, as it appeared his Master did, was to be treated with some other
kind of style than was agreeable to the respect due to a public Minister, and
should therefore be forced to it in case he should refuse. The Turkish
Ambassador having his stomach something taken down with the threats of
returning to Vienna, that afternoon loosed from Komara, and between three and
four a (...) arrived at the place of Exchange; but the wind blowing hard, had
put some of his Boats ashore, which were most laden; and fewest men to govern
them, which afforded him occasion of farther delay, pretending that his Goods
might be arrested at Komara, and until he was satisfied to the contrary, he was
resolved not to make the Exchange. The German Ambassador was more moved with
choler at this humor than at the former; and the Turks that attended, growing
more hungry and more cold, bestowed on him a million of curses. The Sun now
declining toward its setting, Count Leslie sent word to the Turk, That he was
resolved not longer to abuse his own patience, but immediately to proceed
forward, giving order to his Coach to drive on, protesting, That if any
mischief was derived from this irregular proceeding, the fault was not his, nor
would he answer for any of those fatal consequences which might ensue; to which
also being added some persuasions of the Pasha of Quinque Ecclesiae, the Turk
at length came out from his Boat and went to his Post. The Turks were drawn up
on their own Quarter to the number of about three hundred, and the Hungarian
Hussars or Horsemen on the other to about two hundred; the two Ambassadors
making a stand at their respective Poles, proceeded with equal paces to meet in
the middle, where some few Complements having passed between them, and Salutes
interchangeably sent to the chief Ministers of each Empire, the German
Ambassador entered his Coach, and the Turk his Boat, and so both returned to
their respective Courts. Such as was the sordid and interessed humor of the
Turkish Ambassador in this transaction, so no less dishonorable was his way
of living at Vienna, where he so journed with that miserable famine and penury
in his house, as discontented all his family, causing some to leave him and
return home; others with better motives (as it is hoped) to the number of
thirty became Christians, and embraced the Faith; at the same rate he was
generous in his Presents: for to the Master of the House where he lodged he
gave two five-Senars or eighteen Pence English, and to the Commissary who
conducted him to the Frontiers, he presented a Bag of Rice, which was not
accepted but returned with the like complement, as that with which it was
tendered.

But no sooner was this Peace concluded, The Turks meditate a new War.
and the Ceremonies thereof thus happily finished, but the Turks, attentive to
another War, which is the life of their Empire, and their only security against
intestine Discords, made all the Preparations and Provisions this Year, that
were possible, for the total subjection of Candia, of which this Vizier was
highly ambitious, designing thereby to gain unto himself that renown of which
his Predecessors had been in pursuit for the space of twenty five years; so
that all Ammunition, Victual, and whatsoever was necessary, was in great
quantities supplied from all the circumjacent parts of the Empire.

The City of Candia was some time before governed by the Proveditor Priuli; but
afterward the Venetians, apprehensive of the succeeding War, conferred the
Charge on Marquess Villa, a worthy and experienced Soldier, with Title of
General of the Venetian Infantry, as we have before intimated; and having left
him and his Forces in the month of December last, on the Island of Paros; where
having, as is said, mustered his Forces, he embarked them on sixteen Galleys,
five Galleasses, and thirty five Men of War; with which sailing in company from
Anti-Paros, the whole Fleet on the 12th of February made their Rendezvous at
Argentiera; during which time the Turks landed eighteen hundred Janisaries at
Canea, being transported thither on thirty five Galleys, which having
incountred with the Cavalier Hoquincourt in the channel of Scio, received some
damage and loss of men in their way, though this Cavalier himself was wounded
in the Engagement, and forty of his men slain. The Venetian Fleet departing
from Argentiera on the 23th of February, came in sight of Candia, when a very
great storm arising with Thunder and Lightning, put the whole fleet in danger
of shipwreck; but by Gods Providence, though tossed with contrary winds, they
arrived on the 26th in safety in the Port of Suda, being directed thither in a
dark night, by those Lights which the Fortress had put abroad, though the Turks
on the other side had put out false Fires to deceive them. The Army being
landed at this place, and a Muster made of the Forces, Pay was given to the
Soldiery; with which being become the more courageous, they marched toward
Canea, with hopes to perform some memorable Enterprise at that place. The
Lieutenant General Vuersmiller led the Van, An Engagement near Conea.
consisting of sixhundred Foot, and an hundred and eighty Horse, and advancing
beyond those bounds which Marquess Villa had prescribed him, was incountred by
a more numerous Force from the Garrison, by which being at first put into some
disorder, had been entirely defeated, had not the Marquess opportunely arrived
to his Succor: howsoever the Venetians lost in this Skirmish three hundred
Soldiers, forty Horse, and twelve Officers, amongst which the Murquess Ceva
was slain upon the place, and Captain Scot a Scoth man taken Prisoner, whom the
English Factory redeemed at Smyrna; of the Turks seven hundred were computed to
have been killed, with the Aga of the Janisaries, a stout and a well
experienced Soldier. And as this beginning was not very auspicious to the
Christians, so neither did the Heavens seem much to favor them; for an unusual
rain with few fair days continued almost for the space of three months, which
filled all Rivers, Marshes, and Ditches with so strange an inundation, that the
Army beginning to want Forage for the Horses, and all other Provisions for
their Men; and the Garrison of Canea being reinforced from Retimo, Chiramo,
Armiro, and other places, discouraged the Commanders in that manner, that they
thought it more convenient to retire and incamp in the pleasant and fruitful
Valleys of Spina Longa, until better weather, and other Recruits of their Army
should open a way either to make another Attempt on Canea, or new Candia. But
Fortune did not favor these designs; for the Captain General Andrea Cornaro
arriving with his Fleet, part at Candia, and part at Standia, (which is an
Island or Rock about two Leagues distant from this City) a new resolution was
taken to remain on the defensive part, and to attend wholly to the guard of the
City: for as in the natural body, upon it is assaulted by acute and hot humors,
the spirits retire to the heart to comfort and secure that from the violence of
the distemper; so the Venetians perceiving that their Enemies daily grew more
numerous, resolved to contract their Force into one Body for defense of that
City, which was the heart or the most principal instrument of life in that
Island: Wherefore Recruits both of Men, Ammunition, and Provisions were daily
sent thither; and the Captain of the Gulf arriving at Suda with eleven Galleys
and one Galleass, carrying fifteen hundred Soldiers, with three hundred
Pioniere, joined his Forces to the Body of the Fleet; and all imbarking in
diverse Squadrons, made haste to land their men in the City of Candia with all
possible expedition.

The Marquess Villa landed here the first of March, Marquess Villa lands at the
City of Candia.
being conducted from the Mole by the Proveditor to the Palace, which was
provided for him; where having been complemented, and having received and
returned the usual Visits, he in the first place took care to quarter the
HOrse, and the new Forces lately arrived with due convenience; next he visited
the Garrison and every Fort in particular, where he amended what was amiss, and
added what was defective. The Captain General by this time arriving with the
remainder of the Militia, a general Muster was made in the Trenches of the Fort
Panigra; of which the Turks having advice, fell unexpectedly upon them with a
strong Body; the Christians being surprised hereat; and Versama a valiant
Colonel being slain, they began shamefully to run, nor could either the
Bravery of the Marquess or his Authority stop their flight; howsoever the
Musket Shot and great great Guns from the Walls were so plentifully bestowed on
the Turks, that few of those who were over-sorward in the purfuit, returned to
their Companions.

On the 12th of April a Fleet of Galleys arrived with new Recruits, with which
the Christians being reinforced, Marquess Villa resolved to take the Field; so
that marching out of the City by night with seven thousand Foot and six hundred
and fifty Horse, The Ventians incamp.
he encamped between that and the Valley of the River Gi^ffiro, drawing his
Trenches just opposite to the the Enemies Camp; in the mean Time two Squadrons
of Ships were sent abroad, one toward the Cr^ciere, and the other toward the
Coast of Canea, to intercept and hinder such Succors as might be sent to the
Enemies Camp. Nor were the Turks less vigilant or valiant on their side; The
Turks assault them.
for a Party of about two thousand men fallying from their Trenches, and
marching secretly under the covert of a Mountain, unexpectedly assailed the
Out-guards of about fifty Foot belonging to the Regiment of Frischein,
commanded by Captain Rades; which after a stout resistance retreated into
another Body of fifty Musketeers, and twenty five Arquibusiers of the Regiment
Arborio; who also being assisted by other detachments, recovered their first
Post; but being afterward overpowred by great numbers of Turks, were forced to
quit the place, which Marquess Villa observing, ordered fifty Horse under
Lieutenant-Collonel Mattiazzi, and seventy Foot under Blane Sergeant Major of
the Regiment Arborio to their assistance, by whom the Post was again recovered
with great slaughter of the Enemy: but this advantage was of little other
benefit than to inflame the spirits of the Turks, who rallying again their
Force with fresh courage and extraordinary valor came to handy-blows with the
Venetians, forcing them to another Retreat with the death of Lieutenant Cerusa
a Savoyard, and some common Soldiers; but the Turks enjoyed not long this
advantage; for the Musketeers from the line with some small Guns, and the
Gross Artillery from the Walls did much execution on them; and at the same time
being charged by a Party of Horse under Command of Colonel Rades, the
Venetians with glory and encouragement recovered their Post, driving the Turks
in disorder and confusion to their Trenches. This success of the Christians
served to heat the spirits of the Turks, and animate them to another
Engagement: (...) having by private ways of hidden Valleys conducted their Men,
about four hours before night made another Assault upon the Venetians, I will
not say surprised them; The Turks make another assault.
because remaining always in apprehension of the Enemy, they kept themselves so
watchfully on their Guard that in a moment they were ready to receive them; and
that so warmly, not firing until they came within the length of two Pikes, that
in a moment the Field was covered with the bodies of Horse and Men; the Turks
startled hereat, not knowing whether it were better to stand to it, or fly,
until encouraged by their Leaders, they kept their ground for a time: but being
galled by the continual Vollies of shot, and charged by a Body of Horse led by
Count Sforza Bissaro and Captain Casick; they were so shaken, that they turned
their backs, and began to run until falling in with the gross Body of their
Party they made head again; and mixing both Horse and Foot with the Venetians,
they forced them to retreat to the side of their Trenches; and so closely plied
them, that the fresh Troops of the Turks on the right and left wing had cut
them off, had not the Count Corradini, by order of Count Sforza with a Regiment
of Curassiers, and likewise Colonel Scoppa with his Lieutenant Colonel Tadeo
Motta, with a good number of Archibusiers, assisted by a Squadron of the
Regiment of Count Bassaro, sallied from the Line, and being succored on all
sides, forced the Turks at length to sound a Retreat. The night coming on,
dissuaded any pursuit of the Enemy, lest unknown ways and darkness should
betray their men into ambushes or other snares. The Turks lost a thousand men,
with diverse Commanders of Quality and Note: Of the Venetians were killed
Lieutenant Cerusa, Gio. Tessari, Captain to La Motte, eleven Horse, and some
few Foot: Motte, Corradini, Soupe, Count Corbelli, and some others were wounded.

About this time advice being come to the Captain General, That the Turks were
dispeeding fifty Galleys laden with Men and Ammunition, he resolved to
encounter them at Sea with four Galleasses, and twenty Galleys, reinforcing his
Fleet with twelve hundred men, which he took from the Camp; which being thereby
considerably diminished, as also by the late Engagements: yet Marquess Villa
kept his ground, but contracted the compass of his Trenches, and raised a Fort
in sight of the Enemy, who had not the courage to give him the least
interruption; but rather after this example fortified their own Trenches,
shutting all Avenues or passages to Renegadoes, whom they suspected might fly,
and give advice to the Christians: howsoever some of them escaped to the
Venetian Camp, declaring that the Cannon from the Town did much incommode the
Turks in their Trenches; upon which Intelligence Marquess Villa ordered forty
eight shot to be made at that place, where they were most offended, which put
the Turks into great consternation: after which no considerable Engagements
happened, besides some few Skirmishes and Rencounters of no memorable note, in
which one Antiquario a Quartermaster, Count Pio Ferretti, and others
signalized themselves by particular Acts of Valor, as also Captain Vimes who
killed Mehmet Bey, a Turk of great esteem, with his own hand.

But now the Turks receiving daily Recruits, as of eight hundred Janissaries,
and six hundred Spahees, landed at Gira-petra, and seventeen hundred more
disbarked at Chissamo; and advices daily coming of great numbers of Galeots and
Brigantines providing in the Gulf of Lepanto, and of eighteen Ships of Barbary,
all ready to transport Soldiers to Candia, moved the Captain General to
persuade the removal of the Camp for better security of the most important
places: The Venetian Camp raised.
the which Marquess Villa performed accordingly in the night preceding the
first of June, with much order and care; for first he caused the Artillery to
be withdrawn, with the Mortar-pieces, Ammunition, and Provisions of War, and
placed in the Fort of Mocenigo; then he caused half the Army to work in filling
the Trenches, whilst the other half remained in form of Battle, and two hours
before day blew up the Fort; which having done, they marched in three Bodies to
the City, to the great joy and satisfaction of the Turks, who on that occasion
made a day of Festival.

These particulars of Action having passed under the Conduct of Marquess Villa
without any signal Victory or advantage over the Turk, administered subject to
such who in the parts of Christendom were emulous of his glory, and envious of
his eminent charge, to give liberty to their tongues to disparage the
management of his Affairs, as not agreeable to that high expectation of success
which the World conceived thereof, when he first entered on this employment: But
here it is observable at what rate men who lie soft and warm in their beds at
home, unconcerned in the dangers, labors, and hazards of those who live and
act abroad, can make their reflections, and pass their censures on active and
engaged men, not considering the state of affairs, the uncertainty of Succors
in so long and distant a tract of Sea, as passes between Venice and Candia,
subjected to Winds, and a thousand Casualties; nor yet the numerous Troops of
the Enemy, nor the Puissance of that Empire, which for its Power, Richess, and
the Valor of its Soldiery, may be esteemed the most Potent and considerable of
all the Monarchies and known Kingdoms of the Universe. But what conjectures
soever envious men might make of the Conduct of Marquess Villa, yet the Senate
of Venice applauded his labors, and owned his services, as being such, which
having merited the admiration and esteem of all the World, did in a particular
manner challenge their thankfulness and acknowledgments. About this time the
Galleys of Malta arrived at Candia, where some dispute arising touching the
place of precedence in the Fleet, which the Venetians denied to them: they
departed thence with some dissatisfaction, and returned to the Westward to
transport the young Empress out of Spain into Italy.

And now intelligence coming to Candia by diverse Letters, that the Great Vizier
was departed from Adrinaople with a numerous Army, and was already arrived at
Thebes, The Great Vizier arrives at Thebes.
where a general Rendezvous was appointed of the whole Army, with resolution to
be transported from Malvoisin to that Island; the Venetian Generals and
Commanders in chief concluded in necessary, if possible, to hinder their
passage, and rather to fight them at Sea, which was their more propitious
Element, than to attend their Landing, where they would be forced to dispute
with unequal numbers, and on disadvantageous terms. Accordingly the
Captain General reinforced his Fleet with two thousand Foot, and a thousand
Horse under the Command of Count Licinio Martinoni, appointing the Rendezvous
to be at Argentiera, to which place also Marquess Villa repaired, touching by
the way at Milo for refreshment of his Horse, it being an Island abounding with
Herbage; the Captain General being for some days detained at Standia by
contrary Winds, a Consultation was held for the more advantageous management of
the War; after which the whole Fleet making Sail, was on August the ninth
scattered by a furious storm, and not being able to recover Santoxini, they by
good fortune setched Stampalia, an Island abounding with generous Wines,
excellent Fruit, Partridges, and other Provisions; at length after various
fortunes arriving at Andra, which is a great and populous Island, another
Council of War was held, where it was again concluded, That all care was to be
taken to intercept the Succors which the Enemy daily sent to Candia; to which
end the Cavalier Grimani, Captain of the Galleons, was ordered to cruise about
the Coast; and hearing that twelve Turkish Ships were lading Provisions in the
Gulf of Volo, he repaired thither, and had the good fortune to take them with
all their lading; Twelve Turkish Vessels taken.
but the other Squadrons missed of the like success; for notwithstanding the
care and vigilance which was used, all matters seemed to succeed prosperous for
the Turks, and adverse to the Christians; the designs of the first having an
issue agreeable to their intentions, whilst those of the latter were always
disappointed either by Nature or by Fortune, or rather by that secret hand of
Providence, which had allotted that Island for a Prize to the Ottoman Arms.

By this time the Turkish Army being at their Rendezvous at Thebes, the Great
Vizier prepared to imbark; and considering the difficulty of the passage,
thought it prudent first to make new Propositions to Signior Ballarino before
he entered on this hazardous attempt, supposing perhaps, that the rumor of this
March might have affrighted the Venetians to a Surrender of that Kingdom, that
they might spare the blood and charge of that War which afterward ensued:
Wherefore Ballarino being called from his House at Constantinople, began his
Journey toward Thebes on the twentyfifth of August, accompanied by a
Capugibashee, and three Janissaries: and in twenty three days arriving at
Thessalonica, now called Salonica, he fell sick of a violent Fever, caused by
that agitation of body in his Travels to which he was unaccustomed, and for
want of that sleep which he used to take after his slender dinner, passing the
rest of the day and night in continual watchings: at first he felt only some
little alterations, which he hoping might pass over, resolved to proceed on his
Journey notwithstanding the persuasions to the contrary of Signior Patavino his
Secretary, with whom I was well acquainted, and ever esteemed for an honest and
a worthy Person: but he continued resolute to proceed, fearing lest his delays
by the way should lose him the opportunity of that moment of Treaty, which was
impossible afterward to be retrieved; for in his Journey he would often reason
in this manner: If I should stop here, what censure would the World pass on me?
I may possibly excuse my self; but in the mean time the Vizier may engage too
far in his design, and frustrate all those methods and foundations which I have
laid toward a Peace: and then if I live, I shall be over-burdened with the
reproaches of the World, for having abandoned the grand incumbance in its
ultimate necessity, which is charged upon me, which will be a more sensible
affliction than the agony of death. My sickness will be esteemed by many to be
rather dissembled than real. The dead man lives in the memory of his
faithfulness and constancy, and the living man dies in the indelible characters
of his cowardice and misfortune. These were his own words.

And thus traveling forward his Fever daily increased to that excess, that on
the sixth day he was forced to stop at a City called Isdino, where having
instructed Signior Patavino in what manner he ought to manage affairs, and
recommending his services and children to the favor and protection of the
Senate, he passed to the other World, being honored by a solemn Funeral at the
public Expense, and Interred in the Church of St. Mark, his Son Domenico
Ballarino succeeding into the Office and Inheritance of his Father. The Senate
understanding by advices from Signior Padavino. That the Vizier desired another
Envoy, qualified with the Character of a public Minister to reside with him in
Candia, dispatched the Secretary Girolamo Giavarina, a Person of good
abilities, to that place. And at the same time the Captain General Andrea
Cornaro pressing the Senate for license to return to his own Country; his
request was granted, and Francesco Morosini was appointed to succeed him in
that important Charge, and was accompanied at a time of so great emergency with
powerful Convoys, and with Recruits of Men, Provisions, and Ammunition fitting
to carry on so pressing a War.

On the Month of October the Great Vizier in person imbarking himself and Army
at Malvoisia with many Pasha's, The Vizier passes over into Candia.
and men expert and active in the War, passed over to the Isle of Candia,
resolving by strength and dint of Sword to force that strong City to obedience
the main Bulwark of Christendom, situated at the Entrance of the Archipelago;
of the success of which famous Siege we shall have occasion to discourse more
at large and more particularly hereafter; in order unto which the Great Vizier
on the last day of this Year, went in Person to take a view of this City, and
having surveyed all sides of it, apprehended that the Siege would be long and
tedious; and therefore returned again to Canea to take those measures which
were requisite for an Enterprise of that weight and consideration.

In the mean time the Princes of Christendom being for the most part either in
that discord amongst themselves, of which the Turks have always made their
advantage; or else living in parts remote, did not consider Candia as a Pulwaik
to their Dominions, and therefore rendered little other assistance to the
Venetians than good words, and vain wishes for their success and Victory. The
Popes Forces only under Command of Muzeo Mattei which were in Dalmatia, were
transported to Candia, and five hundred Foot belonging to the Grand Duke of
Toscany, came into their places for desence of that Country. The most Christian
King in return to the Embassy of Venice performed by the Cavalier Alvise
Sagredo, remitted to that Republic an hundred thousand Crowns, and Cardinal
Barberini at his expense supplied four thousand Measures of Corn. But the
present Conjuncture did not seem to smile on the Venetians, for all the Galleys
belonging to Spain and Italy, as well as those of Malta, were employed in the
Transportation of the new Empress Margerita of Austria. The Pope was infirm,
and distracted with his own Domestic Affairs. The Emperor was a young
Bridegroom, and besides the Diversion which a Wife gave him from Cares, he
apprehended that he might speedily receive some disturbance from the Princes of
the Rhine, and from Sweden in the Dukedom of Bremen. The King of Spain was a
Child of five years old, laboring at the same time under a War with Portugal,
and threatened by the more powerful Arms of France, on the pretense of Flanders:
Besides all which, the Turks were as well in quietness amongst themselves, as
they were at peace with all other Princes; so that we may expect that the force
and power of the Ottoman Empire should now be turned, like a Torrent, to
overwhelm this spot of Land, which seemed to be so situated, as well to resist
the Waves of the Seas, as the Inundation of this mighty and Martial People.

Anno 1667. Hegeira 1078.
AT the Beginning of this year the Winter and Cold which chilled and benumbed
the Earth, increased the heat, and gave vigor and action to the Tartars, who
made such an unexpected incursion into Poland, that they carried with them near
a hundred thousand captived Souls, as they were numbered before Jash, in their
return home. The Polanders, awakened hereat, but ill advised, resolved on a
Treaty where there was more just cause for an open War, and in order thereunto
dispeeded an Ambassador to the Sultan, to expostulate the reason of this
breach of Peace, and require justice and satisfaction on those his Subjects,
who had, contrary to the Articles of Peace., committed such actions, and
outrages of open hostility; or at least, that the Turk would not take upon him
to abet the cause of the Tartars, whilst the olanders took just revenge for
their late injuries. The Ambassador with this Mossage put himself in a
readiness, and with a retinue of about two hundred and fifty Persons, begun his
Journey toward the end of April, and on the second of May crossed the River
Niestro, which divides Poland from Moldavia, where he was received by two of
the Boiars, or Moldavian Noblemen, and thence conducted to Jash, where the
Prince of that Country resided. The Ambassador expected the Visit of the
Prince, according to Custom and Articles of Peace; but the Prince being either
forbidden by the Port, or rather out of an ignorant stiffness and pride,
omitted to pass the Civilities of that Office, but yet supplied the Ambassador
with Plenty of Wine and Provisions; which the Polanders enjoying freely,
dispensed perhaps more easily with other neglects and omissions which concerned
Formalities and Ceremonies.

The ninth of June the Ambassador arrived at Adrianople, and thence was called
to Demitochum, a City about a days Journey distant, where the Grand Signior,
for the sake of his hunting and divertisement, remained under Tents, as the
most convenient Lodging in that Season of the Year; By the number of Coftans is
to be esteemed the honor the Turks bear to one Prince above the other.
the 25th the Ambassador had his first Audience with the Chimacam, at which
thirty five of his Retinue were vested with Coftans, nothing passing but the
usual Ceremonies and Complements. The 28th he had Audience of the Grand
Signior; but first made tender of his Presents as follows.

A Crystal Cup in a Case of Gold, adorned with Rubies and Diamonds.

2 Baskets rarely woven with a very fine Rush. A Clock. A Cabinet of Ebony
supported with four Eagles made of Silver, in which also was a Clock with a
perspective Looking-Glass. 2 Silver Cups of considerable bigness. 2 Silver
Flaggons. A Gun which discharged twenty times. 2 Spotted Dogs. 4 Mastiffs. 100
Else of Holland.
These Presents preceding, The Polish Ambassadors Audience.
made way for the Ambassadors Audience, at which he declared, That the
Commission from his Master the King of Poland, was to make Complaints unto his
Majesty of the grand Incursions the Tartars had made into Poland without any
reason or cause of War; and that therefore his Master did expect from him, as
from a just and virtuous Prince, a permission for revenge, and satisfaction of
his injuries, to enter Tartary, without assuming it as any ground of Breach or
Infringement of that Peace which he held with him; or else that he would by his
authority enjoin the Tartars to restore their Captives, and their spoils, and
render them a reasonable satisfaction. The Grand Signior returned no reply
hereunto, but referred that to be done by his Chimacam, silence being esteemed
some part of his Majesty and State, which he seldom breaks but with few and
haughty words.

This Ambassador was a man of a bold and daring Spirit, a fit Orator for such
an Embassy, had not his immoderate Covetousness, the Vice and Folly commonly
incident to Old Age, much eclipsed many of those Virtues of which he was
Master. He was also a Man of a violent temper, feavered to a madness in the
height of his Choler, which strangely betrayed him to many undecencies in his
Language and Comportment. For at his Audience with the Chimacam, when he came
to receive the Grand Signior's Answer, his words were vented with that heat,
and so like to menaces, that the Turks taking exception thereat, returned his
course Speeches with the like Dialect, at which the Ambassador swelled with
that indignation and anger, as became not the Moderation and Gravity of his
Office; adding in Conclusion, That he was an Aged Man, full of Years and
Corporal Infirmities; that nothing could arrive more happy to him than a Death
in which he should triumph to suffer for the benefit and glory of his Country.
This excess and intemperance of Language moved the Turks to set a Guard upon
him, and confine him to his own House in the nature of a Prisoner; which
violation of his Sacred Office, so worked upon his Spirits, that he often
vented some part of his fury in words and blows on the Officers of his Guard;
for which rude behavior having received some reproofs from the Chimacam, The
Death of the Polish Ambassador.
his passion not knowing which way to ease it self, feavered him into a
desperate sickness, of which in a few days, phrensical and distracted, he
departed his life.

The Secretary of the Embassy, being the next in Office, took upon him the
Function and Charge of the Ambassador, and having now nothing to act, but to
receive the Answer to the Message of his Master, for which a Day being
appointed, he was presented with a Horse and Furniture by the Chimacam, of whom
having Audience, he received no other satisfaction to the Complaints against
the Tartars than these following, which were related to me by the Secretary of
the Embassy, who did me the honor to make me a Visit, when I was on my
recovery from a dangerous Sickness, at Constantinople.

First, That no compensation or pretense be ever hereafter demanded for the
late incursions made by the Tartars into Poland.

Secondly, That the Polanders make not War upon the Cossacks, who had lately
renounced their subjection, and were fled for protection to the Ottoman Power.

Thirdly, That the Poles immediately make War upon the Muscovite.

Fourthly, That the Turk Merchants have free Trade into Poland, and that the
Turkish Merchants receive satisfaction for what injuries and losses they lately
suffered.

With these Propositions and Conditions of Peace, the Secretary was dispatched,
which did not so well please the Poles as to return thanks for them, or a
Messenger with Advice of their Acceptance or Ratification; and though they
could not but be sensible of the scorn and yoke the Turks would impose upon
them, yet having still remaining amongst them certain Relics of their former
dissentions and diversity about election of a Successor to their King, and
there being a certain Spirit of Luxury, Pride, and Sedition which was crept in
amongst the Nobility, they considered not the advantage of the present time,
but willingly preferred a present ease, and enjoyment of their Feasts and
Banquets, before the hazards and uncertainties of benefit, which they might
receive by the doubtful lot and fortune of War; and though never any Season
appeared more opportune and advantageous to the Pole than this, when the flower
of the Turkish Youth and Force was employed in Candia, and all places, in part,
dismantled of their usual strength and complement of Soldiers to defend their
Frontiers; yet they seemed resolved to pass by the former Incursions, and
Spoils, and Robberies made on their People, so the Turk would but stop here,
and permit them, without farther provocation, to enjoy their quiet, and
debauched way of living: Only some of the Borderers on the Turks, who had
deeply suffered by the late Incursions, moved with the loss of their Estates,
and the Captivity of their nearest Relations, joined with a considerable number
of the Muscovites, entered Tartary in the months of October and November, and
burned about three hundred Villages, carrying away Captives, and other prey,
from under the very Walls of Coffa.

At this time also the Pasha of Balsora began new rumors and an unseasonable
Rebellions, The Revolt of the Pasha of Balsora.
who being reported to have an Army of Horse and Foot consisting of forty
thousand men, gave no small disturbance and apprehension to the Turks; who with
their difficulties of War in Candia, and the jealousies of a storm from Poland,
remained with some doubts and hesitancy about the way of their proceedings. At
length Orders were dispatched to the Pashaws of Erzirum, Aleppo, Damascus, and
Darbequier, to unite against the Rebel, to divest him of his Government, and to
send his forfeited head to his Master. These Pashaws accordingly joining their
Forces, defeated the Rebel; and as all Conspiracies of open Rebellion distant
from the Court, have had but ill success in these Countries against the true
Prince, so this Pasha was routed, and being forsaken by his Servants, fled with
a few Horse to the Protection of the King of Persia. The principal Cause which
moved the Pasha of Balsora (as I was informed from the mouth of the Pasha of
Damascus) to this Rebellion, was the Confidence he had in his own strength, and
the fidelity of his people, to whom of ancient right, that Government was of
hereditary Succession, descended to him by his Ancestors for many Generations:
by which means he challenged such absolute interest in his Principality, that
for many Years he refused to acknowledge the Grand Signior by any other tokens
of homage, than in the bare name of his Protector, and in making Public
Prayers for his Prosperity and Victories. But at length the Grand Signior
coming to impose farther on him, stirred his hot desires into Rebellion, and to
an open defiance.

About the beginning of this Year the Captain General Cornaro, with the
Proveditor of the Armata Francesco Barbaro, returned to Venice, bringing with
them one Ramadam a Sangiack of Egypt, and other Slaves taken by the Captains
Grimani and Molini. The manner was this: Ramadam, with three and twenty Ships,
laden with Men and Ammunion, endeavored to enter into Canea, but being charged
by the Venetians, and overcome, set sire to their Ship, and leaping into the
Schiff to save their Lives, were taken by the Boat of Molino; and though
fourteen Galleys came out of Canea to their assistance, yet they could not
hinder the taking of five of their Ships, besides several others which were put
ashore and strand by four Maltese Corsairs, who entered into the Fight, being
called at a distance by the sound of the Cannon. About that time also a Turkish
Gally was surrendered by the Industry and Ingenuity of the Slaves, who having
secretly boared some holes in the bottom of the Gally, and plugged them up
afterward, so as that they might let in the Water, or stop it when they
pleased; it happened that the Gally being near the Rock, which is called
Polycandro, they secretly drew out the plug, whereby so great a Flood of Water
on a sudden came in, that the Gally being ready to sink, the Turks affrighted
forsook the Gally to save themselves on the Rock, leaving the Slaves in the
Gally to shift as well as they could. The Slaves being thus freed of their
Masters the Turks, plugged up the hol^s again, and clearing the Gally of Water,
rowed away, and delivered themselves into the hands of the Venetians; upon
which advice, the Captain General dispatched the Captain of the Gulf Lorenzo
Cornaro with two Galleys to that Rock, where they became masters of all the
Turks except two, who threw themselves into the Sea, preferring Death before
Slavery.

In the mean time the Duke of Savoy recalled Marquess Villa, who was his
Subject, from Candia; the reasons for which was attributed to an appearance of
Breach with Geneva, the Switzers and the Valtelines, who were his Subjects, or
rather to the ill Offices of those who envied his preferment, being desirous to
have him recalled from a place of so much honor and reputation. In obedience
to this revocation Marquess Villa taking his leave of General Cornaro, returned
from Candia as far as Zant; where meeting the new Captain General Francesco
Morasidi, and being by him assured, That the Pope, and Senate of Venice
representing the difficulty of Affairs in Candia, and the present urgency and
necessity for his presence there, had obtained License from the Duke of Savoy
for his continuance in that employment; upon which assurance, Marquess Villa
took a resolution to return again to Candia, being accompanied with a strong
Squadran of Vessels carrying considerable quantities both of Ammunition and
Provisions.

The History of the famous Siege of Candia.
On the 27th of April the Forces from Egypt under the Command of Messir Bey
appeared in the field, and on the 5th of May N S. the General of the Janisaries
encamped on the right side of New Candia, that he might better view and survey
the ground near the Lazaretto.

At the beginning of the New Moon of this Year's May, being the 12/22th day of
the month, public Prayers being first made through the most principal places
of the Empire for the success of the Ottoman Arms, and so solemnly continued
every Monday and Thursday for the space of a year; the Great Vizier first
appeared before the renowned Fortress of Candia, and began the memorable Siege
of that City, which for the space of twenty five years preceding had been the
subject to which the special care and expense of Venice, and the Art of the
most subtle Engineers of the World, as far as humanely was possible, did concur
to render it the most impregnable Fortress of the Universe.

The Town was fortified with seven great Bastions, viz. the Sabionera, Vetturi,
Jesus, Martinengo, Betlem, Panigra, and St. Andrea; these were all encompassed
with a large and deep Ditch, of which were the Revelin of St. Spirito, the
Revelin of Panigra flanked to the right with the Half Moon of Mocenigo: next
hereunto was the Revelin of Betlem bordering on the Work of St. Mary's, which
to the left had the Revelin of St. Nicholas, and this adjoined to the
Fortification of de Palma, next whereunto was the Revelin of Priuli, with the
Redoubt of Crepa-cuore; and over all was the Royal Fort of St. Demetrio, which
commanded the Work of Molino and Sabionera unto the very Sea.

Marquess Villa at his last return was chiefly intent to strengthen the
Fortifications, and repair the Outworks, especially that of St. Andrea which
was almost ruined, and the old subterranean Traverses were so full of water,
and the old Galleries so high, that the Enemy could easily pass under them, all
which he repaired and amended in a short time. In confidence of gaining this
strong Fortress, the Turks demolished New Candia, situate about two miles from
the Old, which the Vizier now pointed out to them as a better Seat, and
encouraged them to win and inhabit it; so that 14/24th of May the Turks
encamped over against St. Mary's along the Valley of Gioffiro with the sound of
their Drums and Trumpets, and firing great Guns and Vollies of Muskets. Their
Forces at first consisted of about forty thousand fighting Men, and eight
thousand Pioniers, but soon afterward increased to seventy thousand, and so
for the most part were maintained during the Siege.

The first Traverses began from the side of St. Mary's, and were carried to the
Sea, the Great Vizier took his Quarters over against Panigra, The disposition
of the Turks Camp.
the Janisar-Aga against Martinengo, and other Pasha's between that and Betlem.
On the other side the Pasha of Romelia encamped against the Lazaretto, and
Catirgi-Ogle Pasha of Canea against Sabionera, Achmet Pasha Vizier of the Camp,
and Zagargibashee Major General of the Janisaries, who had the reputation of
old soldiers and good Engineers, were ordered to enlarge and lengthen the
Traverses on the side of the Half Moon of Mocenigo. Quarters being thus
assigned, they raised three The Batteries raised by the Turks.
Batteries, the first against the Bastion of Martinengo, and the right side of
the Work St. Mary's; a second against Panigra; and soon after a third against
the Halfmoon and Bulwark of Betlem, from whence they continualy thundered with
their great Cannons, shooting Bullets of sixty, ninety to an hundred and twenty
pound weight.

Nor were the Besieged within less industrious or wise in the disposition of
their Affairs; for Marquess Villa took his Quarters at the entrance of the
Bulwark Jesus, Proveditor Barbaro at Panigra, the Proveditor General of the
Kingdom at Martinengo, the Duke of Candia, Francesco Battaglia, in the Fort of
Sabionera, and other Officers between the Curtains of St. Andrea, Betlem, and
Sabionera.

Things thus disposed on both sides, many and various were the valiant Assaults
and Sallies, the Traverses extraordinary, the Rencounters bloody, the
resistance vigorous, not known or recorded in any Siege before; which though
they can never be fully expressed, or particularly denoted, yet I should do
injury to the ashes of those Heroic Christians who so freely entered the List,
and on this Theater of the World sacrificed their lives in defense of
Christendom, should I not signalize some of them of diverse Nations for their
Prowess and Valor. And here pardon me, good Reader, if I come short or fail in
this relation, where many of unparalleled Valor and Virtue dyed obscurely and
unknown, and the numbers of others so great, that to specify them all, were to
swell this Work to a larger Volume than the Book of Martyrs. Here was that
Martial field into which remote Nations and unconcerned descended, carried
thither by zeal to the Christian cause, or by certain Principles of Valor and
Magnanimity; so that though the War bore no other denomination than of the
Venetian and the Turk, yet so great was the confluence of both parts of the
World to this little Isle, as if it had been chosen by unanimous consent for a
Stage to try the Title to the Universal Empire. The Town being thus beleagured
on all sides, but where The first Mine blown up.
Neptune the Spouse of Venice kept it open, the Christians endeavored first to
disturb the Traverses of the Turks by a Mine of Powder which they blew up; but
through the neglect or little experience of the Engineer, it being the first
which they had fired, reverted, and did more hurt to themselves than to the
Enemy; the error of which being observed, another Fornello was fired, which
taking its due place and measures, so affrighted the Turks, as yet not
acquainted with this manner and invention of War, that they began at the first
onset to be discouraged, considering that if the ground was unsecure and
unstable at that distance what abysses and chasmes must there be prepared to
make them graves under the Walls or entrance to the City. To second and
justify this Gunpowder Plot the Christians made two Sallies, one by the
Savoyards under Command of Colonel Profito Torse, who issued forth from the
Revelin of Betlem, and made great slaughter of the Turks with Grenades on the
side of Panigra; another was performed by Colonel Arborio and Colonel Marini,
accompanied with Count Brurasco Captain of the Guards to Marquess Villa who
assaulted two Redouts of the Turks, Two Sallies made by the Christians.
and forced them to flight, and afterward with some loss retreated
victoriously to their Works. In like manner Colonel Frigeri Commander of St.
Demetrio, made a Sally on Catirgi-Ogle near the Lazaretto, and with some loss
returned triumphant.

About this time arrived at Standi the Captain General Francesco Morosini, who
after some Consultation disarming his Fleet of about a thousand men, The
Captain General disarms is Galleys.
entered with that Succor into the Town, and yet fitted out a convenient
Squadron of Galleys and Galleasses to rove in the Archipelago to hinder the
Enemies Succors and Recruits, which were designed for Candia. In this interim
the Turks repaired the old Battery against the Lazaretto, Five Mines the
Christians sprang.
and labored continually in their Galleries and subterranean Works; so that by
that time that the Christians had sprang five Fornelli upon them toward the
point of the Half Moon of Mocenigo, the Turks had advanced so well toward the
Borders of Panigra, that they sprang two Mines; but these being but the first
proofs or essays of this kind of invention, reverted on themselves with the
loss of two hundred of their men, and again fired a third with little success:
which the Christians answered to better purpose, blowing up sixty or seventy
Turks. Wherefore the Turks made a farther trial of two Mines by the Half Moon,
rather to their own loss, than to the damage of their Enemy.

In all the month of July passed not a day without some considerable action,
sometimes to good, sometimes with bad success to both Parties; every day Mines
were sprank on both sides, destroying the Lines, and overthrowing the
Galleries; Attempts of the Turks on the side of Panigra.
but the main force and heat of the War as it were concentring it self toward
the Quarters of Panigra, in defense thereof the Engineer Castellan as freely as
courageously proffered the use of his Art, and the hazard of his Person. In
which whilst he employed himself, and endeavored to cleanse the Galleries of
their rubbish, which the Enemies Mines had thrown down, the Turks threw such
quantities of Bomboes and Stink-pots into those Caverns, as made the stench
thereof so suffocating and noisome, that two Officers were choked or smothered
that went to view the place, and Lieutenant Colonel Cavalli and the Engineer
Castellan himself were brought away half dead, poisoned with Sulphur and
pestiferous smoke; to purify which Grota, nothing could render the air more
wholesome, in expulsion of the preceding vapor, than the smoke of Juniper and
burnt Aqua vitae, which being made use of with good success, the Christians
fired two Mines, which opened so dreadful an abyss, as served for the grave of
great numbers of Infidels. Arrival of Galleys from the Pope and Malta.


During this time daily rencounters arrived the Auxiliary Galleys from the Pope
and Malta, commanded by Prior Bichi and Bali del Been, as also the Galleys of
Naples and Sicily commanded by Gianettino Doria and the Duke of Ferrandina, of
whom the Captain General would have borrowed some Forces to have served at
Land; but their Commissions it seems or their courages were too strait to
afford any such Supplies, being designed to cruise in the Archipelago; only the
generous Chevalier d'Harcourt with ten other Camerades that were embarked on
the Galleys of Malta agreed to enter the Garrison, Chevalier d'Harcourt.
having come with no other design from France, than to offer themselves in
defense of the Christian cause, and in a time of Peace, when their Prince had
no need of their assistance and service, to give the World true evidences and
proofs of the value and greatness of their souls. In all Enterprises this
Person, worthily descended of the House of Lorrain, was a Companion to Marquess
Villa, and one day venturing on a design to disturb the Enemies approaches, was
shot in the face with a Musket-bullet; of which wound recovering some time
after, he with his Companions returned to France having like Cavaliers Passant
acted the parts of true Chivalry. But neither did the Prior Bichi Commander of
the Popes Galleys, nor Doria Admiral of those of Naples, act agreeable to the
bravery of those French Gentlemen; for they not only denied, as we have said,
to land a small number of their men, but as if they came only to make them a
visit, sent this short Letter of Advice dated the 24th of August, in these
words. The Auxiliary Galleys are obliged to depart this night and to return to
Suda, where they are to remain until the expiration of that time which is
appointed for them in these Seas. Prior Bichi likewise sent word to Marquess
Villa, That he judged it fit to depart, by reason that no action presented for
them to undertake: to which the Marquess replied, That he who seeks may find,
and that such opportunities never offer to those who endeavor to avoid them.
Doria also, to color his excuses, said, That his Orders were not to land men,
unless the Town were in the extremity of danger of being taken; to which Villa
replied, That he could not well be assured in what condition the Town was,
since he never vouchsafed to set his foot ashore, or conceived a curiosity of
seeing the greatest and the most famous Siege that ever was in the World. In
short, these Holy and Catholic Squadrons departed without contributing any
assistance to the Christians, incurring thereby the severe censure of the
Commanders in chief, with the anger and disdain of of the Soldiery.

The Venetians have always thought it Policy to maintain an Agent in the
Ottoman Quarters, perhaps with design to afford them Intelligence, or to be
ready to apply Terms of Peace in times of most urgent necessities. An Agent
arrives at Candia to treat with the Vizier.
According to which Rule Signior Giavarina was sent to Candia upon the Venetian
Armata, now governed at Sea by one Pasqualino, with Instructions to treat with
the Vizier, and perhaps to grant him any thing besides Candia, though without
this nothing could come either welcome or satisfactory to the Turks. Howsoever
to introduce him into the Camp, a white Flag was displayed on the side of the
Lazaretto; which when the Turks perceived, they flocked in great numbers to
know the mystery of this Signal of Pacification. And though nothing appeared,
besides a Letter directed to the Great Vizier, yet they hoped it might portend
something of Treaty, which in the end would produce a Peace, and a conclusion
of their labors, before the Winter surprised them in their colder Lodgings.
The Vizier having read the Letter, had his thoughts raised as high as was
possible in hopes of a Surrender; and therefore most freely ordered, That
Signior Giavarina should the Sunday following come to the Valley of Gioffiro
with what Attendance and Followers he judged fit, proffering at the same time a
cessation of Arms and all acts of Hostility: but the Christians who were not
reduced to that extremity as to crave Peace, or a respite from action, kindly
refused his gentle proffer, which so enraged the Vizier, that in a fury he gave
fire to a Mine on the left side of Panigra, The Turks assault Panigra.
which was seconded with that furious assault, that Panigra had been put into
great danger, had not the courage of the Defendants been supereminent, and
repulsed the Enemy with so great a slaughter, that the earth round about was
covered with dead bodies: which action was seconded by a brisk Sally performed
by some Knights of Malta, as la Maison Neufve, de Langeron, de Clement, de
Monrosier, de Charboniere, and de Blanbuisson, though against the advice and
counsel of Marquess Villa, of which the two first were slain, and the rest
returned with honor and success.

At the end of this month of July the Garrison received a Supply of six hundred
Foot under Command of Ottavio Abia, a noble Venetian, who likewise made his
entry more acceptable by twenty thousand Ducats which he brought with him. At
the time of his arrival the Christians fired a Mine with good success, but the
Enemy had prepared another in revenge, which took such effect on the right
Angle of Panigra, as broke the Counterscarp ten paces, and filled the Ditch
with Earth, on advantage of which the Turks came to an Assault, but through the
courage of Luca Grandis Sergeant Major, and other gallant Officers, a stop was
given to the Enemies fury, and they beaten off with considerable loss.

And now for the present all Sallies ceased, whilst both sides carried on their
designs under ground, thwarthing and crossing the Mines, each of other; in
which subterranean Travels and Passages, the Miners often met, and had frequent
and bloody Encounters, those that were strongest robbed the Powder and Utensils
of the weaker, so that the Scene of War seemed to be transferred ad inferos,
and to be carried on with more fury and violence in the Grave, or the other
world, than it was in the open Air of the Cydonian Fields. The Turks fire a
dreadful. Mine.
The Turks becoming now as expert as the Christian in their secret and hidden
Traverses, had penetrated so far, that on the 8th of August they fired a most
dreadful Mine on the side of the half Moon, which made so great a Breach in
that work, that eight men could march a breast; which so animated the Enemy
with the advantage, that immediately in great numbers they mounted the breach
to give an Assault; but supplies being timely afforded in assistance of the
Guard, the Enemy was precipitated headlong, and overwhelmed with such showers
of Musket shot, that the Retreat into their works was not only disorderly, but
the number of those who survived so few and diminished, as gave proof how
hazardous it was to attempt other more difficult and better fortified Bastions.

Nor was the success of the Turks less on the side of Panigra, where having
made a Breach, they endeavored to make good their ground under shelter of
Sacks of earth, which the Christians drew away from them with long iron hooks,
which was such a piece of sport to the besieged to see their Enemies dismantled
of their shelter, and lie open to their shot, that a young Page of Marquess
Villa, called du Clos, venturing in this action beyond his years, was shot with
a Musket Bullet in the head, and so hastened to the other World covered with
glory and renown.

There was scarce now a day which passed, that was not signalized with the
springing of several Mines both on one side and the other; most of those made
by the Christians were seconded with Sallies, and those of the Turks with
Assaults and Stormings of one Fort or other. On the 10th of September Signior
da Riva, a noble Venetian, arrived with a Recruit of five hundred Soldiers,
and a great number of Pioneers, and the same day was celebrated, after the
usual manner, by springing of Mines; one of which threw a Turk on the Fort of
Panigra, and ruined the Galleries of the Enemy; the next day likewise several
Fornelli were fired by the Enginier Lubatiers from the parts of the half Moon,
and of Panigra, which filled up the Line, and spoiled the Redoubts of the Turks.

On the 15th the Christians vigorously sallied out with seventy Foot, under the
Command of Colonel Vechia, and two other Captains from the Revelin of Panigra,
who after a valiant skirmish, orderly retreated under the rampart of the
Revelin; to which place the Turks eagerly pursuing them, were entertained with
a Mine, and tossed into the Air; which being done, the Venetians returned
again, and were in the same manner encountered by the Turks, whereby a very hot
fight began; during which time the Captain General, who stood on the Bastion of
Betlem to observe the motions of the Enemy, saluted them with a plentiful
shower of Musket shot. In short, after the Venetians had for the space of an
hour resisted the Force of the Enemy with much slaughter, they retired with
good order into the Ditch of the City.

On the 18th Captain Fedeli, with a hundred Soldiers, made another Sally, but
being wounded, he retreated with some loss; which was retured again on the
Enemy by a Mine which the Enginier Quadruplani sprang with happy success on the
Quarter of Panigra; and on the same day the Captain of the Galleasses, called
Gioseppe Morosini, arriving with five hundred men, and two hundred thousand
Ducats together with good quantities of Ammunition and Victuals, gave
encouragement and relief to all the City; with whom also came the Cavalier
Gonges and his Brother, in quality of Adventurers for Honor and Religion.
There was not one day in all this Month, but diverse Fornelli and Mines were
fired on one side and the other; and though, the Christians exercised as much
military Art, Industry, and Valor, as men were capable to perform, yet the
Turks still gained ground, and daily advanced their works upon the Christians;
wherefore the Captain General ordered that a Mine and three Fornelli should be
fired; by which a small Fort of the Turks, near the Counterscarp, was
overthrown, with diverse other works lately raised.

The Turks had such good success with their last Mines, that a Week after they
fired another, which was calculated so well that it ruined the Gallery of
Communication between Panigra and its Outworks, and threw the Counterscarp
into the Ditch of the Town; The Turks spring ansther Mine.
For the necessary repair of which Breach, and clearing of the Ditch, the
Governors gave immediate Order, and appointed a strong Guard for defense and
protection of those that labored; and to make better dispatch, a most
ingenious Engine was contrived to remove and rid the Ditch of Earth, which
whilst it worked with admirable success, the Turks, by help of a Mine, blew it
into the Air, and shattered it into a thousand pieces. Howsoever, the
Christians desisted not from their intended work, but still labored with
Baskets, Sacks, and Wheelbarrows to carry away the Earth; which that they might
do quietly and undisturbed, the Savoyards and Sclavonians made a furious and
desperate Sally, which continued for the space of two hours; and though in that
time the Enemy had opportunity to collect their greater Force into a Body, yet
the Christians were not put to flight, but retreated orderly, and in a fighting
posture, though with the loss of several Officers, Two Mines of the Christians.
of which were Captain Re, and others. To revenge these mines of the Turks, the
Christians fired two others as dreadful as the others; the first near St.
Spirito, which being under the Enemies Traverses, performed its desired Effect;
the second was on the side of the half Moon, which swallowed up two of their
Redoubts; And on the third of October they fired four other mines on the sides
of Panigra and Betlem, one of which consisted of six and thirty Barrels of
Powder, and another of fourteen, ordering at the same time a furious Sally from
diverse places; as namely, Four Mines and a Sally of the Christians.
Captain Gamba sallied from the Revelin of St. Spirito, Sergeant Major Arasi
from under the Bulwark of Panigra. Colonel George Maria was ordered to assault
the Redoubts which were opposed to the Breach; Colonel Vechia to attaque the
Redoubts between Panigra and the half Moon, Colonel Cremasco and Marini to
assault the redoubts between the half Moon and Betlem. Count Brusasco defended
the work of St. Maria, Colonel Inberti defended the Revelin of St. Nicholas,
and Scrjeant Motta with thirty able Soldiers advanced to the farthest Lines of
the Enemy, killing and putting to flight all before them. Colonel Frigeri
Captain of the Fort St. Dimetry, and Lieutenant Colonel Vimes possessed several
Redoubts; and in the conclusion all retreated in excellent order with success
and triumph, to vield the Turks evident arguments of their fortitude and
courage; and that the Town was still so well provided, as not only to be in a
Condition of defending it self, but offending the Enemy.

Yet the Turks were still laboring to countermine the Fornelli of the Enemy,
and to revenge the former Plots; to which end they had penetrated to the most
inward works of Panigra; but the Pioniers, employed by the Engineer
Quadruplani, discovering their Gallery, entered boldly in, and drove away the
Turks from whom they took thirty two Barrels of Powder, and by that means for
the present preserved that work, and the Lives of many Soldiers.

The 17th of October the Christians sprang two Mines, one of thirty, Two Mines
of the Christians.
and another of five and thirty Barrels of Powder, which did the desired
execution upon the Turks; which some brave spirits seconded by a bold Sally,
amongst which none was more eminent than a Greek Priest, who moved with zeal to
his Country, entered far into the Enemies Trenches, where having killed a
Person of Quality hand to hand, he was returning with the Trophy of his head;
but being in the way intercepted by three at once, he was unequally matched,
and slain, and died with the highest honor imaginable under the Walls of his
Native City.

Soon after the Cavalier Verneda, One Mine of the Christians.
another Engineer, fired a Mine of forty Barrels of powder, which made the very
City and Works tremble, like an Earthquake; for whereas this Mine should have
taken its effect on the Enemies Redoubts, Providence ordered that it should
take its passage through an old Gallery with so much violence and Smoke that it
suffocated the Miners, Carpenters, and Masons, to the number of sixty men.

Toward the end of this Summer the Turks at Constantinople and Adrianople grew
big with the expectation of the happy News and Arrival of that messenger that
should declare the taking of Candia, and the end of the Venetian War; to
entertain which joy with the more readiness, they had prepared Lights, and
Lamps, and artificial Fireworks to solemnize their Which is their Triumph for
Victory.
Dunalma, and made public prayers and procession of the youth of the City
twice a week; but finding their hopes frustrated, and their joys from Month to
Month deferred, their expectations became tired and wearied, and growing almost
ashamed of their disappointment, began to throw the blame of the miscarriage of
their Affairs on the ill Conduct of the Vizier, and the sluggishness of their
Soldiery. The G. Signior sends a Messenger to bring him certain information of
the state of his Camp in Candia.
The Grand Signior also more impatient than the rest, dispatched away a
Messenger with Letters to the Vizier, reproaching his cowardice and sloth; that
being provided with a most puissant Army, and with all other appointments of
War, should suffer the Ottoman Forces to be baffled and entertained in taking a
single Fort for longer time, than formerly it had been in subduing whole
Provinces and Kingdoms; and moreover charged the Messenger to bring him a
faithful and true Relation of the state of all Affairs, and what was the
rea^^use and difficulty that so long obstructed the progress of his Arms; but
yet sent the Vizier for his encouragement a Sword, and a Vest of Sables, as
tokens of his favor. The Great Vizier moved with this message, resolved to
give some certain proofs of his industry and valor, and either to take the
place, or else at least to convince his Master, by the knowledge and testimony
of his Inquisitor, that the Work was of more hazard and longer time than was
apprehended in the Seraglio. Whereupon preparations were made, and the time of
assault was appointed chiefly on the side of Panigra, so that pressing
valiantly forward, they planted six of their Colors on the ruins of that
work; so that now, full of hope and courage, they adventured to descend into
the Ditch, but being prevented by three Mines, which contained seventy Barrels
of powder, they were mounted in the air with so much noise and violence, that
many Bodies were tossed on the Rampire of the Town, many of their greatest
Redoubts overthrown, and Graves made for multitudes of the Assailants. This
Assault as it began with great fury, so it continued for many hours; in which
action Signior Pisani, Proveditor General of the Kingdom, was killed by a
Granado. Howsoever, the Enemy was repulsed by the valor of the Christians,
insomuch that the Turks growing faint were pressed forward by the Vizier, who,
to encourage his Soldiers, promised an extraordinary reward of honor and money
to him who should but first touch the Walls with his hands. The hopes of riches
and honor so pricked forward all conditions of the Soldiery, that the
Commonalty desperately threw themselves at all, and endangered so fat the
taking of Panigra, that they had certainly possessed themselves of it, had not
the Venetians had recourse to their last refuge of Mines, and blown the whole
Work into the Air, by which perished three Pashaws, and great numbers of common
Soldiers. And this for the present astonished the Turks, and gave a stop to
the farther proceedings of this Assault. This proof gave an evident Conviction
to the Grand Signior's Inquisitor of the strength of the place, and difficulty
of the Work; and having been an Eyewitness of all, returned with dismal
Stories of a cruel War, reporting perhaps, and it was related in the parts of
Christendom, That this was a place where blood was spilt day and night, where
Gallant Men had forgot to sleep, living in perpetual labors, enured to
intolerable sufferings and hourly dangers, there being none secure either in
the Church, in the house, or in the street; for Grenades rained, Cannons
thundered, Arrows flew, with stones like a Tempest; so that there was none in
that place, but who quartered on the Brink of the Grave.

It now grew toward Winter, and yet the Vizier thought of no other Quarters
than his Trenches, judging that if he should quit his station, the labors and
progress of the former Summer would be lost, and the Work to be again begun in
the Spring. Wherefore resolving to keep his Works, provided all conveyances to
carry away the Water, and sheds to cast off the Rain, and warmer Tents for the
Soldiery, which yet could not so artificially be contrived, but that the Camp
was full of mire and dirt, tedious and troublesome to Man and Beast, and the
Quarters of the Soldiery, so damp between their Banks of Earth, as caused
Catarrhs, Fluxes, Fevers, and other Camp Diseases with much mortality.

It was now the dead of Winter, The Winter causes all Action to cease.
and yet Martial Exploits were as frequent as they had been in Summer; and
though the great rains and floods of water extinguished the fires, and made, as
it were a cessation of Arms, and of all acts of hostility; yet this interval of
calmness and tranquillity the Christians made use of to repair the Palisade of
St. Andrea, and the Lines of Communication within the Ditch. And because the
main Bulwark was also shaken, and in some danger, all the Chiorma or Slaves of
the Galleys were commanded a shore to labor in the reparation, and to make an
inward retrenchment, which in short time, with admirable diligence, was
persected, and on all sides completed.

The Turks in the mean time carried their Traverses forward as much as they
could, for they were now entered into the very Ditch of the Town; and because
there was no possibility to work in the Mines, by reason that the Galleries
were filled with water, they attended wholly to employ their great Guns, and
fire Grenades, so that they raised a new Eattery near the Work of Mocenigo,
which began to batter the lower parts of St. Andrea, and raised another Battery
on the ruins of the Revelin of Panigra, which being lower ground could not
much prejudice the main Bulwark.

The Sultan satisfied with the Relation given by his Messenger concerning the
progress his Vizier had made upon the Town, and of the hopes there was in time
to gain it, encouraged him with a Letter of Praise, accompanied with a Sword,
and Vest of Sables, the magnificent Signal of the Sultans favor. And now
besides the Force of Firearms, the Turks made use of Arrows, slot into the
Town, carrying papers written in Italian and French, persuading the Soldiers
to fly to their Camp, where they should receive civil treatment, and a secure
refuge; which gave that encouragement to those wearied with the labors of the
Siege and hard usage, that many of them made Trial of the Turks entertainment,
and escaping out of the Works, fled to the Enemies Camp, where they were
clothed, received Conduct Money, and were permitted License to embark
themselves for what place they pleased.

About this time the Proveditor General Barbaro and the Lieutenant General of
the Artillery Vvertmiller having obtained license from the Senate, returned to
Venice; the first was displeased, General Barbaro and Uvertmiller departed from
the Army.
that Marquess Villa should take the precedence of him; and the other, because
his opinion of making a general Sally of all the Garrison on the Enemy was not
followed, but rejected by the Council of War, as a design pernicious and
over-hazardous; for that the fighting with an Enemy more numerous than
themselves, fortified in their Redoubts and Works, and hidden under ground in
inextricable Labyrinths, was an Enterprise so rash, that no man wishing well to
the Garrison, and of sound judgment ought to advise.

The Turks having in this Campaign fixed themselves well in a formal Siege, and
gained ground, and many advantages on the Christians, of which the destruction
of the Work of Panigra was none of the least: the Vizier supposed it a
seasonable time to enter into a Treaty by the hand of the Secretary Giavarina
who was there entertained for that purpose but he falling sick of the
Camp-distemper dyed in a short time, The deaths of Secretary Giavarina and
Padavino.
whose death was soon after followed by that of Signior Padavino, who finished
his days at Canea; the Plate, Money, and Household Stuff of both were carefully
inventored, and by the justice of the Vizier duly accounted for, and
administered to the Venetians. The Instruments of Treaty being thus taken away,
the Captain-Pasha was dispatched to Constantinople, carrying with him four
thousand wounded and sick men, and a Letter to the Grand Signior and Divan,
signifying his resolutions to win the place, or dye under the Walls of it; and
to that end desired them to send him such Recruits of men and supply of
Provisions as were requisite. He complained of the cowardice of those to whom
they had incharged the Convoys; that he wanted both Powder and Bullet, for
default of which they could neither ply their great Guns, nor go forward in
their Mines; that bread was so dear, that no price could be set to it; that his
Soldiers by slaughter and sickness did daily diminish, so that his Army was
reduced to twenty three thousand Foot, seven hundred Horse, and two thousand
Pioniers; and in fine concluded with urgent instances to have Recruits of all
dispeeded to him, without which it was impossible to gain the Town, or save
himself. Hereupon Recruits came from all parts, both of Men, Ammunition, and
Provisions, especially from the Frontiers or adjacent places, which by such
vast evacuations were almost dispeopled, more particularly in Albania and
Castelnuovo extraordinary Preparations were making both of Men, Horse, and
Camels; and a report was spread, that the Grand Signior intended to pass over
in Person to Candia; but this was soon disproved by his residence at Larissa,
where he remained to render assistance more easily, and receive advices more
speedily than could be performed at Adrianople.

Great quantities of Corn were also sent from diverse places, particularly from
Smyrna, where English, French, and Dutch Ships were taken up for that service,
to the prejudice of the Trade, and damage of the concerned: some of which
Vessels were taken in their passage to Candia, whilst others arrived in safety
through the negligence, as was supposed, of the Commanders at Sea. And indeed
the Turks plied their business with that industry and diligence, that
notwithstanding the Force which the Venetians ^ad at Sea, their Recruits for
the most part arrived safe, and Corn began to be so plentiful, that the Vizier
gave a prohibition against having more imported; and in short, nothing wanted
for prosecution of the War, which was carried on in the Winter, as far as the
season or the weather would permit; so that scarce a day passed without
something of action, either of storming or blowing up of Forts, overthrowing
Galleries, filling Trenches, the particulars of all which are so numerous, that
to recount them would fill a Volume, and are more proper to be related in a
Journal than a History, in which minute matters ought to be passed by, and
nothing but acts of greatest moment be recorded.

Howsoever great Actions at this season ceased for a while on one side and the
other, only continual discharges of great shot and Bomboes were practiced. And
the Turks endeavoring with artifice to cover their designs, dispatched a
Letter to the Senate of Venice by way of Suda, and thence in a Galley to
Candia, touching certain Motives of Peace, supposing that Propositions and
Offers of Accommodation would loosen the minds of the Officers, and render them
less intent and diligen in their Affairs; on receipt of which Letter, though
Marquess Villa replied, That he had as much power from the Senate to conclude a
Peace, as the Vizier himself had from his Master, yet the Vizier would not
treat with him, but sent a Letter which was consigned by an Aga at the Bulwark
of Palma under the caution of a white Flag, desiring that it should be
forwarded to Venice. About this time arrived to the great comfort of the
Besieged the new Proveditor Barnardo Nani with five hundred Soldiers, and
Matteo Matheus Sergeant General with some Recruits from the Pope, bringing with
him three hundred Medals of Silver to bestow on such as deserved them, with
Jubilees and Indulgences without number, and thus ended the Action of this Year.

Anne Christi 1668. Hegeira 1079.
THE Spring approaching, toward the end of January the Turks full of hopes to
complete their Conquest, vigorously in all maritime Ports of the Empire made
provisions of Corn and other Victuals to be sent to the Camp, when occasion
should require, and opened a door for Janisaries according to the Turkish
phrase, the Formality of which is in this manner: The Chief Officer appointed
for that purpose asks severally such as come to be listed, Of what Chamber they
desire to be; Formality in making Janisaries in these days:
to which they making reply, That they will be of the fifth, sixth, or seventh,
or the like, the Officer gives them a blow under the ear with the palm of his
hand, and bids them repair to their Chamber, with which they nimbly pass away.
But herein the due form and order of Janisaries was corrupted; for in former
days Janisaries were educated in that condition from children, and from thence
named Yenisheri or Tyrones, or the young Soldiery; but now on this necessity
of raising Forces, ancient men, Fathers of Families with long beards were
admitted, to the disparagement of that Order, and corruption of the exactness
of that Discipline. Considerable Supplies also were sent of Beldargees or
Pioniers; so that this year from several parts, according to the best
computation, the Forces of Candia were recruited with a Supply of seventy
thousand men, for transportation of which and of their Provisions, all
Christian Ships were imbarged at Smyrna and Constantinople, several of which in
their voyage to Candia, were intercepted by the Maltese Corsaires, and
particularly a French Ship called the Arms of France, on which were between
four and five hundred Turks, was taken, and in bording of her about an hundred
Turks were killed upon the Deck: some other small Vessels (one of which was a
Ligornese under English Colors) were taken the French Barks which had in this
manner lost their Corn, unadvisedly returned to Smyrna, supposing the excuse of
having done their endeavors, and of being overpowered by a stronger Force was
sufficient: But the Turks who judge of nothing well, but by the success, having
gotten them into their hands, made them not only return their Freight, but
satisfy the loss of the Cargason.

In the Month of March the Vizier having intelligence of six or seven Venetian
Galleys to be at Fodile, not far from Standia, A Fight at Sea.
under the Command of the Proveditor of the Armata Lorenco Cornaro, gave order
to Regep Pasha of Romelia, who was Captain of the Soldiery, and Durach Begh,
who commanded a Squadron of twelve Galleys, to weigh Anchor in the night, and
there surprise them: Durach Begh, though sore against his will, doubting the
truth of the report, yet readily obeyed and fitted his Galleys for the
Enterprise. The Captain General having intelligence of the design, prepared
four Galleys in Port, and embarked that night with a French Regiment and some
Italians to the number of six hundred, besides two Companies of the Guards, and
one of the Proveditor Nam, under the Command of Colonel Audre Facile and
Montalto, accompanied also with the Proveditor Extraordinary Daniel Justiniani,
Commissary of the Treasury of the Militia, with several other Captains and
Officers; and arriving at Sandia, found the Proveditor General Cornaro newly
entered there from crusing the Seas with sixteen Galleys, to whom having
communicated the design, they immediately loosed from the Port, and arrived at
Fodile before midnight. The Turks having from the place of their Anchorage
discovered two Sail, hoped there might be no more, and therefore came forth to
fight them; but engaging farther, met such a number as evidenced the danger,
and the little hope there was in other than in their Courage and Arms. The
night being dark, the Venetians not to mistake each other, carried such great
Lights on their Mast-heads, as not only distinguished them from the Enemy, but
also directed them to give battle to the Turks, which they prosecuted so home,
that they took and sunk five of the Turkish Galleys, of which the Admiral
commanded by Durach Bey was one; the rest, though much shattered, and for the
present unserviceable, did yet by the help of their Oars, and the darkness of
the night, find a way to escape: nor was this Victory gained by the Venetians
in a Fight of seven hours without the loss of two hundred Soldiers killed, and
about five hundred wounded, besides some Persons of Quality and Command, viz
the Cavalier Arasi Justiniani, the Commissary Francesco Cornaro, Foscarini,
etc. the wounded were Georgio Greco, Lorenco Bembo, and Marco Balbi. The Turks
lost many of their best Seamen and Soldiers, besides Slaves and others,
counting on every Galley one with another three hundred persons; amongst the
Prisoners which amounted to four hundred and ten, the Beys of Cyprus and
Navarine with Mustapha of Anatolia, and the Chiaus of the Pasha of Aleppo were
taken, together with eleven hundred Christian Slaves who were all freed, on
condition that they should serve the Summer following in the Venetian Armata.
Of the Turks were slain Durach Bey, the Bey of Coron, and Hastam formerly Bey
of Coron. The Great Vizier from the Camp could all the time behold the flashes
of the small and great shot, and by help of the Venetian Lights perceive the
success of his own Fleet, not answerable to his expectation. What loss the
Turks sustained with Slaves and Soldiers is uncertain, only an hundred
Christian Slaves were released, and four hundred Turks captivated, and amongst
the slain was Durach Bey himself, a stout Seaman, and a known Pirate, who from
a small Brigantine had raised himself to be Begh of the Morea, and to command
four or five Galleys of his own. In like manner, and not long after, a Squadron
of Venetian Ships were forced by storm in the night to anchor under Cape Spada,
where accidentally six Turkish Galleys were riding. The Sky being very dark and
close, the first Ship ran foul of a Galley, and so shattered and crushed her
sides, that being ready to sink, the Turks forsook her, and run aboard the Ship
to save a life which was to be afterward miserable and slavish. The others
affrighted at the arrival of these unexpected guests, flipt their Cables to
seek harbor in a tempestuous Sea; but the weather being too boisterous for
Galleys, one of them was cast away, and about an hundred and seventy men lost:
the news hereof being brought to Venice by Colonel Vecthia with the Ensigns and
Spoils taken from the Enemy, the Senate bestowed the honor of Knighthood on
the Captain General, comforting the families of the slain and wounded with
signal marks of Honor and Glory.

The Captain Pasha put this year to Sea more early than was usual, designing to
make as many Voyages to Candia as was possible, with Succors both of Men and
Ammunition; his design and work was wholly to avoid the Venetians, and to steal
ashore his Recruits; to which end he made such expedition in every Voyage, The
success of the Turks at Sea.
that scarce could the Christians have advice of his arrival in any part of the
Isle of Candia, before he was well forwarded in his return: yet his haste was
not so great, but one time having fifty three Galleys in his Company, he
adventured to look into the Port of Nio, where he met four Corsaires or
Free-booters under Mastese Colors, commanded by two Brothers Themericort, and
by the Knights Verva and Bremant: two of the Ships were on the Careen washing
and tallowing their Vessels, whilst the other two, viz. the Themericort
Brothers were on the Guard, being at anchor in the narrowest entrance to the
Harbor. The Turks supposed at first, that so formidable an appearance of their
Fleet would affright the Christians to a Surrender, rather than to contend on
those unequal terms. But it seems the Corsaires were more resolute than was
imagined; for no sooner did the Turks approach, than the Christians discharged
their Cannon and Vollies of small shot so plentifully, as caused the Galleys to
dispute at a farther distance, where shooting as it were at rovers with their
long Cashee Pieces (not adventuring to come to a nearer Fight) for the space of
eight hours made (as reported) about eight thousand shot, with little or no
execution; so that the Captain-Pasha made his sign of Retreat, and forsook the
Engagement, as being too dangereous and difficult an Enterprise. But better
success had the Turks the next month at Sea against Captain Georgio, an old and
subtle Pirate, who for many years had vexed and pillaged, not only the Turks,
but Christians on all Isles of the Archipelago: great fortune he had in taking
Turkish Saiks and Vessels; and some of them considerably rich, and when that
prey failed him, or was scarce, he pursued his game on the shore, from whence
he often carried men, women, and children into slavery, and oft-times had the
fortune of considerable Booty. The Islands which lay open and ungarded were his
common Rendezvous, where the men attended his service, and the women his lust.
In this manner the Pirate passed for several years, have obtained unto himself
a fame and terror with the Turks, and riches at home: the place which he
commonly chose to wash and tallow his Vessels, was amongst certain small Isles
in the Bay of Edremit, anciently Adrimetum, opposite unto Mytilene, from whence
he had as from a Thicket or Wood a view of such Vessels as passed the great
Road toward Constantinople: these frequent successes rendered him so confident
and secure, that he still continued his station, notwithstanding the Turkish
Naval Forces, which in the Summer season made their Rendezvous at Scio. But at
length the Captain-Pasha with the whole Turkish Armata being at Scio, and with
him three Ships of Tripoli, advice came that Captain Georgio had not forsaken
his little Isles, but was there careening his small Fleet which consisted of
two Ships and a Brigantine: hereupon the Tripoleses were commanded out to
encounter the Enemy, whom the next day they found so secure and negligent, that
he discovered not his Foes before they were ready to attaque him. The Captain
Pasha also fearing that the Tripoleses were not of sufficient Force to
encounter so valiant and experienced a Commander, both to make the Enterprise
the more easy and certain, and to gain the reputation of that business to
himself, went out in person with all his Galleys. The Tripoleses had began to
fire on Captain Georgio before the Pasha came in to their assistance, but it
falling calm, and the Ships not able to join in a nearer fight, gave way for
the Galleys, which being above fifty in number, overpowered the Christians on
all sides; howsoever, the two Ships defended themselves against all this Force,
until the Captain himself being killed, his own Ship surrendered, but so
shattered, that she was scarce able to swim above water. Captain Georgio taken
by the Turks.
This Ship being oversome, the Turks boarded the other, commanded by Captain de
Lescases, who seeing no remedy to avoid being taken, he leaped into his Boat,
and blew up his Ship; howsoever could not escape his destiny, for having his
Arm broke, he became a prey and a slave to his Enemy.

The News of this Victory was celebrated with so much the more joy, by how much
this person was feared and hated, and was not only a subject of rejoicing to
the Turks, but also to the Christians, whose Parents and Relations this
Corsaire had pillaged and enslaved; so that the Inhabitants of the Archipelago
for the most part were pleased with the revenge, and promised more security and
quietness to their open Coasts. With no less triumph was this News posted to
the Grand Signior, who rewarded the Messenger with two thousand Dollars
gratuity, and caused demonstrations of joy to be made through the whole Court;
so dreadful was grown the Name of so inconsiderable a person, in respect of the
greatness of the Ottoman Empire.

But the success of this advantage did not heighten the courage of the Captain
Pasha to that pitch, as to make him more bold with the Venetian Armata; for in
the month of July having great Recruits of Men and Provisions to land, and
hearing that the Venetians lay before Canea, having fortified a Rock, called
St. Todoro, at the mouth of that Port, he resolved for Retimo; but pursuits, or
intelligence of the Enemies being in the way, or his own fears still prevented
him, until at length he was forced to Gira-Petra, a small and obscure place,
far distant from the City of Candia, and the way thither by land rocky, and
almost unpassable for Beasts of Burden; howsoever, the Men and Ammunition were
there landed with that haste and expedition, that in less than thirty hours
time the Captain Pasha was again upon his return for Scio, leaving the
Soldiery, and the Ammunition he had disbarked to find a passage through the
Rocks and Mountains: At which the Vizier was so displeased, that he sent the
Captain Pasha this Message, That the next time he should forbear to bring
farther supplies, until he could find a more commodious Port wherein to land
them.

In this manner the Marine Affairs passed this year at Sea, the Turkish Fleet
having, besides other succors, transported Ibrahim Pasha of Damascus with
eight hundred Spahees unto Candia, whom we mentioned formerly to have been
Pasha of Grand Cairo, and married to the Grand Signior's Sister; and being one
with whom I had a former acquaintance, and who was a great friend to the
English Nation, I made him a visit as he passed through Smyrna.

Whilst these matters were transacting at Sea, on the 7th of January arrived
the new Proveditor General Bernardo Nani, and Sergeant General Muteo Matei with
five hundred Foot, sent by the Pope, who gave License for destruction of some
Monasteries, whose Orders were judged less necessary in the Venetian State,
that their Revenue might be applied to the service of this War; after Arrival
of which succors, a general Muster was made of the whole Garrison, and the
number thereof reckoned to amount unto eight thousand fighting Men; though soon
afterward continual action and exploits of War decimated the number, and many
of the brave Commanders being taken off, every tenth man perished, and rendered
the place in a condition which required continual supplies.

For many and various were the attempts and actions performed on both sides
under the Walls of Candia; and first the Turks began to make appear a Battery
which they had raised on the side of the Lazaretto, which so offended tho Port,
that there was no harbor or access for Vessels. On the contrary to which, by
the Fort of St. Andrea another Battery was raised, which offended Tramata very
much, which was another small harbor, capable only to receive Boats or Barks;
the passage to which was so annoyed now by the Enemies Cannon, that no Vessel
could go in or out, unless in the Night, and that too with some difficulty and
danger.

The Turks gaining advantage on the side of St. Andrea, The Turks resolve to
make their passage by St Andrea.
applied their whole strength and diligence to that part; and one dark Night
passing undiscovered along the Seas, they silently fixed a Cord to the Palisade
of St. Andrea, and with an Engine strained it so violently, that they tore away
several of the main Stakes of the Work without being perceived by the
Sentinels, who paid for that neglect with the price of their lives; upon which
success they continued to advance their lines on that side, which Marquess
Villa perceiving, resolved to hinder by some valiant sallies. And first two
hundred brave men selected out of several Regiments, conducted by Sergeant
Major Motta, issued out from Panigra, and taking their way along the Sea,
bravely mixed with the Turks, and put them to flight; A Sally made by the
Christians.
and though the Alarm thereof brought a Concourse of Turks from all parts of
the Camp, yet the Christians stood so stoutly to it, that they struck a terror
to their Enemies, and once forced them to a Retreat within their Trenches; and
at length, after they had overthrown certain Redoubts and Traverses, they gave
back with good order, returning with Victory and Glory; which bravery the
Captain General-acknowledged to all, and encouraged in the common Soldiery
with a Present of fifty Zechins. This success gave the besieged opportunity to
finish their Platforms which they had raised on the side of the Ditch adjoining
to the Bulwark of St. Andrea, on which they planted two pieces of Cannon which
carried fifty pound Bullet a piece; which much disturbed the Enemies Traverses:
Howsoever, the Turks with indefatigable pains, and invincible patience battered
the little Tower of Priuli, the Curtain, and Revelin of St. Andrea, and
employed all their power and attention to fill the Ditch with Faggots, Earth
and other Rubbish.

On the 29th of February, after the Christians had first made a Breach on the
Enemies Redoubt, which confronted the Revelin of St. Andrea, and sprang five
Mines one after the other, a second Sally was made by a considerable Body of
the besieged, consisting of two hundred French and Savoyards, three hundred
Italians, two hundred Germans, and a hundred and twenty horsemen, Another Sally.
who issued forth with that Gallantry, that driving the Turks under Covert,
advanced far within their Works, with which Demonstration of honor the
Captain General being satisfied, they made the smoke which was a Signal for
their Retreat; so that returning victorious without much loss, that day was
remarkable, and numbered amongst the other days which were esteemed successful
and fortunate in that Siege.

Howsoever, the Turks with admirable patience and assiduity crept forward by
their Traverses, and help of their great shot on the Bastion of St. Andrea,
which whilst Augustine Rostayne, Adjutant of Marquess Villa, considered, he was
taken off by a Cannon Bullet, and yet the Turks could not advance so fast, but
that the Engineer Maupassan gave some retardment to their progress by firing a
Mine, which overthrew two of their Redoubts, and afforded them new work to
repair them and the adjoining Traverses.

This was the present state of the miserable Candia, when the Duke of Savoy
recalled his Subject Marquess Villa from his honorable employment; Marquess
Villa returns into Italy.
and a Ship, called Alexander the Great, by appointment of the Venetian Senate
arrived at Standia to transport him and his Family to Venice; so that on the
22/12 of April, accompanied to Tramata by all the principal Officers of the
Garrison, he embarked in order to his Voyage, whose place was about two Months
after supplied by the Marquess St. Andrea Monthrun, a Nobleman of France, with
whom the Venetian Ambassador at Paris, by order of that Republic, had
prevailed to take upon him the defense and protection of that deplorable City,
reduced now almost to its ulti^^^^ Crisis.

I cannot adventure to assign the reasons that might induce the Duke of Savoy
to recall the worthy Governor from this glorious action. Some say, that those
who were emulous of his glory procured his revocation; Others, that the
Marquess himself desired it; Causes of Marquess Villa's departure.
and that finding the Forces of the Town to decline, and the Turks to encroach
and penetrate daily into the innermost parts of strength, he was desirous,
after so long a Siege, to return with untainted glory; or perhaps weary of a
Siege so tedious and perilous, he might desire to retire, having performed
sufficient already in his own person, and enough to make all Christendom his
Debtors and Admirers. So that I cannot but reproach those tongues and pens,
which in report and writings attribute the cause of Marquess Villa's retirement
to certain just occasions of discontent given him by the Captain General
Francesco Morosini, who, envious of his Fame and actions, and unwilling to have
a conshater with him in his honors, did usually thwart his Counsels and
Proposals; and more particularly contemned a Redoubt which Marquess Villa had
built, and of which he had a singular esteem. Yet that Morosini might evidence
the unsufficiency thereof, it is reported that he wrote a Letter to the Vizier,
to assault that Redoubt; for if he did, he promised to afford him opportunity
to take it, by withdrawing all Forces from thence; which Letter it is said, was
betrayed to Marquess Villa, and brought to his hands, which he with great
prudence and moderation dissembled until the hour of his departure, and then
produced it to the astonishment and shame of Morosini. To this particular I
give the less belief, because I find it wrote in a Journal of this Seige by a
person who was a great Favourer of the French, and willing to share the entire
glory to that Nation, and the miscarriages to the Italian. Whatsoever might be
the motive to Marquess Villa to persuade his return, is uncertain; howsoever,
it is reported, that being arrived at Zant in his way to Venice; and there
meeting a strong Convoy bound for Candia, with recruits of Men, and plenty of
provisions, he conceived new thoughts of the greatness of the Republic; and
beholding also with what vigor and vigilance they attended to the conservation
of that place, he began to testify some remorse and dissatisfaction for having
abandoned a Charge which rendered his Fame great through the World; and the
continuation of which labors being crowned with that success which his courage
and conduct merited, might have brought a Blessing to all Christendom, and
perpetuated his honor and glory to all posterity. The Marquess being arrived
at Venice was received with the usual Ceremonies and Honors from the Public,
and being Introduced, after private Audiences, into the College, he spoke in
this manner.

IF the thanks which I render to your Serenity, Marquess Villa's Speech.
and to your Excellencies could equal the greatness of those favors which I
have received from you, it would have been but an ordinary glory to you not to
have infinitely surpassed the bounds of my acknowledgments, as you have
infinitely outdone the utmost of my Deserts; Nor could this August Senate have
been exalted to the most elevated point of Soveragin Power, had I been able to
render Services worthy of that generosity which composed it. For as the
affection of the Creatures toward God, makes excuses for their wants and
infirmities, so having a zealous desire to contribute to the glories of this
most Serene Republic, not only my endeavors, my labors, and my blood, but
also my life, and my whole being; I beseech you to accept thereof as an
atonement for the weakness of my abilities. This, my Lords, is that desire
which I have ever demonstrated in all the wearisome performances of my Charge
under the generous Conduct of the Captain General of your Arms, whose Valor I
have endeavored to second and imitate. This is that Desire which would have
entertained me in the service of this most Serene Republic to the ultimate
period of my life, if the Command of my Prince, concurring with the Assent of
your Serenity, had not enjoined my return. I confess, that I should feel in my
self an inward Consolation, could I assist at the triumph of Candia, which I
hope in a short time to see victorious over all her Enemies; until when, my
Lords, the honor which you have been pleased to do me hitherto, cannot but be
relished by me as a Comfort of my life. And what greater Glory can I imagine to
my self, than to have served a Republic, which may be called the most perfect
work of the hand of God, which being founded like the Firmament upon the
Waters, communicates happy Tranquillity through all the World? I am able now to
boast, That I have seen a City which of it self alone is able to resist the
Puissance of all Asia, and that I have proved and tried the valorous opposition
which it made against a formidable Enemy. I can (I say) glory that I have
awakened in the hearts of your Soldiery, their ancient Valor, and that I have
sprinkled your Laurels with my own Blood; and it is but just that I should
distill it to the last drop for the service of this most Serene Republic, which
after so many Ages resigns it self up a Sacrifice for all Christendom. It is by
your Arms (my Lords) and by your immovable Constancy, that the City of Candia,
which in former Days was esteemed the weakest of all the Fortresses of Greece,
is become at present the most famous Theater of War. I dare not only hope, that
the conclusion thereof will be happy, so long as your Serenity watchfully
attends to the conservation of that place, but that also this August Senate
will extend their Conquests into the most remote parts of all the East. This
would be, most Serene Prince, and most Excellent Lords, the consummation of all
my desires, and also that I might finish my days in the Service of this most
Serene Republic, toward which I shall for ever conserve a most passionate
zeal and an immortal acknowledgment.


The Senate, that they might testify the esteem they entertained of the person
of Marquess Villa, presented him with a Basin of Gold valued at six thousand
Ducats, together with a Patent recounting at large the many famous Exploits
which he had performed in their Service, which they expressed with a style so
generous and obliging, as may serve for a Record to transmit the Fame of his
Merits to all Posterity.

Marquess Villa being departed from Candia, the Captain General recalled all
his Forces from diverse parts of the Archipelago, which he had sent thither with
the Soldiers wounded in the last Battle; and being returned, they brought with
them great numbers of Pioniers and Workmen to labor in the Fortifications and
Mines: at the same time also the Captain-Pasha arrived at Canea, bringing two
thousand Janisaries with him.

The Marquess St. Andrea Monthrun, Marquess St. Andrea visits the Works.
a Gentleman of the French Nation, was transported to Candia by the General
Proveditor Cornaro, where being entered into the Charge and Office of Marquess
Villa, wanted nothing of the vigilance and circumspection of his Predecessor.
And therefore in the first place having visited all the Forts, Outworks, and
Retrenchments of the Town, ordered what was necessary for repair of the
breaches, and amended what was deficient in the most distressed Fortifications.
And though the Turks fired a Mine the 22th of August at the point of the Fort
St. Andrea, which made a most dangerous breach; yet it was so valiantly
defended, and so speedily repaired, that the Enemy gained little or no
advantage, and all by the extraordinary diligence of this Marquess St. Andrea,
who passed whole months without uncloathing himself; and as his nights were
without sleep, so his days consumed without repose, applying himself personally
to all places where was most of danger, especially at the Fort of St. Andrea,
where he took up his constant Quarters.

The Turksnow daily pressing the Town more nearly than before, Skirmishes and
Sallies were more frequent and more bloody; so that about this time the
Proveditor General Bernardo Nani applying himself with all earnestness in the
performance of his Charge, was slain by a Musket Shot in his head; his death
was much lamented by all, being a Gentleman who was born (as may be said) in
the Fleet, having had his Education there, and passed his youth in Wars and
dangers for the safety and honor of his Country. Girolamo Bataglia was elected
by the Republic to succeed him in the Office, whose death was also seconded by
that of Francesco Bataglia, (...)
Brother of the Duke of Candia, being shot in the breast with a Musket-bullet;
and though he was sent thither to administer Justice to the People, yet his
zeal and courage carrying him to Martial Acts beyond his duty, made a grave for
him amongst the other Heroes and Worthies of that place.

The Turk, approaching daily nearer with their Works, infested very much the
passage of Vessels to the Town, and shot so directly into the Port, that no
Ship, Galley, or Bark could remain in any security from their Cannon; to remedy
which, a small Redoubt was raised at Tramata, which being well and strongly
fortified served for a small Port, under the shelter of which the lesser
Vessels found some protection, and was of great relief to the distressed City.
About this time the Popes Galleys with those of Malta arrived, commanded by
Fra. Vincenzo Rospigliosi, the Popes Nephew, who having not brought a greater
number of people than what served to man their Galleys, they were not able to
spare many for defense of the Town.

The long continuance of this Siege, and the same thereof noised through the
whole World, moved the heroic and gallant Spirits of our Age, to descend into
this Campus Martius, this Field of War, and give proofs of their Prowess and
Valor in defense of the Christan Cause; some being moved by a principle of
vainglory, proceeding from the briskness of a youthful and aerie Spirit, and
others from the sense of Devotion and fervor toward Religion: amongst which
none were more forward than some Gentleman of the French Nation, as namely
Monsieur La Fueillade, alias Duke of Roanez, with the Count St. Paul, Some
French Gentlemen, Adventurers for honor, ar^ive at Candia.
a young Cavalier; to forward which design, taking first the License and
Benediction of their King, they appointed their Rendezvous at Tolon, where they
listed two hundred Gentleman, Cadets or younger Brothers, who went in quest of
Honor, and not of Pay, with four hundred ordinary Soldiers who expected their
maintenance from the bounty of their Leaders. The chief of whom was Monsieur La
Fueillade, and his Lieutenant the Chevalier De Tresmes.

Their whole Body was divided into four Bridgades.

The first commanded by Count St. Paul. The second by the Duke De Carderousse.
The third by the Count De Villa Maur. And the fourth by the Duke De Cheateau
Tiery.
When these Persons of Honor and Courage arrived at Candia, they found the
City hardly beset, and reduced to a strait and difficult condition; for the
Turks were advanced so near to the Fort of St. Andrea, that the Soldiers
within and without could cross their Muskets, and reach Tobaco one to the
other: howsoever this breach was so well repaired with a good Palissado
fortified with several Bonnets, and a double Retrenchment on the Bastion, it
self, and a third Retrenchment of squared stone withal, that the courage of the
Besieged being nothing abated by the many and furious assaults of the Enemy,
the Town still remained in a defensible posture, and still capable with good
Succors and Supplies to yield matter of employment for several years to the
Ottoman Forces. These worthy Champions, as I said, being arrived, moved with
the sense of Religion, and desire of glory to themselves, challenged the
privilege of mounting the Guard of St. Andrea; but that being already
prepossessed by the Knights of Malta and other Officers of the place, was
refused to them. Howsoever the Captain General Morosini was pleased to gratify
them with the Guard of a small Chapel over that Bastion on the right hand of
the breach, a place of no less danger, and therefore of no less honor than the
other; with which the Cavaliers being satisfied, Monsieur St. Paul mounted the
Guard one day at six a clock in the morning, and continued there until the same
hour of the day following; during which time he lost his Major Dupre and
Monsieur De Marenval, the latter of which had his brains knocked out with so
violent a blow of a great shot, that some pieces of his skull dangerously
wounded the Sieurs De Chamilly and De Lare, who were near to him: and more
maliciously did the Turks ply the stations of these new-come Guests than any
others, throwing Bomboes, Grenades, Stink-pots, and other sorts of artificial
Fire without cessation into their Quarters, notwithstanding which, this young
Prince and Monsieur La Fueillade exposed themselves like common Soldiers,
animating their men more with their example than their words.

And now by this time by so many Works and removals of Earth, by so many
Traverses and Mines under ground, and throwing up the caverns and bowels of the
Earth into the Air, the soil became so brittle, crumbling, and as it were
sandy, and like ashes, that it seemed not capable longer enduring of the
Pick-ax or the Shovel, and was so porous, that the light of some Mines
glimmering into the others Traverses, easily discovered each others Mines,
whereby it became equally a trade and custom to steal Powder. The Christians
overthrow a battery of the Turks.
Howsoever the Venetians so closely worked with those Props and Arts, that they
formed a considerable Mine, which on the first of December they sprang with so
much success, that they wholly overthrew a Battery of the Turks directed
against St. Andrea, and buried all their Cannon.

But these French Gallants intended not from the first of their design to make
this War their Trade, or the Town of Candia their place of habitation, but as
Passengers or Pilgrims, whose souls are active, and hate idleness, to give the
World some proofs of their Valor, and so away: wherefore La Fueillade their
General pressed Morosini to give leave, that he and his Fellow Soldiers might
make a Sally, and enter into the Enemies Trenches, so as to yield a
divertisement to those on the Walls, and perform that Action and Enterprise for
which they had designed and undertaken this Voyage: of which some of them were
so impatient, that they would not expect Orders for their Sally, as the
Chevalier De Tresmes, who alone entered into the Enemies Works, and returned
with his Sword all bloody; at which La Fueillade his Commander was so incensed,
that he reproved him with this short reprehension, I would as gladly see a
Butcher as you. Others by this example scarce refrained from the like; amongst
which Monsieur De Ville Franche drew a Turk by force from his Trench, and
brought him to the foot of the Bastion; but there he was forced to quit his
Prize, for being shot in the Leg with a Pistol-bullet, soon after dyed of the
wound: By these examples the Commanders seeing it impossible to repress or
abate the mettle of these vigorous Spirits, their bridle was taken off, and
license given to make their excursion; so that all things being ordered and
contrived for a Sally, before break of day in the morning they silently issued
forth, A S^lly. ^ade by the French.
and leaping into the Enemies Quarters, valiantly mingled with them, cutting
and hewing down all before them; their Banner was a Crucifix carried in the
Front by Father Paul a Capuchin Friar, who little regarding those who followed
him, proceeded with his Ensign as unconcerned, as if he had been in Procession;
which so animated the Soldiery, that like men conducted by miracle, they broke
through the gross Body of the Enemies Force: and so violent they were in their
combat, and so intent to their business, that they neither observed the
multitudes of the Enemy which came upon them, nor the signal of their Commander
for a Retreat; until at length discovering their danger, they made speed with
some disorder to return, having lost an hundred and twenty Gentlemen in this
rencounter, whose heads being cut off (as the custom of the Turks is) were
pitched upon the Pikes end, and ranked before the door of the Viziers Tent,
amongst which the head of the Marquess Doradour did beyond all the others draw
the eyes of the Turks, who admired the clearness of his complexion, and
fairness of the hair; which being breaded in tresses for the more convenience
in fighting, made death it self beautiful, and was at the same time both his
Enemies glory and their compassion. The French having thus evaporated their
fury with this Phlebotomy, there not remaining above two hundred and thirty
after this Sally of all those six hundred brought into Candia, Monsieur La
Fueillade with his relics departed: at which time the whole strength of the
Town consisted of about seven thousand stranger Soldiers, four thousand
Inhabitants, and two thousand Savoyards, which was too weak a Garrison to
resist so potent an Enemy, so formally and strongly encamped, unless supplied
with new Recruits. Wherefore the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg mindful of
their Christian Brethren in this distressed Siege, contributed three Regiments
toward their relief, The Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg sent Forces to
relieve Candia.
consisting in all of three thousand three hundred men. The first under Count
Waldeck; the second under Molleson, and the third under Count Radesfeld. They
made their Muster first at Verona, and imbarking at Venice the 28th of March,
on the 12th of May 1669. they arrived at Candia. These valiant Soldiers
desiring to ease the long besieged Companies, demanded the Guards of Sabionera
and St. Andrea; which being by this time become hot and dangerous stations,
were not disputed with that heat of honor as formerly, but were easily yielded
to the fresh and new-come Soldiery. Many now and various were the assaults
which the Enemy made upon the Town, hoping to carry it by dint of Sword; but
the Christians unweariedly maintained their valor and courage, and
particularly the Lunenburghers, whose gallantry deserved its due praise and
reward. Their General Count Waldeck whilst he undauntedly encouraged his men,
Count Waldeck dies of his ^ounds.
and openly exposed himself on the Works, received a mortal wound, of which
soon afterward he dyed; but before he expired, he assembled together his
Fellow Soldiers, and encouraged them in the Holy cause they were come to
maintain, giving them as a Farwel-Sermon, instructions, and persuasive
arguments to a godly life, and having confessed his owns sins in the presence
of them all, he resigned his spirit into the hands of his Creator, leaving not
only his own Forces, but the whole Town disconsolate for the loss of so able a
Commander.

And now the time of year approaching, wherein the Town expected its ultimate
Relief, and the Union of all the Princes of Christendom for raising the Siege,
which had continued for the space now of about two years; the valiant
Christians full of hopes, daily animated each other, casting their eyes to
Sea-ward, promised a reward to the first Descryer of the long desired Fleet.
The Turks also being advised of the expected Succors, resolved if possible to
perform the business designed before their arrival; and thereupon made one of
the greatest assaults that ever was yet given to the Town, in which though the
Christians behaved themselves with all valor imaginable, yet the Turks still
gained farther footing and advantage. And now it fared with the Town after
every storm, as it does with a physical body after every accession of a Fever,
which though it intermits for some time, yet it leaves the Patient always more
weak and debilitated than before. Wherefore the Christians increasing in care
and diligence, the Captain General disarmed several of his Galleys to supply
the Town with what Force he could possibly contribute, and the Engineers
employed their brains for destruction of the Enemy, so that they fell again to
their Mines, and sprang one which took good effect; soon after they sprang
seven others, after which four more near the Revelin of St. Spirito, A Mine of
an hundred and sixty Sacks of Powder fired by the Chrians.
which blew up many Turks, ruined their Lodgings, and buried one of their
Batteries: these also were followed by another Mine of an hundred and sixty
Sacks of Powder, which took its way between St. Andrea and the Revelin of St.
Spirito with extraordinary execution and violence, throwing up that vast
quantity of Earth and Timber, that it not only overwhelmed the Enemy in the
neighboring Trenches, but overthrew a Battery of three Pieces of Cannon, which
the Turks had raised on the Revelin of St. Andrea: yet all this served to
increase the heat and fury of the Enemy rather than abate it; for they
imagining this to be the ultimate force and the last blast of the expiring
Fortress, plied their assaults with the more fury and madness, pressing forward
the crowds of the Soldiery collected lately in Villages, and the Janisaries
newly created taken from the Plough to be matter and fuel for the Christians
Powder.

Winter now approaching, and the Vizier resolving to quarter a second year
under the Walls of Candia, began to provide against the weather, and resolved
to lie still until the Spring should renew the time for action, but never
intermitted his employment of plying constantly his Batteries, and shooting
Bomboes into the Town. In the mean time the Besieged being animated by their
new additional Forces, whose spirits also were high, and desirous of action;
the Commanders thought it not policy to suppress the heat and mettle of their
courage at the beginning, but gave way to the Soldiers proposition of a Sally,
which was effected in the month of December with no bad success. The Christians
sally on the side of Sabionera.
For the Christians surprising the Turks unawares, little dreaming of any such
design, fell in amongst them on the side of Sabionera, where they took a
Battery, dismounted and spiked the Cannon, with the loss of the Duke of Candia,
being shot in the breast with a Musket-bullet; of the Turks near three thousand
were killed, amongst whom was Benglee the Sampsongibashee or Major General of
the Janisaries, and Katirgi Ogle Pasha of Canea, whom we have already
mentioned, and so returned with Triumph into the Town. This Katirgi Ogle which
signifies the Son of a Mulatier, was formerly a common Thief, who robbed on
certain Mountains near Antioch in Pisidia, called Ock-shaher, which now have
their names from him: Katirgi-Ogle his original and life
and being a courageous man and fortunate, drew a considerable number of
Miscreants from all parts to follow him in his Enterprifes. His profession was
not to rob Caravans or Merchants traveling in their honest employment; but
Knight-Errant-like pretended to revenge the injuries and abuses of his Country
by the unjust and corrupt Ministers, whom for robbing and oppressing the
people, he esteemed it Justice and Virtue to deprive of their ill gotten
Wealth. In which Trade he gained such Riches and Power, that at length he came
to Scutari, from whence acquainting the Grand Signior of the abuses of his
Officers, and his own course of living was upon promises of duty and submission
received into Grace and Favor, and not only obtained pardon, but preferment.
For the Grand Signior discovering in him a spirit of much resolution and
bravery sent him unto Candia, and conferred on him the Pasha, luck of Canea, in
which on all occasions he comported himself with much bravery, dying at last
before the Walls of Candia.

Various were the Sallies and Conflicts the Christians made upon the Turks
toward the end of this Year; one of which, after that foregoing, was made by
Marquess Villa, who with a thousand two hundred men fell in upon the Turks
Trenches, where he had so good success, that he brought back with him a hundred
Turks heads, which he planted on the Walls.

The Turks also as they had made strong Assaults, and gained on the Fort of St.
Andrea to the East, so they undauntedly pressed forwards on the Bastion of
Sabionera to the West, with a Force of ten thousand men, having the advantage
of three Batteries, each consisting of ten pieces of Ordnance. The Turks storm
three Bastions at once.
The next Night the Turks gave a general Assault with all their Forces to the
Bastions of Panigra, Sabionera, and St. Andrea, and the great Fort St.
Demetrius; but the Besieged were armed with all caution and vigilance against
surprise, and with that Conduct and Valor, that they gave the Enemy three
Gallant Repulses with much slaughter and confusion; but yet this succss was
diminished by the loss of the Count de Mare, an experienced Venetian Soldier,
who, after proofs of an invincible Valor, lost his life in defense of the
Christian Cause. But not long after the Marquess Cornaro, and the Baron Spar
arriving with a Recruit of three thousand Men, as if they intended to requite
the Turks last Assaults, made so resolute and so successful a Sally, that they
left above two thousand Infidels dead upon the place, with a considerable
number of their Officers.

The State of Affairs in the Turkish Court, and other Parts of the Empire
during the War in CANDIA.
BUT whilst we are in relation of the Wars abroad, we must not forget the
proceedings of Affairs at home. The Grand Signior now weary of his repose and
abode in his Seraglio at Adrianople, and impatient of the delays in his Affairs
at Candia, judged it as well agreeable to the present convenience of his
Empire, as to his own humor, to seat himself in some place of nearer distance
from Candia, than his present ab^^ad; from whence by his presence and
authority, his Army might with better expedition be supplied with all
necessaries of War and provision. After various Arguments about the choice of
the place, Larissa was fixed upon, a City anciently renowned for Antiquity and
Plenty, The Female Court sent to Constantinople.
And that the Court might not abound with unnecessary Attendants; the Queen
Mother, and Hasaki Sultana, with all the Ladies of their Retinue, were sent to
Constantinople, a policy perhaps to amuse the minds of the people, and afford
them an occasion of discourse, and hopes that the Grand Signior himself might
shortly follow: But before the departure of this Female Court, The Janisaries
jealous of the safety of the Sultans Brothers.
the disposal of the Grand Signior's Brothers was moved and questioned by the
Janisaries, who having long since been jealous and doubtful of their safety,
did demand, that the protection and custody of them should be committed to the
Queen Mother; who willingly received the Charge, and gave security by Hoget to
defend and preserve them from all private Treachery, or public Attempts with
the same tenderness and care as she should her own life, or the life of her
Son. In this manner these Princes and Princesses departing, made a solemn and
magnificent entrance into Constantinople. The chief of the Cavalcade was
Kul-ogli, the Grand Signiors Mosayp, or Favorite, attended with a hundred and
fifty Pages in Coats of Male, and Satin Vests; in one Coach was the Valede
Sultana, or the Queen Mother, in the next was the Hasaki Sultana, or the Grand
Signior's Queen, in the third were the Brothers, in the fourth was the young
Prince, or the Grand Signior's Son, after came the Coaches of more ordinary
Ladies attended with about a hundred and fifty black Eunuchs, in Vests of white
Satin.

The Grand Signior also preparing for his journey to Larissa, pitched his Tents
without the City; from whence one day viewing round the Camp from a Jardac, or
Tent, elevated above the rest, he espied with a Prospective Glass a certain
person taking Tobacco in his Tent, whilst a Slave rubbed his Legs: His
Attendants not able or willing upon his Demands to inform him who he was, The
Grand Signior displeased with Tobacco.
he sent an Officer to make Enquiry, who returned with Answer, that it was
Ibrihim Aga, the Kahya or Steward to the Chimacam, and in effect Chimacam
himself, having a great share in the mannagement of Affairs; but the smoke had
like to have smothered him and all his Fortunes; for this Grand Signior, who is
as great an Enemy to it as King James was, or Sultan Morat, would have made him
the Sacrifice to that Incense, had not those present interceded for him; who
with the Chimacam's own mediation, and the cost of fifty Purses, or five and
twenty thousand Dollars, ransomed his Life.

The Sultan being arrived at Larissa, An Ambassador sent from Venice.
News came of the near approach of the Excellentissimo Alvise de Molino,
Ambassador from the Venetian Republic, with propositions of peace. But the
Turks before they would admit the Embassy, or the person which brought it, to a
nearer approach than a Days Journey from the Court, would be resolved first
whether he brought with him the Keys of Candia; To which it was replied by the
Interpreter, That he was not able to give them satisfaction in that particular,
being but a mean and ordinary servant, to whom the Secrets of State, and
resolutions of great men were not committed; his Office being only to render
faithfully the words and sense of his Masters, and not to enter into the
private thoughts and Cabinet of their Counsels. To which the Chimacam proudly
and barbarously made answer, Go tell thy Master, that unless he brings the Keys
of Candia, thy head shall pay for it. And that he presume not in person to
approach nearer unto this Court. So the Ambassador remained at a distance for
some weeks, and at length was transferred over to the Vizier at Candia; who
being more ready to hearken to propositions, in hopes by some overture or other
to hook in Candia, gave an easy Audience to the Ambassador, and controverted
several Articles and Propositions with all freedom and patience. So that on the
Venetians part, the Surrender of Suda was offered, and a Sum of money, in
compensation of the War. The Vizier on the other side would be contented with
nothing less than the Surrender of Candia; and in lieu thereof to grant a
License to rebuild Paleo-Castro, an ancient Fortress. But the Fortress it self
of Candia being the prize and aim of both, nothing could be concluded without
that; so that, the Ambassador in fine, declared plainly, That the City of
Candia was maintained and defended by the Arms of Foreign Princes, without
whose consent it could not be resigned; all the rest of the Island should be
the reward of their blood and labor, only Candia was capable of no Conditions,
but what were imposed on it by force of Arms.

The Vizier, whose honor could be salved, and the glory of the Ottoman Empire
maintained, at no other rate than the subjection of Candia, would hearken to no
other terms or proposals; so that the Treaty broke off, and the Ambassador
returned to Canea, there to remain until farther Overtures of an Accommodation
should present.

It was now toward the depth of Winter when three men of War and a Fire-Ship,
French Ships of W^r sail to Constantinople.
sent by the most Christian King, steered up the Hellespont with words and
boastings as full of Wind as their Sails; and being arrived at Constantinople,
vaunting of their Force, as if sufficient to subdue the Turkish Dominions, they
uttered certain rumors, that they were come to revenge the late affront offered
to their Merchants, to cause that money to be repaid, which in late and frequent
Avanias had been extorted from their Nation; and to renew their Capitulations
with more advantageous terms. As namely, That their Customs from 5 b^ reduced
to 3 per Cent. as the English, Dutch, and Genoeses pay. That their King be
treated by the Sultan with the equal Presents and Gifts, according to the
Custom used with the Emperor; and that at all times interchangeably Ambassadors
be sent to reside in each others Dominions; with other propositions which
seemed as extravagant to the Turks, as they appeared to others vain, and to
have no foundation but in the report of the Vulgar.

But that which was reported by the most judicious concerning these Ships, was,
That his most Christian Majesty being made to understand perfectly the affronts
put on his Nation by the Turks; and not fully satisfied (as is supposed) with
the respect they had shown to his Ambassador at Constantinople, made it the
chief Design of his Ships to withdraw him from thence, supposing it a less
diminution to his honor, to have the person of his Agent subjected to
affronts, than of his Ambassador, to which (it was imagined) he might be
obnoxious, in consideration of those great supplies, which were in the
following year designed for Candia. In what manner soever the Turks deemed of
this appearance of Men of War to hector and brave them at their Imperial City,
they did yet for the present cunningly dissemble the matter, giving the French
fair Words, and what plenty of Provisions their occasions did require. In what
manner this Affair was transacted, I shall not adventure to relate, nor is it
well or certainly known; Yet not long after came Orders for the Ambassador to
repair to the Court at Larissa; and that until the Grand Signior's pleasure was
farther known, the Ships of War were to be detained. The Commander in chief,
called Monsieur d' Almeras, was not a little troubled to have his Ships thus
embargued, and laboring in his thoughts between the time limited in his
Instructions by his Master and the restraint by the Turks, he once bravely
resolved to hazard his passage through the Castles, but protracting the
execution thereof from day to day, even until the end of April; at length
License came for their departure, and Orders to repair unto Vola, near Larissa,
there to take an Ambassador, or Agent, or Envoye from the Sultan to their King.
For it seems, the Vizier had intimated to the Grand Signior, That it was not
time to disgust the French King, and to bring him under the notion of a
declared and public Enemy, or at least to irritate him so far as might provoke
him to send greater Forces, than perhaps he designed the next year, for Candia:
and that he ought to comply with the present conjuncture, and salve that up for
a time, which he might afterward open at his pleasure. The Grand Signior sends
a Messenger to the French King.
This counsel seeming reasonable to the Grand Signior, and agreeable to the
present necessity, he ordered (as I was credibly informed) a thousand Dollars
only to adorn his Ambassador; so pitifully do the Turks esteem of Christian
Princes, and so highly do they value themselves, as if a Message from them
would be reverenced in Christendom as a favor, though brought by a Porter or a
Slave. But the French Ambassador considering this allowance too mean a
provision for a person qualified to appear before his Master, did (as it is
said) out of his own Purse and generous Soul contribute a far greater Sum, with
two Vests of Sables toward his better Equipage. In this manner the Sultan
dissembling an appearance of good correspondence with his Christian Majesty,
dispatched away his Envoye on the Ships of War, being a Person in quality of a
Mutafaraca, one of the same degree with a Chaous, to expostulate with the King
concerning several Particulars, and especially his Reasons for sending for his
Ambassador, without sending another according to ancient custom to supply his
Office, wondering much at this sudden alteration of friendship, without any
cause given on the Ottoman side: and with these smooth and fair words the Turks
imagined they might charm the Spirit of the King for a while, and suspend his
Succors from Candia, until at last it were beyond his power and wisdom to
relieve. In the mean time the Ambassador from the most Christian King was
detained as an Hostage for the other, of whose return we shall speak in its due
place.

Toward the end of this year Sir Daniel Harvey Lord Ambassador from His
Majesty of Great Britain arrived at Constantinople, Sir Daniel Harvey
Ambassador from his Majesty.
succeeding in the place of the Earl of Winchelsea, who could not obtain
Audience with the G. Signior until the end of the following year, by reason of
the Sultans unsettled abode and far distance; who at length coming to Salonica,
summoned the Ambassador thither, and there conferred on him the usual
Ceremonies and Honors due to the Ambassador at first Reception.

Candia was now hardly assailed in four places, A Relation of the state of
Candia toward the end of this year.
viz. on the side of Betlem, Panigra, St. Andrea, and Sabionera. These places
being twice stormed, in which the Turks lost thirty thousand men, so many Mines
and Fornelli were fired, that the ground lay open like a vast abyss, with
strange heaps of confused and undigested Earth, and hindered the Enemy from
approaching to the Wall; but Sabionera and St. Andrea being esteemed the most
weak, because they were not fortified by any considerable Outworks, or
compassed with any depth of Ditch, were pressed and forced upon by the Turk
with more violence than any parts of the City. The Enemy having by their great
number of Pioniers elevated the confused Earth, they formed some Batteries,
fortifying them and sheltering their people with Sacks of Wool, and a Labyrinth
(as we may say) of Redoubts, they advanced foot by foot upon the Revelin of St.
Andrea, being destitute of all Mines to stop their proceedings; and having at
length blown up the Revelin, and with fire, and earth having taken the
Out-work, they penetrated into the Ditch (which was not deep) with four
Traverses, and came now to the very foot of the wall of the Bulwark, fortified
with eighteen pieces of Cannon, six of which carrying fifty pound Bullet shot
into the Ditch, eight flanked that side which was opposite to Panigra, and four
on that part toward the Revelin of St. Spirito, notwithstanding which they
stormed the Walls in nine places. And beginning to make a breach by firing
certain Mines, which opened a wideness of forty two paces at the point of that
Bulwark; and continuing their breaches toward the Sea, breaking in their way
the Front of the Fort Priulo, they proceeded almost to the Gate of St. Andrea,
and opened forty eight paces more, in all ninety paces. Afterward they ruined
the remainder of the Wall, and that which was called the Scotch Fort to the
very Sea; so that the Christians were forced to retire from their Outworks,
and contract their Precincts to the Walls of the City.

To add unto the misery of this place, an unfortunate shot from the Turks Camp
entered that Magazine which was near St. Peter; Church, where the artificial
Fires were made; and meeting several shells of Grenades already charged, with
thirty Barrels of Powder; all took fire and blew into the air, and burned all
the houses which were near thereunto. At this unlucky accident the Besieged
fearing a general assault, and seeing the Turkish Horse draw into a Body near
Sabionera, the whole Garrison ran to the Walls; but no farther Attempt being
made, toward evening they blew up a Lodge of the Enemy, with all the people
that were therein.

Anno Christi 1669. Hegeira 1080.
Toward the end of the last Year, and at the beginning of this the Turks began
to open their eyes, and find themselves defrauded with the grossest cheat that
ever was imposed on a people who had either reason or humanity. For now three
or four years had ran on, that the French, Dutch, Italians, and other Nations
had introduced into all parts of the Turkish Dominions (unless in those
Eastward, as Aleppo, The story of the false Reaux or Temins.
and farther) a sort of small Money called by some Luigini, by others Ottavi,
and by the Turks Temins, worth about five pence English; which appearing
pleasant and bright to the eye, and commodious for change, and common expenses,
so bewitched the Commonalty, that Pieces of Eight, Zaichins, and other
merchantable Money were laid aside, as neither current or valuable. At first
about nine years past they were of good and warrantable Silver, but afterward
with time by little and little grew worse and of baser alloy: at length the
people doting more and more upon them, they came coarser every day than other;
and being still currantly passable, every person that was failed, and of bad
reputation entered into the Trade, who knowing no bounds of honesty or of gain,
composed their Money wholly of Copper or coarser Metals, with a fair gloss and
resemblance of Silver, buying therewith the Commodities of the Country; and at
length amassed up all the Gold, Silver, and whatsoever came to hand was the
price of their false and bastard Coin, with which they filled and abused all
Asia: nor was this Money only of one Mint, but of diverse Stamps and Mottoes
reproachful to the Turks, and it is pity they had not wit enough to understand
them, as namely, Voluit hanc Asia mercem. De procul pretiam ejus, and such
like; which were so various, that many who had the curiosity to make a
collection of them, found no less than an hundred and twenty several Stamps.
The Commonalty still enamoured with the brightness of their color, and
commodiousness of their change, little reflected on the ill consequence to the
generality, having seldom more than to supply their daily wants. And the
Officers of the the Customs finding a benefit extraordinary to themselves upon
the vast Sums of Money imported, little cared how it fared with the public. In
the mean time the whole current of Merchandise in the Levant was dispossessed
of its ordinary and true chanel; for vast quantities or a glut of Turkish Goods
filled all Christendom, the prices low and cheap, and no profit to any Merchant
dealing upon the square, or upon the old and legal way of Traffic. At Ligorne
and other parts of Italy complaints were made, That the Silver and Bullion of
the Country were melted down to make a composition with baser Metals for
Turkey, and exchanged for decaying and perishable Commodities. In short, no man
seemed satisfied with the Trade, and yet the World, like their sins, which they
disapprove, pursued it with all heat and violence imaginable. This Trade being
thus over-laid, and vast heaps of adulterate Money imported daily worse and
worse, caused the Jews and other Merchants at first to except against some
forts, and admit of others. This scruple, together with the prohibition of them
two years before by the English Factory at Smyrna, obliging themselves unto the
Levant Company under a considerable penalty not to receive this money for Cloth
or other Commodities of the growth of England, together with the circumspection
and contrivance of the English Consul, awakened first the blind minds of the
Turks, who having long been infatuated with this beloved money, began now to
reject and abhor it like the false and farded countenance of a Courtisan: so
that from eleven they fell to twelve, and so to thirteen and fourteen to the
Lion-Dollars. In which conjuncture a Dutch Convoy arrived at Smyrna, importing
vast Sums thereof; which for a Bribe to the Officers of the City, or what the
Customer would ask, were permitted License to be landed; which overflowing in
great abundance, and rather of a worse than better alloy, went declining to
eighteen, and so to twenty, at which Rate for a short time they passed current.
And now at this price the Officers did what was possible to keep them up,
conceiving it impossible, in a time of so much scarcity of all sorts of other
Coins, that the Countries could subsist, or that Trade in buying or selling
could proceed, if this money should wholly lose its esteem and value: nor were
the people so much the care of the Governors, though for many years they had
known no other price or reward of their labors, as were the vast damages of
the Sultan, in whose Coffers were considerable Sums, which were never known to
have been placed unto the loss of the Exchequer; for it is a Proverb amongst
the Turks, That the Grand Signiors Lead cannot sink. But that which raised most
of tumult was the rigor of the Tax-gatherers, who refused to take that money
from the people for their Duties to the Grand Signior, but demanded of them
Lion-Dollars, Sevil and Mexico Pieces of Eight, or the like; which they not
being able to find, beat and imprisoned them in all places, where this question
came into dispute: the people hereupon, though patient, and accustomed to
violence and burden, could not yet support longer an oppression so
unreasonable, but that Insurrection was made in all places where this came into
dispute: and as injured patience turns to fury, at Prusa and Angora the torrent
of the peoples rage was not appeased without the blood and lives of some of
their Officers, alleging with good reason, That their Ministers and Governors
having introduced or permitted this money amongst them, and allowed it as
current in that manner, as that they had for some years known no other, nor
received other for all the fruits of their labor or possessions, they ought
not now to refuse to receive that which they themselves had made passable:
which argument and reason was pressed in sundry places with that violence, that
the Officers were forced to submit to the necessity of the times, and the fury
of the multitude. And now this money had wholly lost its reputation, and began
to be refused generally at any rate whatsoever; so that though the Government
thought fit to license them at thirty to the Dollar; yet the people prosecuting
the abasement of it with a hate and disaffection equal to their former desires,
refused generally and absolutely to accept them in payment. Wherefore the
Sultan perceiving that the power of his Officers was not sufficient to render
this money longer passable at any rate, at length he commanded, that every one
should bring in his money of these sorts into the Mint where it should be melted
down, and the Silver it produced should be delivered to the Proprietor. At
which Summons several Great men voluntarily brought in their money, others had
it seized and condemned to the Furnace, amongst which was a French Merchant
engaged to the import of sixty thousand Dollars. As yet the News of this
alteration not having reached Christendom, divers-Ships arrived at
Constantinople with vast Sums of this money, which were all seized and forced to
the Mint. In like manner other Ships arrived at Smyrna with the same Commodity,
which my self would not suffer to be landed, and some of them having no other
foundation of Stock or Freight, returned empty, to the great loss of the
Employers. It was strange to see, how on a sudden all Trade ceased, no money
being left in the Country, few Bargains were made but by Barters; and though
all this ruin might wholly be attributed to the ill Government, yet the people
were contented, and sat down with the loss. And thus concluded this
extravagant Trade of false Money, being supposed to have wrought more of
destruction and loss at the end, than it brought of benefit at the beginning;
memorable for nothing more than for expiring so quietly, though it had the
chief part of the Turkish Empire to support and defend it.

During these Troubles the Grand Signior passed his time in hunting near
Larissa, where he ruined the Country round about, and tired the people with
beating and driving the Woods for Game and wild Beasts to divertise him, in
which, as formerly, he continued so excessively immoderate, that without
consideration of the heats, or colds, or moisture of the season, he compelled
the people, but especially the Jews (of which great numbers inhabit that
Country) to continual labors in the Woods and Fields; by which many died
through the rigid Frosts of the Winter and Calentures of the Summer. But yet
notwithstanding these Divertisements, the Grand Signior could not easily cast
off the melancholy apprehensions and fears he had for the state of his Affairs,
imagining that the long delays and ill success at Candia, and defaults in
Government had begotten in his Subjects a hate toward his Person, and a desire
of alteration. Wherefore the Spring approaching, he retired into a solitary but
pleasant shade amongst the Mountains, where sprang cool and crystalline waters,
about sixteen hours Journey from Larissa. In this solitude his melancholy
thoughts again disquieted him with a jealousy and suspicion, The Grand Signior
designs to cut off his Brothers.
lest his Brothers now at Constantinople should take their advantage, and one
of them be by the Peoples consent and assistance placed in his Imperial Seat:
which imagination made that impression in him, that he immediately dispatched
away a trusty and valiant Officer with all secrecy, without making any noise,
to bring him their Heads, directing his Commands to his Mother, in whose
custody they were; not doubting of her help and assent, as being most nearly
concerned in his interest, expected every hour the return of his Messenger with
that grateful Present, which could only cure the torture of his jealousy, and
alleviate his cares. But no sooner was this fatal Command arrived at the hands
of the Queen, but she trembled so much, that she could scarce hold the Paper.
At length considering, that (as has been said before) she had given in caution
to the Janisaries for the lives of these Princes, and that to her care they
were committed she immediately disclosed and published the design of the Grand
Signior to the Janisar-Aga, craving his help and protection, protesting that
she was resolved to maintain the faith she had given to those Princes, whose
life she tendered equal with her own. This advice and resolution of the
Queen Mother being brought to the Janisaries, was heartily approved, and
protestations, given that they would never abandon her, nor the lives she
preserved. The rumor hereof in an instant flew through the streets; but with
such variety of reports, that nothing of certainty was known, only in general
some great ruin was apprehended to threaten the City; whereupon a strange
outcry was made to shut up the shops, and every one to consult the safety of
the Public. But some few hours after, it being more distinctly known, that the
Grand Signior had sent for the Heads of his Brothers; the People of
Constantinople, whose sole hopes of seeing the Royal City restored to its
ancient Honor, was by the conservation of these Princes, were in a greater
combustion than before; for every one then betook himself to his Arms: so that
in a short time were assembled forty thousand men at Okmedon well appointed,
where confiding in the strength of a general Cause, in which they were engaged,
they vented many opprobrious speeches against the Government, calling the Chief
Ministers Orsysler, which is unfortunate Fellows, a term amongst the Turks, of
the greatest ignominy, especially to a Governor, and loudly exclaimed and
wished for a reformation. In the mean time the Queen Mother desired aid from
the Janisaries, and Guards about the Apartments of the Princes, lest the
Bostangees, who are the Creatures of the Grand Signior, should assault their
Quarters. The Consultations also amongst the Janisaries were long and secret,
and the Queen Mother dispatched several Messages to the Grand Signior, advising
him to forsake the Mountains, and repair to one of his Imperial Cities, as
became the Majesty of so great a Sultan, being the only means to secure to him
the establishment of his Crown. And now the Reader will with impatience attend
the conclusion and issue of so great rumors and disturbances; but it is now,
as it has been experienced in other Commonwealths, Tac. Lib. 6.
acribus, ut ferme talia, initiis, incurioso fine, matters violent in their
original, spend themselves at first, and produce nothing remarkable in their
end. And so was the effect of these recesses, and mutiny of the people at
Constantinople, whose humor of novelty and change venting it self, and in four
or five days tired with expectation; at length every one began to return to his
dwelling and employment. The face likewise of things at Constantinople seemed
quiet and appeased, carrying with it, as it were, a still modesty and shame for
the late disorders; and nothing was heard or murmured for the space of twenty
or thirty days after, until the Grand Signior trembling with the fears of this
confused Rebellion, kept more strict Guards than ordinary within his mountains,
and after being better recollected, entered into Consultation, and being
advised of the Heads and Leaders of the late Insurrection, proscribed such as
were the prime Actors, and having dispatched away two or three Messengers on
this Errant, they entered secretly in the Night to their Lodgings, where they
quietly, and without noise, took off the heads of four or five of them, and
banished as many without the least noise, or notice taken thereof by the
Vulgar. And because this disorder happened at Constantinople, for which the
chief Commander ought to answer, the Chimacam passed not without a jealousy
either of negligence or consent; wherefore the Vizier sent for him and the
Janisar-Aga to Candia, as if he had occasion of their service, though not
without their own fears and suspicion of others, to answer and make
satisfaction for the late mutiny. And thus for a while this Flame is
extinguished, and the fire raked up in the Embers. We must expect a while and
observe when and where it will again burst forth.

The Spring now approaching, which supplies new Spirits, and warm and fresh
blood into the Veins of Man, as well as sap in Trees, and life in other
Vegetables; let us return again to the Wars, and survey the Camp, and posture
of Affairs before the walls in Candia. The Turkish Army, which, like worms
benumbed with the Cold of Winter, had lain immured between their Banks of
Earth, did not ply their Assaults so frequently as they had done in Summer,
only for a Winters exercise, battered the inward Works of St. Andrea's Fort,
which as we said before, they had hardly beset. And now the time for action
being again come about, The Turks storm again the Fort of St. Andrea.
they renewed their storm on that side so violently, pressing forward the least
esteemed of their Soldiery, that with the help of Spade and Mattock, and
blowing up of some Mines, they penetrated forty paces within the Walls of the
City: But the Christians having long since forseen ^^e weakness of that side,
made it part of their ^inters labors to draw another Wall from the Fort
Panigra (whose Revelin or Out-work was before blown up) crossing over almost to
the Tram^ta, which they fortified as well as could be expected, and made
constant and bold resistance against the Enemy. Notwithstanding which the Turks
pressed so constantly and boldly forward, that though the Christians were
strong within, and provided with all sorts of provisions both of war and
sustenance, yet nothing supported their Courages and Spirits more than the
expectation of promised Succors from France and Italy; it being reported, and
generally believed, that they would be so numerous as might be able to give
Battle in the Field unto the Turk, and force them out of their Trenches; for by
no other means was it possible for this City to be relieved: for it might fare
with this place, as it did formerly with Rhodes and Ostend, which, though
wanting neither men nor provisions, were yet taken by palms and inches of
ground, till not so much was left, as would hold men to defend them. A pregnant
example (as Sr. William Temple well observes) how impossible it is to defend
any Town that cannot be relieved by an Army strong enough to raise the Siege.
Whilst the Christians were entertained with these hopes, the Turks fortified
themselves without as strongly as the besieged had within, heaving like Moles
with their numerous Army of Pioneers, whose lives being not valued, they were
wholly intent unto Mines, blowing up all before them, in that manner that every
day they gained a pace of ground within the City. So that in effect (as will be
seen by the Sequel) this most impregnable Fort of the World was forced and
taken by the Spade and Shovel, and by a Crew of unarmed Laborers, who
understood nothing more than the Plough and Harrow. So that now this Town
seemed to be reduced to its utmost Crisis, either of being taken, or for ever
freed of this malignant Enemy. And indeed the Turks had so far advanced upon
the Bulwark of St. Andrea, that now nothing remained of it, more than ruins,
and undigested heaps of Earth and stone, in defense of which the chief
Commanders applying themselves in person with all diligence, the Marquess St.
Andrea Montbrun was wounded by a stone in the face, the Cavalier de Bret was
buried in the ruins to the very Neck, and with difficulty drawn out of the
Earth by Assistants about him; two other Cavaliers were wounded with Grenades,
and the Cavalier Fuillere, who carried the Standard of Malta, was shot into the
Eye with a Musket. The Proveditor General Carnaro serving at the repair of the
Breach, was so wounded in the Belly by a Granado, that his Bowels burst, of
which he died in three hours; and with a piece of the same Granado the Count
Vignole, a French Gentleman of great Valor, was likewise slain: And so hotly
the Turks plied this Breach, that from the 28th. of May to the 2d of June they
sprang five Mines, which brake all the Palisades of the Christians; the which
the Turks seconded with that fury and mettle, as if they intended to win the
place and make an end of their work, before the arrival of the Forces expected
from Christendom. And this Post was now grown so dangerous and weak, that the
Captain General, the Marquess of Montbrun, and all the chief Officers took up
their Quarters at this place, where his Excellency kept an open Table, and the
Marquess took up his Lodgings at Night, that so the other Officers might have
no excuse on account of attendances or orders to abandon these Quarters.

The Princes of Christendom all this time forgot not their besieged Brethren in
Candia. Pope Clement the IX. pressed the most Christian King to make ready his
succors in due time, Succors sent out of Christendom.
who had already himself prepared all things, and elected the Duke of Beaufort
his General of all the Forces by Sea, whether of French or other Nations. This
Duke, like a courageous and brave Prince, thinking it little glory to command
at Sea, where the Enemy was of an inferior and unable Force to encounter him,
did therefore desire License from his King to make trial of his Fortune in the
Field, where he might evidence his Valor in the face of the Infidels, and
signalize his Fame either by Death or Victory. The King, unwilling to hazard so
worthy a person of his blood out of his due Command in the rank of an ordinary
Soldier, at first denied his requests; but the Pope interceding for him, whose
General he was, with holy Arguments, and devout Contemplations of Martyrdom,
and glory of dying for the Christian Cause, at length obtained a concession
from the King, who of himself was flexible to so pious a request, esteeming it
unholy to deprive his Kinsman either of the Palm of a Martyr, or the Laurel of
a Conqueror.

The Summer being come, and all things provided, The French Fleet loose from
Tolon.
the Duke ascended his Ship at Tolon a City in Provence, the 6th. of June,
New-style, with about seven thousand Land Soldiers, commanded by the Duke of
Navailles, with the Marshals Lebret and Colbert, and several other Worthies and
Heroes of undaunted Courage, and arrived before the Town of Candia the 19th. of
the same Month, having casually encountered together in the Seas on the 17th.
with fourteen Sail of Venetian Ships, laden with Horse and Ammunition to mount
the Troops, and relieve the Town: which happy encounter and speedy passage,
seemed a happy Omen of the future success. The appearance of this succor
seemed to the Besieged as sent from Heaven, and administered unto them new hopes
and courage; and the salutes passed between the Town and the Fleet with the
usual Ceremonies, and all the imaginable testimonies of joy and triumph.

No sooner were they arrived than the two Generals, with other principal
Officers, They arrive at Candia.
immediately in their Shallops took the best view and survey they could of the
Enemies Camp, and the Condition of the Besieged; in which whilst they
entertained themselves, they espied a small Vessel making toward them with St.
Mark's Colors, in which was the famous Engineer Signior Castellano, dispatched
by the Captain General Morosini with an axact plat of the Town, and disposition
of the Turkish Camp, which being particularly viewed and considered, it was
evident, That if the Turks should make some very forcible Attempt before the
new Forces could be landed (as it was very probable they might) they would put
all in hazard of being lost; wherefore the Captain General pressed to have some
succors immediately supplied to be assistant in that case of extremity; To
which the Duke of Navailles immediately consented, and landed himself that
Night in person with sufficient Force to mount the Guard on the Breach of St.
Andrea, whose first Rettenchment was continually battered by the Turks; and
though there was a second Retrenchment in hand, yet time being required for
completing thereof, that part of the Town would be reduced to its ultimate
hazard; for should the Enemy spring a Mine (which they feared was already
formed under the present Work) it would lay all open and naked, without other
Fortification. The Duke being ashore, was received by Morosini with all
demonstrations of Civility and Respect due to a personage of his Quality and
Employment; and with a welcome suitable to the present extremity of his
Affairs: all Ceremonies and Complements were soon passed over, the urgency of
matters not permitting them time to be long impertinent; The French Forces
landed.
so that falling into the Discourse of the common safety, it was resolved that
the succors should be immediately landed, which was performed with that
diligence and expedition, that in two days the whole Army came safe on shore,
excepting only some few, cut short by shot from the Enemies Camp.

On the 23d. the Generals and other Officers, held a Council of War, A Council
of War held in Candia.
amongst whom was also the Marquess of St. Andrea; and did unanimously
conclude, that the Town was no longer tenable, or to be maintained unless by
some extraordinary enterprise attempted on the Enemy, and by some furious Sally
performed with resolution, and stratagems of War, in order unto which it was
resolved, That the 27th. should be the day of sally both with Horse and Foot,
and that the Fleet not to lose their part in this action, should play with
their great Guns on that side of the Turkish-Army which lay encamped on the
Quarters of St. Andrea. The order of the Christian Army to make their Sally.
All the Forces were landed on the 26th. and the whole night following was
spent in preparations for the next days sally: the Army being drawn up made
four Batalions, the first called the Admirals commanded by the Sieurs Martel,
Vandre, and Gravier; the second was the Vice-Admirals commanded by the Sieurs
de la Monthe and Planta; the third was the Rere-Admirals under Command of
Chevalier de Bouillion, Garbaret, and the Chevalier Dailly; the fourth was the
Batalion of the Sieur d' Almeras commanded under him by the Sieurs Panetier, de
la Rogue, Fontier, Bitault, and the Chevalier de Nemond; and on the left hand
of these aforesaid Batalions, the Guards of the Duke of Beaufort were disposed.
The Duke of Beaufort unwilling to be a Spectator in this glorious Action,
without bearing a part in his own person, after he had given order to the Fleet
to accost the shore on the side of St. Andrea, as near as consisted with their
security, and from thence with their great Guns to annoy the Enemies Camp as
much as was possible, came that night on shore, resolving to fight in the Head
of the Forlorn Hope, from which hazardous adventure no entreaties or counsel of
his friends could prevail to dissuade him.

The Forlorn consisted of 400 men, on the head of which marched fifty men with
hand Grenades, flanked with three Troops of Horse, Commanded by Count Dampire:
the Regiments of Guards, with four Troops of Horse for their Wings, flanked
also with three Regiments of Foot, followed the Forlorn. The Reserve consisted
of the Regiments of Harcourt, Conti, Lignieres, Rosan, Montpesat, and Vendosme,
flanked with four Troops of Horse under Command of the Count Choiseul, which
placed themselves on a rising ground, to hinder all Communication between the
Vizier, whose Camp was before St. Andrea, and the Janizar Aga, who lay before
Sabionera. Between the first and second line, were placed fifty Musketeers of
the King, to be assistant on occasion; and the other Troops of Horse were to
take the left hand along the Trench leading to the Sabionera: the Regiment of
Montpeyroux was to mount the Guard on the Fort of St. Demetrius to secure the
Retreat, if occasion should require. In like manner five hundred Pioniers were
ordered to level the Trenches of the Enemy on the Quarter of St. Andrea, whilst
the Body of the Turks Army was employed in repulsing the violence of the Sally.

Things being disposed in this manner, and the morn approaching, the Forces
marched out by the Gate of St. George with all silence possible; covering their
Matches, that the fire might not alarm the Enemy; the Onset was to begin with
the dawning of the day, and the Signal was to be given by firing of the chief
Mine Royal; which being large, The Christians sally at the Gate St. George
and furnished with a great quantity of Powder, might (as was supposed) make
way to the slaughter of the Turks whom the Christians might find terrified and
disordered by such an unexpected accident. This Mine was reserved for the last
extremity, but being low was full of water; so that the Powder was stowed on
floats and rafts to support it, but yet received so great a damp and moisture,
that when they came to spring it, the Powder took not fire, which was the first
disappointment of this Enterprise. Though some are of opinion, that the Mine
was so vast, and contained such a quantity of Powder, that the Engineers were
timorous to spring it, lest it should reverse on the Besieged, as well as take
effect on the Enemies Camp. But be it how it will, a quarter of an hour before
day the Generals expecting no longer, the Forlorn Hope which lay within half a
Musket Shot of the Enemy, assaulted two Redoubts, took them, The Christians
fall upon the Turks.
and put them all to the Sword: with the like courage the other Regiments
entered the Line, and making themselves Masters of the Trenches after much blood
and slaughter, and storming a Fort on which was the Battery directed against
St. Demetrio, possessed themselves of it, and therewith of a great Magazine of
Powder belonging to the Enemy, spiking all the Cannon that were found therein.

The day by this time being clearly broken out, discovered the action; so that
the Turks with all expedition put themselves into a Body on the Hill near New
Candy, from whence observing and contemning the small number of the Christians,
came thundering down in great numbers to regain their Trenches. The Duke of
Navailles perceiving his Forlorn hardly beset, came in to their assistance with
two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, which behaved themselves with
that gallantry, as engaged the Turks again to quit their Trenches. But whilst
success seemed thus to smile on the Christians, the Magazine of Powder which
was newly won, containing an hundred thirty four Kintals of Powder (by what
accident is not known) took fire, and blew up all into the air, by which many
were destroyed and wounded, especially of the Battallion of the Guards, with
many Officers. This fatal blow quite turned the Scale of Fortune. For the
Soldiers hearing the dreadful clap, and feeling as it were the Earth to
tremble under them, supposed it to be the eruption of some Mine near them, The
Christian Army in confusion.
with which they were so amazed, that they began with confusion to disperse to
the right and left, and put themselves into shameful flight. In like manner the
Forces near the Sea sensible of the blow, began to retreat, and abandon their
design, which no persuasions of their Officers, or other encouragement could
animate them to prosecute; but that the faintness of a second Attempt (an
infirmity accorded of ancient Times to be incident to the nature of the French
Nation) prevailed upon their spirits, beyond any possibility of arrest, so that
in a disorderly manner they fled into the Body of the first Battalion, where
being now united with the Reserve, they for some time sustained the shock of
the Enemy; until other Bodies of the Turks from New Candia and St. Andrea
overpowered them with greater multitudes, so that then they wholly abandoned
the field, and every one as well as he could, sought his Sanctuary and refuge
within the Precincts of the Fortifications. Howsoever Choiseul and Lebret, each
of which had a Horse killed under him, encouraging their Troops, disputed the
case yet longer, and still with other Officers made head upon the Enemy; but at
length with the Duke of Navailles, and several other Gentlemen, who made their
way through the Enemy with their Swords, they were forced to retreat honorably
into the Town. The Duke of Beaufort was said to have labored much in resisting
the shameful flight of his men, and venturing his Person into danger, from
whence he resolved never to retreat, was overwhelmed with unequal numbers, and
so fell amongst the common heaps: but his body, though much sought after, being
not found, it was believed rather, that he perished by that fatal Magazine of
Powder, which blowing up, affrighted and disordered the whole Christian Army.

But not only did misfortunes attend the Landforces, but the Fleet at Sea
shared in the disasters. For some few days after the wind blowing hard from the
Sea, caused the Ships to ride at a distance from the shore. The whole Fleet
consisted of eighty Ships small and great, fifty Galleys, and six Galleasses,
being the whole Force of that Year from France, Italy, and Malta. All which
being at Anchor in due order as near the shore as was safe or convenient, made
many shot into the Turks Camp, but with little execution: during which Action,
the Santa Teresa, a French Ship of seventy Brass Guns blew up, and her whole
Company lost, being about three hundred men, of which seven only were saved;
the Admiral of France being near to this Ship, received five shot from her
which passed through her, and by the Splinters and fall of Timbers; the Vessel
called La Reale had six Cavaliers killed, and forty Soldiers Slaves were
killed and wounded. After this it was proposed in Council, That another Sally
should be made of ten thousand French; to which the Duke De Navailles assented,
on condition that they might be preceded in the Van by four thousand Venetians,
who were well acquainted and versed in the nature of the place, and knew the
several Redoubts, Galleries, and Trenches of the Enemy. But the Captain General
being desirous to reserve his own experienced Soldiers to the ultimate and
last occasion of emergency, refused to assent thereunto.

The loss the Turks sustained that day was uncertain, of the French were only
an hundred thirty five heads brought in by tale, as I was informed from one who
was present when they were counted, amongst which were many principal Officers.
French Officers slain.
For besides the Duke of Beaufort were slain the Count Rosan, the Chevalier di
Villarceaux, the Chevalier de Quelas, the Sieur de Guene-gaud, Marquis de
Fabert Major of the Regiment of Lorrain, the Sieurs de Montreuil Captain of the
Guards, de Beauvais and Do, Garnier, La Paneterie Touvenin, Lanson, Bellebrune,
Hautefage d'Avenne, Maran de S. Jean de Chauveniere, Goindreville Captain of
the Regiment of Bretagne, Forcan, du Boulet Captains of the Regiment of
Harcourt, Chaselet, Martinval de Bossemoat, de la Hay, de Bourneuf, de Vandre
Martel Captain of a Ship, the Chevalier Lodeve with nine Captains and eight
Lieutenants Reformades of the Brigade of Picardy, Navarre, and Normandy. The
Sieur Lebret was shot through the Buttocks with a Musket-bullet; besides whom
were wounded the Sieurs de Montagne Colonel of a Regiment, de Castelan Major of
the Guards, de Cavison, Croiselles, de Montigny, and de Moissac by the Battery
which blew up: the Chevalier d'Ailleurs; was hurt with an Arrow through the Arm
De la Marliere Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Lorrain with five or six
Officers of that Body, and Villiers Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment Jonzac
were all wounded. The Marquess of Lignieres had his Thigh broken and a Finger
shot off, and his Lieutenant Colonel had his Arm broken. The Marquess of St.
Vallier Colonel with five or six of his Officers, the Chevalier de Novion
Colonel with several Officers of the Regiments of Bretagnie, Montpezat,
Harcourt, and Conti were all wounded, with four other Captains of Horse, and
four Lieutenants; also the Marquess of Vxelles, the Chevalier de la Haugette,
the Count de Loss Captain of the Guards to the Duke of Navailles, the Count de
Montbrun Commander of the Kings Musketeers, and the Sieur de Tagni
Quarter-master-General were wounded: who being Persons of great Quality as well
as Courage that left their Country, and exposed themselves to dangers, with no
other motive than their own gallantry or defense of the Christian Cause, ought
be numbered amongst the Heroes and Champions of our Age. Of Prisoners there were
not above seven or eight taken, amongst which were the Sieur de Bois-Dauphin a
Norman, and Son of a Marshal of France, and the Sieur de Chateau Neuf, the
first for his Youth, Beauty, and Courage greatly esteemed by the Turks, and
both entertained by the Vizier with more generosity than usually possesses the
Nature of Turks: who after this success, having gathered and thrown the heads
of the slain according to their manner into a heap, did one day in merriment
pitch them upon the points of their Lances, and ranking them in file and order,
with Hats and Feathers on them, beat the French March amongst them with shouts
and Vollies of Muskets.

Matters succeeding in this manner unhappily, and the Enemy already almost in
the midst of the Town, being come to the last Retrenchment, beyond which could
be raised no more inward Fortifications; the Officers as in like cases of
misfortune began to throw the blame upon each other, and the contest between
the French and Italians grew as hot within the Town, as the War was without; so
that the Duke of Navailles appearing discontented, The French leave the Town.
though in reality he might well be discouraged, and might be apprehensive with
due reason that the Town was in a desperate condition; howsoever he pretended,
that the time was almost expired, which the King had prefixed for the
continuance of his Forces in Candia and that therefore he could not think of
any other design for them, than that which was in order to their imbarking. The
Captain General being greatly surprised at this resolution, endeavored to
persuade him to the contrary, and being accompanied with the General of Candia,
and the Proveditor General waited on the Duke at his own Quarters, where he
represented to him in the most efficacious terms possible the present dangerous
condition to which the City was reduced; until which time, under the Providence
of God, they acknowleged the preservation thereof to the magnanimous Arms of
their religious King; and therefore in such a conjuncture of misfortunes and
extremity they knew not unto whom they might have recourse for assistance, but
to the Generosity of his Excellency, and of those Gentlemen, who for no other
end but that of Religion and Honor, had undertaken so great a Voyage, and had
volluntarily cast themselves into the hourly dangers of this Siege: That the
Succor they demanded was really great and most important for defense of the
place, in regard that thereon their whole safety depended. Howsoever it might
have cost some labor, though not much blood to the French Forces, if they
would have worked on a new Retrenchment with the same celerity and diligence,
as they formerly used, whereby the Siege might be prolonged until the the
Winter, or till the Christian Princes might take new measures, and send greater
Recruits Hereunto Navailles gave answer, That the zeal which the King his
Master conceived for the conservation of Candia, was evidenced by better
effects, than the empty promises without fruit of other Princes; and that
accounting the present number of Forces and Gentlemen of considerable Quality
which were engaged in this War, together with the great expense and charge his
Majesty had been at in maintenance of a Fleet to transport them, his Majesty's
affection to the Republic was unquestionable: and that both he and his
Officers who had the honor to command those Forces had undertaken along
Voyage, and entered into dangers with constancy and readiness of mind, and had
assaulted the Enemy almost before they saw them, and given relief to the Town
before they set their foot in it: but if the issue of affairs did not
correspond with a^ success agreeable to their good intentions, and the primary
design of this Enterprise, they must have patience, seeing that it costs no
other than the slaughter of French-^^^, and that there had been a large
effusion of the Noble and Illustrious as well as of the common blood. It was a
species of ingratitude not ^o remain contented with such forcible arguments of
friendship; and it was a breach of modesty to pretend, that because his King
had (...) them eight thousand men, that therefore they should continue in
Candia so long as one remained alive. It was true, that besides the Kings
service he was acted by some inward motives of Religion, but that he could not
transgress the Commands and Instructions of his Majesty, which enjoined him to
imbark his Forces in order to their return about the 20th. of that present
month of August. In reply to which, though the Captain General and the other
Venetian Officers, and also Bali Rospigliosi the Admiral of the Popes Galleys
urged his stay with all the instances and arguments imaginable, yet nothing
could prevail to detain him until the arrival of other Forces, only he was
contented to leave six hundred men in the Town during the time that he
continued at Standia: so that by this time having embarked his Forces, and
lastly the six hundred men left on the Works, the Duke took his farewell and
departed: so that the Town being as it were deserted and forsaken of its chief
hopes, all things were given for desperate, and men began to be weary of their
lives, as well as of the War and of their labors; and whereas with the
assistance of the French, (as it was said in the Council) the Town might have
held out until the next Spring, it was now by this grand revulsion reduced to
its last Crisis, and so weakened, as that no possibility of preservation
remained but in honorable terms of Surrender. And though the French in their
Voyage home about Malta encountered positive Orders to remain on the place, yet
judging the Town might already be surrendered, and so the return disgraceful
and in vain, proceeded notwithstanding in their course for France, for which
default and want of constancy the Duke of Navailles being arrived at Tolon,
sustained the punishment of his Princes disfavour, and ordered for some time
not to approach the Court.

The Turks, by departure of the French, The Turks make an assault.
increasing in hopes and courage, made an assault on the Quarters of Sabionera
and St. Andrea; and first attaquing some Soldiers to the number of about
thirty, who were placed on the Guard at the Post of St. Pelagia, they cut most
of them off, and put the rest to flight; with which the Turks being more
animated, advanced to the Palisade of the new Rentrenchment; but Vollies of
Cannon, and showers of Musket Shot, and stones pouring on them, gave some stop
to the ^ury of their career. Grimaldi observing that the Enemy was at a stand,
brought up his Volunteers and Cavalry which served on Foot, and together with
the Forces from Brunswick so plied the Turks with stones, Grenades, and shot,
that the Fight was confused, bloody, and horrid; howsoever the Enemy so
persisted, that the Commanders gave Order, That the gross of the Army should
fall on; but the Soldiers were so broken and torn, that they refused to
advance, though thrust forward with the point of Sword and Spear. The
Captain General in the mean time taking his course along the Marine, on which
part also the Turks were far advanced, caused a Mine to be sprang under the
thickest crowd of the Turks: which consisting of an hundred Barrels of Powder,
made such a destruction, as abated much of the storm, and induced the Enemy to
retire within their Redoubts. The Marquess St. Andrea, in like manner
performing the office of a valiant and experienced Soldier, applied himself to
all places where danger most required his presence, and recovered certain
Breast-works which the Enemy had gained in the Skirmish.

Nor was the storm less furious and bloody on the part of Sabionera, nor was
the success and advantage on the Christians side less considerable, in all
which the Soldiery deserved great commendations and renown; the two French
Regiments of Perasi and Jonsac under the Command of the Sieur Choiseul did
wonders; as also those few which remained of the Regiments of Savoy commanded
by Signior Arborio: Signior Rados, Micolo Polani a Noble Venetian, the
Proveditor Cornaro, the Colonels Gabriel, Givii, and the Sergeant Major of the
Troops of Brunswick, and Sergeant Major Bellegarde, as also the Commander in
chief of Malta gave honorable testimonies of their Bravery and Valor. In
short the Captain General praised them all, which was the best reward he could
bestow on such generous Souls; and then sent Orders to Standia, That the Forces
arrived with the Duke Mirandola should immediately be landed: these Forces,
which when they were first embarked, amounted to the number of a thousand five
hundred men, were now by Calentures and other sicknesses caused by the
excessive heats of the season reduced to six hundred; and though they were
unhealthy and unexperienced Soldiers, yet the extremity of Affairs was such,
as called them to immediate service, and to be placed on the Guard of the new
Retrenchment.

But all this could give little relief to the perishing condition of this
miserable Town; which was not only weakened by departure of the French, but by
at least five hundred others, such as Swedes and Germans, and other Nations,
who notwithstanding all care and endeavors to the contrary, crowded under the
French Banner. Likewise the Batalion of Malta embarked, which though reduced to
a small Body, was yet very considerable for the Quality and Valor of the
Cavaliers; which example all the Volunteers followed, and thereby reduced the
Town to a condition beyond all possibility of defense; for that in actual
service not above four thousand men remained, and of these at least an hundred
a day being killed, the Town must necessarily in a short time become a prey to
the Enemy; wherefore the Captain General called a Council of the most eminent
Officers; A Council for to consider of the state of Candia.
and because the matter was of great importance, he judged fit also to have the
opinion of the Commanders of the Galleasses, and of the other Captains of the
Fleet. At this Council were present.

Francesco Morosini Captain General. Giacomo Contarini Duke of Candia. Girolamo
Battaglia Proveditor General of Arms. Daniel Morosini Proveditor of the
Kingdom. Giacomo Cornaro Proveditor of the Kingdom. Alvise Minio Commissary of
the Ammunition and Provision. Marquis St. Andrea Montbrun General of the Army.
Marquis of Frontenac Lieutenant General. The Baron Frederick de Spaar General
of the Tramontani. The Cavalier Bartolomeo Varisano Grimaldi Sergeant General.
Baron Chilmerseck Sergeant General. Count Francis Salvatico Governor of the
Arms of the City. Cavalier Verneda Chief Engineer, and Superintendent of the
Artillery. On the other side sat the Commanders at Sea, which were as
follows. Lorenzo Cornaro Proveditor of the Fleet. Alvise Magno Captain in
Extraordinary of the Galleasses. Iseppo Morosini Captain in Ordinary of the
Galleasses. Georgio Benzoni Captain of the Gulf. Ascanio Giustiniano Governor
of the Gulf. Angelo Morosini Play Master. Gio. Batt. Calbo Commissary of the
Ammunition and Provisions. Alexandro Locattelli Cancellier.
All which having taken their places, the Captain General began to declare,
That the extremity of the place was so well known and evident to them all, that
there was no need for him to inform them of the particulars; only that he had
called them together to know their opinions and counsels in what manner the
defense of the Town might be best prolonged, and what advice they would give
him touching the present premures and emergency of Affairs. He added further,
That he had by good experience proved them to be as well judicious and wise in
their Counsels, as they were valiant in the Execution; and that now was the
time to lay aside all ostentation of speech, and to attend unto that which was
solid reason and advice, which he desired every one to deliver freely with a
clear and real sense and affection toward the grand Concernment. Then he
ordered the Cancellier to read a short preamble of the matter on which they
were to deliver their opinions, desiring every one to express his judgment in
Writing; But after some few had subscribed their Declaration, so much time was
spent therein, that it was conceived more expedite for every person to declare
his opinion by word of mouth.

As to the first point all generally concurred, that considering the small
number of the Defendants, the Town could not hold out much longer; for that the
Enemy on the side of St. Andrea was arrived to the last Retrenchment, which
being low, weak, and composed of bad matter, could not long resist their power;
that on the side also of Sabionera they were so far advanced by the lower
grounds toward the Arsenal, that in a short time they would block up the Port,
and cut off all provisions and succors from the Town; and that if the Enemy
were resolved to adventure the loss of two or three thousand men by a general
storm; there would remain no possibility of withstanding their Force. This
being generally assented unto, and concluded on all hands, another Question was
propounded; namely, That considering the premises, what was to be done which
might render the most effectual service to the Republic; it was well known how
important that place was to the Public, and what vast Treasures of Gold and
Silver, and what plentiful Effusions of blood had been expended and poured
forth in defense thereof; and that therefore it ought to be maintained to the
utmost and last gasp of strength; but that it ought also to be considered, That
the Town being either taken by assault, or the Port blocked up, there would
certainly ensue such deplorable Consequences as every person may imagine; and
the Republic be damaged by losing all that which is now in a possibility of
being saved. It was therefore put to the Vote, beginning on the side of the
Inferiors, as the custom is, and so ascending to the chief; and it was resolved
that they should capitulate, and enter into a Treaty with the Turks. When it
came to Grimaldi's turn to speak, he confessed clearly, That the Town could not
hold out for many days, and though it was more glorious to the Defenders to dye
on the Walls of it, yet it would be of worse service to the Public; howsoever
he was of opinion, that rather than surrender, it would be better to burn it,
or blow it up with Mines; in execution of which, the wounded and unserviceable
people should in the first place be shipped away, then taking the opportunity
of a dark and quiet Night, the Infantry might be all embarked; it was true, as
he confessed, that the action was difficult and full of hazard; howsoever, two
things moved him to this Counsel; One was, The little assurance he conceived of
the faith of the Turks; and the other was, The gloriousness of the action: for
as this City had been in an extraordinary manner defended, and of which the
World cannot give the like example; so the end thereof would not be less
renowned and famous, it not being a greater triumph to drive the Enemy from the
Walls, than being vanquished to leave a bloody Victory, and instead of a Palace
a heap of stones and ashes. Many of the Council, and amongst them Marquess St.
Andrea Montbrun was of the same opinion, and the Commissary Minio endeavored
to second it with efficacious Arguments; But in fine, after a long Discourse,
they all concluded that the resolution was more generous than practicable; by
reason that so many people could not be embarked without knowledge of the
Enemy, who was not only quartered near, but within the very Walls of the City.

The Captain General was of a different opinion; for that besides the
difficulty of embarking the Soldiery, there were also some other
considerations which might dissuade this resolution, and render it more
prejudicial to the Public than a Surrender by Composition. After some short
debate, all at length concurred in the same sentiment, from which also Grimaldi
did not much dissent, confessing that the proposition he had made would prove
difficult in the Execution; howsoever, considering the little faith which the
Turks observe, he thought it more secure to confide their safety to Fortune and
their own Swords, than to the engagements and moderation of a perfidious and
enraged Enemy. In short, he submitted wholly to the better judgments of the
Council, and more particularly to the Captain General, and the Marquess of St.
Andrea, who were best acquainted with what more nearly concerned the service
and interest of the Prince.

In fine, the conclusion was, That they should enter into a Treaty with the
Vizier, and endeavor to obtain the most advantageous Conditions possible.
Howsoever, it was thought fit to advertise first this their determination to
the Auxiliary Forces at Standia; and to renew the instances they had formerly
made to them for three thousand men, Result of the Council.
with which, and with two thousand Gally Slaves they would endeavor the making
of another Retrenchment, whereby the Town might be conserved for some time
longer. Howsoever, in this Interim the Captain General being willing to touch
the Viziers pulse, that he might better discover in what manner he stood
affected toward a Treaty, dispatched one Colonel Thomas Anand, an Englishman,
of courage, and of able Parts, and of entire honesty, together with one Stefano
Cordili, an intelligent young man to the Vizier's Camp; and that his design
might not be discovered by those of the Town, they were ordered to pass from
Standia with a white Flag^ up the River Gioffiro; and that being come to a
Treaty, they should only discover the mind and inclinations of the Turks,
without making known their intentions, or entering into particulars.

Being come in this manner prepared to the Vizier's Camp, they told the Turks,
That they were come to renew the Treaty begun by Signior Molino, which had been
broken off by the Arrival of the French and Pope's Forces; to which a Turk,
then come from the Vizier's Tent, resolutely answered, That they should think
of no Articles, nor Treaty without a Surrender, To which Anand replied, That
they would do well to acquaint the Vizier so much, for that perhaps he might be
of another opinion; and so not urging farther they departed; but returning
after Dinner the same Turk came down again, called Achmet Aga, a Confident of
the Vizier's together with Panaiotti the Vizier's Interpreter; and then with
more earnestness declaring, That nothing would be heard, unless in the first
place they were resolved to deliver the Town, and threatened them in case they
returned without this Proposition: The Captain General being advised hereof,
the next morning Anand and Scordili went again on the same message; and meeting
the Turks under Paleocastro, they acquainted them that they had orders to treat
about a Surrender; but first desired to know what Articles they would give
them, and what Town in exchange for this. In this manner a Treaty being begun,
it was resolved for better expedition to erect Tents nearer to the Town for the
place of Conference, where the Plenipotentiaries on both sides were to meet.
Ibrahim Pasha, late Pasha of Aleppo, Achmet Aga, the Kahyabegh of the
Janisaries, the Spahyler Agasi, and the Interpreter Panaiotri, were the persons
chosen by the Turks on the part of the Christians, after some Debate, no other
persons were chosen besides Anand and Scordili, who meeting the Turks at the
time and place appointed, demanded of them some other place in exchange for
that of Candia. To which the Turks with some heat replied, That it was against
their Law to deliver Towns where Moschs were built, into the hands of
Christians. To which the others answered, That this could not be their Law,
since that in a Treaty some months past begun by the Cavelier Molino, they had
offered to deliver up into the hands of the Christians Candia Nuova, Sitia, and
Girapitra, all places where Mohammedan Moschs were erected; and though the Turks
might now imagine it easy to win the Town by force, they assured them that
greater difficulties remained; and that if they remembered what blood, what
labors, and what Treasures their small acquests and advance had cost them,
they might thence calculate what Force still remained to conquer, and that the
last gasp of this dying Fortress would spend it self with more ruin and
destruction than they had felt in all the other approaches and assaults
thereunto. In fine, the Turks seeming resolved to be sole Masters of the whole
Kingdom of Candia, the Venetians began to condescend to receive some
compensation in another manner.

Howsoever, the difficulties were not yet ended but greater appeared, for the
Turks demanded satisfaction for the charge of the War; and the Haratch or
head-mony, which for all those years of the Wars they had not received from the
people of the Isles of the Archipelago; they demanded also a Tribute for the
Forts and Islands of Cerigo, Tino, and Clissa, and the other Conquests in
Dalmatia; all which points caused new Disputes, which were maintained with
those heats, and with that obstinacy, as if it had been impossible for both
parties ever to meet in a conclusion. Notwithstanding, after long Debates, on
the fourth of September they came to agree of giving hostages, and to certain
proposals concerning the manner of surrendering the place. The Turks demanded to
have the Outworks put into their hands, with one of the Gates of the City, and
the Palisade of the new Retrenchment: To which Anand and Scordili answered,
That this was not a proposition to be made to the Captain General, for that
they were assured, the Garrison would sooner suffer themselves to be cut in
pieces, than to commit themselves to the mercy of the Turkish Soldiery; whose
faith is recorded in the History of Famagusta, and may serve for a true example
and mirror of their treachery and faithlesness to all Ages. In this manner the
Treaty had like to have been broken off; but at length they concluded, That it
was necessary to render an accout to the Vizier of the particulars of this
Conference, adjourning the Treaty until the next Morning.

Notwithstanding all which, the Turks did not abate in the least point their
progress in the War, laboring in their Works, and fighting with more heat than
ever. The Venetians on the other side were not less active, firing continually
their Cannon and Grenades, and making some little Sallies, endeavored as much
as they were able to cover the weakness of their Forces. The Turks had raised a
new Battery which broke a great part of the Palisade of the new Retrenchment,
upon which it was expected that they should make a strong attempt, for whose
better entertainment two Mines were prepared to receive them; but they
deferring the assault, the Captain General gave orders to fire both the Mines
at once, which consisting of a hundred and fifty Barrels of Powder, made the
ground to tremble both in the City and in the Camp, overthrowing several works
with miserable slaughter of the Enemy.

The Turks observing this resolution in the defendants, became more tractable,
and less severe in their demands; so that Ibrahim Pasha with the rest contented
themselves with no other security for performances of Conditions than Hostages;
of which three were consigned mutually on both sides. After which, other
Articles were, with less Difficulty, concluded; so that in the morning of the
6th of September the Turks demanded that the Christians should give all their
Articles in Writing; whereupon the Council ordered Grimaldi to draw them up;
which were in substance as follows.

First, The Conditions of Peace.
That for obtaining a good and lasting Peace, it is agreed, That the City of
Candia, with all its Cannon which were planted there before the time of the
War, be consigned into the hands of the Vizier.

Secondly, That quiet possession be given to the Republic of Suda, Carabusa,
and Spina Longa, with the Territories thereunto belonging, with the Fortress of
Clissa in Dalmatia.

Thirdly, That the Venetians may carry away all the Cannon which have been
brought into the Town since the beginning of the War.

Fourthly, That for embarking the Soldiery, Pionieers, and Inhabitants of all
Qualities and Conditions, with their Arms, Provisions, and Baggage twelve days
time shall be granted and assigned.

Fifthly, That what shall remain unshipped at the end of the twelve days
aforesaid, the Vizier shall, with his own Boats, assist to the lading thereof.

Sixthly, That during this time of truce, no person whatsoever shall transgress
his Limits, or pass the bounds of his Station or Quarters; and that he who does
shall be treated as an Enemy.

Seventhly, That so soon as these Articles shall be subscribed under the white
Flag, all Acts of Hostility shall cease both on one side and the other.

Eighthly, That for security of performance of these Articles, three Hostages
be mutually given on one side and the other.

Ninthly, That for better assurance, that the Venetians will use all their
endeavors to embark their Men and Goods, the Turks may employ two Officers for
Eyewitnesses of the same.

Tenthly, That for better effecting hereof, all Ships, Galleys, and other
Vessels may freely approach near unto the shore, and enter into the Port both
by Day and Night.

Eleventhly, That the Venetian Fleet may remain at Standia, or at any other
Island in the Archipelago, until such time as they are dispatched, or that
things are duly prepared for their departure.

Twelfthly, That all Commissions given by one side and the other be revoked,
and that whosoever shall after the space of forty days commit any Act of
Hostility against the tenor of these Articles of Peace, shall be punished with
capital punishment.

Thirteenly, That so soon as an Ambassador from Venice shall arrive at the
Port, all Slaves or Prisoners of War taken under the Venetian Colors shall be
freed and released.

Fourteenthly, That what depredations shall be made at Sea or Land after these
Articles are subscribed, and before the publication thereof, shall be
faithfully made good and restored.

Fifteenthly, That a general pardon be given to the Subjects of both sides, who
have acted contrary to their Faith and Allegiance, during this War.

Sixteenthly, That in Virtue of these Capitulations the former Articles be
likewise confirmed which were made in the Year 1571, and that no Tribute or
Present be demanded from the Port, unless as has formerly been paid for such
Islands as the Venetians hold in the Archipelago.

Seventeenthly, That of these Articles two Copies be made, one in Turkish with
its Translation into Italian, subscribed by the Vizier, and sealed with the
Grand Signior's Signet; and the other in Italian underwrote by the
Captain General, and sealed with the Seal of the Republic.

These Articles being signed, the Hostages were given both on one side and the
other. Those given by the Venetians were Faustino da Riva Lieutenant General,
Giovanni Battista Calbo Commissary, and Zaccaria Mocenigo who had been Duke of
Candia. Those given by the Turks were Belin Assan Pasha, Mahomet Aga of the
Janisaries, and Gurgi Bei Tefterdar or Treasurer.

During this Siege, of the Venetians side there were killed and wounded thirty
thousand nine hundred eighty five, of the Turks one hundred eighteen thousand
seven hundred fifty four.

The Batteries which the Turks raised against Sabionera and St. Andrea,
consisted of fifty nine Pieces of Cannon, carrying from fifty to an hundred and
twenty pound weight of Bullet.

The Storms which the Turks made upon the Town were fifty six.

The Combats under ground forty five.

The Sallies made by the Venetians ninety six.

The Mines and Fornelli sprang by the Venetians eleven hundred seventy three,
by the Turks four hundred seventy two.

The Venetians spent Barrels of Powder fifty thousand three hundred and
seventeen.

Bomboes of all sorts by the Venetians of fifty to five hundred weight, were
forty eight thousand an hundred and nineteen.

Grenades of Brass and Iron an hundred thousand nine hundred and sixty:
Grenades of Glass eighty four thousand eight hundred seventy four.

Cannon shot of all sorts two hundred seventy six thousand seven hundred forty
three.

Pounds of Lead eighteen millions forty four thousand nine hundred fifty seven.
Of Match pounds thirteen millions twelve thousand five hundred.

What quantities the Turks might consume of Ammunition is not certain; only it
is observable, That the Brass taken up in the streets which came from the
Enemies Bomboes was so much, that whole Warehouses were filled with the Metal,
and so much sold as yielded many thousands of Crowns.

The Articles being subscribed, and Hostages given, the Captain General
attended with all application of mind and industry imaginable to imbark the Men
and Ammunition, committing in the mean time the care of the City to Cornaro the
Proveditor of the Fleet.

During these days that all things were providing in order to a Surrender,
there was great silence in the Turkish Camp, and no disorder in the City; the
Soldiers on the Ramparts, and the Turks in their Trenches saluted each other
with civility, and entertained communication and discourses together with
friendship and freedom of several passages relating to their War, nothing of
quarrel, or scuffle, or rude words happening out between them in all the term
of the twelve days. The Vizier sent diverse times civil Messages and Presents of
refreshment to the Captain General and Marquess St. Andrea, which they returned
with equal respect and generosity; and so excessive were the Turks in these
offices, that the Venetians began to be jealous, lest under this mark and guise
of courtesy some fraud or design should be covered according to their own
Proverb: Chi ti fa piu carezze che suole, o ti ha engannato o enganar ti vuole.

In short, all things were dispatched with that diligence and care, that on the
27th of September the City was consigned; all the Inhabitants departed thence,
not one remaining in the City, except only two Greek Priests, a Woman, and
three Jews.

In this manner the Whole Isle of Candia, The War began in April 1645.
the cause and occasion of all that Blood and Treasure that was spilt, and
exhausted in twenty five years War, fell at length to the fortune and increase
of the Turkish Empire, with its most impregnable Fortress of the World,
strengthened with as much Art and Industry, as the human Wit of this Age was
capable to invent, after a strait Siege of two years, three months, and twenty
seven days. For the space of twelve days allotted for the Surrender being
expired, Candia delivered.
on the 27/17th. of September being Friday, the great Cross erected on the Wall
was after midnight taken down, and advice given to the Venetians, so soon as
the morning dawned, that the Turks did that day attend the Surrender, which was
accordingly performed by the Principal Citizen about nine of the clock of the
same morning who offering the Keys of the City to the Great Vizier in a Basin
of Silver on the breach of St. Andrea, was by him presented with a Vest of
Sables, and five hundred Zechins in Gold, and to his Servants were given two
hundred. To Morosini also a Present was offered worthy his Quality; but he
refused it, saying, That he would never give a seeming occasion to the
malicious World to slander him with the least appearance of having sold his
important Charge. Whilst these things were transacting on the breach, some of
the most cowardly and disorderly amongst the Janisaries pressed forward to have
entered by force, in violation of the Articles so lately agreed and confirmed;
but some of the Garrison not yet embarked, keeping themselves still on the
Guard, repulsed the most forward in the Riot by killing three or four of their
Companions: which disturbance and insolence of the Soldiery, when made known
to the Vizier, he assembled the disorderly together; and first upbraiding their
cowardice, who durst not enter in the time of War, would now counterfeit Valor
in the time of Peace, sentenced fifteen of them to be impaled on the breach,
which piece of Justice and Gallantry was immediately executed. This rumor
being appeased, the Topegibashee and Cebegibashee, or the Generals of the
Ordnance and Arms took quiet possession of the Forts and Cannon of the City,
and whilst the Turks entered over the breach, the Christian Army withdrew and
embarked themselves as fast as convenience and decency would permit, who after
the departure of the French, and of such who accompanied them, were not
computed to be above two thousand five hundred men, and those sickly, ill
accoutred, and half naked; and thus this City and whole Island became subject
and a prey to the Ottoman Arms. Amongst the Officers which took possession of
the Town were the Tefterdar and the Aga of the Janisaries. The Tefterdar as he
passed over the breach of St. Andrea, and observing how low and weak the Works
were on that side, turned to the Aga of the Janisaries, and with some disdain
said to him, We have here spent ten days in the Surrender of this Town which we
might have taken in two hours.

The Turkish Army taking possession on Friday the 27/17th. of September, the
Vizier made his Entry on Friday the 4th. of October; in which time they had
erected a triumphant Bridge over the breach of St. Andrea, on which the Vizier
entered into the Town, and passed directly to the Church of St. Francis, which
was converted to a Mohammedan Mosch, where having said his Namaz or Prayer, he
went to the house where the Marquess St. Andrea was lodged, which was prepared
for him, with a sumptuous Entertainment of five hundred Dishes at the expense
of the Grand Signior.

This City in four parts of five was ruined and demolished in the time of the
Siege, all the Bells and Ornaments of the Churches and Houses to the very Locks
of the doors were carried away; the Arms remaining were old and rusty, and not
above three hundred and fifty Pieces of Cannon left on the Walls, and those for
the most part very small: the Inhahitants remaining were only five, as we have
said before, unless some few decrepit Jews and Greeks, which might make up the
number of about thirty; so that never could be a more sad spectacle of
desolation, nor a more clear Mirror of the miseries of War.

The Great Vizier being possessed of the Town, dispatched away an Express with
the good News thereof to the Sultan, who posted as fast as wind and weather
would permit. And here the Reader may easily apprehend what joy possessed the
minds of the Turks in all places where the rumor flew of this Cities
Surrender, which had for so many years baffled and put a stand to the Ottoman
Sword, And though the joyful tidings added wings to the Messengers have, yet
the uncertainty of the Grand Signiors abode retarded some days the arrival of
the News: which will seem very strange to him that considers, that the motion
of so great an Emperor in the Glory of his Fortunes should be less obscure
than the light of the Sun, perceptible by all conditions, who inhabit that side
of the Globe, where his rays are visible. At length the Messenger found the
Sultan within the Woods and Mountains of Nogyopont where he had passed the
heats of the Summer, The News brought to the Grand Signior at Negropont.
and some part of his discontent in those solitary retirements: it being now
toward the end of September, and the Winter approaching, the Isle was
incapable to entertain so great a Court, and to return back seemed as
dishonorable as it was dangerous, the Soldiery and People being equally
discontented, the one by the ill success and government of Affairs, and the
other by oppression of Taxes: but this joyful News cleared all those clouds and
ombrages of doubtful and disconsolate thoughts, which the Grand Signior
received like a dream, being at first so surprised with such an unexpected
happiness, that he could scarce believe it; but at length recollecting his
scattered spirits, without delay returned the Messenger again with his
Embrahore or Master of his Horse to the Vizier with the Present of a Sable
Vest, a Dagger, and a Sword, being the usual signals of the Sultans favor, and
with a Letter freighted with Encomiums and Praises of his Valor and Fortune.
And whereas the Vizier had persuaded him to return to Constantinople, he
answered, That he was resolved to winter at Salonica, where with the Spring he
expected his presence, and from thence in company with him, should be ready to
choose any Seat, which in his judgment the Vizier apprehended most conducing to
the benefit of the Empire.

The Captain General Morosini having in the mean time embarked his Forces,
sailed to Suda to provide and fortify that place, Spina Longa and Carabusa,
poor Rocks and Appendages to the greater Isle of Candia, with all necessary
supplies of Victuals and Ammunition: which only serve for a Prospect into
Candia, and to keep alive the Title of the Venetian Republic to that Kingdom.
Suda is the most considerable of the three, but yet not strong, the Sea being
fordable between that and Candia, The Venetians at Suda.
and not of long resistance, whenever the Turk shall think it worth his time
to subdue. Here Morosini attended the Ratification of the Peace from Venice,
and the disbanding of the Turkish Army, in which time four French Ships with
Succors of Men and Ammunition arrived at Candia, but coming late were
disappointed of their design, and so returned back into their own Country.

The Turks having now finished their work, dispeeded a way their Janisaries and
Pioniers by all occasions of shipping: those that remained were employed all
the Winter in filling the Trenches without the City, and many Slaves taken out
of the Galleys to repair the breach of St. Andrea: in which work, whilst they
threw up the difordered rubbish, so poisonous a stench evaporated from the
bodies of the slain, which lay buried in those ruins, as begat a Pestilence
and other diseases in the City and in the Galleys; but laboring continually on
that work, they soon acquitted themselves of the contagion, by help of the
Winters cold which then approached.

In this manner expired the Action of this Year, fortunate in its success to
the Turks; for though they gained but thirty Acres of Land with expense
inestimable of Blood and Treasure, yet the Glory and Fame which attended it,
being the consummation of twenty five years Wars, and the Theater where the
whole World were Spectators, was of greater value to the Turks than any other
consideration, and may with time prove a place of advantage to the farther
increase of their Western Empire, unless God Almighty by his Mercy and
Providence give a stop to the progress of this Grand Oppressor.

But before this Year ended, Serini and the Nobles of Hungary offer themselves
to the Turk.
behold the misery of Christendom, by reason of discontents and animosities in
the Imperial Court, the Count Serini Prince of Croatia, the Marquess Frangipani
and Count Nadasti, joined with other Nobles of Hungary, sent Messengers to the
Grand Signior offering themselves Subjects and Tributaries to the Turk,
desiring his Protection of their Religion and Liberties, designing to act the
part of Bethlem Gabor.

The Great Vizier employed himself this whole Winter past in repairing the
Fortifications of Candia, regulating them in some measure according to the
Turkish Model, and in repairing and beautifying the Town, which was done with
such admirable expedition, that in a few months most of the houses demolished
in the time of the Siege were again erected, and the Churches converted into
Moschs and adorned, three of the principal whereof took the Names of the Grand
Signior, Great Vizier and Captain Pasha, and were endowed by them with an
honorable Revenue, sufficient to maintain them in Reparations, Lamps, and
Talismans. But the Turks were not more pious toward their Moschs than the
Christians were careless and cold toward their Churches; for the Venetians
inserted not one Article in favor of a Christian Church or a Religious House,
which would have been granted as soon as demanded, only a Greek who was
Interpreter to the Great Vizier called Panaiotti, a Person of Parts and
Learning, at the expense of two thousand two hundred Dollars; and an Armenian
Merchant called Apro Chelabei at the charge of a thousand four hundred
purchased two Churches for their respective Nations.

The Grand Signior in the mean time returned to Salonica to pass the remainder
of the Winter, which place being famous for multitude of all sorts of Game, The
G. Signior returns to Salonica, and hunts.
drew is heart, and made him impatient till he arrived those Plains, more
desired by him than the Elysian fields; for having made his Entry into that
City, the next day he designed to hunt: but being put in mind that the English
Ambassador Sir Daniel Harvey, Sir Daniel Harvey, his Majesty's Ambassador,
has his Audience of the Grand Signior.
who (as we said) arrived at Constantinople the year before, attended his
Audience, he was contented to grant it to him the next morning. But yet not to
lose his hunting, at midnight he sent Officers to the Ambassador to prepare
for the next days Audience very early; and to gain time, ordered his Horses to
be all ready, that so having dispatched that Ceremony, he might immediately
mount into the Saddle and pursue his Game. Howsoever he was not in so much
haste, but he testified due respect to His Majesty of Great Britain, and the
esteem he had of the English Nation, ordering the Capitulations to be renewed;
and commanding the Chimacam, that if any one should break or infringe them,
that he should cut him off without farther argument. But as to renewing the
Capitulations, the Chimacam falling at the Grand Signiors feet, beseeched him,
That that particular might be deferred until the arrival of the Great Vizier,
whose proper power and act it was to make War and Peace; and therefore for him
to intermeddle about Capitulations was to invade the Viziers, Authority, which
he durst not do without putting his life in danger, or at least rendering his
Person obnoxious to his irreconcilable displeasure; with which the Grand
Signior being satisfied, ordered that the renewing of the Capitulations should
be deferred until the return of the Visiier, and so dismissed the Lord
Ambassador from his Presence; but this work of renewing the Capitulations was
reserved for the care and conduct of Sir John Finch, who succeeded in the
Embassy after the death of Sir Danil Harvey.

The Grand Signior arising from his Throne mounted into his Saddle to follow
his excessive delight in Hunting, which now he pursued every day without
respect of cold or wet, or Horses or Attendants; but like an impetuous Nimrod
raged amongst the timorous Hares and flying Hearts, over-spreading the Woods
with vast numbers of poor Jews and Peasants, which he had commanded forth to
drive for Game, not respecting the extreme rigor and Frosts of Winter, by
which many of those poor Wretches lying abroad in the nights, were benumbed,
and dyed. And so far did his humor transport him in this Recreation, that he
was discouraged at no inconvenience or labors which attended it; for one day
appointing his Hunting at a certain place, which to pass on Horseback was a
great circuit, but a nearer cut over a Gulf or Arm of the Sea, he ordered his
Horses round, whilst he in Person attended with the Chimacam and several of his
Grandees, passed over to the other side in a Gally. But being impatient of his
Sport, and not able to give time to his Horses to make their way, ascended his
Gally, commanding them to row away with all speed; and arriving at the other
side some hours before His Horses could come, would yet land: and being weary
of expectation, resolved to meet them on foot through all the dirt and mire of
a low and rich soil: where whilst he traveled heavily, and almost tried, by
good fortune they espied a Miller driving his Horse laden with two Sacks of
Meal; whom when they had called, and made him to lighten his burden, and take
off the Pack-saddle, the Chimacam himself stripped off his own Sables Vest, and
covered the Horse with it, on which the Grand Signior mounting in great state,
rode like a Prince till he met his own Retinue, which passage served to fill
the discourse at night of that days Hunting, and deserves to be chronicled with
our English Dialogue between the Miller and the King: howsoever we make use of
it here to demonstrate the strange and passionate humor which possessed this
Sultan in his Hunting.

Little other recreation did this Grand Signior take, The G. Signior delights
solely in his Queen.
unless it were in the Company of his chief Sultana, called the Hasaki Sultana,
by whom having had a Son, which beginning now to play and speak, reconciled
much of his affection to the Female Sex, but yet with that moderation and well
regulated love, that he confined himself wholly to this one Woman, having sent
for her to be his Companion in all journies and adventures of Errantry, whilst
the other Ladies as encumbrances and impediments to the speedy motions of the
wandering Court, were dispeeded to Constantinople under the Government of the
Queen Mother, as we have before declared; of which privilege this Sultana
beginning to be sensible, endeavored to increase and conserve the Affections
of her Lord by all the arts and tricks of love imaginable; for she was really,
or else feigned to be, so enamoured of him, that she pined and macerated away
her self for his absence; and when he was indisposed in his health, or intended
a long Journey from her, she would fall into Swoundings, and Paralytical Fits,
or something else, which was an undoubted symptom of true affection, such as
commonly intervenes amongst us in the chaste embraces of single marriage; that
the Grand Signior, whose love to Women were not naturally as vagrant as his
delights after the chase of wild Beasts, was so much satisfied in her alone,
that he could be no more without her than she without him; so that, like Diana,
or some Mountain Nymph, she became a Huntress after her Prince, as he a Ranger
after his Game.

And now in this place it may be pertinent to add; that on the 30th. of
December of this year 1669. Sir. Daniel Harvey his Majesty's Ambassador, being
then on his departure from Salonica, Mr. Willam Hedges who was with him there,
being the Treasurer to the Levant Company in Turk^, and Signior Antonio Perone,
the Druggerman or Interpreter, having occasion of business attended that day on
the Keis-Efendi, or chief Secretary; who so soon, as they came into his
presence he called out to them, I hope said he, that you are come to turn
Musselmen, or believers; for your great Champion Serini Ogly, (for so they call
Serini) is become Feudatary, having submitted, and put himself under protection
of the Grand Signior. It was but the night before, that certain Messengers from
Count Serini, and his adherents arrived at this Court, proffering to accept the
Standart from the Grand Signior, and pay him Tribute, so they might obtain the
power and protection of the Ottoman Arms against the Emperor. This proposition
though in appearance so advantageous, that it might seem to admit of no doubt
in the acceptance; yet both the Grand Signior and the Chimacam were so ready
after the late success at Candia to join in their Complement to the Vizier,
that they would neither conclude, nor give answer to these Messengers, until
first they had consulted his sense, and opinion on the proffer, wherefore to
loose no time according to the usual expedition of the Turks, two galleys were
the very same night dispatched with these Messengers to the Vizier at Candia,
to give him notice of this tender, and to demand his counsel, and assent
thereunto: with like speed the galleys were returned with the Viziers
approbation, though afterward on better considerations the Turks touched this
cause so tenderly, that Serini and his accomplices being detected, the plot
Miscarried and the Conspirators brought to condign punishment, as shall
hereafter be related; what suspicion the Counsel at Vienna might have of this
design is uncertain, yet this is out of all doubt, that they had no assured
knowledge thereof, until it was first brought them by Mr. Hedges; and yet so
much time was taken up herein, as that he travailed from Salonica to
Constantinople, where he arrived the 13th. of January, and there remaining some
time for the better Setlement of his affairs before his journey thence for
England, by Land he departed on the 14th. of Feburary, and on the 29th. of
March following, was by Leiutenant General Esterhas received in to Raab, to
whom giving this first Intelligence about Serini, and his adherents, was
courteously treated, but yet detained, until advice was given hereof to General
Montecuculi then at Vienna, and his license, and pass given to Mr. Hedges for
his farther proceedings in his journey. Answer hereof being returned, he had
license given him to depart, and a guard to conduct him safe to Vienna, which
is very necessary on those Frontiers. At Vienna Mr. Hedges being examined upon
Oath by Count Capelliers to the truth of the foregoing Relation, Troops were
immediately dispatched to the Castle of Serini, where they so seasonably
arrived, as to take possession of it for the Emperor some few hours before the
Turkish Forces, (having received a stop by cutting of the bridge) came to seize
it for the Grand Signior: (Count Serini perceiving by this Act, that his
design, was discovered, fled with Frangipani his Father-in-law toward
Transylvania, but being on his way thither overtaken by the Emperors Edict, he
was together with Frangipani seized at Colonel Careis House, and thence brought
to Vienna, and lodged at the Convent of Father Nicholas Donilard an Irish Friar
in the Suburbs of that city; where Serini having seen, and discoursed
personally with Mr. Hedges, he declared to him, That if the Turks had been, as
good as their words, he had not been there a prisoner at that time. In this
particular two things seem strange, and unusual. First on the Turks side, that
a matter of this secrecy should be so openly divulged and discoursed by them at
Salonica: And secondly, on the Emperors part, that a business of this
Importance commonly known at the Grand Signor's Court, should want a person to
advice, and transfer it to Vienna; until it came accidentally to be published
by a stranger, who having taken a circuit with it by way of Constantinople, and
his leisure there to accomodate his own affairs, vented it rather as a Subject
of discourse, then a new discovery. It Is true, the Turks are very commonly open
in their counsels, and have a quality to keep nothing secret though
recommended to them under never so many Injunctions of privacy: yet that the
Emperor who commonly maintains a Minister tending at the Ottoman Court, should
have no other intelligence hereof, then such an accidental, and unexpected
conveyance, is a matter which affords occasion to upbraid the Negligence of the
Germans, and at the same time to admire and praise the divine Providence and
Justice.

Anno Christi 1670. Hegeira 1081.
THE Spring coming forward, the Great Vizier declared, That after St. George's
day, which is the 23d day of April, (called by the Turks Cassim gheun) he
resolved to depart from Candia; and therefore ordered, That all Ships, Saiks,
Brigantines, and other Vessels, which were found in any Port of the Grand
Signior's Dominions, should be sent to Candia, to transport him and the
remainder of his Army to Rhodesto in Romelia, from whence he designed his March
to meet the Grand Signior at Adrianople. The Vizier takes a survey of the whole
Isle of Candia.
But before his departure he took a view of the Island, taking his progress
through the whole circumference of it, and numbering all the Inhabitants which
paid Harach, or Pole-mony, found them not to exceed two and twenty thousand
persons. For though in the time of Dellee Mehmet Pasha, who was the first that
brought the Ottoman Sword into that Country, there were listed fifty five
thousand, who paid duties of Harach; yet now the Plague, the Sword, and other
miseries of War had reduced them to that small number, of whom ten thousand (as
is reported) perished in the Mines, and before the Walls of their own City; and
great numbers of Olive Trees being cut down and burned by the Soldiery in tiem
of the War, is the reason that that Island yields not half the quantity of Oils
as in former times.

The Ambassador of Venice Signior Alivise Molino, before mentioned, was now at
Candia, designing to accompany the Vizier in his Voyage to the Grand Signior;
for adorning which Embassy the Republic had appointed a Ship to carry the
Presents and several Persons of Quality for attendance of the Bailo (for so
their Ambassador is called;) and in regard in that passage the ship was to
touch at Zant, they laded on her a hundred thousand Zechins for payment of that
Soldiery, which with the Captain General were returned from Candia to that
place, with Presents for the Grand Signior and his Court; but it pleased God,
that this Ship failing down the Gulf, met with so furious a storm of Wind, that
she suffered shipwreck on the Coast of Italy, where not only the ship and goods
were lost, but every soul upon that ship perished; amonst which was Lorenzo
Molino Son of the Ambassador, and Ottavio Labia, another noble Venetian.

The Great Vizier entertained himself so long in Candia that the month of May
was well entered before he departed thence; The Vizier departs from Candia, and
arrives at Scio.
and by the way touched at Scio, where he was met by all the Officers and
Governors of the adjacent Jurisdictions, who came to made tender of their
Presents and Services; but the Vizier in a plausible manner, accepted of their
courteous Offers, but returned their Gifts, saying, That he was so sensible of
the great oppressions and expenses the neighboring Countries had suffered by
reason of the War, that he was resolved to superinduce no new Charge by Victory
and Peace.

In like manner from all parts was a confluence of poor oppressed people, who
came to petition for justice and relief against the corruption and tyranny of
their Governors in the respective Countries. But the Vizier admitted no
Audience for Complaints, whether it were to maintain an apprehension of his
clemency and gentleness, by acting nothing that was cruel or severe, or to
enjoy himself after his cares and turmoils in the War; he almost for fourteen
days continuance entertained himself in private by the cool and crystalline
Fountains of Scio. Some report, that he gave himself at that time so
excessively to Wine, being overjoyed at his success, and conclusion of the War,
that he was never capable, during his abode there, of serious thoughts or
counsels; so that his Kahya, or Secretary, could hever be admitted access,
unless he were called, though on the most urgent occasion of business. Others
interpreted his retirements to be in order to serious considerations about the
management of Affairs at his return; as how to satisfy the expectations of the
Grandees, who patiently attended an amendment of abuses in the Government; how
he might pacify the minds of the Soldiery, who were jealous of Couspiracies
against the lives of the Royal Brothers, and how to steer in an even course at
Court between the security of his Master, and satisfaction of the Vulgar; for
all the World lived in hope that alteration of times would amend abuses, and
that the last remedy of all was the return of the Viziers Authority. Howsoever,
it is certainly reported, That the Vizier was become exceedingly intemperate in
wine, and drowned much of his cares in the fumes and vapors of it, supposing
himself, as Tiberius did in Caprea, exempt from the eyes of the World, whilst
he remained in Scio, which the Sea had separated from the greater Continent.
The Great Vizier persuaded to drink wine.
And yet the Vizier, is believed, never to have tasted Wine, or known whether
it was bitter or sweet, till the pride of his success in Candia transported him
to make his joy extravagant, to which the Officers about his Person invited
him, as that which cheared the spirits, strengthened the Nerves, and induced a
strange kind of delight and pleasure in the fancy, beyond any thing of Poppies,
or Opiate Compositions, or Biram-Pasha's Pills, or Berse, or a thousand other
inventions, fit only to confuse men's reason, and stupifie the brain, and benumb
all the senses, in which some, as I have heard, had so practiced themselves by
degrees, that they could swallow five drams in twenty four hours, though I
never knew any, unless one Turk, whom I saw eat above three; but then they
could eat nothing else, nor were they fit afterward to receive or digest any
other nourishment, Nature being used to that poison, rejected all other founder
nutriment. But Wine (they said) cheared the heart in that manner, and comforted
the stomach, that the Turks began now generally to drink it, unless he were
some Pharisaical Hypocrite of the Ulamah, or some superstitious aged and
ignorant Professor. The Soldiers and other Turks drink Wine to excess.
So that the vice of drunkenness became more common amongst the Turks, than
amongst the Germans, or our selves: I am sure more intolerable, and administered
to more mischiefs, by how much the Turks being unaccustomed to Wine, knew less
how to comport the heats of Intemperance.

And here I shall make a little digression from my purpose in hand to acquaint
my Reader of the effects which I have observed to be produced in those who
accustom themselves to the use of Opium. A digression about Opium.
In all the Country Villages amongst the Turks, the more aged sort of men who
have most leisure, and least necessity to work, addict themselves to Opium for
alleviation (as they say) of their cares, and to forget their sorrow, for
pleasure in the taste there can be none, being very bitter to the palate; which
being taken in a morning in a small quantity, about the bigness of a Tare,
superinduces at first a strange cheerfulness about the heart, and thence raises
a more pleasing vapor to the head, than any can proceed from the spirits of the
best and the highest Wines: but afterward as it begins to digest, the vapor
becomes more gross, and consequently a kind of stupefaction is induced over the
brain and nerves, which with drowsiness and sleep passes away like a drunken
fit. The Youth amongst them which drink Wine abhor Opium, until growing into
years, and to the care of a family (as a sign of which they suffer their beards
to increase) they are taught by their Imaum, and more by example of others,
that Wine being against their Law, is only dispensable in wild and unbridled
Youth, but in those of riper age is a vice to be reproached by all sober and
well-governed men. In the place of which they take up the lawful and innocent
Pill of Opium, which makes men serious and settled (as they say) because that it
operates not like Wine, which makes men mad, and rash, and violent, but
disposes them to be Sots, and to sit grave and quiet without doing hurt to any
man, which is a qualification accounted very laudable amongst them, and is one
of the greatest Virtues which they endeavor to acquire in their Tekees or
Monasteries. This being the reason for which it is taken and allowed, it is
grown a common custom almost amongst all the Country People, who in the morning
before they go to work take first their Opium, and upon it three or four dishes
of Coffee; for it is observable, that none eats Opium but who accompanies it
with great quantities of Coffee, which is doubtless a kind of Opiate in it
self, and partakes very much of a Narcotick Quality; by this means and constant
use some arrive to take strange quantities; the most that ever I knew any man
take was three drams in twenty four hours, viz. a dram and a half or
thereabouts in the morning, and as much an hour afternoon: the which for more
exactness I had the curiosity to see weighed. The same person offered for a
small reward to take five drams in twenty four hours; but then he said, it
required a long time to digest, and did not doubt but to overcome it: but I was
too scrupulous to put a man into a sleep, from whence I feared he might never
awake. This person was of a thin and livid complexion, his skin shriveled, no
more beard than a few hairs, his mouth commonly open, because his chap was
fallen; his countenance putting me often in mind of the Picture I have seen of
the Gorgons head; for had it been encompassed with Snakes instead of his
Turbant, it might have served for a perfect Original. He had arrived to the
years of forty eight, and from the years thirty he had entered into Opium from
great excess of Wine: in which condition he found that his stomach required
littled other nourishment, being content with a small quantity of bread and
water for his other Diet, Opium supplying him with all the other Delicacies he
could desire: he was the father notwithstanding of two or three children, which
he confessed to have begot in the strength of his Opium, having no desire to
accompany with his wife, until he was first invigorated with his usual Dose,
being till then like a Trunk or Log, wanting spirits almost to turn his body.
For his Opium was that only which could revive all, which about a quarter of an
hour after it was taken began to operate, and then we discovered in his eyes,
which before were dull and heavy, scarce opening, a certain quickness and
sparkling, and then soon after he was fitted for the work of the day, and could
labor as others, and take a journey on foot of seven or eight miles to Market,
and return home at night: his body was always bound, or his belly constipated
with the hardness of his excrement, and yet he was subject to no other
sickness, unless his vitiated desire to this Poison which can nourish no
wholesome or healthful body. The Turks, as I have learned, make little other
use of Opium than this; yet sometimes they will put it into their Camels ears,
and the nostrils of their Horses, when faint and weary, wherewith they revive
again, and soon recover their strength and force to travel.

The Vizier having thus passed some days of Entertainment at Scio, entered again
his Gally, and passing through the Streights of the Hellespont arrived at
Rodesto, where having landed many of his Janisaries and such of the Army as
remained with him, after a few days continuance he marched to Adrianople, where
he was received by the Grand Signior with all evidences of satisfaction, and
entered the City triumphant after the manner of the Turkish Allai.

The Ceremonies and Complements being past, which usually intervene between
Great Personages after a long absence, the grand Consultation was, In what
manner to prevent the seditious irruptions of the Soldiery, and how to
reconcile the Jealousies between the Grand Signior and his Brothers. For the
former, two things were concluded necessary. First, to divide the Militia of
the Janisaries, which was immediately executed, and eight thousand of them,
under pretense of Incursions, were sent through Moldavia to remain on the
Frontiers of Poland. Secondly, it being observed, that most of the Soldiery
drank Wine, from whence in ancient times arose many Mutinies and Seditions of
the Soldiery, dangerous to the Ottoman State, as namely in the time of Mahomet
III. when the Janisaries in the heat of drunkenness entered the Seraglio by
force, and demanded the Heads of the chief Favorites: And as then it was
judged the best Expedient to cool the hot brains of the Janisaries, to proclaim
a Prohibition of Wine at Constantinople, and to command upon pain of death,
That those who had any Wine in their Houses should bring it forth, and stave
it; so now the use of it was universally forbidden in all the parts of the
Grand Signiors Dominions, and a special Command was sent to all places
respectively under the penalty of death, and a thousand maledictions, cursing
Wine as come from Hell, and as a Liquor produced by the Devil to ensnare men's
souls, and inebriate their heads, and confound States. And so generally was
this Prohibition enjoined, that his Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople with
long solicitation and charge obtained license for his Family, and the Merchants
there to make Wine; but for the Merchants at Smyrna there was more difficulty,
and this year Wine was not made in their Houses according to custom, and not
without scruple permitted to be imported from the Greeks Islands, and other
parts where the Command extended not its force; for the Prohibition was to all
places where Moschs or Turks Inhabitants, the Villages or Isles where
Christians only lived were not included. To this Prohibition were added on
every Friday Sermons to the People inveighing against Wine, and cursing the
Drinkers of it, in which affair Vanni Efendi the Grand Signiors Preacher was
much concerned, from whom the Original of this Counsel was judged to proceed.
And now to please the Reader, who perhaps may be curious to know the style of
this Prohibition, I have here inserted the Command verbatim as translated out
of the Original, and directed to the Kadi of Smyrna.

TO the most perfect of the Judges amongst Musulmin (or Believers) the most
worthy amongst those Powers which profess one God, The Command against Wine.
the Mine of Virtue and Wisdom, the Exemplar of Justice to all People, the
Inheritor of the Sciences of the Prophets and Apostles, the Ornament of his
Office and (through the Grace of God assisting) our President in Smyrna, whose
Virtues may they ever be augmented. At Receipt of this my Royal Command know,
That Wine and Games at Dice, and figured Cards, and of Arrows without feathers;
which are Lotteries, are the filthiness of Diabolical work (according to the
testimony of the miraculous Revelation) are Fomenters of malice and wickedness,
and are the ferment of that Faction and Sedition which corrupt and seduce the
Servants of God, which being prohibited by Authority, and yet used, provokes
the anger and disdain of Almighty God against us: And whereas by this Mother of
all wickedness (that is, Wine) the Musulmin Kingdoms are defiled, there appears
an evident alteration of the Musulmin Law and Faith, and an inlet to actions of
foul impression. Praised be the high and most great God, that in the days of my
years abounding in Felicity, the observation of lawful Precepts has been
confirmed, and unlawful things have been prohibited; and now I know that this
is the sum of the most important Affair conducing to my Kingdoms and my own
Felicities, and in general the principal and greatest care, and the best and
most necessary Canon of my Empire: so that being desirous to satisfy the
Creator of the World, my Royal and immutable Will resolves to cleanse and
purify the Musulmin Kingdoms of this prohibited and filthy abomination;
wherefore when this Royal Command comes to your hands, wheresoever there are
Taverns of Wine, let them be rased and thrown down in all Cities and Towns
ennobled with Musulmin Moschs, let the buying and selling thereof be
prohibited, with all drinking and use of Wine; and likewise I command, That in
Constantinople, Brusa, and Adrianople the Imposition thereupon be wholly taken
off. And that in all other Cities and Towns adorned with Musulmin Moschs, there
be not a drop of Wine suffered or admitted in; and that Musulmins neither
privately nor secretly drink Wine; and whosoever is or shall be Author of this
sin, and to alter my Command in this particular, either now or hereafter, may
he be punished by the Universal Lord of all the World. Likewise when this my
Command of high Reputation appears, which is a Royal Writing, let it be annexed
to the Decretal Rolls, and be put in execution according as it is obligatory.
And when this Command comes to your hands, you are to have all due care of this
enjoined particular, That it operate according to the Tenor of this Royal
Injunction, participating of Prosperity and Majestic Power, by virtue of which
you are to reprove, reprehend, hinder, and prohibit, according to the Law of
God, the drinking of Wine; and that it may be wholly taken away, let the Tax
and Revenue which proceeds from thence be taken off, and in all guarded and
governed Cities and places of my Kingdoms, let the Taverns be ruined and
overthrown. And therefore you are to make known and publish to all Citizens and
Inhabitants the force of this my Royal Command, as well in the City of Smyrna,
as in other Cities and Towns ennobled with Musulmin Moschs, and you are to
ruin the Taverns which are found there. And you are to take away the Houses of
Entertainment amongst the Franks which are in Smyrna that sell Wine, nor shall
they sell Wine in their own houses, but you shall hinder and prohibit them: and
if those Taverns shall be the Possessions of private men, you shall advise the
Owners of them; or if they be bequeathed by Testament to the Deputies of the
Muteveli, you shall admonish them with earnestness and threats, That in the
place of Taverns they raise other more profitable and lawful Buildings, and
that they re-edifie them in a different form from the first. And the Taverns
being ruined and demolished according to my Royal Command, and the Butts and
other Vtensils thereof taken away, you shall make a public Arz thereof, and
send it to my Royal Stirrup; and you being admonished thereof by my Royal
Admonition, you are to have a care that neither in the City nor Suburbs
thereof, nor in Cities adorned with Royal Moschs any person whatsoever bring in
Wine, or one drop thereof, or that the buying or selling thereof be admitted,
and that no Musulman drink Wine. For if after this I come to understand, That
any person have brought in Wine, though it be but one drop, I swear by the Holy
Souls of my Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers that those who bring it in, or
sell it, or drink it, shall be punished with such tortures, as were never
inflicted on any before. In short, this being a business so important as to the
Faith, as to my Empire, my strong intention and firm resolution is to cleanse
and purify in the highest degree as well the Frontiers, as the Royal Seats of
my Empire from so foul a sink of so much filthiness and dissension; and
therefore do enjoin this Royal Writing of high felicity so far, that nothing
shall be able to change or alter it, or rovoke this Command of Majestic
Reputation. And for the future, let him be who he will, that shall offer to
oppose, or alter, or change this my Command declared by these Presents, or have
intention or design to the contrary, may the curse of God be upon him. In
conformity hereunto know you, that are Judges, that this being my Will and
Pleasure, and ultimate Resolution, you are to register this noble Command in
the Book of public Acts and Decrees, that so it may be preserved; and for
execution thereof, you are to use all your diligence and power, and therein to
take due care; for if after these Admonitions, Confirmations, Menaces, and
Rigors, Wine be either bought or sold in the Cities or Suburbs, or other
places, as before; or that there remains any Tavern not ruined, or if in any
wise a drop of Wine be bought or sold, you shall receive due punishment, and
your self suffer the same torments which are threatened against those who are
publicly guilty of the transgression of this Law. Therefore know this, and
knowing it, give credit to my noble Firm.

Dated in the Month Rabiul Evel, Hegeira 1081. in Adrianople.

And now one would imagine that this Command being a Hattesheriff signed with
the Grand Signior's own hand, would have been of durable and perpetual Force
and Authority. But experience has showed us the contrary, that in one Year
after, License being first given to Franks, to make Wine in their own houses,
and especially to all Christian Ministers; in one year more the indulgence
became universal, and Taverns were again admitted, and still continue as common
and free as in former times.

Anno Christi 1671. Hegeira 1082.
THE Ship which carried the Presents for the Turks and designed to transport
the Ambassador, being cast away, new preparations were made, and the Gally
Brazzana, commanded by Alexandro Zeno, a noble Venetian, was dispatched with
them, being ordered to transport Signior Molino the Ambassador to the Port,
who was received with the usual honors due to his Quality and Character; all
which Ceremonies and Offices being past, several matters occured which were not
so well expressed in the Capitulations, but that they needed an explication;
and new Orders and Models for redress of Affairs in Dalmatia: For the
Morlacchs, who in the time of the War had submitted themselves to the obedience
of the Venetians, began now to infest the Country, and to enter into those
places, which in the first years of the War they had destroyed and abandoned;
the Turks on the other side opposed them, and the Country being open, many
skirmishes happened, and as many troubles ensued as in the time of the War. For
adjusting these differences Mahomet Pasha of Bosna was dispatched into those
Countries with Authority and Instructions; where on the other side he was met
by Antonio Barbaro, Proveditor General of Dalmatia and Albania, appointed by
the Senate to accord and settle the differences of the Confines; and the place
designed for meeting of the Commissioners was appointed to be between Climno
and Clissa; but such was the fury of the people, and the passion that both
parties had to recover their ancient possessions, that the Turks in the Month
of November by force of Arms made themselves Masters of Obronzo and Dernis,
which were surrendered without much opposition, by reason of the small numbers
of the Morlacchs, who neither having Garrison nor Fortifications were easily
surprised, under the pretense of peace. But it succeeded otherwise at Scardona,
where by the assistance of a Gally and some Brigantines, the Turks, who were
the Aggressors, were repulsed; and in like manner at Risano they were beaten
off, and put to flight with much confusion and slaughter, with the death also
of Vsuff Bey, their chief Commander, and Author of all these troubles.

The Relation of these disturbances was carried to the Port by the Bosnacs, who
were concerned in these Affairs, with all circumstances of aggravation which
might incense the Grand Signior, and move the Vizier to take part in their
Quarrel; But he being desirous to maintain that Peace which he himself had
concluded, moved the Grand Signior to dispatch a Hasachee, or one of his Royal
Officers, to render him an exact account of the true state of the Affairs of
that Country. In which Interim Mahomet Pasha of Bosna, the Commissioner
happening to dye, the Vizier moved, That the Morlacchs should surrender up
those places which they had lately possessed, and that new Commissioners should
be again sent for adjusting the Limits of the Confines, and the Possessions of
the Inhabitants. The Senate of Venice accepting this proposition, gave Orders
to their General Barbaro to withdraw the people from the places in dispute, and
in the Month of May 1671. made and constituted the Cavalier Nani Procurator of
St. Mark, their Plenipotentiary, with full authority to compose all differences
touching the Frontiers. On part of the Turks one Mamut, once Pasha of Buda, and
late Chimacam of Constantinople, was nominated and empowered with like faculty;
he was a person with whom I was well acquainted, and of whom we have had
occasion to discourse, when he was Kahya to old Kuperlee. He was a Native of
the Country of Bosna, who are reputed for men of much more affable and
courteous disposition, and of more pleasing Conversation, than the common
temper of the Turks who are for the most part of haughty, sullen, and saturnine
Complexions.

These Commissioners, with Thomas Tarsia Interpreter, met about the end of
July, in the plains of Island between Zara and Sebenico under Tents erected for
that purpose: At this meeting were present also the Mufti, and Treasurer of
Bosna, and all the Kadi's and Military Officers of that Province, which might
make a Body of four or five thousand men, ill armed, and badly accoutred: With
Nani the Commissioner for Venice, were present, Alberto Magno Captain of Zara,
Farsetti Proveditor of Clissa; diverse military Officers, such as the Cavalier
Varisano, Grimaldi Sergeant General, Count Rados, the Count Scorto, Vimercato,
Cesarini, with diverse other Colonels, and Persons of Quality, and Nobles of the
Province, some of which were Representatives for their principal Cities, such
as Zara, Sebenico, Spalato, and Trau. His Excellency the Comissioner Nani had
three Troops of Horse, and as many Companies of Foot, for his Guard, and at
Possidaria were two Galleys and four Brigantines to attend him: so that his
Equipage appeared as well Martial, as agreeable to a place ordained for a
Treaty of Peace.

On the 27th. of July the Commissioners had their first Conference in the
Pasha's Tent, the Debate continued many hours with much heat; which did not
only relate to the late Conquests, but new difficulties arose in regard that
Ferat Aga, appointed Commissioner for the Port, had in the year 1573 assigned
Bounds and Limits to the Confines, according to his pleasure and arbitrary
will, which not being assented unto by the Venetians, a new regulation was made
by the said Ferat, together with Cavalier Soranzo in the year 1576. Time
afterward, and the turbulent spirits of the Inhabitants had altered these
Limits, and by reason of the long War the Landmarks and Bounds of the Confines
were removed or wholly destroyed. The original Copies of the Writings of
Agreement were rotted, and much defaced, the names of the places and the
scituations being wrote in diverse Languages, were confused, and the reports of
the people were so different, proceeding from the diversity of their Interests,
that little of judgment could be founded on their relations. At length, as to
the Confines of Zara, it was agreed, That they should be regulated according as
they were limited by Soranzo and Ferat; for better settlement of which, and to
avoid all doubtfulness or mistake, the Commissioners took the pains to travel
several days journey in person to erect the bounds and Limits of each people;
in which though many contests and differences arose between particular persons,
yet at length personal interests were forced to give way to public
determinations.

In like manner the Confines of Sebenico were determined, being bounded by the
River Checa, and being arrived at Scardona, the Pasha Mamut desired that he
might have the convenience of passing in the Gally, and accordingly he was
received aboard, and treated with that generous entertainment which is
agreeable to the magnificence of the Republic; and landing at the River of
Belulla on the Banks of the Valley Daniel, where the Pasha had placed his Tents,
the Turks who with a greedy eye swallowed in their thoughts the possession and
enjoyment of all these Plains, would have enlarged their Confines to those
marks which Ferat Aga had singly placed according to his own arbitrary
pleasure, including also Verpogly within their Limits. The difference about
Verpogly.
This Verpogly was a small Redoubt on the top of a Hill once belonging to the
Venetians, which at the beginning of the War they abandoned, as costing more to
maintain and defend, than the value or consideration of it; the Turks
afterward possessed it, when they had a design to besiege Sebenico, but
afterward forsook it, and retired; upon this place Mamut much insisted,
producing a Command from the Grand Signior, ordering that it be taken in,
fortified, and garrisoned. But Nani with more force of Argument insisted on the
contrary, producing ancient Writings, and undeniable Testimonies to prove that
this place did really, and of right belong to the Republic; by which though
the Pasha was fully convinced in his own mind; yet being overawed by the
insolent importunities of the Inhabitants, he was cautious and fearful of
declaring his true sense in the case; but rather endeavored to overcome the
Venetians sometimes with flatteries, and anon with menances, having to that
purpose, besides his own Forces, ordered the Beglerbey of Greece to approach
those Confines with an Army of about ten thousand men. But all this did not
move the steady Constancy of the Venetian Commissioner from his reason and
right; for maintenance of which he appeared firm and resolute, and being
necessitated for convenience of Water to remove his Quarters to the Lake
Rebenich, gave some jealousy to the Pasha by this retirement of an intention
to break the Peace; howsoever, Nani declared his meaning to the contrary, and
that there might be no interruption to their proceedings, proposed that these
differences might be remitted to the Supreme Powers; and that in the mean time,
until answers came, they might proceed in the adjustment of other parts of the
Confines. But the Pasha assented not hereunto, but desired rather the dispute
should be referred to the Port, and that in the mean time he himself should
retire to Cettina, and the other to Spallato. Scarce were the Messages sent,
and the Dispatches made (by Isaac Aga, Mamut Pasha dye.
a Person whom I well knew) before Mamut Pasha, after a short indisposition
ended his days: he was a man of about ninety two years of age, at which years I
have admired to see him ride abroad, and transact his affairs with great
dexterity, with a strong memory, and a sound judgment. And here it is admirable
to observe with what constancy and patience the Turkish Officers do usually
support their laborious employments; they contemn all difficulties and
incommodiousness of living, as if they did not feel them, inuring themselves to
colds and hearts, to watchings and labors, being abstemious in their diet, and
as occasions require, not indulging to sleep; and no question but this aged man
traveling in the scalding heat of the Sun, and suffering much for want of
plenty, as well as of good water, dried up that little radical moisture which
remained, and caused this Autumn-fruit to fall, which perhaps might have
continued a short time longer on the tree, had it not been desiccated by
drought, and shaken too hard by the motion of travels and labor.

The News of Mamut Pasha's death being arrived at the Port, a Commission was
immediately granted to Chusaein Pasha Imbrahor, or Master of the Horse to the
Grand Signior, to succeed in his government and business of Treaty concerning
the Limits of the Confines; with which Authority and Instructions Chusaein
posted away, and being well informed by Isaac Aga of the ill nature and
rapacious disposition of those Borderers, arrived with intentions to agree, and
with courteous and benign thoughts towards-Cavalier Nani, who had gained a
great esteem and repute amongst the Turks of a generous and noble disposition.

On the 15/5 of October the Commissioners m^^ in the Valley of St. Daniel,
showing a courteous and kind aspect each toward other. Wherefore laying all
considerations concerning the Limits assigned by Forat Aga, A new Conference of
the Com missioners.
and the Contests about Verpoglie, the Line drawn from the Mountain Tartarus
was agreed, and determined to be the true and undoubted Confines of Sebenico.
The Valley of St. Daniel, for the pleasure and fruitfulness of it, administered
more of difficulty; but at length the Arguments of Nani prevailed, and induced
the Pasha to assent to those Bounds, which had been assigned by Soranco in the
year 1576. giving, to avoid future mistakes, the true names to those places,
which the Turks for their advantage, and to confuse things, had altered and
disguised, that they might not be known. Thence proceeding to the Teritory of
Trau, where was less of difficulty or trouble; for the Wars not having made
much alteration in that place, the Lines were evidently described by Soranco,
according to whose description the Fields, Plains, Rocks, and Mountains were
measured out and, allowed.

Lastly, They came near to Spalato, where before the War there was little of
any Territory assigned; but now by the Conquest of Clissa there was assigned
unto it a spacious and fruitful Country, extending it self to the foot of the
Mountains. As to Clissa there was no difference at all: howsoever the Turks
would on no means admit, that the Venetians should keep Salona and Vragnizzo,
because by that they would cut off all communication between Clissa and
Spalato, and thereby render it a place useless, and of more charge than
benefit; and because those two places of Salona and Vragnizza had been the
Dowry of a Sultana Wife of Russen Pasha, and by her given to endow a Mosch,
which therefore according to their Religion could not be given away, nor
alienated. But Nani insisting as vigorously on this, as on other points, showed
himself resolute to maintain this particular, as being that, which if not
granted, would certainly in a short time be occasion of those quarrels and
dissentions, which must necessarily break forth into an open War: for that
there could be no security of Peace to the Inhabitants of Salona, whilst they
lived amidst their Enemies, and just on the Skirts of Clissa, Spalato, and
Sasso. Chusaein having well comprehended this consideration, and being desirous
to dispose matters toward a durable Peace, slighted the opinion and sense of
the Borderers, and so concluded all matters, and in presence of Nani subscribed
the Agreement on the 24th. of October in open Divan held in the Campaign of
Salona; the which was also mutually subscribed, and Copies interchangeably
given. And in this manner the difference about the Confines was concluded, and
the long War between Venice and the Turks had an end.

Whilst all things were reducing themselves into a posture of Peace, the
Timariots disbanded, and the Janisaries retired to their Chambers, in the month
of October returned the Turks Envoye from France, bringing with him an
Ambassador from that King called Monsieur De Nointel, a Person of an excellent
temper, grave and serious in his Treaties and comportment; and to give this
Embassy the greater reputation, he was attended with three Men of War and a
Fire-ship, which sailing along the Hellespont and Propontick without
opposition, came to an Anchor near seven Towers, from whence sending advice of
their arrival to the Chimacam demanded to be resaluted by the Seraglio, they
promising as they passed to show the first demonstrations of courtesy; but
that being denied, as no usual or customary, the French Ships passed the
Seraglio silently without firing a Gun, or any significations on either side,
whether of Friendship of Hostility: the Ships came to an Anchor at Fonducle,
where the Ambassador remained aboard unsaluted and unacknowledged by the
public Ministers of the City; until the Great Vizier, who supposed that a
breach with France ought to have better foundation than a mere Punctilio of
Honor, seemed more to despise than take notice of the affront. For he who knew
so well to dissemble, after he had seen the French Troops ranged both in
Hungary and Candia, against the Ottoman Forces, and yet politickly connived
thereat, and acepted an excuse, did not esteem it prudence to ground a War for
want of the smoke of a few Guns; but on the contrary ordered, That the
Ambassador should be received with the usual Form and Solemnity of Reception.
The French having the advantage by this success, the Soldiers and Seamen
belonging to the Ships committed many insolences in Pera and Calata, which
never were revenged or accounted for; and when the Ships departed, above an
hundred Slaves escaped from the Galleys and parts of Constantinople, and gained
Sanctuary aboard: amongst the rest one Monsieur De Beau-jeu a Knight of Malta,
who had for a long time been Prisoner in the seven Towers; but at length
knocking off his Irons, and by help of a Cord letting himself down from one of
the highest Towers in the night, recovered the Ships, and regained his liberty.
Nor yet did this nor other affronts, whereby the French did really brave the
Turks, administer sufficient subject of choler to the Vizier; for passing all
by, as if nothing had been done, or nothing worthy his notice, frankly gave his
Orders to let the Ships pass the Castles, which upon the foregoing causes and
pretenses had been before detained: adding, That it was natural, as well for
men as for birds, to endeavor to procure their liberty, and therefore were not
blameable but that those to whose care they were committed, wanting due
circumspection and vigilance in their Office, should pay for the escape of
their charge by the price of their own lives or liberties.

The French Ambassador in the mean time proceeded in his Journey to
Adrianople, where the Court resided; and having passed through the several
degrees and Punctilio's of Visits and other Ceremonies, at length descending to
matters of business, proposed the renovation of the Articles of Peace, with an
addition of thirty two Particulars to be altered or adjoined. The Vizier who
all this time kept more in his heart than he evidenced in his countenance,
refused to condescend to a concession of the most easy and reasonable of their
demands, offering only to renew the Capitulations verbatim according to the
Tenor of the ancient Cannon, without other alteration than the Name of the
present Sultan, and the Date of the Month and Year, and herein he was so
constant and fixed, that no arguments or colors of reason could seem to move
him in the most minute and less important points of circumstances; and this
perhaps lest the World should imagine, that the Turks were affrighted into
Terms and better Treatments of Friendship, or that Immunities and Privileges in
the Ottoman Court were acquired rather by rude usage adjoined with menaces and
neglects, than by more candid and fawning Addresses.

In this manner the French Affairs rather went back than forwards in the
Ottoman Court, and it seemed that the Turks late Embassy into France and of the
French to the Port served to augment the differences more than allay them. For
the new Ambassador falling short in his expectation, having obtained nothing of
those many Particulars which he demanded, retired malcontent from Adrianople
to his usual Residence at Constantinople, where he resolved to attend what
farther Instructions should be given him from France; and supposing his Master
would ill resent his usage so contrary to what was promised in general terms,
did suppose, that his next Orders would be of revocation, and that those
frequent disgusts and disrespects so often received, and given on one side and
the other, would at length burst out into an open defiance. The Turks
apprehended so much themselves, and as their affairs and designs proved
afterward with Poland, they were displeased that they had given the most
Christian King so just an occasion of quarrel: for understanding toward the
latter end of the Year 1671. that great Preparations for War were making in
France both by Sea and Land, they were conscious that their demerits had justly
deserved the chastisement of the French Arms, in revenge of the many injuries
they had offered that Nation, and therefore paused a while, and observed the
motion of these Enemies, before they would engage themselves in a War with
Poland. But at length the beginning of the Year 1672. having discovered the
designs of France to be only intended against Holland, the Turks reassumed
their purposes so long premeditated against Poland, with an arrogance natural
to Turks, and with a scorn not only of France, but of all Christendom. For his
most Christian Majesty judging perhaps, that the rude treatment of an Infidel
Prince so far remote, entrenched not so much on his Honor and Interest, as the
quarrel he had with the neighboring States, seemed to contemn for the present,
or rather to defer the revenge of former injuries until a more fit and
commodious season; wherefore in the mean time his Ambassador upon new
Instructions from France brought purposely by a Man of War, repaired a second
time to Adrianople, where he intimated unto the chief Ministers the great
desire his Master had to maintain that League and Friendship, which for above
an hundred years had continued inviolate and uninterrutped: and therefore
waving all other former Particulars of demand, declared himself satisfied, only
to renew the Capitulations, with that single alteration of their Customs from
five to three in the hundred, according to that Privilege which the English
and all other Christian Merchants enjoyed, whose League and Friendship was
subsequent to that of others. The Great Vizier being now freed of that
suspicion and fear he apprehended of the French Fleet, and being assured that
their Arms were not now probable to disturb him in his designs intended, he
seriously smiled in his sleeve at these Addresses, and with a kind of scorning
neglect bid the Ambassador welcome to the Court, saying, That he should have
what he desired. Wherefore the Capitulations were transcribed, and the
alteration made in the value of their Customs; but the Vizier who meant nothing
less than to yield them this Privilege, deferred the signing thereof from day
to day, pacifying the daily importunity of the Ambassador with dilatory
excuses, until at length having protracted the time to the very day that the
Grand Signior and he began their March toward Poland, without so much as
granting the Ambassador a personal Audience, did then with soft and gentle
words signify to the Interpreters the grand pressures of his Affairs at
present, that would not permit him time to perfect all matters with the
Ambassador, whom they should assure, that at his return with Glory and Victory
from the Enterprises in hand, those requests should be granted, and his
promises performed; and in the mean time his Nation should remain secure in
these Dominions, as in former times, and the League and Friendship continued
and maintained. The Ambassador was strangely surprised at this last Farewell;
but being a Gentleman of great Morality and Virtue, knew, no doubt, how to bear
such a disappointment with an equality of mind agreeable to the greatness of
his Soul; and therefore with a due resentment of the injury received, he
returned to Constantinople, whilst the Sultan and his Vizier proceeded in their
March toward the Confines of Poland.

But before I enter into a relation of the motives of that War, and the success
thereof, which is the Subject of the following Year, let us return to the place
from whence we have digressed, and observe in this Year of Peace and repose of
this Empire, what the Sultan contrived for security of himself by the death of
his Brothers.

We acquainted you formerly in what manner the Sultan was disappointed in his
designs against his Brothers, by means of his Mother, to whom the Janisaries
had committed the care of their safety, which she according to her promise had
maintained, and tendered equally with her own. But now the Vizier being
returned from the Wars, and the most seditious amongst the Janisaries withdrawn
from Constantinople, it was thought fit to make a new attempt on the Princes
still residing in the old Seraglio, which was performed with those duc
preparations and secrecy, that it took effect on Sultan Orchan, the eldest of
the two, who in the Month of September, 1671. Sultan Orchan put to death by his
Brother.
dyed by a draught of poison, which was administered to him as a Present from
his courteous Brother; some say he was strangled, and that before he submitted
his neck to the Bowstring, he killed one of the Executioners with his Hanjarre.
This Prince was reported by the people to be a comely Person, of a strong and
robustious body, of large and black eyes like Sultan Morat: his death was
lamented by all, and presaged as fatal to the Empire, in regard that that very
night that he was murdered the Moon suffered a greater Eclipse than it had
done for many years before, which happening out in this conjuncture was
interpreted as ominous, and served to increase the maledictions and evil
speeches, which the Turks in all places cast out upon those who gave this
counsel to the Sultan.

About this time the State of Genoua desirous to change their Officers in
Turkey, sent a new Resident to Constantinople, A new Resident sent from Genoua.
and a Consul to Smyrna, which change was prinicipally obtained at the request
of the old Ministers, who weary of an employment so tedious, without a benefit
corresponding to their melancholy life, and perceiving their Trade decline
before it was arrived to any tolerable state or degree of reputation, by the
assistance and mediation of friends solicited their Letters of Revocation. For
the Trade of Genoua being chiefly founded on hopes of those advantages which
they expected from a coarse or base alloy of money, did instantly decay so soon
as the Turks discovered themselves to be abused by the vast quantities of
Temins imported, as we have before related: after which their profit failing,
the Consulage consequently decayed, which is the only subsistence and
encouragement of such Officers as are necessary to reside for the continuance
of that Peace, which but a few years before they unadvisedly made with the
Turk. The new Resident had no sooner arrived at Constantinople, and considered
the poor and mean estate and ill foundation of their Trade, the growing charge
of the Residency, and the great debts thereof that were to devolve upon him
from his Predecessor; but he perceived into what a Labyrinth of troubles he had
ingulfed himself, instead of being preferred according to his hopes into a
place of Honor and happy retirement. In which confusion of thoughts arising
one morning before day from his bed, and sitting on his Close-stool (as the
servants of the house report) reached at a Towel, which being entangled within
the Lock of a Carbine that hanged always charged near his bed, unfortunately
drew the Trigger too hard, which with that gave fire, and shot the poor
Gentleman into the belly with a brace of Bullets, of which being mortally
wounded, after Confession and some Prayers in a few hours he passed to another
life: unhappy mischance, if it may be called a chance; for I have understood
from a sober person of that Nation, that the anguish of mind which he conceived
at the evil condition of his Affairs, wrought in him a deepness of melancholy
and despair, under which languishing some days, did at last most miserably lay
violent hands upon himself.

And now it is time to recall to mind the Conspiracy of Count Serini, The
Conspiracy of Serini, Frangipani, and Nadasti.
Marquess Frangipani, and Count Nadasti, Persons of Quality and of great Power
in Croatia and Hungary, who (as we said before) had sent their Messengers to
the Great Vizier then remaining in the Leagure of Candia, with overtures of
submission to the Ottoman Power. It was strange News to the World to hear that
the House of Serini should abandon the Christian Party, and those renowned
Defenders of their Country should apostatize, though not from Christianity, yet
from that Cause and Liberty which their Ancestors and themselves had defended
with Blood, Treasure, Valor, and Constancy. But dissentions and animosities
sown by Satan, the Enemy of the Christian Church, did strangely corrupt the
minds of those famous Persons, and raise in them a Spirit resolved to avenge
the neglect and injuries put upon them by the Ministers of the Imperial Court,
though at the expense and hazard of their fortunes and lives, and ruin and
shiprack of their Honor and Consciences: For the neglects and affronts
undeservedly cast on Nicholas Serini during the late War (as before related)
and the contempt and scorn put on the Croatian and Hungarian Nobility, was
supposed to have fired the hot and ambitious Spirit of these Persons, who could
more easily endure the slavery of the Turkish yoke, than condescend to the
Government and prevalency of a contrary Party. Wherefore in prosecution of
their design, the accomplices of Serini being resolved to submit to the Turk,
dispatched two other Gentlemen to the Ottoman Court (besides those which were
sent the year before to Salonica) who arrived at Adrianople the 11th of
February 1670/1 demanding the protection of the Sultan, for which they promised
a Tribute of thirty Purses, or fifteen thousand Dollars every year for those
Lands they held in Croatia. To make Answer hereunto a Divan or Council was
called, in which were weighed all the Arguments and Reasons on one side and the
other. The Muftee opposed their receiving into protection, as being against the
Capitulations and Agreement so lately concluded with the Emperor, wherein the
receiving or abetting of Rebels is expressly forbidden, and provided against by
one side and the other; but Vanni Efendi the Preacher who used to be always of
a different opinion to the Muftee, urged to have them received, because that
the advancement of the Mohammedan Cause, and enlargement of their Empire was
more sacred than the conservation of their League with an Infidel Prince. And
that the Ottoman Court was no longer to be termed the Refuge of the World, if
it could not yield that protection which oppressed Kingdoms and distressed
Princes petitioned to obtain. In this manner the matter being controverted
without Agreement, it was in fine resolved to refer the matter to the
determination of the Grand Vizier, who was now a few months past returned
triumphant from Candia. But by this time Intelligence being come by way of
Bosna, that the Emperor had already entered Croatia with thirty thousand men,
that he had taken Chiacheturno in Cotoriba, and that Serini and his Associates
were taken already or fled, either to Vienna to beg pardon of the Emperor, or
Transylvania, or to some other place, that the Marquess of Bada had fortified
Sequas and other Castles of Serini with German Garrisons; the Turks esteemed it
too late to administer help to this desperate cause, and therefore refused to
own the Partronage of a People, to whom they could neither pretend by Reason,
nor defend by Arms. The Vizier also like the Fox, contemned those Grapes which
he could not reach, and with an abhorrency as it were of the Revolt or the
Rebellion, as a zealous Hater of all perfidiousness, refused to afford
protection to any of the Accomplices in the late Confederacy, which he politickly
designed in reference to the Emperor, whose friendship he would seem to
conserve most faithfully, lest he should interrupt him in the carrying on of
that War, which he then meditated against Poland. But what became afterward of
these Conspirators is the subject matter of the German History, it is
sufficient to acquaint the Reader here that their design being seasonably
discovered, they were interrupted by the hand of Justice, and met that Fate
which is due to Traitors and Rebels to their Country, having abused the
goodness of their Prince, to whom clemency and mercy are connatural. We shall
therefore leave these men to render the next account to the Judge of all
things, and prosecute our Relation of the Wars of Poland, which now was the
next prize held up to the Turkish Militia, and was that adventure which was to
consummate the glories of the Great Vizier. Howsoever, this gave beginning to
that Rebellion in Hungary, which to this Year 1679 has been continued, without
prospect how far it may proceed, and what may be the issue of such direful
Effects.

Anno Christi 1672. Hegeira 1083.
WE have formerly acquainted you how coarsely the Chimacam of Adrianople had in
the year 1667 treated the Ambassador of Poland, who came to complain of the
incursions made into their Country by the Tartars; desiring that not only
satisfaction might be made for the late spoils, but that that unruly and savage
people might be restrained from the like Attempt for the future. But the Vizier
being now returned in person it was thought necessary, That to preserve this
gross Body of Empire from corruption, it should be exercised with motion, and
the vigorous agitations of a new War. The Turks deliberate of a War.
To what place they should now convert or employ their Arms, was the important
subject of a grand Consultation; they had lately made up a peace with the
Venetians, so that on that side it was too early to make an irruption, the
parts of Persia were too remote and distant to carry on a War with success and
pleasure; the fields of Hungary had been lately traced, and they were satiated
with the blood of Austria and Germany; something now of novelty must be
proposed, and the forgotten ways of Poland must be again opened, there being
something, it seems, of wantonness in prosperous Arms, which delight in
variety, and abhor as much to fight often in the same Country, as Travelers do
to see the same place twice. The Polanders had unto this day so preserved the
Limits of their Country with honor and gallantry, that the Turks could never
secure to themselves one palm of Land within their Territories, until the civil
and most detestable Discords of that Country laid them open to the fury of
their Enemies, who embraced this most grateful opportunity, which facilitated
their Design, and made that easy which they had so long desired, and with care
studied and contrived. But for the better understanding of these Affairs it is
convenient for us to take the Thread of History at some distance off, that so
we may with better light comprehend the Causes, Original, and Occasions of this
War.

The hatred and jealousies which the Ottoman Port has always nourished and
conserved against the Kingdom and Dominions of Poland, are ancient and
inveterate, having their rise from the valiant opposition and successful
repulses it always made against the various attempts of the Turks; whereby the
Poles were animated to treat always at equals with them, and with terms
agreeable to that vain glory and swelling pride, which are natural to their
Nation. The Causes of the War with Poland.
But that which renewed the memory of past actions, and raised an expectation
in the Turks to avenge the injuries by subjugating the Cosacks, was one Bogdan
Chimilniczki General of the Cosacks, who growing powerful in that Country, with
the strength of a numerous Army, abhorring the Pride of the Polish Nobility,
denied obedience to their Kingdom, resolving to make himself the absolute
Prince of that Province, from whence various fortunes of War succeeding, he was
at length forced to join himself to the Tartars, and crave the protection of
the Turkish Arms. In the mean time, Poland, invaded by the Swedes, Moscovites,
and Transilvanians, was dismembered of Livonia, and a great part of Lituania and
Verania, the first possessed by the Swedes, and the latter by the Czar of
Moscovy, and the Rebel Cosacks; which confusions rejoiced the Turks, and gave
them the first hopes, not only to free themselves from the frequent Piracies
the Cosacks committed on them in the Black Sea, but to impose upon them the
Ottoman Yoke; to which end they maintained a secret correspondence with the
Generals of that people, promising them the assistance of Men, Money, and Arms,
but yet with that caution, that they would not seem unprovoked to quarrel with
the Poles, or without just cause to violate the peace of Choccin, to which they
pretended a most religious and reverend regard.

Wherefore, that they might not appear causeless Actors against that solemn
League, they secretly encouraged those Incursions, which in the Years 1666 and
1667 we have already mentioned to have been made by the Tartars into Poland, as
far as the Walls of Leopolis; which action, that the Tartars might not have
occasion to abett and maintain, the Poles resolved to send a most splendid
Embassy to the Turks, desiring that the Tartar Han might be deposed, for having
unjustly violated the sacred peace of Choccin. For that as the Poles were
obliged to restrain the Piracies and Depredations of the Cosacks in the Black
Sea, so the Turks were become security against the incursions of the Tartars.
Scarce had the Ambassador Radiowski delivered this message, before he unhappily
died at Adrianople (as we have before signified;) to whose Complaint and
Demand, after many delays, no other answer was given, than that the Poles
should first break their League which they had contracted with Moscovy for
thirteen years, without the consent, and against the pleasure of the Port, and
then after that they might expect and promise themselves all due satisfaction.

In this manner Affairs stood when King Casimir, weary of the Factions and
Discords of the Nobility, resigned up his Crown to retire unto a private life.
And now it being necessary to proceed to a new Election we may consequently
expect various Commotions and Disturbances in this State, sufficient to artract
the eyes of the Turks, and encourage the Cosacks in their intended Revolt. At
length Prince Michael Korebut Wisnowieski being elected King, it seemed
agreeable to reason, that all Verania should have returned to obedience of him,
to whom the best part of that Country did by right of patrimony, and natural
inheritance belong; but the success thereof fell out contrary to all
expectation, for Dorosensko, then General, designing to usurp that Government,
proposed the project of uniting Verania to the Body of Poland, as a member of
the Crown, by which means that Province would not only become free from its
Vassalage to the Nobility, but obtain equal suffrages in the Diet, with all the
other more free and privileged Countries; and in this manner he might not only
compel Poland to condescend to his designs, but confirm himself in the absolute
and supreme Authority of the Cosacks: This proposition therefore seemed so
insolent, and favoring of Rebellion to the Polish Court, that a severe and
menacing Message was dispatched to Dorosensko, threatening to take from him his
Bulaua, or Truncheon of General, if ever he entertained any such imagination so
highly derogatory to the Majesty of the Polish State; he therefore thought it
his time to cast himself wholly into the Protection of the Sultan, and
accordingly dispatched Ambassadors to the Port to signify their submission,
begging to be received into the Arms of the Ottoman Power; and as an assurance
thereof, that he might receive the (Tough) which is the Ensign of Authority,
carried by Pashaws. The Vizier at the first motion hereof, reflecting on the
evil consequences, in case the Grand Signior's honor should be foiled in this
action, suspended a while a complete answer thereunto; but at length being
instantly solicited, and perceiving the Disorders and Factions of Poland to
increase, the Cosacks were received for Subjects of the Empire, and obliged to
wage War against all Enemies to the Ottoman Power.

Duke Michael being elected King, the first Act he performed was to send an
Ambassador extraordinary to the Grand Signior, with no other Design than to
acquaint him of his Election to the Crown, only in case an opportunity
presented, then to move for a ratification of the Articles concluded at
Choccin. This Ambassador, called Wisozki, being of a haughty and proud spirit,
became the Author of all the mischief which ensued; for being of a temper which
could not equally bear the honor of his important Office, lanched out into
matters beyond his Commission, and instead of imparting his Message, would
become sole Arbitrator of all the differences between those two powerful
Princes; for he being unacquainted with the Power or Affairs of the Turks,
supposed nothing in this World comparable to the number, riches, and valor of
his own Nation, and therefore gave himself that liberty of arrogant Language,
that by way of Command and Menaces he rather seemed to act the part of a
Governor or Umpire in the differences of State, than of an Orator or Suppliant
for peace. In his conceit the Turks wanted both courage and power to invade
Poland, and therefore supposed he might safely brave them into a ratification
of former Articles, especially when he mentioned a hundred thousand Horse,
which he undertook before the Vizier to be able on his own account to conduct
as far as the Walls of Adrianople. It was a strange humor of Rodomontado that
inspired these two last Ambassadors, and if from them we may take a pattern of
the disposition of the rest of the Polish Nobility, it will be no wonder to
hear and read the Destractions that are amongst them, that they carry
themselves with disrespect to their Prince, are emulous and factious amongst
themselves, and that their pride and ignorance, which have flattered their
humor, and triumphed amidst their Tenants and Vassals, should betray them to
all those evils which we may fear may be the consequences thereof.

The Great Vizier, considering the confidence which this person used in his
Discourse, imagined that the differences in his Country might be composed, and
therefore in compliance with his desire, offered in general terms to confirm
the peace made at Choccin, without Addition of any new Article in reference to
the Cosacks, being a business of that nature which admitted of no present
determination; this, he said, was his ultimate resolution, which if the
Ambassador approved not, he might then advise it home, and expect a farther
result of their Counsels. Wisozki being really possessed in his fancy of the
Turks weakness, gave way to his passion, and with little judgment replied, That
he approved not of the Proposition, nor needed he to transmit any such advice
into Poland, he himself being a Plenipotentiary of as full a Power as the King
and Council; for being a Nobleman, he was by consequence that necessary Member
of the Republic, that nothing could pass without his Suffrage.

The Vizier amazed at this extravagant way of discourse, the which he supported
with moderation and contempt, dispatched away a Chiaus into Poland with
Letters, desiring that this Ambassador should be recalled, as being a Person
unable to manage matters of the least concernment; and if they supplied his
place with an other, he should be received with due respect, and a plain way
laid open to conclude his Negotiations to the satisfaction of both Parties.

Wisozki abounding in his own sense and humor, represented matters in a far
different manner into Poland, alleging, That the Law of Nations was impeached
by the violence offered to his Person, being imprisoned, and the usual Tain or
Allowance of Ambassadors withheld from him; both which were not absolutely
true: for the maintenance he refused as too mean for his Quality and Office;
and for his Imprisonment, it was no other than Confinement to the City of
Constantinople, with a prohibition only from passing over unto Pera, where
formerly in a house he had taken, he committed a thousand irregularities and
disorders, which caused the Vizier to recall him again over to Constantinople,
denying him the liberty of passing more to the other side. These were the
injuries which he complained of into Poland, still fancying, That if the
Nobility were assembled to consider of these matters, the Turk would be so
affrighted at it as to condescend unto any terms he should propound. These
reports of Wisozki took that impression with the Court, that esteeming all
authentic which he said or wrote, without farther examination issued out
Orders for a general Insurrection, and that all people should prepare for the
War, rendering the Vizier no other answer, than that when their Ambassador was
set at liberty, and had license to depart, the like should be permitted unto
theirs, and in the mean time the Chiaus was committed to safe custody, The
Grand Signior highly angered at this obstinate misunderstanding, immediately
ordered that Wisozki should depart, and at the same time commanded his whole
Militia to rise and follow him to the War; and so much the rather was he
animated by the reports sent him from Dorosenzko, seconded by the Vayvods of
Moldavia and Valachia, whose Letters declared the miserable confusions in
Poland divided into diverse Factions and Parties, their want of money, and the
mutiny of the Soldiery inclined rather to betray than defend Verania. And now
a Sword and other Presents usual in these cases, being sent to the Tartar Han,
he was ordered to unite with the Cossacks, and to invade Poland, where being
encountered near Batona, by a Body of Horse under the Command of Luzecki
Governor of Podolia, the Poles were defeated, and was the first bad Omen of
the ill success of this unhappy War.

To second these beginnings, the Grand Signior having raised an Army of an
hundred and fifty thousand men, marched toward Poland already sick and
languishing with its own intestine distempers, and unable to contend with a
Body united within it self, wanting neither internal vigor, nor nourishment to
maintain its strength; the first Enterprise was the impregnable Fortress of
Caminiecz, which had often in former times baffled the Ottoman Arms; but now
being ill provided, destitute of Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, and but weakly
manned, and what was worst, despairing of any Relief, after eleven days Siege
surrendered it self to the pleasure of the Conqueror. Hence the Turks had an
open passage through all Podolia and Volhinia to the very Walls of Leopolis,
which they passed over like Travelers rather than Enemies, there not appearing
one person in Arms to oppose them, delighting and sporting themselves in these
most fruitful and delicious Countries of Europe: thus had private animosities
and civil rancour possessed the minds of the Poles one agaisnst the other, that
they had rather yield themselves to the servitude of an Enemy, than condescend
to the humor or counsel of a Citizen. Thus had the Turks passed all this Summer
in the Plains and Cities of Poland, where it seemed rather Peace than War, all
places submitting without difficulty unto the Grand Signior as to their true
and natural Lord and Soveragin, by which means the Inhabitants redeemed their
Lives and Estates; for the Sultan willing to demonstrate his clemency, and to
spare those who voluntarily yielded, and encourage others to submit to so
gentle a yoke, forbad all the common outrages of Soldiers, not permitting
Plunder or Booty to be brought into the Camp; nor greater Spoils to be
committed, than if his Army had passed through his own Dominions; whether this
obliging or winning manner of proceedings overcame the stout hearts of the
Polanders more than blows, will be experienced in the sequel of this story; it
is certain the Militia returned home poor and weary, and more broken by this
years Expedition than by the long and tedious March to Persia, and hazardous
Battles during the Siege of Babylon; but the Sultan was desirous to return
home, and give this first proof and testimony to the World of his warlike and
invincible Spirit, of his clemency and of his success in Arms, that at his
first appearing in the Field, all Armies and Fortresses submitted to his Power.
The Poles on the other side being of an opinion and temper far different to
that of their Ambasadour Wisozki, resolved to purchase the departure of their
new Guests on any terms; so that these following Articles were agreed and
concluded.

That the King of Poland should quit all Claim to Vkrain, Podolia, and Rusland.

That for Leopolis and the Country thereabouts should be paid a Tribute of
seventy thousand Dollars a year; all other Capitulations formerly made were to
stand in force and virtue.

These Articles being signed, the Grand Signior committed the Government of
Verama and Podolia to Dorosenzko, and the defense of Caminiecz to Chusaein
Pasha with a Garrison of twelve thousand Janisaries; so that now being returned
home, the Militia was permitted to repair to their several Countries and
Dwellings, the following year being dedicated to the repose and ease of the
Soldiery.

Toward the end of this Year, when the Ships of Barbary returned home, those
of Tripoli conceived a certain discontent against their Pasha named Osman for
his covetous behavior toward his Soldiers; for having that Summer taken very
rich Prizes from the Venetians and other Nations, the Soldiers expected at
their return home to receive a division of their Spoils according to their just
and equal shares. But the Pasha grown old and covetous, getting the whole into
his hand, appropriated the greatest part to his own Coffers, distributing to
the Soldiers an inconsiderable proportion of what they had gained the year
before. Hereupon the chiefest Commanders amongst them becoming greatly enraged
began to incense the Soldiery, which for interest or want of Pay, being always
ready to mutiny, took fire immediately, and easily were blown into a Rebellion;
so that first making Parties, and retiring into secret Junto's and Councils,
they resolved to destroy the Pasha, and alter the Government, and thereby make
themselves Masters of all the Treasure and Riches which Osman Pasha had in the
space of thirty years amassed together. The Pasha having notice of all that
passed, and apprehending the Conspiracies of this unbridled People to be
dangerous, began to provide for his safety, and getting together so many as he
supposed of his Party, and that were, or might be faithful to him, which joined
with his Slaves and Servants, made up a small Garrison, wherewith to defend and
preserve himself within his Castle, which being well provided of Ammunition and
Victuals, he shut his Gates, denying access or admittance unto all persons upon
pretense and account whatsoever. Hereupon the Mutiny appearing, the Soldiery
drew into a Body in the open field, against whom several shot were made from
the Castle; so that now the Civil War was begun, and the whole Force of Tripoli
raised against the Pasha and his Castle, which being straightly besieged the
Defendants who were for the most part Servants and Slaves, failing in their
courage, resolved to make Conditions for themselves to the best advantage;
wherefore conspiring against their Master, entered his Chamber and strangled him
in the night; and the next morning opening the Castle-gates, received the Enemy
within the Walls, making manifest the death of their Master and their own
Treachery. Osman Pasha being dead, every one acted for a time what the wildness
of an unruly multitude could suggest, till such time as the Heads of the
Rebellion could frame themselves into some form of Government, which for the
present was resolved to be by a Dei, as most convenient for commanding of the
Soldiery, intending for the future to take the Algier Government by a Divan
for their Pattern and Model of Rule, under which the people of that place had
found and experienced the sweetness of liberty, riches, and success. These
matters being agreed upon, some of their Men of War were sent to give advice
unto the Grand Signior of the revolutions of their City, supplicating him to
pardon the violence used against their Pasha Osman, whose Covetousness and
Tyranny forced them for self-preservation to precipitate that Authority, which
they knew on their complaints, his Majesty would have granted them; and that he
would be pleased to receive them into his protection and favor, as his
faithful and humble Subjects and Slaves, and as an evidence thereof would grant
them a Pasha confirmed by his Royal Signature. The Sultan, though at first
showed himself much displeased with this manner of proceeding against Osman
Pasha; yet seeing that there was no remedy, suffered himself to be mollified by
their Presents and submission, granting them a Pasha for their Governor, whose
power proved as unsignificant as his does, who bears that Title at Algier.
Matters being thus reduced to some tolerable condition amongst them, they
concluded, That the most beneficial course of life to render them considerable,
as well as to amuse and divert the minds of their rude people from innovations
against their Governors, was to grant free liberty to whomsoever pleased to
arm out Ships of War; which Privilege Osman Pasha reserved to himself and his
Confidents; and finding at present that they were able to set out six Sail from
forty to fifty Guns, and four more from twelve to thirty, intending to
accomplish in all the full number of fifteen Sail; those who traded in the
Levant Seas began to apprehend, that this faithless and heady people would at a
time, when they found their advantage and the temptation of a rich Prize, break
their Peace with his Majesty our King, the which Osman Pasha had
notwithstanding conserved for several years without violation, moved perhaps
thereunto out of an apprehension, that in such troubles which a War with
England might bring upon them, he might lose or impair his riches, and bring
the like confusion on his people, as he had lately heard of in Algier on the
like occasion: but how and in what manner these matters succeeded, and how at
length this people broke their Peace and Faith, we reserve to be recounted at
the end of the Year 1674.

Toward the end of the month of August it pleased God to take out of this life
unto a better Sir Daniel Harvey his Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople: a
man whose person being comely, was extremely grateful to the Turks; and for the
experience he had at the Ottoman Court, was equal in the happy management of
Affairs to any of his Predecessors.

Anno 1673. Hegeira 1084.
BUT it seems the Turks had made too much haste in their return to digest a
Conquest of so large Extent; so that they were scarce well warmed by their
Winter-fires, before they were alarmed again with Jealousies of Poland, and the
Seditions amongst the Cossacks, whom Dorosenzko wrote he could not keep in
subjection, unless he had some Succors sent him from the Port. The rumors
likewise that the Muscovite armed, and was resolved to Assist the Poles in
recovery of their lost Country, increased the apprehensions of the Turks, who
too late perceived the error they had committed in so soon disbanding their
Army, which before some were scarce got home, they were forced to recall. But
now the year was well begun, and no grand preparations made; so that it was
impossible to collect an Army in so short a time considerable enough to be
honored with the Conduct of the Sultan; wherefore it was resolved, that all
things this year should be disposed in a readiness against the next. But the
Grand Signior had a project of his own to depart speedily with his Court, and
to pass the heats of the Summer in the Mountains of Zegna about five or six
days Journey on his way toward Poland, which being reported to be a place well
planted with Trees, watered with cool and fresh Springs, and abounding with all
sorts of Game, made him impatient to take up his Summer-quarters in a Country
so agreeable to his humor; and that he might cover the design of pleasure with
that of profit and policy, he pretended that the report of his proceeding so
far would both hasten the Army, and give a terror to the Enemy. But the Great
Vizier and his Council who weighed all things better, were of another opinion,
judging it neither honorable for the Court to be retired into Woods and
Mountains, nor the advantage of such a surmise able to countervail the expense
and inconveniences of that Journey; and therefore it was concluded to stand unto
the first resolution, That the Grand Signior with the main Body of his Army
should not move until the following year, but that in this interim all
preparations should be made for Provisions and Ammunition, in order unto which
three thousand Janisaries were already sent away to Keminiecz under the Command
of the Sampsongibashee and six thousand more under the Zagargibashee were to be
landed on that Isthumus, which joins the Crim Tartar unto the Main, from whence
they had a short March to the assistance of Dorhsenzko. Chasaein Pasha lately
come from Damascus, was nominated for General to be sent into Silistria, and
there to command in Chief over the Militia of Dobriza, Bosna, and Rumelia in
case of any alteration and disturbance in Poland: this Person was always
accounted a stout and valiant Soldier, though seldom fortunate, and was the
same that lost the Battle before Lewa in the last German Wars, as we have
before intimated: he was about this time grown infirm by a hepatical Dysentery,
which reduced him to a weak condition of body, with little hopes of recovery.

In the mean time arrived at Adrianople an Ambassador from the great Czar of
Muscovy, bringing Letters dated in April of the preceding year, which was
before the time that the Turks had entered Poland, the contents of which were,
That the Grand Signior would do well to desist from his design against that
Country; The unseasonable Address of the Moscovite Ambassador.
for that if he did proceed and invade those Dominions, he should find himself
obliged to make War upon him, and with his mighty and puissant Power to drive
him back to his own Jurisdiction. This Message appeared very unseasonable, and
caused much laughter at first; for that the Turk had since the Date of that
Letter invaded Poland, and possessed himself of vast Countries, and yet neither
encountered any opposition from the Muscovite, nor so much as heard any rumor of
his Motion. Wherefore the Turks with scorn forbad the Ambassador any farther
Addresses, and commanded him to be gone speedily, saying, That his Master had
neither courage nor force to maintain his word of War, nor wisdom to manage a
Treaty of Peace.

The Reports now from the parts of Poland spoke matters to be in a quiet
posture, and not likely to concern the Turks much for this year; wherefore the
Grand Signior began again to renew his purposes of pastime and pleasure in the
Mountains of Zegna; but because no true or perfect account could be given of
the delights, refreshments, and situation of that place, the Olack Celebi or
chief Postmaster was sent to furvey the Country, and to return with a relation
of all matters: but in the interim the design was altered; for the Grand
Signior having begun a Fabric in which he had expended about eighty thousand
Dollars, at a small Village about nine or ten miles from Adrianople; the place
and novelty of the Building so well pleased him, that he found in himself an
inclination to pass the whole Summer there; and becoming likewise enamoured of
a young Lady in his Seraglio, notwithstanding his former tenderness to his
Queen, and late aversion to all other Women, he judged it was possible to
divertise his time well in those parts, and more to his contentment, than in
wild woods and uninhabited mountains. Whereupon the intentions of Zegna were
laid aside, and nothing thought of but the rest and quietness of the Court for
this year.

But because it was reported, That the Czar of Muscovy made great Preparations
for War, it was judged necessary to command the Crim Tartar to be watchful of
his motion by Land, though the natural slothfulness of that people gave them no
apprehension of their Arms for this year; howsoever it being probable, that
they might prove more active and forward in the Black Sea, than they were
capable to do by Land, by sending forth their small Boats down the Volga to
take and pillage the Saiks and Vessels belonging to Constantinople and other
parts; the Captain-Pasha was ordered to pass into that Sea with thirty five or
forty Sail of Galleys for defense of the Coast, and for fortifying and
repairing Asac, and the Fortresses thereabouts but whilst these Preparations
were making for the Euxine or Black Sea, the other Seas were neglected and
undefended; for the Alexandrian Fleet consisting in all of eight Sail, The
Alexandrian Fleet taken by the Malteses.
were encountered not far from Rhodes by some Maltese and Ligornese Corsaires:
the Ships of the Turks were most of them very great and potent Ships, one of
them was at least fifteen hundred Tuns, and was capable to carry an hundred
Guns, the others of eight hundred or a thousand Tuns, able to have resisted and
overcome, had they been well armed, double the force that assaulted them; but
being now engaged with an Enemy, though not so strong, yet better experienced
in marine Affairs than themselves, they fought with them stoutly the first day;
but the next day six Galleys coming to the Christians assistance, (which had
been harbored in some Port not far distant, and led thither by the noise of
the Cannon, to which also a calm giving the greater advantage) the Turks began
to faint in their courage, so that four Gallions and two Saiks yielded to
mercy, which was a Prize of so great value, that it was supposed never to have
been equalled since the time of Sultan Ibrahim, when the loss of the grand
Sultana and other Ships gave the first occasion of War with Venice. This great
Ship which was reported by those who saw her to be both longer and broader than
the Sovereign, carried only sixty Guns, and was manned accordingly only with
about an hundred Seamen, and about two hundred more which were Landmen, wholly
unacquainted with the Sea or with Naval Fights: the biggest Ship amongst the
rest was belonging to the Queen Mother, and the others to the Grand Signior,
being freighted principally with Sugar, Coffee, Rice, and other Provisions for
the proper maintenance of their Courts, which we may suppose will highly
inflame these grand Personages, with anger and disdain, when they reflect on
their own proper losses which touch them so nearly as their peculiar Goods and
the Furniture of their Kitchins.

The Turkish Court now angered with this loss, was more moved in the midst of
May, when a Messenger from Poland arrived with Letters from the Grand
Chancellor, declaring with modest-terms, The Poles refuse to pay their
promised Tribute.
That their Kingdom was unable or unwilling for many respects to pay the
promised Tribute; so that if they did not judge fit to wave or lay aside those
pretensions, they should be forced to take up Arms in defense of their Honor,
Safety, and Privilege of their Dominions. The Turks surprised with this
unexpected Message, too late perceived the error of the last years
proceedings, which were carried on with a clemency and confidence not agreeable
to the disposition and humor of such an Enemy, as is unacquainred with
servitude, and so far from being able to support a Foreign Yoke, that they
cannot endure subjection to their own Civil Government, every Nobleman (of
which there are many in Poland) being ambitious to be a Prince, judges himself
better than his elected King. Hence proceeded all those dissentions which laid
them open to the late invasion of their powerful Enemy, the apprehension of
whom having obducted for a while those sores of Faction which festered amongst
them, and that principle of self-conservation, which by a forcible nature
inclined them to Union, at length armed them with a resolution to avenge the
Liberties of their Country, and assured them of the Truth of that Saying, That
a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

The Turks now wished that they had either made a true use of their Victory,
and the opportune Conjuncture of the last years Affairs to have settled and
secured their Conquests, or that they had never begun the War; for now finding
themselves engaged in it, The Rebels in Hungary renew their Petition to the
Turks for assistance.
they were in honor obliged to proceed, and lose the fair opportunity which
presented to make their advantage in Hungary; to which place they had been, and
were still invited by the Rebles of that Country, who to revenge the Cause of
Serini, Nadasti, and some other Discontents and Aggrievances of which they
complained, and to defend the Protestant Religion, in which by the zeal of some
Churchmen, they were disturbed, resolved to abandon their Allegiance to their
natural Prince, and rather seek a protection for their Estates, and allowance
for their Religion under the Turks, than remain beholding for either to a
prevailing party at the Imperial Court. The chief Authors of this Rebellion
were Petrozy, Sepesi, Tend, Gabor, Sutrey, and other principal persons amongst
the Hungarians, who having on their own strength opposed themselves against the
Emperor the last year were defeated in diverse engagements, and at length
reduced to a very low and miserable condition. Wherefore they renew again their
Petitions and Presents to the Sultan, sent by their Agents about the beginning
of this Month of April, begging his assistance and protection, representing the
easiness of the Conquest, and how large a Gate they were able to open to his
Armies, and make a plain way for him into the most fertile and opulent
Countries of the World, of which he seemed already half possessed by reason of
those Discontents and Factions that were amongst them.

The Turks though well satisfied of the reasonableness of the design, yet being
engaged in honor against Poland, knew not how to retract, and therefore
dispatched away the Messengers for the present with fair hopes and secret
promises, well treated in private, though they received rather a Denial than
Encouragement in public. For the expedition against Poland was that which
employed solely the wisest heads of the Empire, who as it were in fury issued
out immediate Orders, The rage of the Turks against Poland.
That all those who eat the Grand Signior's Bread, should without farther delay
prepare themselves for the Wars against Poland; and that Provisions and
Ammunition should be supplied in all places according to the usual proportions;
The Tugh, or Horse-Tail, (the Signal for departure) was set forth, the Tents
ordered to be carried into the Field, and such haste made in all parts, as if
the raising of an Army were the business, but of one day; resolving immediately
to proceed against their Enemies, to whom the Sultan returned a most dreadful
and menacing Letter, full of expressions agreeable to the Turkish Style, which
threatened Confusion, Sword, Famine, Fire, Destruction, and a thousand other
more direful Judgments: but the Collection of this great Army, and the
appendages belonging thereunto, were not so suddenly provided as to admit of
such a dispatch as the Sultan's fury pretended; wherefore in cooler blood it
was concluded, That for this Summer they should not pass much beyond the other
side of the Danube, that the Winter Quarters should be designed in Silistria,
from whence they might more effectually threaten and affright their Enemies
with their near approach.

About this time the French found an opportune season to accommodate all their
Affairs with the Port, and to put a period to the several Articles and
particulars they had for many years demanded. For now the French King not only
appeared very formidable by reason of his success against Holland, but likewise
instrumental to promote the designs of the Port, whilst he kept the
Brandenburghers employed, and diverted the whole Armies of the Empire; and now
also that they might engage him not to contribute assistance to the Poles, they
judged it reasonable policy to evidence to that Ambassador more external
demonstrations of kindness, and strain their courtesy beyond the terms which
they could cordially, and in reality afford them. Wherefore, at length the
Capitulations were renewed, and some Articles and Privileges superadded, which
are these that follow.

FIrst, That all religious Persons and Bishops of the French Church shall
remain and continue quiet and unmolested in their respective Habitations and
Dwellings, with liberty to perform all their Ecclesiastical Rites and
Ceremonies. Secondly, That the Religious of Jerusalem and of Bethlem shall
conserve those religious places which they have anciently possessed, and there
may continue to celebrate their Worship of God, and all their Devotions,
without any disturbance. Thirdly, That if these Religious of Jerusalem or
Bethlem have any difference or dispute with the Officers thereof, it shall be
remitted to the decision of the Port. Fourthly, All Frenchmen, and all under
their Banner, shall safely at all times go to Jerusalem, and return without
molestation. Fifthly, The two Churches in Galata belonging to the Jesuits and
Capuchins, and anciently possessed by them, are now again confirmed by these
Presents; one of which belonging to the Capuchins having been burnt, free
liberty is given for the rebuilding thereof, and to remain as formerly in the
hands of the French; and in the Hospital in Galata, if they will read the
Gospel after their fashion, none shall give them disturbance or hinder them.
Sixthly, Whereas the French Nation formerly paid 5 per. Cent. Custom, now in
regard they have been ancient friends to the Port, and that they have renewed
their Capitulations, they shall pay no more than 3 per Cent. and accordingly
let no more be demanded. Seventhly, All Portugueses, Sicilians, Catelans,
Messineses of Ancona, etc. that have no Ambassadors at the Port, if they come
under the French Banner, shall pay no more than 3 per Cent. according as the
French pay. Eighthly, In payment of their Customs, they shall pay the Current
Money such as passes in our Treasury, and the Farmers of the Customs shall not
refuse the same. Ninthly, The Mesteria they shall pay according to what the
English Merchants pay, and no more. Tenthly, All the Merchandise they bring, or
shall bring, shall be valued according to the present estimation, and no more
pretended of them, and if the Customers will notwithstanding raise the esteem
of the Goods above the value, then if the Merchant will pay his Custom in
specie, it shall not be refused. Eleventhly, The Custom of Silk being paid -- a
new Custom ought not to be demanded. Twelfthly, The Custom being once paid, the
Customer shall not refuse to give his Teschare, and the Merchant being willing
to transport his Goods to another Scale, another Custom shall not be demanded.
Thirteenthly, The Officers and Customers at Sidon, Birut, Aleppo, or Cairo
shall not compel the Merchants to take Goods by Eorce, not under any pretense
whatsoever take one Asper from them, nor demand money to be lent unto them.
Fourteenthly, The French Vessels may bring Goods from the Indies, by way of the
Red Sea, unto the Port Suucis, and having paid their Custom once there,
whatsoever Goods they cannot sell in that Country, they may have liberty to
transport over land to Alexandria, and there relade them again on their own
Vessels without paying another Custom, or receiving molestation from any
person. Howsoever, this Capitulation is to be understood with this condition,
that this point shall be signified to the chief Officers of Cairo, who having
called a Council of the most knowing and experienced persons to consider
hereof, and they concluding that this point is in no wise prejudicial to that
Country, nor to the Interest of the Believers then this Article to be of force,
but if they advise the contrary, then this to be of no effect. Fifteenthly, If
the Friars, or Merchants, or Druggermen will make Wine, and transport it
abroad, none shall hinder them. Sixteenthly, The French Consuls, and all under
their Banner, having a difference with any of or above, four thousand Aspers,
it shall be decided at our public Divan. Seventeenthly, If any man slaughter
shall happen in the street where French dwell, they shall not be liable to pay
the price of the Blood, unless it be proved before the Justice that a Frenchman
was guilty thereof. Eighteenthly, The Druggermen in service of the French
Nation shall enjoy the same privileges, as before specified.


Nor was the French interest only available at that time to obtain the
foregoing Articles, and renew their Capitulations with such Additions: but
likewise to procure License for the Ambassador to travel into the remotest
parts of the Ottoman Dominions; The French Ambassador obtains license to travel.
for though it were a thing never practiced before, and denied (as is well
known) to other Christian Ambassadors; yet it was granted to Monsieur de
Nointel with so much freedom, that first in a Brigantine he went to Scio,
thence visited the chief Isles of the Archipelago, thence crossed to Rhodes,
and so proceeded to Satalia, Cyprus, and Jerusalem: so much confidence had the
Turks, contrary to their custom, in this Ambassador: for as they style all
Representatives from Foreign Princes their pawns or pledges of Peace, so had
not the Turks in that conjuncture thought the interest of France worth the
obliging, they would never have deviated from their ancient Custom, and given
an example for other Ministers to demand a privilege of the like nature.

But to return again to the designs against Poland, The Turks resolve on a war
against Poland.
the Sultan about the end of July marched with such Forces as were then in a
readiness toward the Confines of that Country; and though he had not with him
above fifteen thousand men, yet it was concluded that the Fame and terror of
the Grand Signior's motion would either abate and bring low the spirits of the
Poles, and induce them to dispatch an Ambassador with terms of Peace, or at
least this readiness of the Turkish Camp would be an early preparation for the
designs of the next year, and put the whole Empire into a timely motion, and
that uniting with the Forces of the Frontiers, they might make a Body
sufficient to resist any sudden Incursion. This resolution being taken, the
Great Vizier led the Van, and encamped on the Banks of the Danube near a place
called Isacgee, where he with all diligence built a Bridge of Boats to pass his
Forces with the greatest facility to the other side, on which lies the Country
of Moldavia. The Sultan about a days journey short of the Vizier, fixed his
Court and Camp at a place called Babadog; with intention after some days to
cross the River, and proceed as far as Kemenitz, that by the influence of his
powerful Presence he might encourage his Army there, and provide all things
necessary for security of that Garrison. But in the mean time advices coming
that the Polish Army, consisting of about twenty thousand men, was roving about
the Confines of Leopolis, under the Command of General Sobieski, and that a
reconciliation was passed between the King and him; and that Zircha, Commander
of the Cosacks, joined to considerable forces of the Moscovite and Calmuck
Tartars, had made incursions into the parts about Osac, caused the Sultan to
desist from his designed progress to Kemenitz, and to pass no farther than over
the River into Moldavia for hunting or other pastimes. By these matters the
Turks being fully convinced, that the Poles resolved not to pay their promised
tribute, nor to send an Ambassador with propositions, which were condescending
or supplicating for Peace; the Sultan himself dispatched away an Aga with
Letters into Poland full of threats, menaces, and protestations of bringing all
that ruin, misery, and destruction on their Country, which always attends the
most cruel and bloody War, if they did not retrieve their error by a speedy
submission and compliance with those Articles which were the last year
accorded. And this was the last motion the Turks made toward a Peace, which
they were desirous to embrace on any terms honorable, that so they might have
opportunity to divert their Arms to the more mild Climates of Hungary, where,
besides the entertainment they expected to receive from friends, who invited
them, they should not be liable to half those inconveniences of Cold, Frosts,
and Famine, as they were probable to meet in the parts of Poland.

But the Poles were so much in earnest, and so little esteemed the menaces of
the Sultan, that they anticipated his threats by some acts of hostility, and
showed that they so much scorned his anger that they were resolved to be the
first Aggressors. The Poles pass the Neister.
For the great Marshall Sobieski with his Lieutenant General Wisnowitzki
marched forward, and boldly passed the Niester with fifty thousand select
Soldiers. The General of the Turkish Army, Chusaein Pasha, alarmed hereat,
immediately issued forth such Orders for preparing and fitting his Camp as were
agreeable to a speedy Battle; and that he might understand the state of his
Camp, he called the Prince or Vayvord of Moldavia to examine him concerning the
state and condition of his Forces; the answer he gave proving not satisfactory
to the expectation of the Turk, who was enraged at the approach of the Enemy,
with high and proud words insulted over the Prince, giving him no better terms
than Dog and Infidel, and at length struck him over the head with his Pole-Axe;
notwithstanding which, and the disgrace he put upon him, imprudently that night
committed unto him, and to the Prince of Valachia, the care of the Guards,
which consisted of three thousand Men. The Valachians as near Neighbors and
Associates with the others, The Prince of Valachia carried by his own Soldiers
to the Poles.
seemed at first more grievously to resent the affront, than did the
Moldavians, and therefore that Night took their Prince by force and carried him
to the Polish Army. The Prince, that he might make a Virtue of Necessity,
complained of no force or violence offered unto him by his Soldiers, but as if
he had voluntarily revolted, showed outwardly a fair and serene countenance
toward the Poles, until such time as with forty of his Men, he found an
opportunity to escape; but being by next morning at break of day overtaken by
five Troops of Polonian Horse, his whole Retinue was slain by them, excepting
five of his men, who with himself, saved themselves by the swiftness of their
Horses; Howsoever, the Prince received a wound on his left hand with a Sword,
with which presenting himself before the Great Vizier, and by that testimony
boasting of his Faith and Loyalty to the Ottoman House, was conducted by him to
the presence of the Sultan, who, in reward of his fidelity and valor, vested
him with a rich Coftan, and restored him again to his Principality with
addition of three hundred Aspers a day pay. His Wife and Children which
remained as Hostages at Constantinople, being upon the News of the Princes
Revolt clapped into the seven Towers, were again released, and conducted to their
house with all imaginable honor and magnificence.

But the Moldavian Prince was more in earnest, and heartily disdained the
affront offered him by Chusaein Pasha, toward whom, and the other Turks,
though he carried a serene and calm coutenance, yet he nourished a secret flame
and storm within himself; to vent which, and revenge the affront, he maintained
a correspondence with Sobieski, giving him intelligence of all matters in the
Turkish Camp, The Prince of Moldavia revolts.
how he might most easily surprise the Forces of the Pasha of Sivas, and the
four Generals of the Spahees of Alchabolick.

The Christians made use of this intelligence accordingly, by making their
assault on the Enemy on the weakest side, when the Prince having reserved his
anger until an opportune Season, turned his face against the Turks, and with a
courage agreeable to his spirit and command, he entered the Tabor, or
Intrenchment of Chusaein Pasha, and wounded him with his own hand. The heat of
the Fight continued fourteen hours, in which none behaved himself more
valianlty than did Solomon Pasha the Beglerbeg of Bosna, who though he was as
brave and fought as stoutly as any man could having six Horses that day killed
under him, The Turks overthrow.
he was at length forced to fly and abandon the field, following Chusaein
Pasha, of Sivas and Ciddiogla, who made better use, in saving themselves, of
their horses heels, than their own Arms; But in this Flight his Horse pitching
his foot into the hole of a wooden Bridge, which he was to pass, was there
stopped until he was overtaken by a Soldier with a Hat, who shot him through
the Body; so that continuing his flight more faintly than before, he was
overtaken by a Palonian Hussar, who with a Lance bore him to the Ground, where
he was trod under foot, and cut in pieces by the Enemy: The other three Pashaws
were wounded; the Generals of the Green and Yellow Sangiacks of the Spahees
were taken Prisoners, and two other principal Commanders of the Spahees were
killed. The Zagargeebashee, who commanded eighteen Chambers of Janisaries, was
taken prisoner, the Standard of the Janisaries taken, and they wholly cut in
pieces and destroyed, consisting of eight thousand five hundred men; all the
Troops and Attendants of those Pashaws, with four Sangiacks of Spahees, were
slain upon the place, which in all were computed to be about twenty five
thousand men. The booty taken was very considerable, for besides the ordinary
Baggage they took two thousand purses of money, then newly brought for payment
of the Soldiery, and twenty five thousand Wagons of Provisions and Ammunition.

After this success and important Victory the Poles became Masters of the
strong Fortress of Chotin, and other smaller Palanchas, on the Banks of the
Niester, making their Incursions into Moldavia, as far as Jash, which is the
principal City of that Country. And thus far was Kaplan Pasha proceeded with
the Recruits of about four thousand men, when the News came of the fatal Rout,
and the fame thereof increasing by the fearful Relations of such as fled from
the Battle, alarmed the Turks with such frightful apprehensions, that they
retreated back again to the other side of the Danube, and united themselves to
the Forces of the Vizier. But Chusaein Pasha, though he saved his life, yet
could not conserve the Air of the Sultan's favor; for so soon as he arrived at
the Court, he received an ill welcome; for according to the manner of Turks,
Chusaein Pasha imprisoned.
who punish the ill success of a General equal to Crimes committed, he was
immediately put into Chains, deprived of his estate and honors, and sent
prisoner with the attendance only of two servants unto the Castles of the
Dardanelli, where the disturbance and unquietness of his mind reduced him to an
infirmity of Body; so that being sick, and without Friends or Physicians, he
sent to Sir John Finch, his Majesty's Ambassador, as he passed up the
Hellespont, to afford him the use and assistance of his Physician; but the
Ambassador excused himself, letting him know, that his Retinue being passed
before on another Vessel, he was sorry it was not in his power to accommodate
him in the manner he desired.

The Winter being now well entered, which is very wet and cold in those
Coutries, caused the Armies on both sides to draw into their warmet Quatters,
there to meditate and contrive their designs for the more active season. During
these Affairs the King of Poland died; so that the Election of a new Prince,
The King of Poland dies.
the manner of reconciling their intestine Differences, and the means to defend
their Countries, were Subjects of important Consideration, and matters more
than sufficient to employ the wisest heads of that Nation for a longer time
than their common Enemy was resolved to afford them. The Turk on the other side
though full of revenge and anger for their last misfortune, yet patiently took
this loss as the paring only of his Nails, that his Claws might grow the
longer, and was so rowsed with this blow, that he summoned all the Nations of
his large Empire to come in to his assistance, toward which forty thousand
Carts laden with Provisions were appointed to rendezvous on the Banks of the
Danube toward the end of the month of March. Yet in the mean time the Turks
not having patience to see their perfidious Prince avail himself of his Revolt,
and in Despite of the Ottoman Power to to seat himself in his Principality of
Jash, were resolved to drive him thence; and in order thereunto not expecting a
milder season, immediately dispeeded some Troops of Tartars, and two thousand
Spahees under the Command of a new Prince, to drive him out of the Country. In
the mean time the Poles, since their late Victory, kept the Fortress of
Kemenitz straightly blocked up on all sides, and thereby reduced them to such a
want of food and other provisions, as might probably cause them to surrender
before the Summer could open a way to their relief.

But before I conclude this Year, I must not omit to acquaint the Reader, that
in the month of September an English Factor at Smyrna descended of good
Parents, and educated under a severe and religious Master, one who had a
reasonable Estate of his own, and in good business and employment, did
notwithstanding in the absence of his Partner, with whom he was joined in
Commission, carry out of the house 215 fine Cloths belonging to several
Principals of England, with a considerable Sum of ready Money, Jewels, and
things of value: of which having possessed himself, he went before the Kadi,
and there in presence of diverse Officers of the City turned Turk, hoping by the
Privilege of the Mohammedan Law, whereby no Christian testimony can pass
against a Turk, to appropriate unto himself that whole Estate, which he had
thus treacherously got into his sole custody. And it being impossible for Turks
to attest the Marks, Numbers, or know the Estates of Persons being in England,
he judged himself out of the reach of any Power or Art to dispossess him of his
unjust and wicked acquests. Howsoever the Consul did so closely pursue him both
at Smyrna and at the Turkish Court, that in the space of seven months he
regained all the Cloth, and the best part of the Money and Jewels out of his
hands: and in fine reduced this Renegado to so low a condition, that he humbly
supplicated the Consul to contrive a way for his passage into England: at which
time His Majesty's Frigate the Centurion being then in Port, he was embarked
thereupon, and so returned into his own Country.

The Particulars of all which having been amply related in Writing and Letters
to private Friends, I purposely omit the same in this place, that so I might
cast a veil over the nakedness and shame of our Nation in that City. Howsoever
I judge it requisite to recount this Story in brief and in general heads, That
men may know there is a God who rules above, who rejects impious and licentious
persons, confounding the designs of those who betraying their Trust, deviate
from the common Rules of Morality and Honesty.

Anno 1647. Hegeira 1085.
THis Year began at Smyrna with the happy Arrival of Sir John Finch, sent by
His Majesty for Ambassador to the Grand Signior in the place of Sir Daniel
Harvey, who dyed in August 1672. at his Country House not far from
Constantinople. His Excellency entered the City on the first day of January
1673/4 rejoicing the English Factory with the sight of their new Ambassador,
(that Office having been now void for the space of sixteen months) who was
welcome also to people of the Country, judging him fortunate for arriving at
the Feast of their great Biram: nor less pleasing was the News thereof to the
Court, especially to the late Pasha of Tunis, whose Goods and Moneys taken by
one Dominico Franceschi, out of an English Ship called the Mediterranean, in
her passage from Tunis to Tripoli, this Ambassador had recovered from Ligorne
and Malta; which being an action without example, was greatly admired and
applauded by the Turks, and esteemed an evident demonstration of that great
Interest and Power which the Glory of our King has acquired in Foreign parts,
and of the singular dexterity of such a Minister.

About the 18th of March, Sir John Finch arrived at Constantinople being
transported to the Dardanelli on his Majesty's Fregat the Centurion; and thence
on a Gally hired at Smyrna for that purpose. Some few days after his arrival,
the Grand Signior and Vizier being at Adrianople, the Lord Ambassador had
audience of the Chimacam whom he saluted with this speech.

I am come Ambassador from Charles the Second King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, sole Lord and Sovereign of all the Seas, that environ his
Kingdoms, Lord and Sovereign of vast territories, and possessions in the East
and West Indies, Defender of the Christian Faith against all those that Worship
Idols or Images. To the most Powerful and mighty Emperor of the East, to
maintain that peace, which has been so useful, and that commerce which has
been so profitable to this Empire: For the continuance, and increase whereof I
promise you in my station to contribute what I can, and I promise to my self,
that you in your will do the like.

But to proceed to the Wars. The Polanders being thus prosperous, made use of
their success, and the sharp cold of the Winter-season to make their
Incursions, and Winter Quarters through all the Principalities of Moldavia; for
they being born in cold Countries, and accustomed to the Snows and Frosts, were
more patient and enduring of extremity of weather than were the Turks, who were
brought forth from more mild and moderate Climates: so that neither could the
Poles be driven out from those Countries, nor Keminitz be relieved by them,
until such time, that the Sun getting high, and thawing the Snows, and warming
the Earth, prepared a season fit for return of the Turks who marching according
to their custom with an Army composed of great multitudes, quickly compelled
the Poles to retire. For the Grand Signior and Vizier having both seated their
Winter Quarters on the Banks of the Danube, were ready at the first opening of
the Summer to enter their Arms into the Enemies Countries; and having called
the Tartars to their assistance, did according to the usual custom make
Incursions for depredation of Slaves, Cattle, and whatsoever else was portable
in a running March.

The Chan or King of this People was at that time greatly indisposed in his
health, of which he advised the Great Vizier, as if he intended thereby to
obtain a release from his personal attendance that year in the War: But the
Vizier, who either supposed this excuse to be only a pretense, or that he had a
kindness for his Person, immediately dispatched away his own Physician called
Signior Masselini, an Italian born, a worthy Learned man, a good Christian, and
my intimate Friend: with whom maintaining a constant correspondence by Letters,
he wrote me, A Journey into Tartary.
That from the Grand Signiors Quarters which were at Batadog near the Banks of
the Danube, he arrived after seventeen days Journey in Chrim, where (he said)
he was received with singular honor and kindness by the Great Chan, whom he
found to be a Prince of admirable prudence, gentleness, and generosity, but
greatly afflicted with a Hypochondriacal Melancholy; which being an infirmity
of some years standing, was with the more difficulty removed; howsoever he was
so far from being incapable to follow his Army, that he advised him to divert
his mind with the thoughts of War: which counsel having taken, after thirty
days abode in the Camp, he found himself much more cheerful than before, and
greatly relieved of that pressure of Melancholy and caliginous Vapors which
offended his Brain. We are now (said he) at Vssia at the Mouth of the
Boristhenes, which we have passed from the other side unto this, where the
River is nine miles broad, from hence we are marching toward Bender upon the
Niester to pass into Moldavia, and there to join with the Ottoman Army. The
Poles have sent to demand Peace, but with condition, that Kemenitz be restored
to them; which Proposition was with great disdain rejected, and will never be
granted whilst this Emperor reigns. These people greatly desired a Peace with
Poland, which the Election of Sobieski for King may probably facilitate; for
not only they, but the Turks also dread a March into Poland, and are so
inveterately bent to take revenge on the Muscovites and Cosacks, who lately
became their Subjects, that they could accept of any reasonable Terms of
Accommodation with Poland. I for my part found Tartary a very pleasant Country,
plentiful of all Provisions, and the people much more courteous and obliging to
the Strangers and Christians, than those Turks with whom you and I have
conversed. Thus far Masselini writes in commendation of the Tartars, and in
farther confirmation hereof, I have read in some Books, That as to their
Morals, there are very few Nations to be found less vicious, they are extremely
severe and faithful, they have no Thieves or false Witnesses amongst them,
little Injustice or Violence, and live in union and great tranquillity: the
mavelous fidelity of the Captive Tartars in Poland is every day to be
observed, who never fail to return at the time appointed, when they are
licensed upon their word to go and procure their Liberties by the exchange of
Polish Prisoners, which they execute punctually, or return themselves, not
failing a minute. And it is observed, That the Polish Gentlemen do rather trust
the young Tartars, which are in their Service, with the keys of their Money and
Jewels, than any of their Household.

The time for Armies to draw out of the Winter Quarters, and take the Field
being now come, the Grand Signior and Vizier, with great numbers both of Horse
and Foot passed the Danube, and prosecuting their March to the Confines of
Poland, Kemenitz relieved.
they relieved Kemenitz in the first place, the Poles at the News of their
approach rasing the Siege. Thence they proceeded to Chuozim, a strong Fortress
on the Niester, taken from them in the last year by the Christians, after the
defeat given to Chusaein Pasha, as before related, the which was surrendered
without much difficulty on Articles, which were ill observed, the whole
Garrison being afterward put to the Sword. Nor had they worse success against
the Muscovites, who retreated backward as the Turk advanced, leaving Asac,
after it had been sacked and almost destroyed, to be again rebuilt, which was
speedily effected by the assistance of the Captain-Pasha, who was that year
with thirty nine Galleys dispeeded into the Black Sea, and with great numbers
of Slaves and Soldiers repaired the ruins which the Muscovites had made. In
the mean time, whilst the chiefest strength of the marine Force was thus
employed, a small Squadron of about ten Galleys were ordered for the
Archipelago and the Levant, under the Command of one Mahomet Pasha, a Person
that managed sundry great Employments; but his prodigality and profuse way of
living was the cause that he could thrive in none, only he thereby gained so
much interest and credit with the Grandees and Monied men of the Court, who are
the Pages and Eunuchs, as served him to contract a debt of the thousand Dollars
without any ability of his own to give them satisfaction: of which these
Creditors being assured, made it their Petition to the Grand Signior to grant
him the Command of that Squadron of Galleys, which was that year designed for
the Archipelago, Mahomet Pasha sent with a Fleet of Galleys into the Arches.
supposing that he in this Expedition being to pass unto many Islands and
Conutries, knew how to make such use of his time, and the advantage of his
Employment, as would gain him a sufficient benefit whereby to satisfy and
clear all scores and accounts with them. This Office being accordingly
conferred, Mahomet Pasha prepared himself to depart, whilst the Creditors
remained in full expectation of a profitable Voyage and speedy returns; which to
improve to the best advantage, the Pasha first visited the open and undefended
Isles, from whence with the greatest severity and rapine imaginable he pillaged
and plundered what he was able, making some of them to ransom their whole
Country with money. Thence he proceeded to Scala Nova, called by the Turks
Koush-adasee, a place on the Coast of Asia, not far from Ephesus, where he
demanded of the people (though all Turks) the Sum of five thousand Dollars,
which they not finding to pay, were treated with all kind of force and
violence, till at length paying down 1500, and engaging to pay the rest in a
months time, the Pasha departed, leaving an Aga, a Servant of his, to receive
the money at the time agreed. In that interim, the Kadi coming to be changed,
and another of more courage and spirit succeeding in his place, believed that
the best service at his beginning and entrance into Office which he could
perform toward the people, was to relieve them from the oppression of the
Pasha, and persuade them positively to refuse the payment; who taking courage
from their Chief, drove the Aga out of Town, with a thousand menaces and
reproaches, Upon this News Mehmet Pasha returned again full of anger and
indignation, but found not that easy reception nor kind entertainment, as
before; but on the contrary, the Gates were shut against him, and the people
abandoning their Habitations, with common consent resolved to make a Journey,
to the Grand Signior: and to show they were in earnest, proceeded so far in
their way as to Ephesus, which is about ten miles distant from thence: the
prejudice and danger of which complaint Mahomet Pasha greatly fearing, sent
Messengers to pacify them with good words and promises to relinquish his
pretensions, in case they would return; but the uproar was so great, that they
found as much difficulty to quiet it, as the Town Clerk in ancient times had to
appease the Tumult raised by the Silversmiths about Diana of the Ephesians.
Being thus baffled at Koush-adasee, he vented his fury on some poor Islands
which he could more easily master, and thence proceeded to Napoli di Romania,
where the people being already alarmed with his behavior, and violence of his
actions in other places, and encouraged by the example of Koush-adasee, upon
his arrival there, without farther ceremony shut their Gates, and appeared
armed against him upon the Walls; at which entertainment and unexpected
opposition, the Pasha fearing some evil consequences, set sail from thence, and
crossing again the Seas into Asia, made Rhodes his next Port. Thence he passed
to Satalia, to Cyprus, and Scanderone, and so again returned for
Constantinople, taking Smyrna in his way, committing most extreme rapine and
violence on the people, whose complaints having gone before him to the Court,
he was immediately cut off at his arrival; but in the first place, his gains
and ill gotten goods were seized on to satisfy the Grand Signior, and his
Creditors of the Seraglio, who being sent to fish for Wealth, was served like
the Cormorants in the Indies, which being made tame, and taught to fish for the
benefit of their Masters, have a Ring clapped about their necks to prevent them
from swallowing the prey they take.

But to return to the Actions at Land, which were matters of the greatest
importance. The Turks had no sooner relieved Kemenitz, recovered Choczim, and
caused the Muscovites to retreat, and draw their Forces into their Country; The
Turks seclude their Conquest.
but being Masters of the Field, and having the choice of acting according to
their own pleasure, resolved to secure the places they already possessed,
esteeming it more wisdom to make sure their late acquisitions, than to add
thereunto new conquests, which they could not maintain. And therefore
considering the inconstancy of the Cosacks, who having abandoned their
subjection to Poland, had submitted themselves to their yoke; and also how
unable Dorosenzko their Governor was either to keep them in obedience, or else
to defend them from the Polonian Incursions; they resolved for prevention of
these inconveniences, and for a secure remedy against any sinister accidents of
this nature, to make seizure of that Party of the Cosacks, who had not
submitted to them, and transport them into other parts, which they accordingly
put into execution, and sweeping all the Countries as they passed, carried away
men, women, and children into Captivity: part of which, such as belonged to the
Grand Signior, had some Lands assigned them along the Coast near the Black Sea;
the Armenians, who were a Trading people, and lived at Kemenitz, were
transported to Philipopoli; of the Jews some were carried to Adrianople, and
others to Constantinople; but the younger sort of both Sexes were permitted to
the Soldiery to carry them for Slaves to their own homes, and were in great
numbers dispersed through all parts of the Empire: a Policy anciently used by
Pharaoh to his Egyptian Subjects, who having bought their Lands of them, did
afterward transport them from one end of the Land unto the other, that so he
might keep them in the greater servitude and subjection, Genesis 47.21. And as for
the people, he moved them from one end of the borders of Egypt to the other.
And in this manner the success concluding the year, without any great
Enterprise or Feats of Arms, the Sultan returned to his Court at Adrianople
about the end of November, licensing all the Asian Horse and Soldiers of
remotest parts to return to their own Countries, with liberty to appropriate
the the following year to their repose and care for their peculiar concernments.

To these Wars amongst secular Persons and men of Arms were added Differences,
and never to be decided Controversies between the Religious of the Roman and
Greek Churches at Jerusalem, The difference between the Latins and Greeks at
Jerusalem.
who contending for the possession of the Holy Sepulcher of the King of Peace,
rent that seamless Coat of Christ, and managed their Controversy with more
malice and rancour each against other, than Princes do, who invade one the
other with Fire and Sword. For the Franks or Western Christians subjected to
the Popes Dominion, had possessed for several Ages a right to the Holy
Sepulcher, and enjoyed the honor of the custody thereof, notwithstanding the
pretenses of the Greeks thereunto, who for many years in vain attempted at the
Ottoman Court to obtain that Privilege; for the Franks being ever more
powerful by charitable contributions brought from Christendom, besides large
Sums of Money from the King of Spain, and always outbid the Market of the
Greeks, and consequently made use of stronger arguments, than the adverse Party
could produce in defense of their cause. Until such time, that one Panaioti, a
Greek born in the Island of Scio, having by his parts and excellent address
arrived to the honor of being Interpreter for the Western Tongues to the Great
Vizier, at length obtained that favor with his Master, that he seldom refused
whatsoever he with reason and modesty requested; and being a great Zelot in his
Religion, and esteemed the chief Patron and Support of the Greek Church, he
secretly begged in behalf of his Country, the recovery of the Holy Sepulcher at
Jerusalem out of the hands of the Franks; which the Vizier would not deny him,
both to reward him for some services already performed, and likewise because he
knew that a concession of this nature would again raise the spirits and
animosities of Christians; the allaying and appeasing of which being an office
solely in the power of himself, and the supreme Authority, would certainly
prove beneficial to the Ottoman Court. Panaioti having obtained this Command,
and considering that the defense thereof would be a trouble to him, for that
thereby he should create Enemies which were no less than Kings and Princes to
contend with, and perhaps should live to see it reversed, wisely laid it by
him, there to remain dormant until the time of his death; which happening the
year past, the Command was produced and brought to light, and was before the
Easter of this year set on foot at Jerusalem, and by virtue thereof the custody
of the Sepulcher sentenced by the Pasha and Kadi of that place to belong unto
the Greeks, the which was occasion of so great trouble and confusion, as
disturbed the Holy Feast, and polluted the Sacrifices with the blood of one or
two persons, who most earnestly contended for the Privilege of their Nation
and Religion. Nor could this difference be decided here, but both sides
appealed to the Court above; which being heard and debated in public Divan,
the possession of the Sepulcher was adjudged in favor of the Greeks; the
Franks being only to enjoy a precarious the thereof, as Pilgrims and Strangers
to the Country. Howsoever the Friars of Jerusalem would not tamely yield up
their Right, but again resolved to try their Fortune at the Court, having by
means of F. Canisaries their Commissario with expense of a great Sum of Money
obtained a review of the case, but without success; for all these endeavors
and charge proved fruitless, the former sentence being confirmed in favor of
the Greeks; and the Franks having no other Expedient, applied themselves to the
assistance of the French Ambassador, to whose protection the Holy places are
assigned by Capitulations. But neither the power of the French Ambassador, nor
of any other Christian Representative was available; for the Vizier either
mindful of his promise to Panaioti, or being resolute to maintain the Command
he had given, would on no terms be persuaded to revoke it; the which intention
of the Vizier being made known to the Greeks their Patriarch earnestly pressed
a hearing of the case; but the Friars not willing to abide the shock, retired
to Constantinople, lest the Greeks forcing them to Justice, they should be
condemned in Judicio contradictorio, and a Hoget or Sentence passing, they
should be condemned in Law as well as by Authority of the Hattesheriff. Which
to put in execution, the Patriarch took out a Command whereunto was added, That
the Friars in token of their subjection, should pay a Dram of Silver a head
to the Patriarch, and hold all their places of them. This was the issue of the
present controversies, which is certainly determined for the time of the Vizier
without revocation, yet perhaps in the time of another, it may admit of a
review for money, especially being received when as yet the new Minister has
not satiated his covetous desires; howsoever, the expense will always
bechargeable, and the success uncertain. Thus have I seen and observed in this
particular the effect and experience of two things; viz. The covetousness and
pride of Friars, and the conclusion of their Lawsuits before Infidels. The
Franks, or the Western Christians, had until this time the custody of the Holy
Sepulcher, and the Greeks that of the Chapel of Bethlem, but the use was free
to both; but the Franks not being able to enjoy the Sepulcher with contentment,
whilst with envious eyes they beheld the Greeks in possession of Bethlem, were
always contriving designs by force of money, and power of Christian Ministers
to eject them from that Right; until that now in these contentions they have
lost both; being neither able to recover the one, nor conserve the other.

Before we end this year of 1674. and begin that of 1675; it will be necessary
for us to discourse of the cause, and original of that War which England had
with the Government of Tripoli in Barbary, and the success and conclusion
thereof.

In the year 1672. War with Tripoli.
Old Mahomet boar at Scio and of the Greek race who for many years by Baratz or
commission from the Grand Signior had boaren the Office, and Title of Pasha of
Tripoli; and being grown very rich, and covetous by the Pyracies his Ships made
on the Christians, and oppression of his people, not dividing amongst the
Soldiery, that just proportion of the prey, which of right belonged to them,
so incensed the minds of that people, that conspiring against him they murdered
him in his Castle, and seized all his riches, to the use of the Public. The
Pasha being dead all his creatures, and persons that boar Office in his time
were displaced, and others of more justice, and bravery (as they imagined), put
in their places, and a New Governor being set up, he began to make a through
Reformation, and to alter and change every thing according, to his own humor,
and pleasure. In the first place he gave leave to all people to Arm in Corso,
or to set out Private Men of War, as every one pleased, and was able; different
to the practice of the former Pasha, who reserved that benefit, and privilege
to himself; and next it was proposed to constitute a Divan after the manner of
Algier in whom the supreme power of all should be lodged. In order hereunto
they immediately, set forth to Sea six Sail of Ships from forty to fifty Guns,
excellent Saylors, and armed them with the best and stoutest of their Men,
together with four more from twelve to thirty Guns; with these Ships they took
many prizes belonging to French, Venetians, and other Nations; and though they
had long desired to taste also of the sweetness of English Estates; yet not
encountering a prize worthy the trouble and evil consequences of such a breach;
they for some time deferred the design which they had long meditated. Till at
length about the Month of August 1674. they unhappily encountered the Martin, a
rich Ship bound from Venice to Cadiz, which they carried to Tripoly; and on the
17th of September following, they seconded this outrage, by other of the like
nature, committed on the Hunter Fregat, Thomas Parker Commander bound from
Ligorne to Smyrna; whom the Tripolines meeting with six Men of War at the
entrance into the Arche-pelago, they brought her into the Port of Tripoly;
where having plundered all the strangers goods laden upon her, to the import of
forty thousand dollars, the particulars of all which were given under Oath of
the Commander, the Ship was dismissed, and dispeeded on her Voyage to Smyrna
with no other damage to the English, then the embezelment of 726 dollars,
robbed, or pilfered by the Soldiery, together which such charge, as the Consul
of Tripoly challenged for his service therein. This news being advised into
England, as a breach of Peace, his Majesty out of his usual and gracious care
of the welfare of Trade, was pleased to order Sir John Narbrough his Commander
in chief in the Mediterranean Seas, to demand satisfaction from that people;
who accordingly Sailing thither, and requiring restitution of the goods
injuriously taken, received a denial, and denunciation of War. Whereupon Sir
John Narbrough wrote to the Consul of Smyrna in this manner.

These are to advertise you, that the people of Tripoly have broken the peace
with his Majesty; they are resolved to take all the English Ships they can
meet, and overcome. I have been there with a Squadron of his Majesty's Ships to
demand restitution of the goods taken out of the Martin: and Hunter: they
refuse to make any, so that now it is open War with those people: I am now at
Malta taking in water, I intend to fit at Ligorne; I suppose his Majesty will
have a Squadron of Ships to look after these people of Tripoly this Summer.
Sir, I pray signify this to my Lord Ambassador at Constantinople, and to all
others his Majesty's Subjects where you converss, that they way prevent falling
into their hands; in have I conclude, and kiss your hand, and I remain

On board his Majesty's Ship Henrietta at Malta. March 15th 1674/5. Your Humble
Servant John Narbrough.


Sir John Narbrough having fitted himself at Ligorne, and recruited with an
additional Squadron of six or seven Men of War he departed for Tripoly, taking
under his Convoy, the Vyner, Bristol Merchant, and Mediterranean for Smyrna;
and now appearing before the Port of Tripoly in a formidable manner, the
Pirates began to repent of their late violation, knowing that they must now
either disgorge their ill got goods, or prove the evil effects of War; their
hearts began now to fail them, so that they unrigged all their Ships, laying
them up close in the harbor, and with them for the present all thoughts of
roving on the Seas; for supposing, that the English Ships could not lie always
in that Station, but that bad weather or want of provisions would enforce them
some time to retire, they hoped in that interval to find an opportunity to
lanch into the Seas, where being clear, and good Saylors, they might have room
enough to escape. Howsoever Sir John Narbrough with his Squadron, continued
with such diligence on the coast, plying them with continual allarms, standing
off to sea at night, and toward the land in the day; that they found not the
heart, nor opportunity to adventure abroad; until one of their Ships, which had
formerly been their Rere-Admiral, bound with Negroes for the Morea; resolved to
hazard an escape; but not being able to make her passage good, she was forced
ashore, and burnt by our Ship, most of the Negroes falling into the English
hands; some few days after Sir John Narbrough fired three of their Galeots,
burnt a Satee, took a fisher-boat and a Sambechin; with which success being
encouraged, and the Enemy affrighted, their Ships were blocked up in Port for
some months, whist ours found free passage on the Seas; until that at length
growing weary of so long a demorage, necessity drove them to adventure abroad,
which two of their best Men of War successfully effected on the 8th of
September in despite of the English Squadron, being assisted with calm
weather, and help of their Oars: four others observing the success of the
former in a few days after attemted the like, and escaped in the same manner.
And now the Commanders of English Ships in diverse Ports, taking false
measures, on confidence that the Tripolines were blocked up in their Ports,
trusted themselves with unadvised security into the Seas; amongst which none
was so unfortunate, as a Ship called the Bristol Merchant one Plummer
Commander, laden with eighty two Bales of Silk, besides other rich commodities
bound from Smyrna to Ligorne, whereon were several Merchants, some of which
having lived many years in Smyrna had acquired plentiful Estates: namely Mr.
John Foley, Mr. Thomas Laxton, Mr. Jacob Turner, Mr. Phillip Gell, and Mr.
Tison Nephew to Mr. Foley; Persons who expected a prosperous Voyage, and a
happy arrival in their own Country: But observe here the course of humane
disappointments, for being embarked on the Ship aforsaid they set Sail from
Smyrna the 10th or 11th of September in company with the Vyner which happened
to be about two or three days after the Tripolines had first broken out of
their Port; these two Ships by bad weather, or want of due care lost company
each with other in the Arche-pelago, which proved a happy fortune to the Vyner;
for the Bristol Merchant, some few days after being off of Cape Sapientia
encountered the two Tripolines which first came out of Port, and being Vessels
of forty to fifty Gunds, soon made themselves Masters of a Merchant-ship laden,
and of mean force. The Tripolines were greatly elevated with this rich prize
which they immediately carried to a place called Derno; and there landing their
goods, and men; for better security transported them over land to Tripoli. The
Persons we mentioned before, were forced for the most part to walk all the way
a foot, being thirty four days journey, unless some times, they were favored
to mount a Camel, which is such an unpleasant way of riding, that walking is
much more easy; and travailing in a sandy, dry Country, water was very scarce,
the days journies being commonly proportioned according to the distance of the
Wells of Water; which they drank with tetter Appetites, and Pleasure, then they
formerly rellished the most pleasant Wines. Being arrived at Tripoli they were
ill wellcomed by the severe looks, and hard diet which they received from their
Hests; and the Plague raging greatly in the City, added to the miseries, and
dread of the place.

The Tripolines encouraged with this prize, and with the expectation of the
farther success of their Ships abroad, hoped to weary out the English Squadron,
which still continued to infest and trouble their coasts taking their Corn,
Boats, and interrupting all Commerce which that Town had with the Sea. At
length the English resolved to make an attempt on the Ships in Harbor which
they resolutely performed in the night, and with great success according to
this relation which Sir John Narbrough gave under his own hand.

Friday the 14th of January 1675/6.
I Being before Tripoli, in Barbary with his Majesty's Ships under my command,
namely these, Harwich Fregats Henrietta Fregats Portsmouth Fregats Anne and
Christopher Fire ships. Holmes. Fire ships. Guinny Merchants Ships attending
for Convoy. Martin Merchants Ships attending for Convoy.


And seeing four of the Tripoly Ships of War in the Port of considerable force
preparing to go out, and cruise, I fitted a fireboat out of the fireships; and
commanded, that all theboats of my Squadron being twelve in number, should be
manned, armed, and fitted with Fireworks also; I ordered a considerable
Officer to be a Commander in every boat, and my Leiutenant Cloudisly Shovel to
be Commander in chief of them all; for being resolved by Gods permission to
attack the Enemy that night in Port, I gave instructions requisite for such a
design. About twelve a clock in the night my boats resolvedly entered the Port,
took and seized the guard boat, and killed the people in her, boarded the
Ships, and fired them, and utterly destroyed them all, some Turks and Moors
slain, the (...) fled to save themselves. These four Ships lay under the Dey's
Castle Walls, which was all that were in Port, except a Tunis Merchant Ship,
which I ordered should not be meddled with and so escaped firing. This Action
was performed in less then an hours time without sustaining the least damage on
our side, then the expense of some Ammunition, Firworks, and Fireboat, which
were effectually bestowed, as designed, to the great astonishment of the Turks,
who endeavored to impede our design, by plying several great and innumerable
small shot at our boats, and men, which were within Pistol-shot of the Dey's
own Castle, and Palace. Such was the wonderful mercy of God toward us, that
not one man of ours, was killed, wounded or touched; nor a boat any way
disabled, but all returned in safety, bringing the Guard boat, two Moors, and
the Turkish Colors of the four Ships in triumph along with them to my Ship.
Our men employed in the boats on this occasion were one hundred fifty and
seven, they all behaving themselves, as became Englishmen.

To God alone be the Glory.
Names of the Tripoly Ships of War that were burnt with their Guns.
Guns White crowned Eagle 50 Looking-Glass 34 Sta Chiara 24 French Petach 20

Guard boat brought off with one Peterero, and two Moors in her.

I verily believe that in case I had landed at that time with five hundred men
only I might have carried the City, for the Turks were so amazed, that they
fled out of it, they fired several great and small shot all to random, without
hurt to any of cur men, God being pleased so to direct it.

The 26th of January I fired about one hundred shot into the City of Tripoly
amongst the Inhabitants.

The first and third of February I took and destroyed five Corn boats twenty
Leagues to the Eastward of Tripoly, and landed and burned a Stack of wood and
Tinther, which was for building their new Ship, and some small Masts, and Yards,
and some bags of bread brought off, and two Guns spiked, which could not be got
off; it beginning to blow, and likely to be bad weather; so I was constrained
to leave them, and repair on board, and leave the coast, The tenth of this
Month the Portsmouth took a Sambechee in her ballast thirty Leagues to the
Eastward of Tripoly, she belonging to that Government, the Moors got all ashore
but the Sambechee was brought to Malta.

From aboard his Majesty's Ship, Harwich March the 18th 1675/6. John Narbrough.


The Tripolines being discouraged, and affrighted with this boldness and
diligence of the English, and apprehending that they would always infest their
coast, which would be an utter ruin, and destruction to them; and being
touched in the most sensible parts of their interest, and wilfare; they
generally concluded, that there was now no safety, but by making a peace with
the English: To farther which, and to assist in the Office of Mediation; it
happened, that there was at the same time at Tripoly, one Haffse bey, a great
man of Tunis, who had been Dei of that Country; but being droven from thence by
his Nephews, was come to Tripoly with an immense treasure, intending afterward
to Transport himself to Constantinople, to make his aggreivances known at the
Grand Signiors Court. Of this person we shall discourse more at large
hereafter; but in this place it is pertinent to relate, how instrumental he was
to effect this peace in which he labored with the greater zeal, that so by
assistance of the English, he might find a speedy and safe conveyance on their
Ships of his Person, Goods, and Servants into the Morea, from whence he
designed by land to Constantinople. The Treaty being thus began; a peace was
concluded between his Majesty's of Great Britain, etc. and Halil Pasha, Ibrahim
Dey, Aga, Divan and Governors of the Noble City, and Kingdom of Tripoly, Dated
the fifth of March 1675/6. Being the last day of the Moon Zelhedga, and Hegeira
1086. By this instrument all the former Articles were again confirmed with
addition of two others.

First, that all Persons taken under English Colors should be delivered to Sir
John Narbrough and set at liberty without payment of any ransom for them; under
which notion, Mr. Foley, Mr. Laxton, Mr. Turner, Mr. Gell, and Mr. Tison, with
the Captain and Seamen taken on the Bristol Merchant were freed; whose ransom
otherwise might have cost dear, and perhaps almost the value of their private
Estates.

Secondly, That eighty thousand Dollars ( which was the account made of the
value of goods, and Money taken on the Martin and Hunter) should be made good to
Sir John Narbrough, in Money, or Goods, and Slaves. To which was adjoined such a
submission, recantation, and acknowledgment for their late offense, and
outrage, as testified the sorrow of their true repentance, as we shall see more
at large in their following Articles.

And now the peace being concluded; Sir John Narbrough returned to Malta; and
soon after came back to Tripoly to receive the remainder of the moneys, and
goods agreed for, the Slaves being delivered already. In this interim the six
Ships which had formerly broken out of the harbor, and sailed to the Levant,
hearing of the peace, returned to Tripoly; where great feuds and dissentions
arose; the Soldiery accusing Ibrahim Dei, nick named Misser ogli as the
beginner and Author of the War, and for continuing it so long with obstinacy,
until they were reduced to their last extremity. In fine they threatened to cut
him in Pieces; but at length they were contented to cashier him only from his
Office; after which he fled into the Morea and their Vice Admiral Mustapha
Grande was made Dei in his place; with whom, and with the Soldiers in general
now returned; Sir John Narbrough renewed the Articles of Peace, and dated them
the first of May 1676; which are these that follow, Articles of Peace and
Commerce between, etc.

Articles of Peace, and Commerce Between the most Serene, and Mighty Prince
Charles the Second by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. And the Most Illustrious Lords
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dei, Aga Divan, and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom
of Tripoly in Barbary concluded by Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of his
Majesty's Fleet, in the Mediterranean Seas.
1. IN the first place, It is Agreed, and Concluded, That from this day and for
ever forward; There be a true, firm and Inviolable Peace, between the Most
Serene King of Great Britain France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian
Faith, etc. And the most Illustrious Lords, The Bassa, Dai, Aga Divan, and
Governors of the City and Kingdom of Tripoly in Barbary, And between all the
Dominions and Subjects of either side; And that the Ships, or other Vessels,
and the Subjects and People of both sides, shall not from henceforth, do to
each other, any harm, offense, or Injury in word or Deed, But shall Treat one
another with all possible respect and Friendship?

II. That any of the Ships, or other Vessels, belonging to the said King of
Great Britain, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects, may safely come to the
Port of Tripoly, or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, or Dominions
thereunto belonging; freely to buy, and sell without the least Disturbance;
paying the usual Customs as in former times has been paid, for such goods as
they sell; And for the goods they sell not, they shall have free Liberty to
carry on Board their own Ships without paying any Duties for the same; And when
they please they shall freely Depart, from thence without any stop, hindrance
or molestation whatsoever.

III. That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the King of
Great Britain, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects, as also those belonging to
the People and Kingdom of Tripoly, shall freely pass the Seas, and traffic
where they please without any search, hinderance, or molestation from each
other; And that all Persons and Passengers of what Country whatsoever; And all
Monys, Goods, Merchandise and Movables, to whatsoever People or Nation
belonging; being on board any of the said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly
free, and shall not be stopped taken or Plundered, nor receive any harm or
Damage whatsoever from either Party.

IV. That the Tripoly Ships of War, or other Vessels thereunto belonging,
meeting with any Merchant Ships, or other Vessels of the King of Great
Britains Subjects, not being in any of the Seas appertaining to his Majesty's
Dominions may send on board one single boat, with but two Sitters, besides the
ordinary Crew of Rowers, and no more but the two Sitters to enter any of the
said Merchants Ships or any other Vessels; without the Express from the
Commander of every such Ship or Vessel; And then upon producing them a Pass
under the hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of England, the said Boat
shall presently Depart; And if the Merchant, Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels
produce no Pass from the Lord High Admiral of England, yet if the Major part of
the said Ships or Vessels Company, be Subjects to the said King of Great
Britain, The said Boat shall presently Depart, And the Merchants Ship or Ships,
Vessel or Vessels, shall proceed freely on her, or their Voyage, And if any of
the said Ships of War, or other Vessels of his said Majesty's meeting with any
Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels belonging unto Tripoly; if the Commander or
Commanders, of any such Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, shall produce a Pass,
Signed by the chief Governor of Tripoly and a Certificate from the English
Consul, living there, Or if they have no such Pass or Certificate yet if the
Major part of their Ships Company or Companies, be Turks, Moors, or Slaves
belonging to Tripoly, Then the said Tripoly Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels
shall proceed freely.

V. That no Commander, or other Person, of any Ship, or other Vessel of
Tripoly, shall take out of any Ship or Vessel of his said Majesty's Subjects,
any Person or Persons whatsoever to carry them any where, to be examined, or
upon any other pretense, nor shall use any Torture or Violence to any Person of
what Nation or quality whatsoever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel, of his
Majesty's Subjects upon any pretense whatsoever.

VI. That no Shipwreck belonging to the King of Great Britain or any of his
Majesty's Subjects, upon any part of the coast belonging unto Tripoly shall be
made or become a Prize. And that neither the goods thereof shall be seized, nor
the Men made Slaves; But that all the People of Tripoly, shall do their best
endeavors to save the said Men and their Goods.

VII. That no Ship or any other Vessel of Tripoly shall have permission to be
Delivered up, or to go to any place in Enmity with the said King of Great
Britain, to be made use of as Cosairs or Sea Rovers against his said Majesty's
Subjects.

VIII. That none of the Ships or other smaler Vessels of Tripoly shall remain
Cruising, near his Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier or in sight of it,
nor any other way Disturb the Peace and Commerce of that place.

IX. That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Argier, Tittuan, or Salli, or any
other place being in War with the said King of Great Britain, bring any Ships
or Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of his said Majesty's Subjects to
Tripoly, or to any Port or Place within that Kingdom; The Governors there shall
not permit them to be sold within the Territories of Tripoly.

X. That if any of the Ships of War, of the said King of Great Britain do come
to Tripoly or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, with any Prize, they
may freely sell it, or otherwise dispose of it, at their own pleasure, without
being molested by any; And that his Majesty's said Ships of War, shall not be
obliged to pay Custom in any sort; And that if they want Provisions, Victuals,
or any other things they may freely buy them at the rate in the Market.

XI. That when any of his said Majesty's Ships of War shall appear before
Tripoly, upon Notice thereof given to the English Consul, or by the Commander
of the said Ships, to the chief Governors of Tripoly; Public Proclamation
shall be immediately made, to secure the Christian Captives, And if after that
any Christians whatsoever make their escape, on board any of the Ships of War;
They shall not be required back again, Nor shall the said Consul, or Commander,
or any other his Majesty's Subjects, be obliged to pay any thing for the said
Christians.

XII. That if any Subject of the King of Great Britain, happen to dye in
Tripoly, or its Territories, his Goods or Monys, shall not be seized by the
Governors or any Ministers of Tripoly, but shall all remain with the English
Consul.

XIII. That neither the English Consul, nor any other Subject of the said King
of Great Britains shall be bound to pay the Debts of any other of his
Majesty's Subjects; Except that they become surety for the same by a Public
Act.

XIV. That the Subjects of his said Majesty in Tripoly, or its Territories in
matter of Controversy, shall be liable to no other Jurisdictions but that of
the Dai, or Divan, except they happen to be at Difference between themselves;
In which case they shall be liable to no other Determination, but that of the
Consul only.

XV. That in case any Subject of his Majesty, being in any part of the Kingdom
of Tripoly, happen to strike, wound or kill, a Turk or a Moor (if he be taken)
he is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater Severity, than a
Turk ought to be (being guilty) of the same offense; But if he escape, Neither
the said English Consul, nor any other of his said Majesty's Subjects, shall be
in any sort questioned or troubled therefore.

XVI. That the English Consul, now or at any time hereafter living in Tripoly
shall be there at all times, with entire freedom, and safety of his Person and
Estate, and shall be permitted to choose his own Druggerman, and Broaker, And
freely to go on board any Ship in the Road, as often, and when he pleases; And
to have the Liberty of the Country; and that he shall be allowed a place to
pray in; And that no Man shall do him any Injury in Word or Deed.

XVII. That not only during the Continuance of this Peace and Friendship, but
likewise (if any Breach or War) happen to be hereafter between the said King of
Great Britain, and the City and Kingdom of Tripoly, The said Consul and all
other his said Majesty's Subjects, shall always and at all times, both of Peace
and War, have full and absolute Liberty to Depart and go to their own, or any
other Country, upon any Ship or Vessel of what Nation soever, they shall think
fit, and to Carry with them, all their Estates, Goods, Families, and Servants,
(although born in the Country,) without any Interruption or hindrance.

XVIII. That no Subject of his said Majesty being a Passenger, from, or to any
Port shall be any way molested or meddled with, although he be on Board, any
Ship or Vessel in Enmity with Tripoly.

XIX. That whereas a War has lately happened, between the most Serene King of
Great Britain, and the most Illustrious Lords Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dai, The Aga
Divan, and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoly in Barbary; by
reason of the Injuries done unto the King of Great Britain and his Subjects,
by the Government and People of Tripoly contrary to the Articles of Peace; We
Halil Basla, Ibraim Dai, Aga Divan, and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom
of Tripoly in Barbary, do acknowledge the Injuries done; And that the Breach of
the Peace, between his most Excellent Majesty of Great Britain, and Us of
Tripoly was committed by our Subjects, for which some are banished and some
fled from our Justice; And for further Satisfaction to his most Excellent
Majesty for the Breach of Articles we are sorry for the same, and do by these
engage to set at Liberty and Deliver unto the Right Honorable Sir John
Narbrough Knight, Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet, in the Mediterranian Sea; All
English Captives, Residing in the City and Kingdom of Tripoly, and Dominions
thereunto belonging, without paying any Ransom for them; And likewise by
setting at Liberty and delivering unto the said Sir John Narbrough Knight, all
other Persons taken under English Colors without paying any Ransom for them,
And by paying eighty thousand Dollars in Money, Goods, and Slaves, to the
aforesaid Sir John Narbrough Knight: And moreover we do engage our selves and
successors, That if any Injuries for the future be done, contrary to these
Articles, by the Government and People of Tripoly, to the King of Great Britain
and his Subjects, if upon demand of satisfaction from the Government, and
people of Tripoly; We, or they refuse, or deny to give satisfaction therefore,
so that a War be occasioned thereby, between the King of Great Britain, and the
Government and people of Tripoly; We do engage our selves and successors to
make restitution for the Injuries done, and likewise to make satisfaction to
the King of Great Britain for the full charge and damage of that War.

XX. That no Subject of the King of Great Britain, etc. shall be permitted to
turn Turk or Moor in the City and Kingdom of Tripoly, being induced thereunto
by any surprizal whatsoever, unless he voluntarily appear before the Dei, or
Governor with the English Consuls Druggerman three times in twenty four hours
space, and every time Declare his Resolution, to turn Turk or Moor.

XXI. That at all times, when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britain,
etc. carrying his said Majesty's Flag at the main-top-mast-head, appear before
the City of Tripoly, and come to Anchor in the Road, That immediately after
notice thereof given, by his said Majesty's Consul or Officer from the Ship,
unto the Dei and Government of Tripoly; They shall in honor to his Majesty
cause a Salute of one and twenty Cannons to be shot off, from the Castles and
Forts of the City, and that the said Ship shall return an Answer by shooting of
the same Number of Cannons.

XXII. That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles, by us
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dei, Aga Divan, and Governors of the Noble Kingdoms and
City of Tripoly, all Injuries, and Damages sustained on either part, shall be
quiet taken away and forgotten, and this Peace shall be in full force and
virtue, and continue for ever, And for all Depredations, and Damages, that
shall hereafter be Committed, or done by either side, before Notice can be
given of this Peace, full satisfaction be immediately made, And whatsoever
remains in kind shall instantly be restored.

XXIII. That whatsoever shall happen hereafter, that any thing is done or
committed, by the Ships or Subjects of either side contrary to any of these
Articles (Satisfaction being Demanded therefore) shall be made to the full, and
without any manner of Delay, and that it shall not be Lawful to break this
Peace, unless such satisfaction be denied, and our Faith shall be our Faith,
and our word, our word, and whosoever shall be the Cause of the breaking of
this Peace shall assuredly be punished with present Death.

Confirmed and Sealed in the Presents of Almighty God, the fifth day of March
Old Style, and in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ, one thousand six hundred
seventy five, Being the last day of the Moon Zelheldga, and the year of the
Hegeira on thousand and eighty six.
WHereas there were several Articles of Peace and Commerce, between the most
Serene and Mighty Prince Charles the Second, by the Grace of God King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. And
the most Illustrious Lords Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dei, Aga Divan, and Governors of
the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoly in Barbary, lately made and concluded by
the said Lords, on the one part; And by Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of
his said Serene Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas, on the other part,
and by them confirmed and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, the fifth day
of March, Old Style, And in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1675/6 being the
last day of the Moon Zelhedga, And the year of the Hegeira 1086.

Since which time of Confirming and Sealing the aforesaid Articles of Peace,
and Commerce, The aforesaid Lord Ibraim Dei, being fled away from the
Government, of the City and Kingdom of Tripoly in Barbary.

Now we Halil Bassa, Aga Divan Governors, Soldiers and People of the aforesaid
City and Kingdom of Tripoly, have Choosen and Elected Vice Admiral Mustapha
Grande to be Dei of the aforesaid City and Kingdom of Tripoly to succeed Ibraim
Dei, in the aforesaid Government.

And now we Halil Bassa, Aga Divan, and Governors, Soldiers and People of
Tripoly aforesaid, having seen the aforesaid Articles of Peace and Commerce
which were lately made and concluded as aforesaid; And having seriously perused
and fully considered all particulars therein mentioned, Do fully approve of all
and every the aforesaid Articles of Peace, and we and every one of us do now by
these presents, consent and agree to and with Sir John Narbrough Knight
aforesaid, for the just and exact keeping and performing of the said Articles;
And do accept, approve, ratify, and confirm all and every of them in the same
manner and form as they are incerted and repeated in the preceding Articles
aforesaid; hereby firmly engaging our selves, and successors, assuring on our
faith sacredly to maintain and strictly to observe, perform, and keep
inviolably all and every the aforesaid Article and Articles of Peace and
Agreements for ever. And to cause and require all our Subjects and people of
what degree or quality whatsoever, within the City or Kingdom of Tripoly in
Barbary; or Dominions thereunto belonging, both by Sea and Land punctually,
inviolably, carefully and duly to observe, keep, and perform all and every the
aforesaid Article, and Articles, thereof for ever: And our Faith shall be our
Faith, and our word our word, and whosoever shall at any time violate and break
any part of the said Article, or Articles of Peace, they shall be assuredly
punished, with greatest severity, and his or their heads shall be immediately
cut off; and forthwith be presented unto any Officer whom the most Serene King
of Great Britain, etc. shall Authorize, to make Demand thereof.

It is further agreed that the Subjects belonging unto the most serene King of
Great Britain etc. Trading unto the Port of the City and Kingdom of Tripoly in
Barbary aforesaid, or to any Port or Place of the Dominions thereunto
belonging; in any Merchants Ship or other Vessel belonging to the said Serene
Kings Subjects shall not pay so much Custom by one per Cent. for whatsoever
Goods or Merchandise they sell or buy; as other Nations do for the Customs of
the like Goods, or Merchandise, notwithstanding whatsoever is Specified in the
Second Article aforesaid to the contrary.

And that the most Serene King of Great Britains Consul residing in Tripoly
aforesaid, shall have Liberty at all times, when he pleases to put up his said
Serene Majesty's Flag, on the Flag-staff on the Top of his House, and thereto
continue it spread as long time as he pleases; likewise the said Consul to
have the same Liberty of putting up and spreading the said Flag in his Boat,
when he passes on the Water, and no Man whatsoever to Oppose, Molest, Disturb,
or Injury him therein either by Word or Deed.

These and all other preceding Articles are to remain firm for ever, without
any alteration; and in all other particulars not mentioned in any of these
Articles, the Regulation shall be according to the Capitulation general with
the Grand Signior.

Confirmed likewise and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, at our Castle
in the noble City and Kingdom of Tripoly in Barbary, the first day of May Old
Style, and in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1676, being the twenty sixth
day of the Moon Zaphire, and the year of the Hegeira 1080. Halil Bassa's Seal,
Mustapha Dei's Seal, Aga's Seal, Ally Admiral's Seal.
A True Copy Examined out of Sir John Narbroughs.

Thomas Fowler.



HAving thus related the original cause, proceedings, and conclusion of our War
with Tripoly. Let us Travel to Tunis; which though since the year 1655 has
ever maintained Peace with England, yet the civil dissentions among themselves
have administered unto us Subject of discourse, and more especially, since it
has some relation to Hoffse-bey, whom formerly we named, as Mediator of the
Peace between Us, and Tripoly.

On the sixth of September 1675. Civil War at Tunis in Barbary.
Morat Bei General of all the Land Forces in the Kingdom of Tunis dyed, the
most Politic, and Popular Person, that ever managed that Office, his Sons
Ciddi Mehmet and Ciddi Ali by the general approbation, and consent of the
Soldiery jointly succeeding him in that charge. But the ambition of these two
young Gallants would admit no union in the Government; the Elder would know no
equal, and the younger no superior, so that it was necessary for one to govern,
or both to be laid aside: the decision of which was referred to a full Assembly
of the Turks. In the mean time Hoffsey-bey Brother to Morat deceased, and Uncle
to the two Competitors, taking advantage of these divisions, offered himself a
Candidate for the place; and so operated with the force of money, and with
assistance of the younger Nephew who would rather yield to an Uncle, then to a
brother, that he clearly carried the election by the common suffrages of the
people. The Elder Son Ciddi Mehmet not enduring the indignity to be thus
degraded took the field and set up his standard; After him followed all his
Fathers Old Spahees and the Moors abroad came into him, so that in a few days
he became so formidable as to give Laws to the Dei and People of Tunis;
obliging them immediately to banish his Uncle, and to receive him as sole, and
absolute General of all the Land Soldiery in those Dominions Hoffse-bey not
being able to resist this force, posted away with such expedition that he
adventured to embark himself, retinue and treasure (which as was reported being
modestly calculated, amounted to three millions of Dollars) on no better a
Vessel, then a French Satte for Tripoli; where he was honorably received by
that Government, and Letters sent from them to the young Bei at Tunis,
mediating for the return of his Uncle, with promise, that he should live
quietly, and give no interruption to the course of his Government; but Ciddi
Mehmet resolving not to trust him, positively declared against his readmission,
as not consistent with his Government, and Safety.

It happened at this time that the English had War with Tripoly, and blocked up
the Port; and that afterward a Peace ensuing; (Hoffse-bey) (as we said
before,) showed himself very forward, and zealous in the Mediation; which
taking effect; he was afterward together with his retinue transported on the
Bristol Fregat Commanded by Sir John Berry to Modon in the Morea, from whence
he went by Land to carry his Complaints to Constantinople; whilst the Bristol
Fregat proceeded to Smyrna, to receive the Turkey Companies Ships under Convoy
for England.

Hoffs-bey being arrived at the Grand Signiors Court prepared an easy and
ready access to the Grandees, by the great Presents, he sent them; which being
the only means to mollify and make tender the hearts of Turks; he found upon
all his addresses such resentments, and compassionate feelings of his
aggreivances that if assurances in words, and promises would do his work, he
might be ascertained of engaging the entire power, and puissance of the Empire
for his re-establishment. The news of Hoffse-bey; being gone to address himself
to the Turkish Court for relief much perplexed the Government at Tunis; and at
the same time the plague desperately raging there, made them sick, and infirm
both in body, and mind: wherefore after serious considerations and debates
hereupon; it was concluded necessary, to Fight Hoffse with his own Weapons; and
immediately to dispatch away four Ships for Constantinople with Messengers, and
Presents to the Grand Signior and his Officers being the only means to open the
reasons and understandings of the Turks, and make them as well capable to
comprehend the justice of their cause, as to reconcile their affections. The
four Ships arriving at Constantinople, were seized on, at the instance of
Hoffse-bey; and he declaring, that those Ships were belonging to him, and his
own proper Estate, easily procured a judgment in his favor; and the Captains
of them being called to the Divan, were Commanded to own Hoffse-bey for their
Master, and to obey him as their Pasha, and absolute Lord under the Grand
Signior. It was too late, when at Tunis they apprehended the Error, they had
Committed, in sending these four Ships to Constantinople; which now upon more
serious consideration then the former they expected to return freighted with
armed Men, and Imperial Commands to re-establish Hoffse-bey in the Government
of which, and of what was farther preparting at the Ottoman Court, that they
might have good advice; they dispatched two Messengers for Constantinople on a
French Satee, which they had freighted for that purpose, to Land them at
Smyrna; where being arrived they addressed themselves to me, then Consul there,
bringing me Letters of recommendation from friends at Tunis to assist and help
them in all their occurences. I was well informed in all particulars concerning
the success, and motions of Hoffse-bey at Constantinople, and I did not omit to
relate all matters distinctly to them; for not long before, I had occasion to
be acquainted with Hoffse-bey himself having at his earnest request found means
to furnish him with the Sum of three thousand Dollars, upon a good Pawn of
Gold, and Jewels; amongst which there was a Fetlock of Gold enameled, and set
with Diamonds, just in the form and fashion of those, which we put on our
horses, when they go to grass; and this, I understood, was one of the
Ornaments, which they put on the Ancle of the Bride on the marriage day; I know
not whether it were to grace her legs, as bracelets do our wrists, or to put
her in mind of her servitude, so soon as she submits to Wedlock. I acquainted
them, as I said, with all matters: That the Grand Signior, and his Officers,
had greatly resented the sufferings of Hoffse-bey and that they owned his
cause, having stopped the four Ships of Tunis at Constantinople; and had promised
to furnish him with a whole Chamber of Janisaries, with a License to raise such
Volunteers on the Seacoast of Asia, as would willingly, and of their own accord
follow his Colors. I had not many days given them this intelligence, which
others confirmed in like manner; before Hoffse-bey himself with his four men of
War and two other hired Ships arrived in the Port of Smyrna: where having
stayed some days to taken in provisions, and embark those who had listed
themselves for his service in those Parts; they departed for Tunis, touching at
Scio, Navarine, and Tripoly, in their Way, reinforcing themselves with such, as
voluntarily followed their Standard. The Messengers posted back with all speed,
on a Vessel hired at Smyrna; and arriving some time before Hoffse-bey; rendered
an account of the treatment which he had found at Constantinople, with the
particulars of the forces he brought with him. The Tunesines being prepared
with this intelligence, took courage to oppose a handful of men, to whom they
refused License so much as to one man of them to land; only out of respect to
the Grand Signior's Commands, they were willing to admit Hoffse-bey to a
treaty; and to receive him ashore with three or four Servants and COmpanions;
They slightly perused his Papers, rather to discover his strength, and the
porgress of his negotiations, then with intentions to condescend in the least
to his desires; which having done, and given permission to see his house, and
visit his wife, and children; they hastened him again aboard; and all the
Country being in Arms, they threatened to treat him and his People, as Enemies,
if they adventured to make a descent. Hoffse-bey being discouraged with this
rude Treatment, and with the Union, and general Confederacy of the people
against him contrary to his expectations; returned to Navarine; where he
landed, discharged his Ships, and Soldiers, which lay too heavy upon a Private
Purse, and retired himself for some time with much melancholy and discontent;
at length he traveled again to Constantinople, where the Turkish Officers
attended his coming with open mouths, expecting to share once more in the
recruits he had brought with him from Tunis. But his stock being low, he was
not able to dispense his money, and presents so generously, and plentifully as
before; which the Turks perceiving fell much in their respects for him, and
strangly on a sudden lost wholly the zeal and compassion for his cause;
suffering him to live at Constantinople in the Condition of a private Aga. In
the mean time the disturbances, and civil dissentions ran high at Tunis: the
two Brothers waging War with various and interchangeable success, caused such
agitions in the State, that in three months time four Deys were cut off. At
length the younger Brother Ciddi Ali gaining the Victory, and always inclining
toward his Uncle, consented that he should be recalled from Constantinople;
whereupon four Ships were fitted at Porto Farina, to carry presents of
atonement to Constantinople, and to bring Hoffse-bey from thence with Title of
Pasha; whom the people now, expected with great impatience, as the only Person,
whose Presence and Authority was able to settle, and restore them to their
former quietness and union. This happened in the year 1677; when the Country
was so harrassed with Civil Wars, that a miserable Famine ensued; so that a
Caffice of Wheat which was ten Bushels, was sold for twenty eight Dollars, and
of Barley for fourteen: and the scarcity of this Country which is commonly the
Granary of Italy, had such influence on those parts and Spain, in the years
1677 and 1678 that the Sat of the Grand Duke of Tuscany suffered much thereby;
and had more, had not the State of Luca out of Friendship, and on the score of
Neighborhood relieved their necessities.

Anno 1675. Hegeira 1086.
PRopositions of peace not being so earnestly pressed, nor so advantageously
proffered by the Poles, as the pride of the Turks did expect, the War still
continued, but not prosecuted either on the one side or on the other with the
same violence with which it began. For the Sultan designing this year to
circumcise his Son, the young Prince, now about twelve years of Age, and to
marry his Daughter of seven to his Mosayp, or Favorite, Pasha of Magnasia,
commonly called by the Name of Kul-ogli, which signifies the Son of a Slave, he
resolved todedicate this whole Year to quiet repose, mirth, and jollity at
home, only two thousand Janisaries were sent to Ibrahim Pasha to recruit the
Soldiers on the Frontiers of Poland, and the Tartars were reinforced with some
Turkish Troops under Vsuff Pasha to assist Dorosensko against the Poles, who
were with a considerable Army fallen into Vkrania; And the Captain Pasha, with
twenty eight Sail of Galleys, was dispeeded into the Black Sea for carrying of
such Provisions and Ammunition for War as was necessary for supply of the Army:
Besides which, no preparations of War were designed, these being judged
sufficient, though not to conquer, yet at least to repress the Incursions, and
amuse or keep the Arms of the Enemy employed.

For at the Cttoman Court the sace of all things was become serene and calm, no
Seditinos of great men, nor discontents of the people, nor balck and cruel
designs of State disturbed, or clouded the splendor of the Solemnities, The
happy state of the Ottoman. Court.
or the brows of the great Statists, but all matters ran in an uninterrupted
course of Joy and Festivity. The Sultan, who in his action showed himself a
most benign Prince, sparing and compassionate of the blood and misery of his
Subjects, has, since his arrival to a mature Age, exercised a wise manner of
Government, severe and just, and yet void of the cruelty and tyranny of his
Ancestors; under whom the trading Christian enjoyed the privilege of their
Capitulations with more justice, and less frequent Avanias. The Vizier also,
and other great Officers, being sensible of the benefit which Trade begat,
treated Merchants with more gentleness and respect than in former times, their
Ships not being forced on every occasion into the Grand Signior's service, but
rather persuaded to it by rewards and fair promises, otherwise than in the
times of former Viziers, and it is to be wished also that the like might be
said under the Government of those which are to succeed; though if we look
forward to the years 1678 and 1679 we shall find the Scene of things altered,
and not only Merchants, but even Ambassadors, and the Representatives
themselves, remain under sad discouragements, Amongst these joys and gentle
ways of Government; the manner of this Court was much altered; the Divan had
not for two months space been opened for business, to the great prejudice and
interruption of Justice; Wine, that great abomination to the Turkish Law, which
four years past was by the Imperial Decree forbidden under pain of Death and a
thousand Execrations and Curses, was now the common Drink, and divertisement in
fashion, used immoderately by all, excepting the Grand Signior, the Mufti, and
Reis Effendi; the Vizier himself having been excessively intemperate therein,
had extinguished the natural heat of his stomach, which could be warmed by no
less heat than what proceeds from Aqua Vitae; by which debauchery and
indisposition all Businesses were slowly and negligently dispatched, and
according to his example the Officer and Ministers acted in their Affairs,
which in former times being always, dispatched by nine a Clock in the Morning,
that became now the time and hour of rising.

The Grand Signior himself, though not taught by his Attendants to drink Wine,
lest it should perhaps betray him to some actions dangerous to them, gave
himself to Amors; for falling in love with a Polish Woman, lately captivated
at Kemenitz, he made her his Second Hasakee or Sultaness; for having had the
good fortune to bring him a Son, that honor was the reward of her
fruitfulness; and that he might give other testimonies of his favor, he cast
his eyes on a poor Chinganee, or Gipsy Boy, who with singing and dancing so
pleased him, that he gave him six purses of money containing three thousand
Dollars, with Horses and Servants, and took him into the Seraglio. Amidst these
Delights the Grand Signior gave order to the Vizier not to speak to him of
three things: Neither of returning to Constantinople, nor against his
Favorite, nor against his Hunting; in other matters he might use freedom.

Another alteration of a better nature, with reference to Learning and
Knowledge, seems also remarkable in this Court; for the Grand Signior having
been some years past presented by the Dutch Resident, with twelves large
Volumes of the new Atlas, upon an accidental sight thereof was so pleased, that
he commanded it should speedily be translated into Turkish; to which Work Dr.
Alexandro Mauro Cordato, the Viziers Interpreter, who succeeded in the place of
Panaioti deceased, was nominated; but he finding it too unweildy for him,
desired the assistance of a French Jesuit, then at Scio, skilful in the Turkish
and Arabic Languages, who was immediately sent for, and therein employed; and
though it is thought, that this business is above their Element, and that it
will soon cool and be neglected, yet it seems to be the first step which the
Turks have made unto Learning, and therefore is the more observable.

And now the Festivals beginning on the 16th. of May, The great Festivals in
what manner celebrated at the Turkish Court.
we must for some days lay aside all business, and observe with what order and
form these Solemnities were performed. In the first place. On this day the
Grand Signior, with the young Prince his Son, went to their Tents, which were
pitched very sumptuously in the Plain near the City, and indeed were truly
stately and magnificent; all the great men, as the Vizier, Mufti, and others,
having their Pavilions erected; amongst which was raised a very stately Throne,
with a Canopy of Cloth of Gold, extended under the shady leaviness of two tall
Elms, which, set off with many Lamps, in the Night represented a very pleasant
and glorious Scene. On this Seat of State the Sultan placed himself in the
morning, being accompanied thither by all the Pashaws then present, and by the
Rrepresentatives of those who were absent; who according to their Degree, in
order kissing his Vest, delivered in a Silk Purse, a Note or Schedule of their
Presents, which were afterward put into the Tefterdar's or Lord Treasurers
hands to see and compare them with the particulars received; which were so
great and considerable, that they far surpassed the Charges and Disbursments of
the Solemnity. Opposite to the Tents were several poles fixed, between which at
Night were hung Lamps of several shapes, which being varied every Night made a
very pleasing and magnificent Object; by light of which in the Evening were
exercised several tricks of Activity, as Wrestlings, Dancing, and Singing, and
sometimes were acted Turkish Comedies, which consist only of Farces, and some
ridiculous Dialogues, and at last the divertisements of the night concluded
with Fireworks, which were so many, that (as reported) 240 men were employed
for four months time in the main Christendom; only one seemed to excel the
rest, being a sort of Rocket, which went up very high, without any tail of
fire, like the common ones, carrying only a small compacted Globe of red fire
like a Star, and making to noise in mounting, but raised to its height, breaks.
These were the pastimes of the Night; in the day time all the several Arts and
Trades, some one day, and some another, passed before the Tents, every one
offering their Presents, as they passed, representing by some kind of Pageant
and Procession their diversities of Trade: this continued for fifteen days. On
the 25th. of this instant May, was a solemn Cavalcade, in which marched the
Janisaries with all their chief Officers, Chiauses, and Mutafaracas, etc. And
of the Great Men, the Vizier, Mufti, and Kul-ogli the Favorite, the first on
the right hand, and the second in the middle; after them followed the young
Prince who was to be circumcised, extraodinary rich in the Furniture of his
Horse, and the number and largeness of the Diamonds, which were on his Tulbant
and Breast. In this Cavalcade were carried twenty four small Nachils, and two
large ones, as high as the Mast of a Ship, which were carried by a hundred
Slaves, and set before the Seraglio, which are in form of triumphant Pyramids,
adorned with Tinsils in thirteen Divisions, according to this following Form or
Description.

A Turkish Pageant
High 27 Menar Pikes Each Almost as Long as a yard. and 32 Spanns about at The
Bottom

The form of a Nachil

Vests of Cloth and Silk



On the 27th. being the day of Mahomet's Birth, the Grand Signior rode
publicly to the Mosch of Sultan Selim, having no other attendance than the
Retinue of his own Court; his Pages were very rich in Cloth of Gold, each
carrying a Feather studded with a rich Jewel on his Head; after the Grand
Signior rode the young Prince, who that Night was circumcised. During this
Festival, a vast number of people was fed at the charge of the Grand Signior,
and about two thousand circumcised, every one of which had a Quilt given him,
with a small pay of three Asper a day for his Life. The manner of the Marriage
of the Grand Signior's Daughter.


This Solemnity for the Circumcision being ended, on the 10th. of June began
the Feast for the Marriage. The Kuzlir Aga, who is the black Eunuch of the
Women, was Bridegroom or Compare to the young Princess, and the Tefterdar or
Lord Treasurer to Kul-ogli, both which in the name of the Bride and Bridegroom
went before the Lord Chief Justice called the Kadelescher, and by him had the
Articles of Marriage wrote, and passed into public Act; which being done, the
Presents were sent, and first those from the Bridegoom to the Bride, which were
these, a great number of Beasts and Birds ill-favouredly made in Sugar, thirty
Mules laden with two Chests of Sweetmeats a piece, and about their necks each
carried a Vest of Satin for the Muletiers, then were carried a great many Pots
of Sherbet, then an hundred and twelve men carrying Vests of Silk, Cloth,
Velvet, and Cloth of Gold, some had three, some five or six at least wrapped up
in Linen; then went five Horses, one with rich Furniture; then followed a noble
Vest of Cloth of Gold lined with Sables and nine Buttons and Loops on a side
embroidered with large Pearl, on the top of which on the one side was a very
large Diamond, and on the other a Sapphire, with Shoes, Boots, and Pattents for
the Bagno, all covered with Pearl; likewise two Dressing-boxes, with
Looking-glasses, and a Cap in form of a Crown, a little Cabinet embroidered all
over with Pearl, eight Girdles set with Emeralds, Rubies, and Diamonds, a large
Diamond-ring, a pair of Pendants of two great Emeralds, with many other
particulars, which in passage were impossible to be remembered.

These Presents being thus performed on the part of the Bridegroom to his
Bride, the next Presents concerned the Grand Signior to his Daughter, which
were in place of her Dowry according to the custom of the Eastern Countries:
wherefore the 19th. of this month the Presents were ushered with a most solemn
Cavalcade of all the Grandees of the Court to the House of the Bridegroom,
which were two Gardens made of Sugar, forty little Nachils, eighty six Mules
laden with Housholdstusf, ten men with her Dressings, as Boots, Shoes, etc.
embroidered with Pearl as the former; then were carried her Jewels set in
Girdles, Bracelets, etc. promiscuously together, not in that rule as those were
which were sent her by the Bridegroom. The Household Stuff was made up with
coverts, yet howsoever some parts were left open on the sides, to show that the
Cushions were embroidered with Pearl, and others were of Velvet embroiderded
with Gold. At last came twelve Coaches with Slaves and thirty six black
Eunuchs. The 23d. the Bride was conducted to her Bridegrooms Palace with a
solemn Cavalcade, with two great Nachils of the same form and bigness as those
carried at the Cavalcade of the Prince, with two smaller ones of Silver. The
Bride was seated in a handsome Coach drawn with six Horses, and covered with
Plates of Silver, and the sides adorned with long Streamers of Tinsel: before
which went the Kuzlit Aga or chief black Eunuch of of the Women: after followed
four Coaches, with Six Horses apiece, and twenty one more with four Horses,
each carrying two Eunuchs: than at some distance off came the Hasakee or
Queen Mother to the Bride in a Coach all covered with Plates of Silver, and
attended with ten other Coaches more: the night following the Bride was
conducted to the Nuptial Chamber in ceremony only, she not being yet ripe for
consummation of Marriage: all which Solemnity was attended at the Bridegrooms
Court, with the same Sports and Fireworks which were made at the Tents, with
an addition of dancing on the Ropes, and sliding down a Rope fastened to the top
of the Steeple of the Mosch of Sultan Selim, which had like to have proved
fatal to one who came down with a Boy at his back; for when he was about twenty
yards from the ground, the Rope broke, but falling on a tree first, and then on
a man, he was taken up with little hurt. The most remarkable of all these Shows
was a man that walked up a Rope as high asthe second Balcony of the Menareh or
Steeple of Sultan Selion, which is as high as commonly our Spire-Steeples are
in England: And another hanging on a Rope with his hands, with his body
extended, turned himself twelve times round with his hands: at all which Sight
the Grand Signior was a constant Spectator. In this manner these Solemities
ended, the Mosayp or Favorite rich in the esteem of his Prince, and in high
honor with all, had yet some allay to attemper and moderate his joy; for the
Princess not yet fit for consummation, in case she dyed before that time, all
her Jewels and Goods must return to the Grand Signior, notwithstanding which he
would be obliged to pay her Dowry, which was said to be the Sum. of two years
Revenue of Grand Cairo, but let it be what it will, he will be insolvent,
being, as reported, three hundred Purses already in debt. And now to
demonstrate the uncertainty of the Courts of Princes, as well as of all other
places and conditions of the World, the Great Tefterdar or Treasurer, who had
for the space of thirteen years managed this Office with singular industry and
advantage, was now removed from thence, and under a specious show of
Preferment, was advanced to the Dignity of Pasha of Grand Cairo: this change
was the more wondered at, because he was a Person so acute and so proper for
the Office, The Tefterdar put out of his Office.
that no man that held the place did ever manage it with greater reputation,
nor with greater benefit to the Interest of his Prince; for besides his good
husbandry in other matters, he was so skilful in knowing the price of
Commodities, and so near in making his Bargains, that the Merchant could scarce
live by him, which in that consumption of Goods made in the Seraglio, will
produce a considerable abatement when all things are bought at the best hand;
considering which, many reasons were alleged, and conjectures made of his
removal: some said, That the Grand Signior having a liking to a young Man of
his, to prevent his being taken into the Seraglio, the Tefterdar gave him a
Wife, and thereby greatly displeased the Grand Signior, as if he had purposely
contrived it, to defeat his desires: others said, That the Grand Signior would
have borrowed money of him to pay the Arrears of the Spahees, which he refused
to lend: but others talked, and that with best reason, That Kara Mustapha the
old Chimacam, who is always with the Grand Signior, had found an opportunity to
represent him amiss, suggesting, that the Tefterdar should say, That want of
money in the Treasury was caused by the vast Sums consumed in the fooleries of
the late Feasts: Ways for raising Money.
and the Vizier, though he entertained no personal animosity against him, yet
was willing to sacrifice him to the friendship of Kara Mustapha. And so being
dispossessed of his Office, thereunto succeeded the Janisary Efendi or
Judge-Advocate of the Janisaries, a great Drinker of Wine, and one not to hold
any comparison with the parts and abilities of his Predecessor. Money now
wanting greatly in the Treasury, several ways were sought to bring it in, and
to save expenses. The first of which was, that a review be made of all Otoraks,
such as Milites emeriti, who are excused from the War, and yet receive their
pay; from which number those were excluded who had bought it, or were not come
legally by it, which would save the Grand Signior a vast Sum of Money yearly:
and to help at this time of need, the late Treasurer must refund and ease
himself of money, before he enters on that rich and important Office of Grand
Cairo. And Chusaein Aga the chief Customer, who was a man that had enriched
himself by many bad ways and arts, was displaced from his Office, and caused to
disgorge great Sums of Money to add unto the Supplies of the Treasury. He was a
Person of a subtle disposition, raised from the mean degree of a Shoemaker, and
being well acquainted both with good and bad ways of gaining money, was a
proper Instrument for the Turkish Government, it being his fortune to fish
riches rather for others than himself. And now being deprived of his Office and
the best part of his Wealth, he resolved, like all other discontented
Ministers, to take a Pilgrimage to Mecha, and to that end made a solemn Visit
to the Pasha of Cairo, then in his Tents near Scutari, acquainting him of his
intentions to wait on him, and perform his Respects in his passage to the Holy
Keblech or Mecha.

The Turks have not of late years been very prodigal of the blood of their
Subjects, nor have those Executions been done of late on any Officer, unless
his Tyranny and Oppression of the people did justly draw due punishment upon
himself. And such was the case of the Kahya or Secretary of the Chimacam or
Governor in the Viziers absence of Constantinople, who taking on himself the
management of all the Affairs of his Master, acted every thing according to his
own pleasure; for finding that whatsoever he did or propounded, was always
confirmed and assented unto by his easy Lord, he assumed a boldness to
undertake any thing upon the proffers of money, so the Sum was in any manner
agreeable to the greatness of the matter required, The Chimacam of
Constantinople his Steward cut off.
or to the danger he incurred; by which means he involved his careless and
unwary Master in such intrigues, as could have no excuse besides his own
supineness, and the corruptness of his Servant. At this manner of administering
Justice, the people being discontented, hastened the removal of the Chimacam:
and now another entering on the Office, the Kahya remained exposed to the malice
and complaints of all his Enemies, amongst which none was of greater force than
an accusation laid against him, for having granted leave to the Armenian
Christians at Constantinople for a Sum of Money to erect a Church; for which,
though a Command was granted by the Great Vizier, obtained at a good price, to
build one there of Timber, but of a low and mean Fabric; yet the Kahya for a
greater Sum of twenty Purses of Money, or ten thousand Dollars, improved this
Command, and changed their Materials from Timber to Stone and Mortar: the which
Building beginning to rise with some magnificence, offended the neighboring
Turks with so much scandal, that great numbers of them carried the Complaints
thereof to the Grand Signior; who calling the Vizier, and examining the Case,
the Vizier would own no other Command, than for repairing of an old Church, but
not building one new. Whereupon Sentence of Death being passed on the Kahya, an
Officer was sent to execute it. And in his way to Constantinople, at a place
called Selebrea, meeting with the Offender, he caused him to return again with
him to Constantinople, where having strangled him, his Body was thrown into
the Sea.

We have thus far discoursed of the Affairs at home, which consisted for the
most part in jollities and divertisements; let us now look on the enterprises
and attempts abroad, and we shall find no great matter of action this year
performed against Poland, more than some incursions made into Vkrania by the
Turks and Tartars under the Conduct of Ibrahim Pasha, in which we have no
Battles, nor great Skirmishes to recount, only a seizure or surprise of those
Cosacks, which were not under the jurisdiction of Dorosensko, who like sheep
were driven from their pastures, and Men, Women, and Children carried away into
Captivity, and transplanted into Countries, where they might better serve the
purposes and designs of the Turkish Empire; to which ends also vast numbers of
Tartars with their Families, were called to inhabit the circumjacent parts of
Kemenitz, for better security of the Conquest, to which the Tartars most
willingly concurred, esteeming it a happy Bargain to exchange the Soil of
Tartary for the fruitful Plains, and more gentle Air of Poland. And thus we may
consider what the intestine Discord of the Poles has brought upon themselves;
that they, who in former days maintained their honor and reputation with the
Turks, beyond any of the bordering Nations; not having every suffered them to
continue in their Country, much less to sojourn or possess one palm of Ground
therein; can now more easily see them before the Walls of Leopolis or Cracovia,
and planted in the very Bowels of their Country, rather than a King of their
own Country set over them not agreeable to their own humor and fancy; or
perhaps rather than behold the envied exaltation of some persons to dignity, or
some little disorders in their Government; of which the Turk knows well to make
use, it being no new Lesson for him, to profit himself of the Discord and
Animosities of the Christians.

In like manner the Marine Affairs of the Turks this year afforded little
worthy of observation, unless it were, That the Captain Pasha was employed with
about thirty Sail of Galleys into the Black Sea, for transporting of Ammunition
and Provisions to those Forces in Vkrania; but he returned not with an equal
number of Galleys, with which he departed, having lost five of them by storm,
and then arrived at Constantinople on the 26th. of October, called by the
Greeks the Feast of St. Demetrius, and by the Turks Cassin-gheun, a day which
is commonly remarkable for Storms at Sea; of which the Turks and Greeks are so
aprehensive or superstitious, that on that day or near that time, either before
or after, until the storm has vented its fury, and taken its course, they will
not adventure themselves unto the Sea, upon the most pressing occasion, or
hopeful inducement whatsoever.

And here I judge it requisite to conclude this Year with two matters very
observable relating unto Trade: The first is with reference unto the Genoueses,
who in the Year 1666. first sent their Ambassador Signior Durazzo, with many
Presents and great Magnificence to conclude a Peace with the Ottoman Empire,
with the sole design and intention of Trade; which having been established on
no other foundation at the beginning, than that of their Temins, The Trade of
Genoua.
and the Fabric of their own Cloth, when the first failed, as it did in two
years after, and that their Cloth turned not to account, but was out-sold by
the English and Dutch, then their Trade began to decay, or rather never came to
perfection, like the fruit of a young tree, which buds fairly, and produces
fruit, but has not strength to digest or bring it to maturity: Even so it was
with the Genoueses, who having been at the charge of an Ambassador
Extraordinary, and settled a Resident at Constantinople, and a Consul at Smyrna,
and all the other Formalities of Trade, wanted that nourishment thereof from
their own soil, which produces the true and natural fruit of Commerce, which is
gain and profit; and being outdone by other Nations in shipping, there could
little or no benefit be expected from their own Navigation in the Levant. For
these reasons, their Trade failing, the Duties of Consulage on Goods appointed
to maintain the Officers, and defray the public Expenses, were consequently
wanting; so that the Count Fieschi Resident for that Republic at
Constantinople, finding himself in great distresses and necessities, and unable
to maintain himself and his Attendants agreeable to his Character and Quality,
often advised his Prince and the Senate of the unhappy state of their Affairs,
desiring from them either to provide a Supply agreeable to the occasions, or to
recall him from that Office, where he could no longer live in that Honor
required. This importunity produced the exchange of Officers, and the Mission
of Signior Giustiniano to reside at Constantinople, and Signior Gentile at
Smyrna; the first of which, some few days after his arrival, being
unfortunately killed with a Carabine in his Chamber at Constantinople, as
before related, the Office of Resident came to be still continued in the person
of Fieschi, who remaining without provisions necessary to maintain his degree,
and the annual Presents expected by the Turks, which they esteem as due as
their Income, and as part of their Revenues, was forced to take up money on
Pawns, and his own Credit at the Interest of 20, 25, or 30 per cent. according
as his necessities increased; and the apprehensions men conceived of an
insufficiency and hazard in their security, was the cause that the debt, which
in the beginning was inconsiderable, increasing with Interest upon Interest,
came at length to the Sum of sixty or seventy thousand Dollars, which the
Republic of Genoua, attributing in a great measure to the ill Conduct of
Fieschi, and judging the greatest part of this debt to be feigned, sent another
Resident called Signior Spinola to succeed him in his Office, who arriving at
Smyrna in the month of May of this present year, on a stout Ship hired of the
Venetians, and under the notion of a Man of War accompanied with a Merchant
Ship, and a new Consul (the old one dying the year before) settled there such
Orders, as were judged necessary for the government of their Affairs. But
before these Genoueses arrived, a report had fore-ran them from Ligorne and
other parts, that their Ships brought great quantities of false Gold and false
Pieces of Eight: the which coming to the ears of the Turks, Commands were
provided against their arrival to search their Ships, and try their Moneys; to
which the Genoueses not condescending, Arz or testimony was made thereof by the
Kadi unto the Grand Signiors Court. In the interim whilst this Arz went up, and
the answer expected, the Genouese Resident designing to proceed forward on his
Voyage to Constantinople, demanded the Kadi's Moraselau or Ticket of License
for the Man of War on which he came, to pass the Castle, (for that Ship had
entered within the Port.) The Kadi judging it necessary, that both the Resident
and Ship should attend the arrival of the answer from above, refused to grant
this License; whereupon the Resident all in a rage embarked himself, and
immediately set sail, and having a fair Breez out of the Port, gently slided
along by the side of the Castle without any stop or interruption.

This affront being put upon the Kadi, greatly displeased him; so that calling
the Lieutenant and Gunner of the Castle into question, and not admitting of
their Plea, that the Ship was a Man of War, and the person thereon a Resident,
both which were privileged, and both going up to the Grand Signiors Court, were
to answer there for what was laid against them; but this I say, not being
admitted for reason, the Kadi committed them both to Prison, from whence with
some charge afterward they released themselves.

The new Resident being arrived at Constantinople, the Creditors of Count
Fieschi demanded payment of the debts owing to them, which was given in, to
amout to sixty thousand Dollars, and so much was to be paid before Fieschi
should be permitted to depart, or at least that part thereof being satified in
hand, the new Resident Spinola should give security for payment of the
remainder: the which he refusing to do, as not owning the accounts which
Fieschi had given in, in regard he judged them to be composed of extravagant
Interests, and to arise on charges not allowable by that Republic, who after
the death of Giu^tiniano disowned Fieschi for their Minister; hereupon great
disturbances and commotions arose amongst the Creditors, some of which being in
great Power, as the Janisary-Aga and others, Sequestration was laid on their
Man of War; so that she was toaed away to the Arsenal, and there laid up, and
attached for payment of the debt: which arising on the account of the Public,
the Goods of the Commonwealth was justly esteemed liable to the Sequestration:
during which time the Pestilence, the Epidemical disease of that season at
Constantinople, affecting with its contagion the Ships company, about eighteen
or twenty of them dyed thereof, and all their affairs reduced to a strange
consternation.

In this interim many and various were the disputes and contests between the
two Residents; sometimes they proposed to refer their differences to the
decision of the English, French, and Venetian Ministers; sometimes again,
finding the distance so wide and spacious between them, they resolved to have
their matters determined by Turkish Sentence. At length the new Resident
perceiving no end of this business, and that the Ship lay engaged at a great
charge, and as it were captivated to the great dishonor of the Republic, came
to an agreement to pay thirty three thousand Dollars, one third whereof was to
be paid in hand, and the other two thirds by equal portions in the space of one
year; the first payment to be made after six months, and the other six months
after; to which not only the Resident, but their Merchants also entered
personally into obligation. In this manner the Ship being cleared, and taking
such Lading as offered for Genoua at Constantinople sailed for Smyrna; where
taking another Ship of the same Country into her company, departed with the
Dutch Convoy for Christendom. But having remained six months in Port, subjected
to much charge and trouble, and not finding a Freight equal to the time and
expense, was no great encouragement to the Genoueses to continue this Trade,
which by good experience appears in no manner agreeable to their Country, nor
yielding success answerable to the long expectation of ten years past.

In this Year it was, that the Grand Signior and Great Vizier at the
instigation of Chusaein Aga the chief Customer (whom we have before mentioned)
casting their eyes on Smyrna, and finding it a place of a great Trade, and a
convenient Port, for which in ancient times it was always famous, and for the
same cause was frequented by Merchants both from the Eastern and Western parts
of the World; so that it was become the only great and considerable Mart or
Scale within the Precincts of the Turkish Empire: considering it (I say) in
this manner with a benign eye, as bringing great profit and advantage, they
began to think it worthy the Ornament of some public Edifices, founded with
that Magnificence as might endure long, and renew the ancient Honor and
Reputation of Smyrna: A Besasteen and new Custom-house, and a Royal Chan built
at Smyrna.
Hereupon they erected in the first place a Besasteen, which is in the nature
of our Exchange, where several Shops are made, and variety of Goods sold; and
to make the better Front toward the Sea, it was founded therein on vast Stones
and Piles, fit to support a weighty Building.

The next Edifice erected was a Custom-house built into the Sea only on Piles
of Timber, with a handsome Front toward the Sea; and this the Great Vizier
judged to be a work not only necessary, but also agreeable to the Majesty of
his Master; for until this time the Customer lived in a hired House not unlike
the others which Merchants inhabit. And now this House being completed, a
Hattesheriff or Royal decree came down from the Court, commanding that all
Ships that came into that Port either to lade or unlade, should lay their sides
to that Custom-house Scale, and thereon discharge their Goods, and receive
others.

And now whereas the Merchants enjoyed at all times in former days the
convenience of having their Goods landed on, and laden from their own Keys or
Scales, they greatly resented this innovation; and as they unwillingly quit any
Privilege, so they judged this not unworthy to be contended for with singular
constancy and resolution: the commodiousness of which was thought so
considerable, that it not only caused this place in former days to flourish,
and to be distinguished from all the Marts in the World; but also the enjoyment
thereof invited the Inhabitants from the more elevated parts of Smyrna (where
was health and pleasure) to the lower Bogs and Marshes, exchanging health and
cheerful air for profit and convenience of Commerce. Hereupon applications were
made by all the Consuls of the Frank Nations to their Ambassadors and
Ministers at the Grand Signiors Court. In the mean time Trade by common
agreement was interdicted, at least as to the lading or unlading of Ships,
which continued for several days, and touched somewhat grievously the English
and Dutch Nations: the first having two Ships, and the latter six
Merchants-ships in Port. The English Ambassador being then personally at
Adrianople, was the first who without the assistance of any other Minister,
moved in this affair, but found great opposition in it from the Turkish
Officers; who with some resentment of the present reluctance of the Merchants,
declared not without passion, the resolution the Grand Signior had to conform
the honor of the Custom-house in some semblance with those of Christian
Princes; and therefore did wonder that the Christian Merchants could so easily
condescend to the rules of those Custom houses in their own Countries, where
they were Natives, and yet could not support the same in these parts where they
were Aliens and Strangers. And as a farther evidence of the Turks resolution to
maintain this point, it was said by the Vizier's Kahya, that the Grand Signior
was resolved to blow up both Port and Town, rather than not be obeyed in his
own Dominions; with this Answer, Merchants despairing of the success, began to
unlade their ships at the Custom house, or to give an account there of the
Goods in their Boats; for the Customer was become sensible, there was not
sufficient Water for ships to ride at the Key of the Custom house, and did also
indulge unto the Merchants several other particulars herein, that so the
innovation might sit the more lightly on them, which he perceived was so ill
resented and taken to heart. And this was the first beginning in the Months of
August and September, when this privilege was taken from the Merchants. And in
this Year also the Great Chan next to the Besasteen was in Building, and the
first Foundation thereof laid, and the great Aquaduct brought from the Plains
of Bogiaw, and little Harchi-bonar.

At the end of the year 1674, we have related the beginning proceedings, and
conclusion of the War, which our Gracious King was pleased in defense of his
Subjects, and Commerce to make on Tripoly; which we brought down to this year
1676; when Sir John Narbrough Sailing home for England, touched in his way at
Algiers, for better understanding of the State of all matters with that
Government. Things had for some time remained in a doubtful condition between
England, and that people; who having lately proved the smart effects of War
with us, were not very forward to make a breach. Howsoever it being that time,
when by means of a General Peace, which we enjoyed with all the World, and of a
War in which the rest of Christendom was involved, that our navigation
flourished, and that few other Ships besides English passed the Seas; the
Algerines grew weary of a Peace with us. And herein they seemed to have some
more reason then usual, because that when it was their fortune to meet with
strangers, they were so disguised with English Colors, and Passports
surreptitiously, and fraudulently procured, that they could not distinguish
their Friends from Enemies, whereof they made frequent Complaints, and
addresses to his Majesty. The King out of a sense of Justice, and a tender care
of his Subjects welfare, knowing that such indirect practices must necessarily
produce a War was pleased by a Letter to that People, to signify his care in
that particular, and recalling all Passports formerly given, promised a better
regulation of them for the future; as appears by the Proclamation here
following, which was enclosed, and sent in the Letter to Algiers.

By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
Relating to the Articles concluded between His MAJESTY, and the Government of
Algiers.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the late Articles of Peace concluded between His Majesty, and the
Government of Algiers, His Majesty out of His Royal Care of the Persons and
Estates of His Subjects, did agree and provide, That none of His Subjects
employed or trading in any English Ship or Vessel, should for the future be
taken and sold as Slaves, or his or their Goods made Prize by any of the
Subjects of the said Government of Algiers; And also, that any of His Majesty's
Subjects going in Foreign Ships, as Passengers only, and having Authentic
Passports testifying the same, should have the like freedom for their Persons
and Goods aboard such Foreign Ships: And whereas His Majesty is informed, that
diverse of His Subjects, contrary to the effect and true meaning of the said
Treaty, do take upon them to color and conceal the Ships of Foreigners, with
whom the said Government of Algiers is in War, and to that end do either wholly
Navigate the Ships of such Foreigners, or otherwise serve in the same as
Mariners or Soldiers: Which way of proceeding, as it does for the present
administer just cause of Complaint from the said Government of Algiers, so will
it in a short time (if not prevented) endanger the Security intended by the
said Articles for the Ships, Persons and Estates of His Majesty's Subjects: His
Majesty does therefore by this His Royal Proclamation, strictly forbid all His
Subjects, that they do not for the future Navigate the Ships or Vessels of any
foreigners in War with the said Government, nor presume to serve in the same
either as Mariners or Soldiers. And His Majesty does hereby further Declare,
That if any Offenders contrary to this His Royal Proclamation, shall be taken,
His Majesty will not require any release of their Persons or Estates from the
said Government of Algiers; but that they must expect to be excluded (as they
were intended) out of the benefit of the said Articles; His Majesty also
strictly charging such persons as shall hereafter go as Passengers in foreign
Ships or Vessels, to take care that they have Passports with them signed by His
Majesty's proper Ministers in England, or His Ministers or Consuls abroad,
expressing the Names of their Persons, and the Contents and Qualities of their
Goods, at their perils.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, this Two and twentieth day of December 1675.
in the Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
This Care and just Expedient of his Majesty to prevent Fraud and Abuses in
this business, was otherwise construed by the Algerines, and made use of, in a
contrary sense, then was intended by his Majesty. For now whatsoever Ships they
met with, without these new Passes, they began to send to Algier, and make
prize of their goods; not considering that the meaning of the King was by these
Passes to determine doubtful cases about Ships; and not to make a snare to
entrap Ships English built, manned with English Men, and freighted with the
goods of his Subjects. But these Pirates, and ungracious Villains would find a
knot in a Bull-rush, and a scruple where none was; for now they seized most
English Ships they met with; for few had been so cautious, as to procure the
new Passport; so that by this pretense having made themselves Masters of a
considerable Estate belonging to English Merchants; and denying to restore the
same, a War was the necessary consequence of their refusal, which broak out in
the year 1676, the success of which we may perchance have occasion to relate in
the following years.

Anno Christi 1676. Hegeirae 1087.
THis Year began with joyful News to the whole Turkish Empire, all Places and
Cities of less renown rejoicing to hear the intentions of the Sultan to refresh
and adorn again his Capital Throne of Constantinople with the Imperial
Presence; for that City (which is the most proper Situation of the World, to
be made the head of a great Empire) having now almost for sixteen years wanted
the Rays of Majesty, and the Countenance of the Sultan, became almost abandoned
and forsaken of its Inhabitants, so that the spacious Seraglios or Palaces of
the chief Ministers and Officers of the Empire began to decay and run to ruin,
and the Artisans and Shopkeepers to leave their dwellings, and to follow their
Trade at Adrianople, The G. Signior returns ^o Constantinople
or in the Camp. But now the News of the designed return of the Grand Signior
to his ancient Seat, filled all places with joy and triumph, especialy at
Constantinople, which was not more satisfied with the consideration of the
benefit and advantage it was likely to receive by the Royal Presence, than that
those suspicions and jealousies which formerly possesed the mind of the Sultan
with a prejudice against this place, did seem now to vanish, and that he
reassumed a confidence of his Royal City equal to that love and esteem which
his Ancestors had of it; so that the humor which then possessed Constantinople
appeared like that of London at our Kings Restoration, all joy, even to
transport, for this unexpected Return; the people in the streets congratulating
their mutual happiness, thanked God, that they had lived to see that happy day
and blessed hour.

The occasion of this unexpected and sudden resolution caused many roving
guesses and opinations of the reasons of it. Some said a Dream which the Grand
Signior had, and which gave great disturbance to his thoughts, until he
resolved for Constantinople. Others said, the revolt and troubles at Cairo, of
which we shall presently have occasion to discourse, and some added certain
Commotions at Bagdat, or Babylon; some reported, that Xeriff of Mecha wrote him
a Letter, that he could not acknowledge him the Head and Protector of the
Mussulmin Faith, Conjectures concerning the reasons of the Grand Signiors
return to Constantinople.
so long as he had abandoned his Imperial City, and lived in the mountains and
unknown places. Others said, that the Janisaries and Militia murmured, and that
his Coming to Constantinople was forced and not to be avoided; and that the
Sultan being now out of love with Adrianople, had cursed it, and sworn never
more to set foot in it, having ordered the materials sent for the building of
the Great Seraglio at Adrianople, to be stopped on the way, and returned back
again. At this rate all the World talked and discoursed, joy and hopes made the
people fancy every thing according to their wishes. The Grand Signior being
approached near to Constantinople, fixed himself in his Camp in the Fields,
near a small Seraglio of his own, called Daout Basha, from whence the people
for many days expected, that he should, according to the Custom of his
Ancestors, make a solemn Entry; instead whereof he made some Salies with a
small Company through the Streets, as it were incognito, taking his pastime on
the Water, and on the sides of the Bosphorus in his Galleys and Boats, but most
commonly frequented his Place of Scutari on the Asian side, where with much
delight and confidence he lodged and reposed his Court, but made no solemn
Entry through the City, not frequented his great Seraglio; where though he
might perhaps dine, and pass certain hours, yet he slept not one Night there;
of which the people took especial notice, and thereby received confirmation of
the jealousy their Sovereign had of them, to their extraordinary grief and
dissatisfaction; however it was some contentment to the people, and renown unto
the City to have their Emperor so near, though it was rumoured as if the Court
toward the approach of Winter intended again to return unto Adrianople. In the
mean time the Grand Signior took his chief delight and divertisement on the
Water, passing in his Galleys and Pleasure-Boats up the Bosphorus to the mouth
of the Black Sea; and thence returning, much frequented the Gardens, and Houses
of Delight upon the Banks of the River; and visiting all places, a Country
House called Therapea, belonging to the Dutch Resident, received the honor of
his Presence, which he liked so well, that he took it from the Proprietor, and
conferred it without any consideration of money onone of his Courtiers, giving
out a Proclamation, That no Christian Minister should possess any Seat or
Habitation on the side of the Bosphorus, A strange thing, and what is not to be
paralleled in any part of the World.

About the beginning of this Year the Captain Pasha died, and Zaid Ahmet
Pash-ogli, then at the Camp, succeeded him; his Father was a famous Man, and in
the same Charge, but cut off by old Kuperlee. Soon after Ibrahim Pasha, General
of the Army at Keminitz, likewise died, and his Office was conferred on Ibrahim
Pasha, that was Pasha of Candia, of whom we have had often occasion to speak,
being a great friend to the English Nation. The Great Vizier also was not far
remote from the Confines of Death, being now fallen, by reason of immoderate
drinking of Wine, and chiefly of hot Cinnamon Waters, into a formed Dropsy and
Jaundice.

In the preceding year we touched on the removal of the Tefterdar or Treasurer
from his Office to the Government of Grand Cairo, and the reasons for it, which
though it might be a preferment (being the richest and most important Charge of
the Empire) to which the esteem the Sultan had of his parts and abilites, might
probably advance him; yet the employing of him at a distance so remote, was
certainly an effect of some displeasure, whereby he or his Favorites judged
him a Person not fit to remain longer near the Royal Presence. Wherefore having
commenced his Journey (as before mentioned) he arrived at Grand Cairo, where he
had not long continued before he began, according to the natural acuteness of
his mind and hugstering manner, to pierce with a narrow inspection into all
Affairs of that Government, and particularly into the Revenue and Treasure of
the Country, contriving with himself by what means the disorders might be
corrected, and the Revenue and Tribute improved; for he had an excellent Genius
or Spirit in the matters of Money, nothing in advantage of Interest could ever
escape him; so that he began to lay a new foundation in all proceedings; he
would not be contented with the old Taxes and Impositions, and where he found
Lands improved, or the Customs augmented, he would put in for a share of the
Benefits, and would reform every thing wherein he judged his Master to have
been abused. But though he was acute and sharp-sighted in such matters as
these, yet he wanted experience in the Government of Egypt; for these great
Beghs of this Country being alarmed with the innovations, began to stand upon
their Guard, and to enter into private Consultations, in what manner to oppose
themselves to this new way of Government, which looked like slavery, and
designs of bringing them into servitude, and a subjection unknown to them and
their Forefathers. For indeed the Government of Egypt, if well considered, is
rather Aristocratical than Monarchical; for though they acknowledge the Sultan
to be their Head, and accept his Pasha for Ruler, and pay a yearly Tribute, yet
the Beghs which are great Lords in their respective Countries, carry the sway
and Dominion in all other matters, and will endure nothing with favors of
oppression or innovation; so that these persons grown jealous by the
proceedings of the new Pasha, flew into open Sedition, and immediately to Arms,
with force of which they assaulted the Pasha's Palace, took him and threw him
into Prison. The News whereof flying with all haste to the Ottoman Court,
appeared at the first apprehension or surprise as if all Egypt had revolted,
and gave the World occasion to discourse, That the Wars were to be carried
Eastward, and that the sudden resolution of removing the Court to
Constantinople, was in order to a farther March into those parts. But frequent
Messages with time making the business to be better understood, caused the
Grand Signior to dispeed with all haste another Pasha, with Commission to
remove the former, and to continue all the ancient Customs and Privileges from
the beginning indulged to the Beghs of Egypt: with which Message and gentle
words of grace and favor from the Sultan, all discontents being pacified, the
former Pasha was released from his Imprisonment, and suffered to depart, and
thence proce^ed to the Island of Candia, where he entered on that Pashaluck,
succeeding Ibrahim Pasha in Charge, who (as before related) was sent to
Kemenitz to be General of the Army, in place of the Pasha lately deceased.

But here I must not forget a story which happened during the time of this
Summer, whilst the Grand Signior had his abode and enjoyed his Recreations in
the circumjacent parts of Constantinople; there was a certain Sultana which had
been a cast Wench of Sultan Ibrahim, who after his death, having been married
to some Pasha, obtained her release from the old Seraglio, and being also a
Widow by the death of this Husband, had liberty to take her habitation on the
Banks of the Bosphorus, or where she thought fit. This Lady was called Soltana
Sporcha, in Turkish Modar: The History of Soltana Sporcha.
how she came to be so nominated I cannot tell, perhaps some Italian Pages of
the Court might in respect to her way of living impose this Name upon her, for
she was no other than a Bawd, or something worse, making it her Profession to
buy young Girls, and to educate them in singing, dancing and in all the ways
which best accomplish Courtisans. Amongst this Train of Scholars, she had one
more brisk and aerie than the others, which could sing, and dance, and prate
incomparably, and was so quick in her Reparties, that she greatly delighted the
Pasha's and Lords, whose pleasures she atended, bringing from them considerable
Gifts and Presents to the enriching of her self and Mistress; and became so
much the talk of the Court, that at length the report of her arrived the cars
of the Grand Signior, who being also desirous to enjoy some divertisements by
the pranks of this witty Girl, sent to the Sultana one of the black Eunuchs for
her: which Imperial Command she not daring to disobey, consigned her with great
submission into the hands of the Messenger; but with this caution, that she
humbly desired the Sultan not to make any attempt on her Chastity, in regard
she was both a Virgin and Freewoman. The grand Signior having pleased himself
with the wantonness of this Wench, began to take a fancy to her, and resolved
to take her into the Seraglio; but she showing a kind of nicety and coiness,
the Grand Signior, who perhaps was better accommodated, sent her back again to
her Mistress, reflecting (as was supposed) with some disgust on the caution
which accompanied her. It happened not long after, that this Girl exercising
her Art in the presence of some great Persons, one Chesme Aga, a Bosnian by
Nation, Captain of the Great Visiers Guard, a stout and valiant man, happening
to be a Spectator one night, became unfortunately enamoured of her, and from
that time not being able to remove the impression she had made in his heart,
resolved, if possible, to make her his Wife, and to that end made his
affections known and his intentions of Marriage, both to her and to her
Mistress. The Girl was well enough pleased to become the Wife of so honorable
a Person; but the Sultana unwilling to lose the profit and benefit she daily
brought her in, refused the Match, declaring, That she was a Slave, and not at
her own disposal, and therefore in no capacity of bestowing her self any way
without her consent. This impediment giving a stop to the Marriage, put the two
Lovers on plots and contrivances in what manner to enjoy each other, and Love
being ingenious, quickly found out a means to bring them together; for the Girl
escaping from her Mistress, lodged her self in those Chambers which her Lover
had found for her. And being now missed, none but Chesme Aga was charged with
her, of whom she complained to the Grand Signior, and cited him before his
Master the Great Vizier to answer for her; but he denying to know any thing of
her, and no witness appearing against him, all farther proceedings were
superseded for the present: But Soltana Sporcha keeping watchful spies upon all
the motions of Chesme Aga, at length found him and his Mistress together, and
by the Authority of Officers brought them both before the Vizier: to whom the
Sultana sent a rude message, That Chesme Aga should be punished, and that her
Slave should be returned. The Vizier hereof acquainted the Grand Signior, and
gave him to understand the message which the Sultana had sent him, desiring to
know what punishment he was pleased should be inflicted on them. In which
interrim Chesme Aga told the Vizier, That he expected no other than a sentence
of death from the Grand Signior, only he desired that his beloved Mistress
might be spared, for he was sure he should live in her. It was not long before
the fatal Decree came for putting Chesme Aga to death, and sending the Woman to
the Seraglio, which was immediately executed; which act might seem to denote a
natural cruelty in the Sultan, being in reality very severe, though the whole
course of his Reign has been more gentle and mild than of any of the Ottoman
Emperors; only this fact proceeded rather from disdain than thirst of blood,
being angry that this Girl should prefer the Love of one of his Vassals before
the Honors of the Seraglio, and that her Mistress the Sultana should charm him
with a lie of her being free, when she was no other than a slave, and not long
before bought for an inconsiderable price.

Not long after this, and toward the 11th, or 12th, of September, when the Sun
was come to the Equinoctial, the Grand Signior prepared to depart. The Grand
Signior returns again to Adrianople.
The rumor of which displeasing and making sad the people hearts, as much as
his presence before comforted them, it was given out, That the Grand Signior
intended to return with the Spring, and divide the consolation, which his
residence produced, between the two Regal Cities, and for an evidence thereof,
he ordered a Platform to be laid for erecting a new Seraglio at Scutari, and
the Vizier designed another at Bezick-rash, and the Palaces of the Pasha's and
great Men were all putting into a way of Reparation, which for some time amused
and contented the minds of the Commonalty.

About the beginning of October the Grand Signior set forward toward
Adrianople, being accompanied with the Mosayp, which is his Favorite, and Kara
Mustapha who was his Chimacam, taking his recreation by the way in Hunting; but
the Great Vizier Achmet Pasha continuing still sick of his Dropsy and
Jaundice, took his Journey by Water as far as Selebra for his better ease, and
thence proceeding in a Horse litter to Churlu, which is the halfway to
Adrianople, The Death of the Vizier Achmet.
on the twenty third of October expired his last; his Discase, though heightened
by Wine and hot Spirits, yet was in some part hereditary, his father dying of
the Dropsy. His Body was on the twenty fifth brought back again in a Coach to
Constantinople with a small Attendance, and buried in the same Sepulcher with
his Father. He was a Person (for I have seen him often, His Character.
and knew him well) of a middle stature, of a black beard, and brown complexion,
something short-sighted, which caused him to knit his brows and pore very
intently when any strange person entered to his presence: he was inclining to be
fat, and grew corpulent toward his latter days. If we consider his age when he
first took upon him this important Charge, the Enemies his Father had created
him, the contentions he had with the Valede Sultana or the Queen Mother, and
the Arts he had used to reconcile the affections of these great Personages, and
conserve himself in the unalterable esteem of his Sovereign to the last hour of
his death, there is none but must judge him to have deserved the Character of a
prudent and politic Person. If we consider how few were put to death, and what
inconsiderable Mutinies or Rebellions happened in any part of the Empire during
his Government, it will afford us a clear evidence and proof of his gentleness
and moderation beyond the example of former times; for certainly he was not a
Person who delighted in blood, and in that respect of an humor far different
from the temper of his Father; He was generous, and free from Avarice, a rare
Virtue in a Turk! He was educated in the Law, and therefore greatly addicted to
all the Formalities of it, and in the Administration of that sort of Justice
very punctual and severe; He was very observant of the Capitulations between
our King and the Grand Signior, being ready to do Justice upon any corrupt
Minister, who pertinaciously violated and transgressed them, of which I could
give several instances, but these being improper for this place, are only in
general to be mentioned with due gratitude in honor to his Memory. As to his
behavior toward the neighboring Princes, there may, I believe, be fewer
examples of his breach of Faith, than what his Predecessors have given in a
shorter time of Rule. In his Wars abroad he was successful, having upon every
expedition enlarged the Bounds of the Empire; He overcame Newhawsel or Oywar,
and laid thereunto a considerable part of Hungary, which to this day continues
subject, and pays contribution to the Turk.

He concluded the War with Venice after twenty seven years continuance, by an
entire and total subjection of the Island of Candia, having subdued that
impregnable Fortress, which by the rest of the World was esteemed invincible.

He won Kemenitz, the Key of Poland, where the Turks had been frequently
baffled, and laid Vkrania to the Empire; reducing the Cosacks, those mortal
Enemies, to subjection, and to a desire of taking on them the Ottoman Yoke: and
finally, he imposed a new Tribute on all Poland. After all which Glories he
dyed in the 47th year of his Age, and 15th year and 8th day of his Government;
a short time, if we consider it, for such great actions; howsoever, if we
measure his triumphs, rather than count his years though he might seem to have
lived but little to his Prince and People, yet certainly to himself he could
not dye more seasonable, nor in a greater height and eminency of Glory.
Vtcunque Principi, and Reipublicae parum, sibi certe satis suaeque Gloriae
vixisse videbitur.

The Great Vizier having in this manner expired his last breath, the Seal was
immediately carried by his Brother to the Grand Signior, who upon Receipt
thereof, according to common expectation, conferred the same on Kara Mustapha
Pasha, who had for so many years formerly exercised the Office of Chimacam,
Kara Mustapha made Vizier.
which is as much as Deputy to the Great Vizier, of whom in other places we
gave a Character of being a wise and experienced Person, of a smooth behavior,
and a great Courtier; agreeable to which temper of mind, so soon as he attained
this promotion, he sent an obliging and courteous Message to the Servants of
the deceased Vizier, condoling with them the death of their Master, promising
to take them and their Concernments into his Care and Protection; according
whereunto he advanced Solomon Kahya (who was the late Vizier's Substitute,) and
for some years had managed all Affairs to the Office of Embrahore, which is
chief Master of the Grand Signiors horse, and is a place not only of honor,
but of great security. He that was his own Kahya he made a Vizier of the Bench,
and Chimacam in the same manner as he was to Achmet Vizier; by which point of
policy he seemed to have strengthened himself against all Enemies, for having
two Creatures of his own so well disposed; one near the Person of his Prince,
who would be able to do him all good Offices; and the other (whenever the
Wars or other occasions should cause him to be absent from the Royal Presence)
might supply his place without attempting to supplant him. The
Kapisler-Kahyasee, or Master of the Ceremonies to the late Vizier, he made his
own Kahya, and all the other Agas which depended on that Court, he received
into his own service; so that in effect there seemed, by this great chance of
Mortality, to be little other alteration in the Court, than of the single
person of the deceased Vizier; of whose Memory, that the Grand Signior might
evidence the love and esteem that he retained, he did not intermeddle or
appropriate unto himself any part of his Estate, or disanulled his Testament;
but resigned all into the hands of his Relations, challenging no share or
proportion thereof: And whereas the Vizier lest no Children, the Estate fell to
his Brother and Sisters, who to evidence their Devotion to Religion, and good
will to the Public, and to please the eyes of the envious World, conferred on
Mecha the Rent of the new Custom house, the Besasteen, and new Chan built at
Smyrna, and finished in the year 1677.

At this first change there were rumors that the new Vizier had begun his
Government in blood, having cut off several heads lately in Authority; but all
was false, and only grounded on a displeasure which he was known to have
conceived against certain persons. Only one act he performed rather of justice
than severity, having cut off one of the Pay-masters of the Exchequer for false
Money. The occasion was this: Certain Muletiers having received money from the
Exchequer in Venetian Zechins, and finding several of them false, returned them
again, but could not previal to have them changed; whereupon having made their
Memorial thereof, they carried them to the Vizier, and upon examination, the
Paymaster declared, That he received them from the Great Ibrahim Han-ogli, who
being for that Cause sent for and accused, was put into a fear, which proved as
dangerous to him as a Disease, the apprehensions of Death being worse than the
reality; but the Great Tefterdar soon cleared him of this Accusation, having
attested, That to his knowledge the money received from him was good, and
disposed on other occasions; so that the whole blame lying now on the
Play Master, and upon farther search more of the same stamp being found in his
hands, he deservedly suffered the punishment of Death, the which had likewise
been inflicted on another Officer of the same rank, but not being found so
culpable as the other, he was permitted to redeem his life with forty Purses of
Money, or twenty thousand Dollars.

Thus far we have seen the gentle and smooth behavior of the present Vizier
toward the Friends, Relations, and Servants of the Deceased, Aheratiens with
the new Vizier.
and with what Acts of Justice he began his Government. But, behold, on a
sudden the face of the whole Court was changed, every Officer thereof putting
on a Countenance of fierceness, pride, and arrogance, beyond the manner and
custom lately practiced. For the Great Vizier took on himself the State and
Grandeur of the Sultan, (the access being as difficult to him as to his Master)
his Kahya that of the Vizier, and so every inferior Officer advanced himself
into a fancy of possessing the next and immediate Degree above him. This
haughty behavior had a more particular influence on the Ministers and
Representatives of Foreign Princes, whose Interpreters were not admitted, as
formerly, to private Audiences or Conferences about their Affairs, but only at
the Public Divan, where their Arzes or Memorials were to be preferred in the
same manner as was practiced by the Subjects of the Country, and those of
conquered Nations, who petition for Justice. The which abasement was not only
cast on the Interpreters, but on the Persons of the Representatives themselves:
an example of which we have in the French Ambassador; who coming at the time
appointed to receive his Audience of the Vizier, was forced to expect a long
time before he could have admittance, and then entering into the Chamber of
Audience, was rudely crowded, and rushed upon by a Crew of unmannerly Chaouses,
who no otherwise regarded the Person of the Ambassador, than if he had been one
of the Grooms or Lacquies. Being come to the Seat of Audience, the Ambaslador
observed, That the Stool for the Great Vizier was set upon the Soffra, and that
for Him below, or at the foot of it; the which being an unusual and unpractised
diminution of the ancient honor given formerly to Ambassadors, he ordered one
of his Servants, To set it again on the Soffra equal with that of the Visier's;
the which being done, was again brought down by one of the Visiers Pages, and
placed as before; whereupon, the Ambassador seizing the Stool with his own
hand, carried it on the Soffta, and sat upon it; which being reported to the
Vizier, then in his retiring Chamber, he sent twice to him to remove, letting
him know, That unless the Stool were returned into the Place appointed by him,
he would not appear in the Chamber of Audience. Whereunto his Excellency
returned this prudent Answer, That the Vizier might dispose of his Chair as he
pleased, but not of his Person. In which Interim the Chaous-Bashee came in,
roaring out, Calder, Calder, which is, Take it away, Take it away, (meaning the
Stool) at which noise the Ambassador arising to see what the matter was, had
the Stool taken from under him; whereat being greatly enraged, he threw out of
the Room in a high passion, and causing the Presents which he brought to be
again returned with him, he mounted his Horse, and departed.

Afterward it was intimated unto the English Ambassador, That he might, if he
pleased, receive Audience of the Great Vifier; But his Excellency,
uuderstanding in what manner the French Ambassador had been treated, excused
his going, on pretense of an Indisposition of health. Howsoever, the Venetian
Bailo, and the Residents of Holland and Genoua were contented to be admitted
unto Audience on those terms which the Vizier was pleased to allow. And though
during the time that he was Chimacam, and bore other inferior Offices, and
Charges of Trust, his behavior was gentle, affable, and civil; yet I fear,
that now having changed his Office, he will have altered his humor, and that
his Greatness will have en-creased his Pride, Avarice, and Fierceness: thus, no
man knows what another will be, when he shall enter into power.

Dic mihi si fueris tu Leo, qualis eris. And as Magistratus indicat Virum, so
in the actions of his management the temper and constitution of this great
Person will be discovered. And thus having given a short Account and Character
of this present Vizier, his future Acts and Monuments must be the Subject of
other Pens.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF THE TURKISH EMPIRE CONTINUED, From the Year One thousand Six
hundred Seventy six, to the Year One thousand Six hundred Eighty six.

By Sir ROGER MANLEY, Knight.

THE HISTORY OF THE TURKISH EMPIRE CONTINUED, From the Year of Our Lord, 1676,
to the Year 1686.
By Sir Roger Manley, Knight.
THE History of the Turkish Empire, having been transferred to us by Mr.
Knolles very methodically and well, and continued by the deferving Pen of Sir
Paul Rycaut, to the Year 1676, being the Twenty eighth of Sultan Mahomet the
Fourth, now reigning: We have, as well by inclination, as to satisfy the
desires of some Friends, thought fit to prosecute so laudable a Design, by
extending the History of that great Monarchy to our present Times. And though
we may be defective in skill for so Eminent an Undertaking, we shall
notwithstanding add Industry to our Endeavors, and compensate our Failings by
the candor and ingenuity of our Narrative.

Achmet, the great Vizier, being dead in his way to Adrianople, was succeeded
by Kara Mustapha, his Brother-in-Law, aged about fifty, and who had exercised
the office of Caimacan for many years. The Grand Seignior, to indear him the
more to him, married him to one of his Daughters, though very young, not
exceeding five years of age, according to the custom practiced by the Sultans,
to be rid of their Daughters betimes, which are always numerous, by reason of
the multiplicity of their Concubines, and by this means to ease themselves of
the Expense which they are obliged to be at in maintaining them according to
their Quality.

In the same Month of January, the strong Garrison of Canisia, having drawn out
a Party to attack the Isle of Sexin, allarmed all Croatia, by their Military
Executions exacting Contributions, and pillaging and burning such places as did
not submit to their tyranny. The Turks of Newhausel did also ravage the
Country on their side as far as Frystat. But before we enter upon their stage
of War, it may be requisite to say somewhat of the Troubles of Hungary which
preceded, and their causes, and how the Infidels came to be Principals in a War
of Religion between Christians.

The Kingdom of Hungary, being subdivided into Counties, as in England, or
Communities, have right to send their Deputies to the Dyets or Conventions of
the Estates, which ought to be summoned every three years, according to the
Laws of the Kingdom. This Assembly is composed of the Clergy, the principal
Lords, the Gentry, and the said Deputies of the Counties. It has the right of
choosing a Palatine, who ought to be an Hungarian according to the privileges
of the Nation, and to have the entire direction of War and Justice. The great
Lords have so great Authority over their Vassals, that they are looked upon as
so many lesser Sovereigns in their several Territories. They have also great
Revenues, which inables them upon occasion to raise considerable Bodies of Men,
the People in general being strong, active, and valiant, but covetous,
vindicative, and inconstant.

The great Employments of the Kingdom were also invested in the Natives, and no
Strangers were to be imposed upon them, or Foreigners enquartered amongst them;
all which the Emperor, upon his Election to the Crown, was obliged to observe
by the solemnity of an Oath. But on the other side, there being very many
Arrians, Calvinists, and Lutherans in the Country, they added to the aversion
the Natives have to the Germans, having been, as they thought, too severely
used by them; complaining, that they were hindered in the free Exercise of their
Religion, their Churches violently taken away from them, and their Ministers
forced from their Duty. It was farther complained, that the Grandees of the
Kingdom were not permitted to enjoy their Privileges, of which one was, That
none of them should for any Crime whatsoever be convened before any Judges but
those of their own Nation.

Notwithstanding all this, as the Emperor had sworn to maintain their
Privileges, he had likewise promised to derend their Country, which could not
be done against the Insults of so powerful an Enemy as the Turk, without an
Army; and those strangers living ill with the Inhabitants, and they again
shutting their Towns against them, occasioned infinite Violences and Disorders
on both sides, which Repugnancy was the source of all the Troubles in Hungary.

The Emperor, beginning to suspect the fidelity of the Hungarians, by reason
of the obstinacy wherewith they refused to lodge his Troops, began seriously to
think of securing the Kingdom to himself, which being perceived, he augmented
by that Precaution the hatred which the Nation had conceived against him; which
was re-doubled by the refusal of his Generals to withdraw their Troops out of
their Fortresses. These Grievances did so far agitate these Spirits, already
jealous and diffident, that they at length resolved to shake off a Yoke that
seemed so insupportable. Many great Lords by their particular Interest were
glad to entertain this aversion, which might serve for the Execution of the
Designs they had already formed. And thus the Spirit of revolting did
insensibly diffuse it self through the whole Kingdom, and the general aversion
grew to that height, that they of the Religion said openly, that they would
rather live under the Domination of the Turks than the Tyranny of the Germans,
whilst one of their Preachers did dare maliciously to insinuate, That these
Infidels would at least grant them the liberty of their Religion; whilst the
Dutch would rack their Consciences, under pretense of reforming them.

The Emperor being informed of these murmurings, thought it expedient to
secure the Lower Hungary, and so strangle the Rebellion in its birth. Their
reiterated pressing to have the German Troops removed out of the Kingdom, gave
him just cause of jealousy: and besides, he would not lose the expense of all
his toyls, and those vast charges he had been at in fortifying the Frontier
places, and entertaining Armies capable to oppose the Invasions of the Turks.
Finally, he judged it absolutely necessary, to reduce a Nation to their duty,
that gloried in their disobedience to his Orders: being a King is no farther a
Sovereign, than whilst he obliges his Subjects to pay obedience to the Laws,
and his Commands.

And thus in short we have showed the cause of this Revolt (which yet last) on
both sides, and though perhaps this digression may seem foreign to some, yet,
being the Turks have been so mainly concerned as to become Parties in it, we
thought it reasonable to subjoyn it to their History.

And now to come nearer to the matter in hand, we will say somewhat of the
Maxims of these Infidels, which will give us some light into their Policies;
And first, it is a fundamental one to keep their Men perpetually employed; for
Idleness ingenders indigested Humors in the Politic, as well as the Natural
Body, which renders it infirm. Another Maxim is, that they do never employ
their Forces more than in one War at one time, unless against weak Princes; Nor
do they desire to continue long in Arms against the same Enemy, unless
constrained by their constancy, to the end they may not grow too warlike and
expert; but leaving them by Treaties and Pacifications to their ease, keep
themselves still employed, and consequently disciplined, and their Sables from
rusting, by continual managing of them. They moreover never break out into a
distant War, before they have composed Affairs with their Neighbors. Thus when
they transport their Armies toward the Frontiers of Persia, they make Peace
with the Princes of Europe, and so on the contrary. But the unhappy Europeans,
giving them more opportunities by their diffention to enlarge their Empire than
any other, they, as well out of Ambition, as an irreconcilable Enmity to the
Name of Christ, pursue the same with equal violence and hate. Hence it was,
that though they had a Peace with the Emperor, they did not cease to
countenance and assist his Rebels in Hungary underhand with their Forces and
Protections, receiving them, when closely pursued, into their own Quarters,
where, being followed by the Imperial Troops, several Hostilities were
committed by them, which produced in some time an open rupture between the two
Nations. The Emperor, to hinder this Commerce betwixt them, dispatched
Meninsky, his Interpreter for the Oriental Languages, to the Port; with
instructions to discover whether the Hostilities which were committed upon his
Subjects, were done by command of the Ministers at that Court? But he could
effect nothing. He had indeed had Audience of the Vizier at Adrianople, who
only told him, That the Grand Seignior would send a Chiaux of his own to his
Imperial Majesty, who should inform him of his Intentions.

The Emperor hereupon dispatched an Express to Count Schaffgots, his Envoy in
Poland, with orders to endeavor to break the Negotiation of Peace betwixt that
Crown and the Sultan, though this Precaution proved of no effect, the Treaty
betwixt those Potentates being signed presently after, and very seasonably on
the Poles side, who, having an Army scarce of 15000 Men, were surrounded near
Zorawno, by well night 200000 Turks, who yet gave them Peace when they least
expected it, though upon Conditions then not ungrateful, though afterward
quarreled at. The Transilvanians did also join with the Malcontents, for
Prince Abaffi, having discovered a Conspiracy against his Life, in April, and
suspecting the Germans to have designed it, it contributed much to engage him
against them. About the end of this Month the Bassa of Buda was strangled by
order of the Grand Seignior, perhaps by reason of his immense Riches; for they
found two Millions of Money, which was brought into the Sultan's Treasury.

In the beginning of August, there happened an Encounter betwixt the
Malcontents and the Croats, where the first were worsted; but the Turks at the
same time pillaged a Town near Raab, putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword;
and 4000 of these Infidels, having gained the Passage of the River Hydrousk,
upon the Frontiers of Croatia and Styria, ravaged the Country even to the Gates
of Papa, of Vesprin and of Legrat, driving away a great number of Cattle, and
burning a great many Houses.

Prince Abaffi, finding that the Grand Seignior did approve of the assistance
he gave the Hungarians sent them fresh Troops, with twenty pieces of Cannon.
Their Army being commanded by Count Wesselini, their Palatine, amounting to
16000 Men, designed to besiege Zatmar and Kalo, which Major General Smith, who
commanded the Germans, perceiving, he sent a Convoy with Artillery and
Ammunition to the first of these places, which was defeated and taken by the
Malcontents. But my design not being to describe this War, I shall only
mention it, as far forth as I find the Turks, whose History we write, concerned
in it. Upon conclusion of the Peace in Poland, the Hungarians had sent thither
to engage part of the Troops which that King had disbanded, to their Service,
and obtained 6000 of them, commanded by the Count of Boham, who joining with
the Hungarian Horse, defeated Smith, with part of the Imperial Army, who
designed to obstruct their Conjunction with Wesselini; which however being
effected, they could scarce suffice to withstand General Kops, in so much that
being assured that the Peace was not only concluded betwixt the Poles and the
Turks, but that the Palatine of Culm was sent to Constantinople to see it
ratified, they also deputed one of their principal Officers to endeavor to
oblige the Grand Seignior to turn his Arms against the German Empire. But being
the Turks were in actual War with the Great Duke of Muscovy, they would not
(being already engaged against so powerful an Enemy) entangle themselves in a
new War: And yet this Envoy obtained so much, that Orders were sent to the
Bassaes of Buda, of Belgrade, Waradin, and other Places in Hungary, to assist
them with all their Power. And they were assisted by them, for these Infidels,
not content to send Troops to join with them, they themselves made several
Incursions in their favor. Four hundred Men of the Garrison of Nieuhausel took
several Prisoners by Neutra, and beat the Hussars of Comorra who would have
opposed them; two thousand Turks entered into Croatia, and having spoiled the
Country about Zaklholm, they defeated a party of Imperialists near Carlstat.
And thus these Infidels made War without declaring it, pretending they did not
violate the Peace by these particular Encounters. But the Emperor being of
another opinion, dispatched Hoffman, his Secretary of State and War, to
complain to the Grand Seignior, how his Bassaes did daily assist his Rebels,
against the purport of the Peace betwixt the two Empires. Being admitted to
audience by the Grand Vizier, that Minister made him some propositions for the
renewing of the Peace, but so disadvantageous to his Master, that it seemed
apparent, that the Turks sought for nothing more than a pretense to break. And
yet the Secretary effected so much for the present, that the Bassa of Waradin
was arrested, and afterward strangled by order of the Grand Seignior, who yet
would give that satisfaction to the Emperor upon the pressing Instances of his
Secretary, who also had made rich Presents to all the Ministers of the Port.

Whilst Hoffman negotiated with so little success at Constantinople, the States
of Hungary assembled at Altemburg, where it was resolved, that the Churches
which had been taken from the Protestants, should be restored to them, and many
other points remitted in their Favor, in hopes these concessions might oblige
them to return to their Duty, and break those Engagements they had entered into
with the Infidels. But this passed no farther, for the Ministers endeavored to
elude the said Article, though the most important of all, and therefore the
more insisted upon by the Malcontents. This gave the Deputies of the Diet
subject to believe that though the Ministers of the Emperor seemed to desire
an Accommodation, yet they did not search the means to affect it. And now the
Malcontents, instead of conforming to the Emperor's Intentions, resolved to
elect another King, and some of them proposed one of the House of Frangipani;
though it did not take, being they could not agree upon the choice of their
Sovereign.

The Truth is, the Palatines and great Men of the Kingdom, being weary to see
the Crown as it were Hereditary in the House of Austria, made use of the
pretense of Religion to stir up the People, and oblige them to take Arms for
defense of their Liberty, both Spiritual and Civil. And this aversion was the
true Cause of the War.

The Emperor was no less dissatisfied with the Turks; for General Kops, having
sent complaints to the Bassa of Waradin, for that he had given Quarters to the
Hungarians in Places which depended on his government; the Bassa told him, That
he looked upon them as Passengers, who paid for what they took for their
subsistence, and that consequently he could not look upon their Reception into
his Territories as any violation of the Peace.

The Hostilities betwixt the Imperialists and the Turks did still continue
notwithstanding their Negotiations. Five hundred Christian Horse, commanded by
Azos Benas, advancing toward Erlaw, were cut in pieces by the Infidels.
Another Party, commanded by Colonel Wolping, was likewise defeated by a
Detachment from the Garrison of Newhausel, with the loss of above 200, the
Commander being also much hurt. A few days after this Encounter the Bassa of
that City dyed, which occasioned an Accident which did well-nigh make a rupture
betwixt the Emperor and the Port. The Imperialists had unadvisedly attacked
the new Bassa which the Grand Seignior did send to Newhausel, and defeated his
Convoy consisting of 200 Horse, by way of Reprisal, as they gave out, for the
Damages which had been done them by the Garrison of the Place, without
considering that this new Governor had had no share in these Violences. The
Bassa of Buda sent his complaints of this Affront to the Imperial General, with
threats that he would acquaint his Master with it, and exact satisfaction by
all the ways imaginable. And they did so, for, drawing out strong Parties from
the Garrison of Erlam and Waradin, they resolved to revenge the Insult done to
the Bassa of Newhausel, and marching toward Sando near Butrac, which they
pillaged, they returned with above 200 Prisoners. Count Wourmb, the Emperor's
General, demanded Justice for this Violence from the Bassa of Buda, but
received no other answer, but that what was done was by way of Reprisal.

During these Traverses Count Paul Wesselini dyed, who had Commanded the Army
of the Malcontents with great success, but is succeeded by Count Tekeley,
young, yet wary and brave; who, to this day heads the however broken
discontented Party. The Emperor, who knew that the greatest force of Tekeley's
Army came from Transylvania, would divert Abaffi by re-establishing the Party
of Pedipold, who had formerly contested for the Sovereignty of that
Principality. To this end he obliged that Prince to send four Deputies to
Constantinople, to implore the protection of the Grand Seignior, but the Vizier
caused them to be put into the Castle of the seven Towers, which extremely
surprised the Emperor's Resident, who had orders to Negotiate that Affair
jointly with them. The Emperor being informed hereof, sent Monsieur Jullies
with secret Instructions to the Port, but he dyed by the way, which did not a
little trouble his Imperial Majesty, being all this Envoy's Papers fell into
Count Tekeley's Hands, who drew no small advantage from the lights he received
by them. Hoffman, Secretary of State, returning from Constantinople, was
stopped at Belgrade, being the Bassa of that Place refused to furnish him with
necessaries for the continuation of his Journey. But the Emperor, having
dispatched an Express to the Bassa of Buda to complain of this incivility, he
obtained what he desired. Being upon his departure from Belgrade, he was
informed that the Great Vizier was arrived upon the Banks of the Danube with a
great Army, and design to enter into the Province of Vkraine to fight the
Muscovites; he sent to demand Audience of him, but this Minister returned him
for answer, That he should have it at Constantinople, when the Campaign was
ended. Many and great were the Encounters betwixt the Imperialists and
Malcontents, the latter being for the most part successful, who also ravaged
Moravia, being assisted by 2000 Tartars, and Austria it self, under the Command
of Colonel Josua, sometimes a Priest, known by the Name of Father Joseph, who
turning Protestant, raised 6000 Men at his own Charges, and joining with the
Malcontents, grew formidable even to the Gates of Vienna. But the Imperialists
had also their turn, and Count Esterhasi, Governor of Papa, attacked 2000
Janissaries and 500 Spahies, near Vespren: He took several Prisoners, and
amongst them some Agas. As this Action might cause a Rupture, if
misrepresented betwixt the two Empires; his Imperial Majesty dispatched a
Courier to the Port, to inform the Grand Seignior with the particulars of this
Combat.

The constancy of the Malcontents, and their Intelligence with the Turks did
not a little disquiet the Emperor, but he was more troubled when he heard that
these Infidels were upon the point of agreeing with the Muscovites, which would
put them into a Condition to turn all their power against him. He thought he
could not do better than to divert them by obliging the King of Persia to break
with them, and therefore sent the Baron of Meierburg to Hispahan to negotiate
that Affair.

The Diet of Transylvania being held at Clausenburg, the Grand Seignior, as
well to secure his own Interest, as being dissatisfied with Prince Abaffi's
Conduct, sent the Bassa of Waradin with a strong Army to preside at that
Assembly. But things being accommodated betwixt them, to the satisfaction of
the strongest; the Transilvanian and the Bassa's bordering upon his
Principality, who had been at the Diet, had no other thoughts but of
deliberating with the Deputies of the Hungarians, of the means how to assist
them. The Emperor being advertised hereof, sent Doctor Ferling to
Constantinople, to endeavor to penetrate into the Intentions of that Monarch,
and hinder that the Bassaes should not succor the Rebels. There was also some
underhand dealing with the great ones or the Party, to make their particular
Peace with the Court. Amongst others, the Proposition being made to Palaffi
Imbre, he found so little security in it, that to show his Companions he would
never accommode himself with the Emperor, he treated with the Bassa of Buda,
to deliver all the Places that were in his power, into his hand and possession,
the which also he put in Execution, though his Castle of Devin was in the mean
time invested by Count Strasoldo, before the Turks could enter it, and together
with the City forced by him, 500 of the Garrison being made Prisoners.

The Grand Seignior, to show the esteem and satisfaction he had of the Person
of Abaffi, sent him a Sable as a token of his Favor; and gave Orders at the
same time to all the Bassaes of Hungary, to send Troops and Forces as often as he
should require them, being absolutely resolved to assist the Malcontents,
which he also effectively did.

There had happened a great Battle between the Turks and Muscovites near
Czecherin, which the first had besieged. The Turks had been worsted at first,
but rallying their Forces, they came before Czecherin again, where, after
playing eight or nine Mines, they so furiously assaulted the Place, that they
carried it, with the slaughter of the Garrison, which was great; for all that,
after many Skirmishes, they were forced to retire for want of Provisions.
Hereupon the Great Duke of Muscovy, knowing that the Emperor, not without
reason, apprehended that the Turks would declare War against him, sent him a
solemn Embassy, with offer of making a League Offensive and Defensive with him
against the Infidels; but the Emperor, contrary to the advice of Montecuculi,
who offered to Command the Army in Person, though his great Age might justly
dispense with the Fatigues of War; did not think it advisable to break with the
Port. The Bassa of Buda, being informed of the arrival of the Ambassador, sent
a Chaoux to Vienna, under color of complaining of some Inroads which the
Imperialists had made into the Grand Seignior's Territories, but indeed to
observe the motions of the Muscovites. Nor were they the only motives that
exhorted the Emperor to Arm against the Turks. The King of Poland sent Prince
Radzivil to assure his Imperial Majesty, that he would willingly enter into a
League against the Infidels, if he could resolve to declare War against them:
And however, two Nuntios of the Pope's, who were then at Court, did press this
Prince to determine to prevent the Enemy, who would not fail to attack him,
when a favorable Occasion presented it self; they could not persuade him to
embrace a Proposition so favorable for the repose of Hungary.

The Emperor, not finding himself in a Condition to reduce the Malcontents by
force, resolved to grant what they demanded, provided they would permit him to
levy in Hungary the same Contributions and Taxes which were exacted in the
Hereditary Country. Count Lesley had several Conterences with Colonel Josua
thereupon; and having discussed this Affair, the principal points were agreed
upon, which being communicated to Keski and Tekeley, they promised to procure
the consents of the other Chiefs to agree to them. Upon this favorable
disposition, Lesley had orders to send his Troops into Winter Quarters; but the
precipitate departure of the Emperor to Mazianzel, and thence to Prague, by
reason of the Plague at Vienna, this Affair was interrupted, and all the
measures taken in it changed.

The Plague spread also into the Turkish Countries, and constrained 500
Families to quit Newhausel. These were scarce got a League from the Town, but
they were surprised by five hundred Husars or Haiducs, who took from them all
they had, of which the Turks made great complaints, which seemed the more
reasonable, being they were so civil to Count Lesley's Troops; for he being
obliged by the Contagion to change Quarters, encamped betwixt Chemnitz and
Strigonium, for the better subsistence of his Army. The Bassa of this last
place, to show the Count that the Grand Seignior did not approve of his
Subjects joining with the Malcontents; permitted him to buy such Provisions as
he wanted in the Territories of his Jurisdiction, and also presented him with
several refreshments himself.

The Muscovites pressed the King of Poland to conclude a League Offensive and
Defensive with them against the Grand Seignior; this Prince being not averse to
the proposition, commanded his Resident to represent to the Emperor, that
being he would not engage in this Union, he ought at least to keep a standing
Army in Hungary of 30000 Men, to oppose the Malcontents, and keep the Turks in
suspense on that side, and his Majesty promised to do it; but the want of
Moneys hindered him to execute a Design so honorable for himself, and so
adventageous for Christendom.

However, he endeavored by the Baron of Kaunitz, his Resident at the Port, to
negotiate a Continuation of the Trevis; but the Grand Seignior would not
consent to it but upon condition, that he should be at liberty to assist the
Malcontents at pleasure; which indeed had been to augment the Evil, not heal
it. This Prince was at the same time advertised, that the Port had concluded a
Peace with the Poles and the Muscovites; which gave him occasion to judge that
he had a Design to turn his Arms against him.

Many were the Treaties betwixt he Emperor and the Malcontents, and his
Majesty's concessions such, that the Grand Seignior began to apprehend, that
Tekeley had some inclinations to return to his Obedience to his Sovereign; to
prevent which, he sent a Bassa to divert him, by offering him the Principality
of Transylvania, after the decease of Abaffi. This Bassa had several
Conferences with him and with the other Chiefs of the Faction, and did so well
manage them, with the pretended advantages that they would find by putting
themselves under the Protection of the Port, that eighty of them did promise,
in the name of all the Kingdom, to pay to his Ottoman Highness a Tribute of
eighty thousand Crowns, provided he would powerfully assist them. This Intrigue
being made known to the Emperor, he received it with much Indignation,
commanding, that none of the contrivers of it should appear at the Diet. In the
mean time he ordered the Marquess of Baden, and the Count of Staremburg, to
cause Raab and Vienna, whereof they were Governors, to be fortified, to
prevent any Designs of the Turks upon those Places. And now his Imperial
Majesty did no more question but that the Infidels would transport the War into
Hungary, especially, being informed by his Resident Kaunitz at Constantinople,
that the Port, after many and long Disputes, had at length concluded a
Cessation with the Muscovites for twenty years, upon Condition, that besides
Kiovia, they should enjoy Tripol, Staiki and Vasikow, which had always been
dependants upon Kiovia. The Grand Vizier received these Propositions with joy,
and writ to the Czar thereupon, with very extraordinary Praises and Titles,
assuring him in the name of the Grand Seignior, that he would ratify the
Conditions agreed upon, and that he might send his Ambassador to finish the
Treaty. In the mean time, the Vizier, to prevent the Czar's refusal of sending
another Minister before his, which resided at the Port, (who had been kept
under restraint for some time) was returned into Muscovy, he forthwith
dismissed him, with magnificent Presents for his Master. The Grand Seignior,
who seemed resolved to invade Hungary, staying his removal to Adrianople but
till the return of this Ambassador, did emit a Manifest or Mandate directed to
Prince Abaffi, in these following terms.

Forasmuch as those of Hungary, who have received the Emperor of the Nazarien
Nation to be their Lord, have been spoiled of their Country and Castles by the
Germans, and have therefore had recourse to our Clemency for Protection; it is
Our pleasure, in regard of their long and piteous miseries, and being thereunto
moved by their reiterated Prayers and Supplications, graciously to affranchise
them from the Yoke of that Nation. It Is therefore that We communicate this
Design to you, as Our faithful Minister, by the Bassa Caput, and the Aga
Starra, with express Command, that you make your self forthwith ready to
deliver the Hungarians from the Oppression of their Enemies, with all the
Forces of Transylvania, which shall be immediately reinforced with those of
Valachia, and of the Bassa of Silistria, 13003 Janissaries, and 2000 Horse; for
We have promised them Our Imperial Protection in consideration of the Fidelity
which they have manifested to Us, which We have since had experience of. And
therefore We Command you yet again to neglect nothing that may tend to the
Execution of Our Pleasure and good Will, to the end, that by the Assistance of
the most High and most Mighty God, this People, so cruelly oppressed, may be
forthwith delivered from the Bondage of the unmerciful Germans. In the mean
time, you shall from time to time inform Our great Ottoman Mightiness with what
shall happen, and what you shall have done pursuant hereunto. And you are
farther enjoined to take heed that you do nothing that may be disadvantageous
to Our Incomparable Greatness.

Abaffi, animated with this Mandate, and having received the Orders that were
necessary, drew his Troops together, and joined with Tekeley, with the Turks,
the Valachians and the Moldavians, emitting withal a Declaration, That he did
not Arm against the Interest of Christendom, but only to deliver the
Protestants of Hungary from the Oppression they labored under, by restoring
them in their Possessions and their Churches, and re-establishing them in their
ancient Privileges. He added, that the Grand Seignior had expressly
commissioned him for this Expedition, which he also undertook with the consent
of all the States of Transylvania. He had besieged Zatmar, and pressed the
place vigorously, to show the Defendants that he was in a Condition to force
them if they would not voluntarily Surrender. A few days after, he received a
recruit of 8000 Men, which the Bassa of Buda sent him, who had already
assembled an Army of 40000 Men, which he encamped near the place of his
Government.

Whilst Abaffi was engaged in the aforesaid Siege, 3000 Turks made an Inroad
into Styria near Gratz, where they took a 1000 Prisoners, which they made
Slaves, and very much Pillage. And now the Grand Seignior resolves not only to
assist the Malcontents, but jointly with them to force the Places of Hungary,
until they were in a condition to pay him the Tribute they were engaged to do.
In the mean time, Abaffi, having made his Circumvallation about Zatmar, divided
his Army into four Bodies: The first was composed of the Transilvanians, the
second of the Moldavians, the third of Turks, and the fourth of the
Malcontents, and he forced the City, but could not take the Citadel, which
obliged him to raise his Siege. Many were the Discourses of this Action, and
some gave out, that Abaffi had no mind to take the Place, upon a Surmise, that
the Grand Seignior pretended it should be delivered into his Hands upon
Surrender. However it was, it is certain that the Bassa which commanded the
Ottomans at this Siege, sent great Complaints to Constantinople against this
Prince, which obliged him to return into his own Country, lest his Enemies
should take advantage by his absence. Thus this great Army vanished, as well by
the misintelligence of the Chiefs, and the rigor of the Season, the Winter
approaching; as by the Vigilance of Count Caprara, the Imperial General; who,
though he was not able to fight the Enemy, did notwithstanding perpetually
incommode them with Parties and Detachments. Tekely hereupon having pillaged
and burnt Kalo, except the Citadel, which he garrisoned, put his Troops into
their Winter quarters. But the Turks, to finish their Campania would surprise
the Castle of Pettinia, upon the Borders of Croatia, but their design being
discovered, the Militia of the Country drawing into a body, forced them to
retire.

On the side of the Christians, the Winter was spent in fruitless Treaties and
Contestations betwixt the Ecclesiastics and Seculars; save that the Empress
was crowned Queen of Hungary, which was effected with great Magnificence and
Pomp. On the other side, the Turks having agreed with the Muscovites, the Grand
Seignior resolved by the Council of his great Vizier, to carry his Arms into
Hungary; in order to which, vast Magazins were made at Belgrade and other
places of his Obedience. He sent such Bodies of Men thither, that the Soldiers
were forced to lie in Tents and Baracks. Hali Bassa, being sent thither in the
Spring with Moneys to pay these Forces, behaved himself with so little
Prudence, that he had well nigh occasioned a great Mutiny amongst them. In his
review of them he caused the Spahies to pass before the Janissaries, who being
extreme jealous of their rank, mutinied, and threatened to kill him. To repair
this fault, he would restore them to their Precedence, but the Spahies took
also their turn to mutiny; nor did he appease them but by a considerable
gratuity above their pay. Besides these, the preparations for War through all
the extent of the Otthoman Empire were so vast, that they did not suffice only
to protect the Malcontents, but to attack that of Germany, and now they lay a
Bridge over the Danube, and another at Zolnock, over the Teys or Tibiscus,
capable of bearing their great Cannon.

Tekely, however well informed of the Designs of the Port, did notwithstanding
agree to a prolongation of the Trevis with Count Caprara, which was ended the
last of March, to the first of July; but the Malcontents slighting the Treaty,
did in the beginning of May seize upon all the Corn which the Emperor had
bought upon the Frontiers of Poland to furnish his Magazins withal. The Turks
also attacked and forced a Commissary who conducted many Wagons laden with
Cloths for the Imperial Army.

Tekely, being to act as soon as the Treaty was ended jointly with the Turks,
judged it proper for him to take his measures from the Bassa of Buda, in order
to which he went to wait upon him with a Convoy of 3000 Horse; the Bassa being
advertised of his arrival, gave his Son orders to go and receive him at the
Gate of the City, at the Head of the Spahies, or Horse, to complement him in
his Name, and to regale him with refreshments according to the Custom of that
Nation. Being entered the City, he was received by the Bassa at the head of all
his Janissaries, and after reciprocal Civilities, he assured him of the
Protection of the Grand Seignior when ever he had need of it. His Troops in the
mean time were lodged near Pesth along the River side in Tents. The Bassa,
causing Tekely's Bonnet to be taken off, put another after the Turkish fashion
upon his Head, enriched 'with precious Stones and a Heron's Feather. He further
made him a Present from his Otthoman Highness, of a Sable, a Pole-ax, and a
Colors. He gave him also upon his own account, some Horses richly harnessed;
some affirmed that his Civilities passed further, and that Tekely was declared
King of Hungary by the Bassa, who put the Crown upon his Head, and clothed him
in Royal Habiliments, in presence of all the Officers of the Garrison, and
several Bassaes, who had been expressly commanded thither to assist at the
Ceremony.

Tekely having satisfied his Ambition, would now content his Love. He had sent
his Secretary to Vienna to obtain the Emperors Permission to espouse the
Princess Rogotski. His Imperial Majesty, thinking he ought to manage this Count
in a time wherein he endeavored to make him break his Engagements with the
Port; and further perceiving that it was but a Civility done him, and that if
he did not consent, they would effect it without him, granted his Envoy what
ever his Master had desired. Tekely gave immediately advice hereof to the
Princess, and prayed she would not defer his Happiness any longer. She, who as
she had not desired to see him a King, but to prevent her descent into a lower
rank then that wherein Prince Rogotsky had placed her, sent him word that he
might come to Montcatz, where, after his return from Buda, their Marriage was
celebrated with great Pomp. This Lady was Sister to Count Serin, a Roman
Catholic, but in some few Weeks after her espousals with Count Tekely, she
turned Protestant, and thereupon discharged all her Catholic Servants. This
gave so much suspicion to the Imperial Court, that no more good was expected
from that Alliance; nor were they deceived, his Attachments to the Port being
too strict, and his jealousy of the Germans too great. He for all that treated
still with Count Saponara the Emperors Envoy, but it was to amuze him, in
expectation of the Turks taking the field to second his Designs. The Emperor
did also employ Count Serin to his new Brother-in-Law, but he, instead of
serving his Sovereign, entered into new Engagements, as shall be declared
hereafter.

In the beginning of July, the Tartars made inrodes as far as Trinchein, from
whence they brought more than 18000 Slaves, killing all the old men, from whom
they could expect no Service. The Palatine would have raised the Militia of the
Country to oppose them, but the Protestants refused to obey his Orders, until
the Emperor would give them Satisfaction upon all the points that had been
proposed in their Name the last Diet. About the end of the same Month his
Imperial Majesty received Letters from Count Albret Caprara, which signified to
him that he had received Audience from the Great Vizier, and that he could not
obtain a prolongation of the Trevis, but upon the following Terms, viz.

That Hungary should be put into the same state that it was in the year 1655;

That this Kingdom should pay his Otthoman Highness a Tribute of 50000 Florins
yearly;

That the Fortresses of Leopolstat and Gratz should be demolished;

That Neutra, Schults, Eckof, and the Isle of Schults near Presburg, with the
Fort of Muran, should by a formal cession be delivered to Count Tekely;

That a general Amnesty or Act of Oblivion should be granted to the
Malcontents, and that they should be re-established in all their Goods and
Privileges.

These Conditions seemed so harsh to the Emperor, that he rejected them,
preferring a War before such a sordid accommodation.

The Cessation betwixt Tekely and the Germans being ended, he joined Forces
with the Turks near Pest, consisting of 40000 Men. He passed near Caschaw or
Cassovia, and turning suddenly, surprised the Castle of Zatmar, and in a few
days after took the City. Cassovia and other considerable Places ran the same
fate. And now the Turks act by themselves, Tokai rendering it self to them as
soon as they appeared before it. The Emperor sent to complain to the Bassa of
Buda of these Acts of Hostility; but he answered, that he did not pretend to
break the Cessation in attacking these little places, which were but
receptacles of Robbers, the Inhabitants thereof daily pillaging his Highnesses
quarters. Thus the strongest seldom fail of pretenses to oppress the weakest.

On the other side, the Bassa of Waradin having besieged Fileck, pressed it
hard. He had already assaulted the place thrice, and though Strazoldo, Caprara,
Staremberg, and the Palatine advanced with design to relieve it; yet all these
Generals, however brave, durst not attempt the Enemies Lines; and it might be
said, that they were come so far but to be witnesses of the Victory, by the
loss of the place which surrendered it self. The sixteenth of September, the
Hungarians entered into the Turkish Service, but the Germans and all the
Officers were made Prisoners, because they refused to sign the Capitulation,
and the Women were made slaves, the Turks lost 2000 Janissaries in this siege,
which obliged them to treat the Officers with so much Rigor, and perhaps the
place which they demolished was therefore razed, or rather to prevent the
Malcontents (who demanded the possession of it) from enjoying it.

The said Bassa, after the forcing of Filek, went with 40000 Men and invested
Lewentz and Neutra, which surrendered to him upon demand: And Tekeley, taking
advantage of the absence of Strasoldo, rendered himself Master of the High-land
Cities. The Bassa of Buda advanced also toward Gran, with design to make a
Bridge there over the Danube, to the end he might open a passage into upper
Hungary.

Tekeley, seeing himself Master of the upper Hungary, especially of the Cities
thereof, which by their Mines of Gold made up a great part of the Revenues of
the Crown, and now having refreshed himself in these rich Quarters, he caused
Moneys to be coined, representing on one side his Effiges with this
Inscription: Emericus Comes Tekeley Princeps Hongariae; and on the reverse
these words: Pro Deo, pro Patria and pro Liberate. The Winter being now
advanced, he sent his Secretary to Vienna to offer a Cessation of Arms. This
proposal was not disagreeable to the Imperial Court, but they could not resolve
to leave the said upper Cities in his possession; his Deputies represented
thereupon, That their Master could not part with them without the consent of
the Bassa of Buda, but that he would favor the Imperial Workmen, and suffer
them to labor for his Majesty's profit, provided he might be allowed a
Compensation for his Protection, if not, he threatened to destroy the said
Cities, worth 200000 Crowns yearly to his Imperial Majesty; after some
^^tercation the Cessation was again agreed upon, and the Directors of the Mines
were obliged to pay Tekeley six hundred Crowns every Week; this Trevis did not
hinder several Encounters betwixt the Christians and Turks. A Party of Hussars
in November defeated a Detatchment of the Infidels, commanded by an Aga, who
was killed there. There were found in his Pockets nineteen Letters of the Bassa
of Buda's, writ to Officers of that Nation, ordering them to cause the Grand
Seignior's Subjects to pay the Extraordinary Tribute, which his Highness was
not accustomed to exact, but when he undertook some great War. Thus the
Emperor was ascertained that the Turks design was to draw together all their
Forces to attack him the next Summer. He was confirmed in this Opinion by
Letters from his Ambassador at the Port, who writ to him, that the Grand
Seignior was gone from Constantinople on the twenty eighth of October to
Adrianople; that the great Vizier followed him the next day; that Count Tekeley
had complained at the Port of the Bassa of Buda, accusing him for having
separated his Troops too far from his, and so hindered him from making such
considerable progresses in Hungary as he might otherwise have done; and
finally, that the said Bassa was summoned up by the Grand Seignior to answer
this Accusation.

The great Vizier, being expected at Belgrade, the Emperor sent Satonara to
meet him, to obtain more favorable Conditions than those proposed to Count
Albret Caprara. He sent also Count Martinitz to the Pope, and to the other
Princes of Italy to solicit for Succors in this extremity. Count Kaunitz was
likewise sent to Bavaria, and many other principal Men to the other Electors
and Princes of the Empire, to invite their assistance in so pressing an
Exigence. To these Count Wallestein, a Knight of the Order of the Golden
Fleece, was deputed into Poland, to be present at the Diet of Warsaw, to
negotiate a League with that Crown; and the Emperor commanded all his
Regiments to be completed and augmented, his Garrisons to be fortified, and
his Magazins to be filled for the better opposing so powerful an Enemy.

Whilst both parties are preparing for a War with great Vigor, it will be
conducible enough to the design of our History, to subjoyn an Accident which
had like to have made an absolute breach betwixt the French and the Ottoman
Port. Monsieur du Quesne, having given chase to seven Corsairs of Tripoly, The
French force the Tripolins into the Haven of Chio.
forced them into the Haven of Chio, placing themselves under the Cannon of the
Fortress, to cover themselves from the Enemy, but to no purpose, although the
Governor of the Place sent the French Admiral word, that they were under the
Protection of the Grand Seignior; for Monsieur du Quesne, in prosecution of his
Design, when he was come up with them, fired upon them, the Governor did the
same upon the French, but to no great purpose, being they were so ill treated,
that three of their Vessels were disabled, and all of them forced under the
very Walls of the Fortress, one of the Bastions of the same being likewise
almost ruined. Du Quesne not yet satisfied, blocked them up there, until the
News thereof was come to Constantinople. The Alarm was great there, and they
were upon the point of falling upon them of the French Nation, until their
Ambassador there declared, that what was done, was in no wise acted against
the Ottoman Port, but only against the aforesaid Corsairs, who took the Vessels
belonging to his Masters Subjects, and therefore ought not to be received into
the Grand Seigniors Ports. Though this did for the present in some sort appease
them, yet the Capitain Bassa was sent to Chio with eight and forty Galleys, to
make a Peace betwixt the French and the Tripolins; much time was spent before
it could be effected, which being concluded, they of Tripoli had liberty to
repair their Vessels.

For all this the Ottomans were highly offended with the damage Du Quesne had
done at Scio, The Grand Seignior highly offended thereat.
and demanded reparation from the Ambassador of France at Constantinople, who
at first would give no hearing to such frivolous Complaints, but fearing the
French Merchants in Turkey might be incommoded by it, he since offered to make
them a Present of his own accord, not by any order from the King his Master.
The Turks judging the said Present too small, were in no wise satisfied with
it; so that the Ambassador thought fit to make some addition to it, which did
as little satisfy them. In the mean time Du Quesne being sailed out of the
Archipelague, there came an Officer to the Ambassador, telling him, that the
Grand Seignior was in no wise satisfied with his Offer, as being in no wise
proportionable to the damage committed at Scio, adding, that the whole Empire
was offended at it: But yet in consideration of the ancient Amity betwixt the
two Nations, they would pass it by, provided the damage were repaired,
alleging by way of similitude, that if our party sued a Thief into a Friends
House, and that sorhething were broke in it, the Pursuer would be obliged to
pay it. The Ambassador replied, that the harm which was done at Scio might be
repaired with less than what he had already offered of his own, which was more
than he could well bear, and that the Grand Seignior and Great Vizier ought to
be satisfied, that he ruined himself to conserve the Peace betwixt the two
Empires, because he much feared, lest the Present he had offered might not
please the King his Master, to whom he never, had made any mention of it. The
Turkish Officer hereupon being angry, told him in the Name of the Grand
Seignior and Great Vizier, that they were resolved to put him into the seven
Towers, and the French Merchants in Prison; the Port knew very well that the
French King did never disapprove of what his Ambassadors did. The Grand
Seignior and his Vizier were not to be mocked by a present of a few Clocks,
Watches, Stuffs, and Diamonds of small value, in compensation of damages of
seven hundred Purses, arising for the murder of 400 Turks, the ruin of a
whole City, the destruction of many Mosques, and the Castle. The Ambassador
replied, that he was not at all surprised at his Choler, but that he should
have been afraid if he had spoke in these Terms to the Chiaux, whose substitute
he was; that the lives of Turks had never been valued so high; that the number
of the slain at Scio was not so great, and that there had not been one man
killed, if they had not received the Pirates there with the French Prises; and
finally, if they would put him into the seven Towers, he would not come out of
it but by express order from the King his Master, and that he was ready to
follow him thither. The Officer being moved with the Resolution of the
Ambassador, assured him, he should not fail to be conducted thither the next
Morning, whereupon he replied, he could not believe it, because he knew the
Sultan was just, the Vizier prudent, and his King a powerful Prince. The Turk
interrupting him here, told him, that he talked as if he had 100000 men with
him, to whom the other added, that his Master had 400000 men, and always
victorious, and as for him, he spoke like one that would be as good as his
Word. The Vizier, highly offended with the Ambassadors Discourse, caused him to
be told by a Kiaia, that he must add to his Present, or that he should be
obliged for his Reputation to send him to the seven Towers: but the Ambassador
continued positive. Sometime after, it was signified to him, that the Vizier
had obtained a considerable abatement of the 700 Purses, and that he would be
content, if besides the Clocks and rarities, he would yet give 40000 Livers in
Diamonds; but the Ambassador returned answer, that in complizance to the Great
Vizier, he would yet add 1200 Crowns, and no more. Some time after, the Vizier
let him know that he would speak with him himself, which the Ambassador denied,
because he had already refused him the Sofa. However he did so far comply as to
go to him about the end of May, But is appeased.
where after many Contestations about increasing the Present, the Turks
descended to 350000, and afterward to 100000 Crowns, to 10000, and finally
agreed upon 15000 Livers. The Turkish Officers having had the most trouble in
the World so to content the Grand Vizier that the French Ambassador should not
be displeased. A few days after, the Moneys, together with the Presents,
consisting of a small thread of Diamonds, two -- a Venice Looking-glass,
Fautevil.
five Chamber Clocks, one Carpet, ten embroidered Habits, some pieces of Cloth,
Satins, and other Stuffs were exhibited, whereby this affair of Scio was
accommodated, but not the difference about the Sopha, which continues still.

The Emperor being sufficiently satisfied of the Designs of the Mahometans
upon Hungary and Austria, ordered all his Colonels to complete their Regiments
by the first of May, and gave out new Commissions for six Regiments of Horse,
and several of Foot to be raised with all imaginable speed. These Levies were
not only designed to reinforce the Army of Hungary, but also to incamp near
Vienna, to cover that City and the Neighboring Countries from the Invasion of
the Turks. He further commanded the Peasants of all the Neighboring Villages
to cut down Oaks to make Pallizadoes, and to carry them to Vienna for the
repairing of the Fortifications of that City. The Inhabitants of the Suburbs
had likewise order to empty their Cellars, that they might be filled with
Earth, but deferred the pulling down of the Houses until they were assured that
the City should be besieged. Ambassadors being also sent to the Electors, the
Circles, and Princes of the Empire, to invite them to join with his Imperial
Majesty for the Preservation of Hungary. Conte Albret Caprara received likewise
order to return from his Embassy, unless he could obtain a Prolongation of the
Trevis; but the Grand Seignior would not suffer him to depart, but obliged him
to follow him to Adrianople, and thence to Belgrade, causing him to be observed
with much exactness. In the mean time, as also the whole Winter, the Citizens
of Vienna had been trained and exercised with great diligence, the better to
enable them to resist, in case of a Siege, which their fears and the Enemies
braggings gave them just occasion to apprehend. They also were commanded to lay
up Provisions for twelve Months; and not only they, but all the frontier Places
were stored with Magazins, the Isle of Schut was also fortified, where it was
exposed to the Enemies Surprises, and a Regiment of Foot added to defend the
entry against the Infidels. There was also a great Redoubt made on the further
side the Danube to cover the Bridge lately made, and to favor a retreat in
case of necessity. At the same time there happened a Skirmish betwixt the
Hussars of the Garrison of Comorra, Papa, Vesprin, and Raab, against a
Detachment of the Army of the Turks, who lost 1200 men in the Encounter. The
Plague rages in Hungary.
But if the Wars caused great ruins in Hungary, the Plague laid it well nigh
desolate; it raged in Cassovia about Papa, and in many places possessed by the
Turks; insomuch that Tekely was obliged to retire to Montcats to his Wife, and
to choose another Place than Cassovia to convene the Diet which he had summoned.
He had by Cessations and Treaties kept the Imperial Court in suspense,
proposing his Mediation at the Port for a Prolongation of the twenty years
Trevis, for which end he sent Schirmay his Secretary with others thither. Nay,
the Propositions he made were thought so reasonable, that the Baron Zaponara
was sent with new instructions to carry on this Peace as well with Tekely, as
with the Vizier of Buda; but whether Tekely, instead of advancing this Affair,
did not retard it, or that the Turks would not consent to any further
Prolongation of peace with the Emperor, this commerce vanished. This last
Obstacle was sooner believed than the other, by reason of the detention of
Caprara in Turkey, and the vast Preparations of the Ottomans, who would listen
to no Cessation but upon Terms so disadvantageous that his Imperial Majesty
could in no ways assent to.

Zaponara, who had spent much time with Tekely, being returned the beginning of
January to Vienna, reported, that the Count Tekely having been sick at
Montcatz, he had entertained many fruitless Conferences with him, and now he
was well, and seeing no hopes of an accommodation with a man who was entirely
engaged with the Turks, as was visible by all this advances, he could continue
there no longer. And this gained credit by the appearing of a certain project
granted by the Grand Seignior to the Hungarians, which we will also insert, to
satisfy the curious, though we dare not assure them that it was exactly such:
1. That the Count Emmeric Tekely of Ritsmark, of the Illustrious House of
Gabriel Bethelem, shall be installed King of Hungary, and in case he come to
dye, the Grand Seignior will take the Queen his Wife, as well for her Person as
Goods, into his Protection. 2. That after the Death of Count Tekely and his
Children, the Hungarians shall choose such a King as shall seem good to them,
provided they acquaint the Ottoman Port with it. 3. That the Present, which the
Hungarians have promised to give to the Ottoman Port, shall never be raised in
any manner whatsoever. 4. That they shall entirely enjoy their Privileges,
Liberties, Immunities, and Franchises for ever, without any diminution. 5. That
they shall be protected by the Turks from all their Enemies, who, or
whatsoever. 6. That the Turks will religiously observe the Conditions of Peace
made with the Germans at St. Gothard, so far as they concern Hungary. 7. That
the Jesuits, as disturbers of the public Repose, shall be driven out of
Hungary, and never received there again. 8. That the Tributes of the surrendered
Places shall never be raised; but that what they have contributed to the Turks
and to the Hungarians hitherto, shall continue to perpetuity in the same state.
9. That the Treasurers of Hungary shall have free passage through all the parts
of the Ottoman Dominion. 10. And when they carry to the Port the Present of
Honor which they have promised, or shall come there upon any other occasion,
they shall be received magnificently. 11. And finally, the Present of 40000
Crowns, shall, as is already mentioned, never be augmented.


These and several other Passages filled the Imperial Court with diffidence,
notwithstanding Tekely's fair words, and yet the Negotiations were still
continued, the Emperor having proposed to an Officer that Tekely had sent him,
to grant to his Master the Sovereignty of all he possessed in upper Hungary,
with several other Demeanes, so willing they were to have detached this subtle
and brave Enemy from his intelligence with the Turks, who at length declared,
that he could not separate his Interests from the Port, which obliged Hoffman
and Saponara to retire.

The 18 of January, 6000 Turks entered into Canisia, most Janissaries, and the
Garrisons of Belgrade and Newhausel were also augmented with great numbers of
this Militia. The 25th of January, 5000 Tartars arrived at Buda, who were sent
to Newhausel, and 12000 Foot came in their place, who by reason they could not
lodge in the City, encamped at the foot of the Walls.

Upon this News order was given to break the Ice round the Isle of Schults to
keep the River open, the better to oppose their irruptions of the Turks and
Malcontents. The Ice, which was of an extraordinary thickness, broke the
wooden Bridge at Vienna, with the loss of three Charets laden with Wine and
Oats, which fell in. The Inhabitants of the aforesaid Isle of Schults were by
reason of the oppression of the Inperialists forced mostly to abandon it; the
noise whereof being spread through the Kingdom, had like to have caused a
general Insurrection.

The beginning of February, the Turks entered into the Isle of Serin in Croatia,
where they committed great disorders. One of their parties defeated a Convoy
with Munitions of War, and other provisions designed for Zendra, Lossenhilts
who commanded the same, being slain.

The Turks, who provided all things necessary to attempt the siege of Vienna,
laid in at Buda vast stores of Ammunition and Materials to make Bridges of; nor
were they less vigilant on the other side, the Suburbs were demolished round
within a hundred paces of the City, and the great Island was fortified and put
into a Condition to lodge a whole Army. Redoubts were built at both ends of the
wooden Bridge, which is on the side nearest the City, and the Bridge which
traversed the great Arm of the Danube was taken down to build another on the
other side of the Favorites, with several other small Forts for its security:
Two hundred thousand pallizadoes were sent from Newburg to serve for the
Fortifications of Vienna, whereof every Citizen undertook to maintain a
Soldier well armed in case the City should be besieged. All Boats were also
stopped at Vienna, being designed to transport Provisions and Ammunition into
Hungary.

However Tekely continued to block up the Places which remained in the
Emperors Obedience in upper Hungary, and to shut up the Passages that no
relief might be sent to them; he did not cease howsoever to testify to the
Deputies of the Loyal Countries, that he did desire with Passion that his
Imperial Majesty would grant him reasonable Conditions, that might restore him
to the obedience which he owed him; and to make it appear to all the World,
that he had not taken Armns against him out of any animosity, he released an
hundred German Prisoners without Ransom, and sent to assure the Emperor, that
he had dispatched Fagou and Sirmay, his two chief Ministers, to the Port to
endeavor to obtain a prolongation of the Trevis. He spoke to the same purpose
at the Diet he had convened, and released yet again eighty Prisoners which he
had taken at Tokay, and gave Count Herberstein his Liberty upon his parole.

The Turks, about the later end of February, made a new attempt upon the Isle
of Schults with 1000 men of the Garrison of Newhausel, conducted by an
Hungarian Renegade; but the Ice, which was not strong enough, breaking, a great
number of them were drowned: the Imperialists took many Prisoners, and amongst
others the Sub-governour of Newhawsel's Son. A Turkish Officer that offered ten
thousand Dollars for his Life had his Head chopped off. At the same time several
new Troops of the Infidels arrived, who lodged at Essek, and along the Rivers
Savus and Dravus. They armed several Brigantines, which vogued upon the Danube,
to hinder the Imperialists to send any Succors or Ammunition to their
Garrisons. The Baffa of Belgrade received orders to repair an ancient Palace
seated upon a Hill near the Town, to lodge the Grand Seignior there, who
designed to stay there during the Campania.

In March, Tekely, with a considerable body of the Turkish and his own Troops,
endeavored to Surprise Tirnaw, to cut off the Communication of the Fortress of
Leopolstat, with the River Waagh. But this Enterprise failing, this Count
summoned a second Diet in upper Hungary, though those of the Loyal Counties
were admonished not to appear there. At the same time Colonel Albert Caprara
advertised the Emperor, that the Grand Seignior offered to prolong the
Cessation if he would surrender to him the Isles of Schults, of Serin, and of
Raab, with the Fortresses of Raab and Comorra; but his Imperial Majesty did not
think it expedient to accept of such disadvantageous Terms, which rendered the
Turks entire Masters of Hungary, and gave them an open passage to the very
Walls of Vienna. After that, it was impossible for this Minister to write any
more to his Master, for the Turks kept so strict a Guard about him, that he was
suffered to have no Communication with any, for fear of informing the Emperor
with the vast preparations of War which were made in all the extent of the
Ottoman Empire.

The Turks at the same time surprised a Quarter of the Dragoons, killed forty,
and took many Prisoners; they lodged 15000 men in the Neighborhood of Essek,
to hinder the Imperialists from burning the Bridge, and by that means hinder
their Passage into the lower Hungary. The Emperor on the other side caused all
his Forces on the side of the Rhine, except four Regiments which he left for
the Frontiers, to march toward Vienna and Hungary. His Troops also that were
in Bohemia under the command of Count Taff, were commanded that way.

In the beginning of April, the Grand Seignior sent the Bassa Zanko, who,
though he had but one hand, was one of the best Officers in the Turkish Army,
to Cassovia, to command under Count Tekeley. At the same time the Emperor made
a great Detachment of all the Regiments that were in Hungary, to march toward
Treinschin, under the Command of the Count of Schults, to go meet a great Body
of Succors which came out of Poland under the Conduct of Lubomirski. The Count
Herberstein had Orders to pass into Croatia with all the Troops of the lower
Austria, to oppose the Enemy, who pretended to make an Irruption into that
Province.

The Grand Seignior showed so much passion for the War of Hungary, that to
complement him, all the Ministers of the Court would particularly contribute to
it. Every one offered to entertain a certain number of Soldiers at their
proper charge, and did. All the Ministers of the Port contribute to the War of
Hungary, as also the Ladies.
The Great -- himself raised 400 men. And the Ladies no less forward, raised
great sums for the Expedition, especially the Asseki or Sultan Queen. His
Highness being resolved to march in the beginning of the Spring to Belgrade,
sent the Emperor according to the Practice of the Sultans, Mass d^armes.
a -- to mark that he declared War against him. The Great Vizier being ready to
move, sent 1200 Camels laden with Powder to Belgrade before him, together with
Orders to the Bassa of the said place, to build a Bridge upon the Savus, which
was immediately put in Execution.

The Emperor Received at the same time an express from Count Wallestin, March
31.
his Ambassador in Poland, The Emperor and King of Poland make a League
Offensive and Defensive.
which informed him that he had concluded with that King a League Offensive and
Defensive against the Turks. This News did most sensibly affect the Imperial
Court with Joy, because they had doubted much of the Success of this
Negotiation, the King of Poland having showed some Dissatisfaction, in that the
Emperor would never assist him, nor enter into any concert with him, whilst he
alone supported a War against the Turks; but Interest took place of Passion.
The King of Poland, like a prudent Prince, foresaw, that if the Turks conquered
Hungary and the German Neighboring States, he should be scarce able to resist
so powerful a Neighbor; which made him resolve to oppose his Designs, and to
join his Arms with the Emperors. The Conditions of this mutual alliance
briefly were, that the Alliance should be not only defensive, but also
offensive against the Turks, and last till both found their assured repose;
neither should make Peace without consent of the other; his Imperial Majesty
should entertain 6000 Men, whereof 40000 should keep the Field, and the rest be
put in Garrisons; the King of Poland will lead 40000 under his own Conduct: he
shall be also obliged to recover his Places in Podolia, Wallachia, and Vkrania,
whilst the Imperialists shall do the same by those Places they left in Hungary;
The Poles shall furnish 6000 men to act against Tekely. Other Articles not
immediately regarding the present War, are purposely omitted.

There had been ill observed Treaties and Cessations continued betwixt the
Tekelists and Germans, and now the first besiege the Castle of Donavisth in the
County of Sepusa in upper Hungary, C. Caprara having by message represented to
Tekely, Tekely breaks the Cessation.
that it was a violation of the Trevis; He answered, that he only did it
because C. Joanelli, to whom the Place belonged, had refused to come to the
Diet of Cassovia, so frivolous an excuse made it apparent to the Emperors
Ministers, that they were not too much to confide in the Promises of this
Count, and that he would take his advantages as often as occasions presented
themselves. Some few days after, he had News that his Princess was brought to
bed of a Son at Montcats, whereupon he sent one of his chief Officers to Prince
Abaffi, to invite him to Christen the Babe, which he accepted of, and sent one
of the principal Lords in Transylvania to supply his Place.

In the beginning of May, May 3.
the great Vizier came to Belgrade with the Van of the Ottoman Army, and more
than 300 pieces of Cannon, besides Mortars to throw Grenades of a prodigious
bigness. At the same time the Troops that were to compass the Imperial Army,
began to draw toward Presburg, where Count Rabata encamped them as they came,
according to the orders he had received from his Imperial Majesty, who had
chosen the great Plain of Kirtzer, joining to that City to take the general
review of his Army, which being drawn into Batalia in two Lines, extended four
Miles in length; seventy two pieces of Cannon, with the General of the
Artillery, Count Starenberg, were placed at the head of the Infantry, which was
ranged in Batalions, and in such order that they might be perceived on both
sides; they were numbered 20000, and the Horse in two Wings amounted to 12000,
besides 5000 Hussars drawn up on the Right of the German Horse with fourteen
field pieces.

The Emperor arrived in the Camp about Ten of the Clock, preceded by his
Guards, and riding between the Dukes of Bavaria and Lorrain, being followed by
many other Princes and Lords, and saluted with three Vollies of all the Cannon
and Musketeers of the Army. After Mass, the Archbishop of Strigonium read with
a loud Voice the Bull of Indulgence, accorded to such who should fight against
Infidels, and having given his Benediction to their Imperial Majesty's, who
received it on their Knees, and consequently to all the Army, this Prince
caused 500000 Livers to be distributed amongst the Soldiery, which was no less
acceptable to them. The Command of the Forces being given to the Duke of
Lorrain as Generalissimo, the Right wing was conducted by the Duke of
Sax-Lawenburg, the Left by General Caprara, and the Infantry and Cannon by the
Count of Starenberg. With this Army thus composed most of the Emperor's old
and best Soldiery, and under so expert a General as the Duke of Lorrain; the
Court hoped for somewhat extraordinary, though as it will appear they were
disappointed in their Expectation. In the mean time a Council of War was held
to see what might be done before the arrival of the Turks, and after what
manner they should act upon the Defensive when the Enemy did appear. All agreed
that for the Offensive there was nothing to be attempted but Gran or Newhausel,
and that, as they ought to avoid those Enterprises which would cost much Blood,
and weaken the Army, so they seemed to point at Gran as most easy, though
others were for Newhausel for several Reasons. For the Defensive, it was
concluded they must endeavor to defend the Passages of the Rivers Raab and
Waagh. The result of this Council being referred to the Emperor, he judged,
that for the Reputation of his Arms, and other important Reasons, not to suffer
his Army to lie idle the space of two Months time, which they had before the
Enemy could take the field, but left the choice to the Duke, whether he would
attempt Gran or Newhausel? He only recommended to him, that when the Turks
advanced he should take care for the security of the Garrisons, and oppose as
much as in him lay the Enemies ravaging of the Hereditary Countries.

The Army being advanced near Comorra, the Duke having no certain Intelligence
of the condition of Gran, resolved in person to take a view of the Place, which
he did, but being upon the point to resolve its Siege, he was advertised that
the Turks were forming a Camp at Buda, and judging that they might from thence
relieve Gran by Water, (as the Bassa of Newhausel had already done upon the
news of the Christians Design to attempt the place) and perhaps cut off the
Communication betwixt him and Comorra, by posting themselves betwixt this Place
and Gran, he quitted the thoughts of that Enterprise, resolving upon the Siege
of Newhausel as the only choice left him.

This Resolution being taken, June 3.
he sent some Foot toward Gran, and armed Boats down the River, as designing
to burn the Bridge, to gain a belief of his intent to besiege that City, but
wheeling about with his Horse, he marched all that Night and invested Newhausel
the Day following. The Turks seeing this, set the Suburbs on fire to prevent
the Christians approach, who notwithstanding planted their battery, and were
advanced within an hundred paces of the body of the Place, with little loss
save that of Count Taxis, and might probably have given a good account of the
Siege, if the Court, which disapproved the Enterprise, had not sent orders for
them to retire. This command was immediately obeyed, and not without some
Precipitation, the Army returning to their old Camp betwixt Raab and Comorra.
The sudden raising of the Siege seemed strange to some, being the Turkish Army
was not yet ready to appear, and that the Christians were so forward in their
approaches. But the more discerning thought otherwise, because this Town, being
strong and well furnished with all things, the obstinacy of the Besieged might
have wearied the Imperial Troops, and have reduced them to an Inability of
being able to oppose the Ottoman Army when they came into Hungary, and that
therefore it was better choosing the certain, than the hazard of that which was
not so, as was the taking of Newhausel, and to keep upon the Defensive, the
rather being the Polish Army was not ready, nor yet raised; and therefore the
Imperial Army, upon whose Valor depended the Preservation of Hungary and
Austria, was in no wise to be weakened or baffled.

The Duke of Lorrain, having refreshed his Army for some time, advanced with
all his Forces on the side of Raab, having given orders to hasten the Works at
Leopolstat, and repair the Fortifications of Raab and Comorra.

In the mean time, the Turkish Army, composed of all the Nations under their
Obedience, consisting of 200000 Men, advanced into Hungary on the side of
Alba-Regalis, sending 4000 Pioneers before them to dig Pits and Wells in their
passage to furnish all the Army with Water; and the Grand Vizier himself having
passed the Bridge of Essek with the body of his Army, moved toward the
Christian Camp by Raab, with a Resolution to attack it instantly, and oblige
them to a general Battle; his Army was so numerous that they covered the whole
Country from Alba even to the Mountains of Raab, and being come within a League
of the Imperialists, he detached a great number of Tartars to spoil and ravage
the Country out of which the Christians could receive any Subsistence or
Forage, which extremely augmented their wants, which were already but too great.

The Grand Seignior arriving at Belgrade the Third of June, the Sultan Queen
would not stay behind, but accompanied his Highness in his Voyage of Hungary.
At Belgrade he received an Express from the Caimacan, of a great fire at
Constantinople, which had entirely consumed one of the quarters of the City,
and that the Grand Visier's Seraglio had been quite burnt if the neighboring
Houses had not been pulled down to save that sumptuous Building.

Takely having taken his measures from the Grand Vizier, upon whom he had
waited, and concerted with him concerning the following Campania, being
returned to Cassovia, published a Manifest in the Grand Seignior's and his own
Name, that all the Hungarians that would embrace his Party, should be
maintained in their Privileges, Liberties, Goods, Laws, and Religion; but that
such who refused to submit, should have no quarter. This Manifest had the
desired effect, for the Cities of Papa, Tot, and Vesprin, the most remote,
immediately opened their Gates to the Tekelists. The Emperor, fearing that
Neutra would follow the Example of these three Places, commanded Count Schults
the Governor, to draw forth the great Guns, the Arms and Stores, and to quit
the Place. The same Orders were given to the Hilly Cities, and to the Officers
of the Silver Mines, who all obeyed; a Conduct so extraordinary alarmed all
Hungary. The Cities and Counties declared to the Emperors Commissioners, that
they would open their Gates to Count Tekely, to prevent Fire and Pillage, being
there was no hopes of Succors. To all this, the Hungarians, under their
Palatine Esterhasi's Command, who guarded the Passages of the River Waagh,
about 15000 in number deserted likewise, putting themselves under the
Protection of Tekeley, and the Turks, so that this Palatine with scarce a
competent Guard, was forced to retire to Vienna, because he would not violate
his Faith sworn to the Emperor.

Whilst the two Armies did nothing material, but observe each other, a great
Body of Tartars under the Conduct of their Cham, who was there in Person,
animated with the hopes of Pillage, having examined the Avenues and Fords of
the River Raab, by following it toward its source, passed over by swimming
their Horses, and guided by some Hungarians, they came to Kerment and St.
Godthard, a place famous for the memorable Victory which the Christians gained
from the Turks nineteen years past, far from finding any Obstacles to hinder
them, every thing seemed to favor their Passage. Count Badiani abandoned his
post upon the River, joining with Tekely those Hungarians he commanded; so that
the Enemy entered the Country like a torrent, putting all to Fire and Sword;
and passing the Rabwitz, continued their Devastations. The Duke of Lorrain,
finding the Enemy on both sides, and fearing lest they might cut off his way to
Vienna and the Hereditary Countries, having reinforced the Garrisons of Raab and
Comorra, resolved to retire with the rest not exceeding 24000. And to the end
the march of the Horse might not be retarded by the Foot and Artillery, they
were separated, the Infantry and Canon marching along the Isle of Schut, the
way on the left side of the Danube, being exposed to little Danger; from thence
they came safe to Presburg and Thebes, and passing the River Mark, arrived
happily at Vienna. The Duke, having passed the Bridge of Raab with the Cavalry,
marched to Altembourg, where he rested some time, exposing this little Town to
the Pillage of his Soldiers, as being loath to let their Cattle and Provisions
fall into the Enemies Hands, which would infallibly happen. The Inhabitants
however seemed very dissatisfied to be so used by their Friends, though the
Cruelty of the Enemy, who ravaged all with Fire and Sword, effaced the other
ill, as wholly disproportionable: from thence having passed the Straight there,
they marched toward the Plains of Kitz or Kitzer, where two Months before the
general review of the Army was made.

Cara Mustapha, the Great Vizier, attributing this retreat of the Christians to
their fear, called a Council, where it was deliberated whether he should pursue
them, or undertake the Siege of Raab? But judging, according to the
appearances, that their retreat was no better than a running away, it was
resolved to pursue them; whereupon he presently raised his Camp, and followed
the way the Christians were gone, leaving a body of 12000 near the said Raab,
to secure his Convoys and Provisions.

The Duke perceiving their design, and not judging himself in affurance in the
Plains of Kitz against so formidable a power, resolved to march toward Vienna.
He sent Count Aeneas Caprara, General of his Horse, to acquaint the Emperor
with it, and inform him of all things. The Duke following, had sent his Baggage
before, but it happened, that a Troop of Tartars, mingled with Turks, and
conducted by Hungarians, to the number of 3000 in all, having swum over the
River Leithe, and hid themselves in a Wood betwixt the Villages of Petronel and
Elend, fell suddenly upon them, and attacking some Regiments on the left Wing,
which followed the Baggage, with dreadful cries and howlings, did so surprise
them with the terror of so unexpected an irruption, that it brought them all
into confusion, and by reason of the Dust, which was so thick that they could
not distinguish Friend from Foe, not knowing which way to turn, they broke
their Ranks, and communicated their Disorder to the very Regiments that
followed. In the mean time these Barbarians, taking the ordinary Advantages of
their impetuousness, flew some of them upon the Pedees, Carters, and Servants,
which they sacrifice to their Cruelty and Fury, whilst the rest plunder the
Chariots and Baggage. Many Officers lost there their Equipages, and amongst
others the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg, the Prince of Croy, and Aeneas Caprara, all
General Officers, had all their Plate taken away.

This Accident put the Army into a prodigious Consternation, it could not be
comprehended, that the Duke having left the Enemy behind him, this same Enemy
should possibly have got before them, and by ways nearer and shorter intercept,
and so boldly attack their Baggage, which was thought secure under the Convoy
that guarded it. As soon as they had recollected themselves, and that the Duke
had considered the disorder part of his Army was in, he sent fresh Troops to
second the first, and to assist them to repel the Barbarians; yet so as to
avoid a general Engagement, which he greatly apprehended. The Tartars seeing
the Christians rally, began likewise to draw to a head; but the fear to see
themselves deprived of their Prey, obliged them to retire, and to run away with
no less precipitation and speed than they used in their Onset. The Duke caused
them to be pursued by his Light Horse, who took some Standards, being unwilling
to engage with the gross of their Troops, as well being this Detachment was
supported by the Avant-guard of the Army, as not to retard his march to Vienna,
the which he continned afterward without any Interruption. The Chevalier of
Savoy, Brother to the Count of Soissons, was lost in this Confusion, for being
too far advanced with his Dragoons that followed him, a Tartar knocked him from
his Horse with his Sable, and thinking him dead, did alight, and heaving him
cross his Saddle, with his Breast upon the Pomel, pressed him so there, that he
bruised his Stomach. A little after, this Prince being relieved and conducted
to Vienna, and however his Wound in his Head was not mortal, his dislocated
Stomach could not bere-set, so that he died in a few days. Prince Thomas of
Aremberg, and Count Mellini were slain in this scuffle, though the common loss
of either side was not great.

The Emperor, being informed of the present State of Affairs by Count Caprara,
was greatly irresolved, not knowing what to do upon so important and pressing
an Occasion. He immediately caused his chief Ministers to be summoned to know
their Sentiments, and all unanimously counseled his Majesty to retire from
Vienna. They now only deliberate what road or way he ought to take, some
advised he should go over the Mountains without passing the Danube, and so
strait to Campililium, being the shortest and easiest way to Lintz; but the
Enemy being on the same side of the River, the other was preferable, as less
subject to Danger, and the violent pursuits of the Enemies Cavalry, who would
make more way in a day, winged with the hopes of such a purchase, than the
Court could make in four. This last advice being approved, was ordered to be
put in Execution, and all things, as far as was possible in such Confusion,
prepared for the Journey.

The Noise of this retreat was quickly made public. The Wagons which arrived
in Confusion to carry the Baggage sufficiently published it, and at the same
time filled the City and Neighborhood with so much Terror, that it might be
thought no body would stay when the Emperor was gone. All the Horses and Carts
that could possibly be found, were hired to fly away with, many Ladies of
Quality being forced to put themselves into despicable Carriages, little
conformable to their Condition. Houses stored with rich movables, and
furnished with Wine, Corn, and all sort of Provisions, were abandoned, nothing
but what was precious and most portative being saved. The Air was also filled
with the Sighs, the Tears, the Lamentations and the Cries of the Multitude, as
if the Enemy had already rendered themselves Masters of the City.

The same day, July 7.
being the seventh of July, about eight at Night, their Imperial Majesty's with
the whole Court passing through the Palace Gate, went over the Danube, and lay
that Night at Cronenbourg, a pleasant Town two or three miles distant from
Vienna, being guarded by 200 men, who returned to Vienna the next Morning. The
next day there followed such a prodigious number of Coaches, Carts, Chariots,
Horsemen, Foot, etc. as if they had designed to render the City a Desert. They
were thought to amount to 60000, so pressing they were to avoid the danger that
so eminently threatened them. And yet it was computed, that no fewer stayed
behind fit to bear Arms, besides the Garrison, the Women and the Children. This
flight continued several days, but those that went last, fell for the most part
into the danger they would avoid, the hands of the Tartars. Many others did so
overload their Chariots, that they had scarce passed the Bridge over the
Danube, but their Wheels or Axeltrees breaking, they were left in the way in
the Night, not knowing whither to turn themselves.

Count Aversberg, having been dispatched by the Duke of Lorrain to the
Emperor, to inform him of the success of the Battle of Petronel, found him at
Cronenbourg, and greatly rejoiced the whole Court. Upon the first News of the
Regiments that had been baffled, they had published at Vienna that the General
had been slain, the Horse defeated, and the Tartars at the Gates of the City.
Thus all were greatly revived, that the Evil was less than they had believed it
to be.

Whilst their Imperial Majesty's continued their Journey to Lintz, Lorrain
entered Vienna, where his first care was to pacify the Disorders and Confusion
there. July 8.
Count Sterenberg arrived there the same day, and immediately fell to work with
the Counterscharp, fortifying the whole Works, and to plant Palizadoes. As they
had not apprehended a Siege, the Generals found the more to do. Lorrain
endeavored however to provide for all things before the arrival of the Enemy,
July 11.
who began since the 11th to show their most advanced Troops near the City. The
same day Starenberg's Regiment arrived, as also a thousand commanded Men, who
advancing swiftly before the rest of the Army, entered the City.

And now they burn the Suburbs, July 12.
which was continued the day following, the Citizens themselves carrying Fire
into their own Houses; and in the Evening there was a great Skirmish near the
Palace called the Favorite, where the Turks advanced to discover. All the
Infantry arrived the 13th, July 13.
and Lorrain made them all march into the Counterscharp, except eight
Batallions which he retained in the Tabor, the better to defend that Post where
he resolved to stay until the Powder and Bullets expected from Lintz were
arrived; which being effected, and the Ammunition conducted into the Arsenal,
July 14.
he caused the rest of the Foot to be removed into the Town, together with
Dupigni's Regiment of Horse, the whole composing a Body of twelve thousand Men.

The Tartars had committed infinite Ravages and Cruelties in that vast extent
of Countries round Vienna for several Leagues. It is their custom to run before
the Army, armed only with a Javelin, and to burn and sack, and spread Terror
over all where they find no resistance. They kill such as fall into their
Hands, or traffic them away as Slaves with the Turks. No place escapes their
Inhumanity, not the most retired Places of Forests, the impenetrable Dens of
wild Beasts, or the most obscure retreats of Valleys. There is nothing these
Barbarians do not discover by means of their Bloodhounds, the use whereof is
common amonst them.

But now the gross of the Enemies Army approaching, a great number of Wagons,
some with four Horses, and others drawn with Oxen, and very many Camels laden
with Baggage, began to range themselves in form of a Croysent or half Moon
about the City, extending from the Danube behind St. Mark, along the Suburbs of
Leopolstat, and the neighboring Villages, even to Neudorf. At the same time
the Turks opened their Trenches on the side of the Imperial Gate, and lodged
there in spite of the Cannon of the Town that endeavored to hinder them.

The Duke of Lorrain, having ordered Affairs at Vienna, retired with his Horse
and Dragoons over the Bridges, and camp'd there; he would gladly have kept some
Foot with him, but having considered the greatness of the Enemies Strength, the
Works that were to be made, the distance of Supplies, and the diminution which
the continuance of a Siege would make in the Garrison, he resolved to leave all
his Infantry with the Governor, who most earnestly desired it.

The Duke, before he left Vienna, had designed to continue in the Tabor, (or
Isle of St. Leopold) and so conserve the Communication with the City. Tabor is
an Island of a League and a half long, environed with the Danube. This Isle is
full of Houses of Pleasure, Gardens, and Groves. But upon a true Survey of the
Place, his Highness could not think it defensible, the Waters being so low,
that the Arm of the River which formed this Isle was almost every where
fordable, so that whole squadrons might pass at once without breaking their
Ranks: for this and other Reasons, the Isle being likewise exposed to the
Enemies Artillery, they were obliged to repass the Danube.

The Turks by this time had pitched an infinite number of Tents about the City,
and making a lodgement in Rottenhoffs Garden, where they had first opened their
Trenches, and raised a great Battery, they thundered without ceasing to favor
their Works, which they continued winding and turning. The besieged on their
side covered themselves with Gabions and sacks of Earth to hinder the effect of
the Enemies Cannon; they also raised a good Battery on that side, and all the
Engineers and most knowing Officers being distributed into the several Posts,
were continually employed to render their Cannon serviceable, and fortify the
Places the most exposed to the Enemies Fire, which cost many of them their
Lives,

The Turks, moved to see that the Christians were Masters of the Bridges, made
an attempt to force Conte Schultz who had the guard of them. This General
seeing his forlorn and advanced Guards pressed, he sent other Troops to sustain
them; but the Infidels having already a great body in the Isle of Tabor, the
Christians were forced to fly over the Bridge. The Enemy planted their
Standards there, but the Cannon laden with Cartrages flanking that place, and
the swift firing of the Dragoons, ranged along that Arm of the Danube,
constrained them to retire, though themselves were exposed to the Enemies great
and small shot. The Dragoons pressed them with so much violence in their
retreat, that they took their Colors. The Turks upon this occasion lost a
Bassa, and many of their Janissaries. General Schultz himself was wounded here,
as also the Conte of Salsburg, and a Polish Major slain. In the mean time the
Turks, having possessed themselves of St. Leopold's Isle, shut up the City on
all sides. They made Bridges upon that Arm of the Danube which runs next the
City, not only to communicate with their Camp, but to hinder the descent of
Boats They burnt the Favorite, and reduced all the Palaces of the Grandees to
Ashes. As soon as the heat of firing began to cease in the Suburbs, the Turks
filled them with Janissaries, so that none could enter or go out of the City;
which much troubled the Duke of Lorrain, who could no more give or receive
Intelligence from the besieged, though so near and in sight of them.

The Camp of twelve thousand Men which the Grand Vizier had left near Raab to
favor the Convoys, continued there still under the command of the Bassa of
Buda; but he was relieved by Prince Abaffi, being himself obliged to go to the
Siege of Vienna. There was also a Camp almost always betwixt Fickem and
Altembourg, upon the same account, that is, to keep open and assist the Passage
of Convoys which came from Buda, and the Neighboring Parts.

The Turks being posted in St. Vlrick's Suburbs, run their Trenches within
fifty paces of the Counterscharp and Batteries. They also advanced their Cannon
there, but before they discharged them, they caused a little Bag of Linen,
carried upon the Spur by two Spahies, to be thrown into the Counterscharp. This
contained a Letter from the Grand Vizier, written in the Latin and Turkish
Languages, the Explication whereof follows.

TO You, Generals, Governors, and Noble Citizens of Vienna, We make known by
these Presents, according to the Orders we have received from the most Serene,
most Mighty, most Redoubted, and the Mightiest Emperor of the Universe, our
Master, the true Image of God upon Earth, who, by the Grace of the most High,
in imitation of our holy Prophet Mahomet Mustapha, to whom be Honor, Glory,
and Benediction, has rendered himself, by the multitude of his Miracles, the
greatest of all the Sovereigns of the one and the other World, and most August
of Emperors, who, having caused our innumerable Armies, protected always by
Divine Providence, to come hither, We are resolved to take Vienna, and
establish there the Cult of our Divine Religion; it is therefore, that before we
draw our fatal Cymetars, as our chief End is the Propagation of the Musselman
Faith, and that is expressly commanded us by the Laws of our Holy Prophet, first
and before all things, to exhort you to embrace our Holy Religion, we do hereby
advertise you, that if you will cause your selves to be instructed in our
Mysteries, you will find the Salvation of your Souls therein: If you will
deliver up your City without fighting, whether you are young, or more advanced
in years, Rich or Poor, we assure you that you may all live there peaceably. If
any desire to quit the place, and go live elsewhere, no harm shall be done him
in his Person or Goods, and he shall be conducted with his Family and Children
whither he pleases. For such as will rather stay, they shall live in the City
as they did before. But if you suffer us by your Obstinacy to take the City by
force, we shall then spare no Body; and we swear by the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, who neither has, nor never will have his equal, that we shall put all
to the Sword, as is ordained by our Law. Your Goods will be pillaged, and your
Wives and Children will be carried away Slaves. We shall pardon only such who
shall obey the Divine Orders.

Given at the Emperors Camp before Vienna, the 8th of the Moon Regeb, in the
year of the transmigration of the Prophet, 1094.

The Turks continued to deepen their Trenches to four foot, and shot many
Bombs, but without any considerable effect, most of them bursting in the Air,
except some few, which falling near the Walls, burnt an old Playhouse, which
being of Wood, it was feared lest the Flames should reach the Convent and
Church of the Augustines, which occasioned its sudden demolishing.

There happened also another Accident, but more dangerous. The Fire having
seized upon the Scots Church, consumed that stately Building, as also the House
of Frendorf, lately perfectioned by the Bishop of Heliopolis, Suffragan to the
Archbishop of Vienna. The flame proceeded to the Arsenal, full of Powder and
Munitions of War, which would have proved fatally ruinous, if Conte Serin had
not caused the Gate, which they had in vain attempted to unlock, to be broken
open, and immediately removed the Powder, which a few moments delay would have
rendered impossible. But on the other side, they could not hinder the Fire to
consume the Palaces of Aversberg, Traun, and Palsi, which were reduced to
Ashes. A Boy of sixteen years old, habited like a Girl, was accused as guilty
of this burning, being found thereabouts, who was by the enraged People
immediately pulled in pieces, so that the truth by this precipitated death
could not be made known. This Fire continued three days, which if it had feised
the Powder in the Arsenal, as in the year 1629, the Turks might easily have
entered that way into the City.

Since this Accident, the Infidels shot that way that they saw the flame
appear, and endeavored to ruin the Court and the Lion Bastions, with the
Ravelin betwixt both; but the Besieged bravely opposed them with their Sallies
and Countermines. They wanted good Engineers in the City, insomuch that Hasner,
a Captain of the Garrison, who from a private Soldier was by his Virtue come
to that degree, being observed to note all the faults the Miners committed in
their Works, the conduct of them was committed to him, wherein he acquitted
himself with good Success.

Count Starenberg, who was Governor General, was all this while busy in
repairing the Walls, deepning and palizadoing the Ditches, and in raising the
Earth which was drawn out of the Ramparts and Retreats, to cover themselves
when the first Posts and Parapets were thrown down, which afterward
contributed much to the defense of the Place.

The Turks advanced their Works on the Court and Lebel Bastions side, carrying
them on within thirty paces of the Counterscharp, notwithstanding the continued
fire of the Besieged. They also discharged their Cannon and Mortars without
ceasing, and entirely ruined the Emperor's Palace, the Houses and neighboring
Churches.

Count Starenberg, who neglecting the danger, visited every moment the Posts,
to see if his orders were faithfully executed; upon his going out of the
Court-Bulwark was hurt in the Head with a Brick-bat, which a Cannon bullet had
forced. He was immediately carried to his Lodging, and so happily cured, that
in three days he found himself able to quit his Bed and his Chamber; during his
hurt, the Count of Daun was also incapable of acting, being dangerously sick of
a violent Fever, which reduced him to extremity; so that he was not out of
danger before the fourteenth Day of his Malady. But the Counts Serin, Souches,
and Schaffenberg, Brigadiers of the Garrison, applied themselves with so much
care for the defense of the Place, that the Enemy drew no advantage from this
misfortune.

In the mean time, the Duke of Lorrain, finding himself obliged to remove
farther from the City, his first care was to molest the Enemy. Count Dunewald,
Lieut. Marshal of the Field, was sent to Krembs with his Regiment, the two
Rements of Lodron, and Keri, Cravats, Kemgsegs Regiment of Polish Dragoons,
were likewise dispatched thither, not only to keep the Bridge, which was of
great Importance, but to hinder the Enemies Forragers, and oppose the Parties
of Tartars which ravaged about. And here we may wonder at the Politics of
these Miscreants, who burn and ruin all the Forrages, and all the Victuals,
which should make them subsist, and which would have very much accommoded their
Army in the distresses they afterward found themselves.

Lorrain likewise sent Orders to Count Hermestein, who was in Styria, to
advance to the Frontiers on the side of the Mountains, to attempt the Enemies.
He gave also the same Orders to the Garrisons of Raab and Comorra, and to
Castel's Dragoons who were at Newstat. He sent likewise to survey
Closterneubourg, which is an Abbey upon the Danube. The Turkish Camp was but
two Leagues off, and according to the report made to him of the Place, he
judged it necessary to conserve this Post, which he did, by putting Foot into
it, the which might descend the Danube upon occasion, if the Enemy came to
attack them with Cannon.

He dispatched an Officer to Raab, July 17.
for the Regiments of Grana and Baden, which the Duke of Croy brought him with
so much diligence, that parting from Raab at Midnight, they came in 24 hours
to Presburg, and the next day to the Camp.

Count Lesley was sent to Krembs to conduct the Artillery thither, and to
expect the Bavarians Auxiliaries, those of Saxony and Franconia, and some other
loose Regiments in the Empire.

After these first Dispositions, which depended on the Duke's care, his
thoughts more nearly regarded the Court, and the relief of Vienna. He judged
the safety of this Place of such Importance, that he thought it not fit it
should be pressed, and reduced to Extremity, to search the means of saving it.
He knew that the tediousness of Negotiations, and the distance from whence he
was to expect things necessary for this grand Enterprise, would make him lose
much time, whence he concluded that he could not begin too soon. He was not of
the Sentiment of others, who imagined that the Garrison of Vienna was capable
of defending it self against such extraordinary Troops, and cause the Grand
Visier's Army to perish, without any Succor. But he knew that the want of
Necessaries do sometimes produce great Changes in the best Resolutions, that no
body could answer for the Governor's Life; nor for the principal Officers, nor
for the constancy of the People, accustomed to an easy Life, and who had never
seen the Wars but in paint. He knew that the Maladies inevitable in Sieges
might occasion untoward Accidents. He saw the Desolation of the Emperor's
Hereditary Countries, which did daily augment. He heard no other Discourse but
of Places sacked, and People carried into slavery. In this Continuation of
Cruelties and Violences, he judged it reasonable to use all means to stop the
Rapidity of this Torrent. He persuaded himself, that being at the head of the
Army, he ought not to deferr representing all these Particulars to the Emperor
by some Person of Merit and Trust. He gave this Commission to Count Taff, whom
he dispatched to Hassau, and he continued the same Offices during the Siege,
for all the Obstacles and Oppositions which he Encountered, whether by the
Difficulties of Passages, or the slender success of his Negotiations.

The Besiegers, who had drawn two parallel Lines, the one on the Court Bastion,
and the other on the Lebel side, joined them with another of Communication, and
placed above thirty pieces of Battery against them. And though Vienna was
environed with eleven Bastions, the Enemy attacked and battered but three
during the whole Siege, which obliged the Governor to use all his care for
their defense.

The Grand Vizier took his Post on that side that regarded the Ravelin
abovementioned, with the Aga of the Janissaries, called as he was, Cara
Mustapha, his Kiaia, and the Bassa of Romelia; this last was slain with a
Cannon bullet. The Attack on the right side toward the Court Bulwark was
committed to Hussan, the Bassa of Damas, who, though brave, had been beaten by
Prince Ragotzki in Transylvania, by Count Souches at Lewentz, and by the King
of Poland at Cocczin. This Bassa was seconded by the Serasquier, Janisary Aga,
or Colonel of all the Foot.

Achmet, Bassa of Temiswar, commanded the left Attack toward the Lebel
Bulwark. He had been Tefterdar, and died the Third of September of a
Dyssentery. Hussan Bassa, who had also been his Highnesses Treasurer, was put
in his Place.

I shall designedly pretermit the particulars of this Siege, as to the
Approaches, Trenches, Batteries, Minings, Counterminings, Attacks, Sallies, and
Contests, though carried on with admirable Valor and Constancy on both sides,
as being particularised in the Journals of that Siege in all Languages, and of
little or no use to my Countrymen: And yet I shall omit no great Action, nor
any thing that may be required of a just Historian.

Great was the firing on both sides, and a Granado falling on the Spanish
Ambassadors Palace, reversed all his Stables. It would have done yet more harm
without the Governors Precaution, who had commanded 250 men, under their
particular Officers, to march incessantly through the Streets to quench the
artificial Fires occasioned from their Bombs or otherwise.

Being, as we mentioned, close shut up, Count, Starenberg was the more desirous
to communicate Councils with the Duke of Lorrain; for which end he offered 100
Ducats to any that would but carry him a Letter, without the hazard of a
return, but no man presented himself upon this occasion; and yet a Spy sent by
the Duke arrived happily in the City, having traversed the four Branches of the
Danube with his Letters hanged in a Bladder about his Neck; by these the
Governor was informed, that he should certainly be relieved, and that the
Troops of the Circles of the Empire, and the Hereditary Countries with which
the King of Poland, who was at Olmitz, was to join, did daily arrive. In the
mean time some Deserters brought News, and it was seen from the top of St.
Stevens Steeple, that the Infidels were making a Bridge of Boats over the
Danube, a League off, to the end they might pass when they pleased into the
Isle of Prater. Leopolstat.
They knew also that this Commission was given to the Vayvods of Wallachia and
Moldavia, who employed 6000 of their Nation in the Work; but being the Turks
suspected them, as being Christians, and that they were forced, the Vizier
ordered Achmet, Bassa of Magnesia, a City in Natolia, who was camped in this
Isle, and Chider, Bassa of Bosna, who had been Kiaia to the Sultana Asseki, to
attend their Actions, and second them with six thousand Egyptians.

The Baron of Kunitz, who was the Emperors Resident with the Port, being then
in the Camp, sent one of his Domestics with a Letter to Count Starenberg,
which was not very hard to do, though the Turks kept a very strict Guard, by
reason that the Officers and Servants of all the Ministers which resided with
the Grand Seignior, are habited as Turks, and speak the Language of the
Country. The business was kept so little secret, that the News became the next
day the subject of every Conversation. This Indiscretion was the cause that
they could no more profit by this Advantage, the Turks being advertised of this
Commerce by their Spies. Kunitz's Servant being seized upon in his return, was
brought to the Vizier, and seen no more, but without his Letters, which being
wrapped in wax, he prudently let slip into a Ditch, when he saw the Turks come
toward him.

An Order was published by sound of Trumpet, July 25.
commanding all Proprietors of Houses, to keep every one a Man in his Cellar,
to hearken if they could not discern any thumping or removing of Earth, because
it had been noised abroad, that some Traitors had promised to bring the Enemy
through Subterranean Passages into the City. The same day the Turks passing
some great Pieces into Leopolstat upon Boats and Flotes, were discovered by the
besieged, who played upon them with their Cannon from the Ramparts so lukily,
that they sunk two of their largest, with a Mortarpiece, which yet did not
hinder the rest to arrive at Neudorf and Erdorf.

The Cannon on both sides, together with the Mortars, played without ceasing,
and though they ruined the prime Buildings in the Town, they hurt or killed but
very few. The 24th, Nitiski, one of the Engineers, came in great haste to the
Governor, to tell him, that he had seen in one of the Shores of the City,
somewhat that had the Figure of a Man, and that it was to be feared, that the
Turks had found a Passage, and were entered through this Vault, which disgorges
it self in the Danube, and that they designed to surprise the City that way.
The Governor, not being yet well recovered of his hurt, sent Nitski back, with
the Baron of Wels, his Son-in-Law, and Colonel Rumblingen, who was present, to
examine the matter with care; but being they stayed somewhat long, the
Governor, weak as he was, mounted on Horseback. Being come to the place, he
alighted, and entered himself, notwithstanding the infectious smells, into the
hole, having searched all about with Torches, he found that they were Carcasses
that the Executioners men had flead. He very sharply reproved the Authors of
this Inhumanity, having accidentally met some of them, and returned to his
Palace, pleasantly rallying this Pannick fear with those that accompanied him.

The Duke of Lorrain had continued in his Camp by the Bridges of Vienna to
refresh his harassed Cavalry, from the 16th to the 25th of July. He had there
News of the defeat of 800 Tartars by a party of a Detachment which Count
Dunewald Commanded, which rendered these Barbarians more reserved.

The Count de la Tour, the Emperors Envoy in Poland, came to the same Post to
him, to assure him, that that Prince promised to come to the relief of Vienna,
but that he could not be there before the beginning of September.

At the same time the Duke of Lorrain was advertised that Tekely having
assembled his Troops near Tirnau, designed to march to Presburg, that the
Governor of that Castle wavered, and that the City was much solicited to
receive a Garrison of the discontented Hungarians; which obliged him to march
along the Marck to oppose this design, and in the interim he sent 200 men with
Major Okelby, to endeavor to put them into the said Castle with a Convoy of
300 Horse for his Security.

The Duke discamp'd from the Bridges of Vienna, having burnt them, leaving
notwithstanding the Regiments of Savoy and Ricardi to preserve the Forts. Being
arrived at the Mark, he was informed that Okelby with his Convoy were beaten by
a party of the Malcontents; that the City had received a Garrison; that they
were by order of the Grand Vizier preparing a Bridge for the Communication of
both Armies; that Tekely had 20000 Hungarians, and 8000 Turks, commanded by the
Bassa of Waradin and Pest; and that he prepared to come and besiege the Castle
of Presburg. This design appeared to the Duke of that consequence, that he
believed himself obliged to march thither notwithstanding all the Obstacles
that seemed to oppose him. This resolve was however a great while contested. He
considered the difficulty of the ways, the Enemies Forces much superior to his;
the danger of receiving a check, in a time when the Emperors Forces were to be
preserved for relief of Vienna. On the other side, he foresaw that the
Communication of the two Armies at Presburg did put the Enemies in a Condition
to join their Forces to pass where they pleased, and to hinder the Conjunction
of the Arms of Poland, or oblige them to tedious Circuits. These Considerations
made him determine to oppose the Designs of Tekely. He traversed the Marck the
28th of July with his Horse and Dragoons, being in all eight thousand Horse,
and two thousand Poles, commanded by Lubomirsky. A party that appeared a League
from the River, was forced back, the Imperialists continuing their march to the
Lanes that descended to Presburg. Night being come on, Prince Lewis of Baden,
and the Baron Mercy were detached with all the Dragoons to force the narrow
Passages, and gain the tops of the Vineyards, which they did without any
Opposition, having a sight of the Enemy in the plain below. The General upon
notice came speedily there, from whence he observed two Camps posted at some
distance from each other. He caused his Horse to advance, which he had left
behind the narrow Passages, to be ready upon Occasion, and in the mean time
caused Okelby to enter the Castle with two hundred Men, commanded anew for
this Enterprise.

At break of day, the General commanded Prince Lewis of Baden to inspect the
Suburbs, where some Malcontents did appear. Upon his advance, the Enemy
retreated into the City, and abandoned the said Suburbs without resistance.

This happy Success, and that in sight of the Enemy, seemed an Argument of
their Weakness, and occasioned the summoning of the Town, which, in the
Surprise it was, seeing the Imperial Army at their Gates, and the Garrison of
the Castle reinforced, immediately surrendered, deliberating no longer than was
necessary to give means to the Garrison of the Malcontents to retire to their
Camp; which did not happen, for one part of them was cut in pieces when they
were out, and the other made Prisoners in the Town.

After this advantage, the Duke was resolved to attack the Enemy, who were
advanced in Batalia within three quarters of an hour of the City. He gave
Prince Lewis of Baden Orders to seize with his Dragoons the Vineyards and
Gardens at the head of the Suburbs, and to extend on both hands from the Danube
to the foot of the Mountain; whilst the Horse, commanded by Count Caprara,
descended by the same Vineyards to embattel themselves.

The Enemy on their side made some motions of coming up to the Imperialists,
and detached some Parties to begin the Skirmish; but the Duke would not Engage
them before all his Troops were in Battel-array. As soon as the second Line was
formed, they began to advance; which occasioned the Malcontents to change
their Countenance, for whereas they had appeared, as if designing to bring the
business to a Battle, much Dust appeared in the Rear of their right Wing, as
also the left, and removed farther off, which seemed to be occasioned by
retiring Troops, which also proved so; all the Line which stood opposite to the
Imperialists, wheeling and separating into a perfect Retreat.

Those who were on the Lorrainers right, and had a Party of Polanders in
opposition to them, finding themselves pressed by their Ayantguard were
entirely routed, being chased with considerable loss, until they had gained a
Wood, and passed a Brook two miles off, they there rallied on the other side,
and obliged the Troops that had pressed them to a stand. On the left, another
detachment of Poles, seconded by some German Squadrons, and the Regiment of
Palfi, charged the Enemy with so much Vigor, that having broken them, they
killed and took betwixt five and six hundred of them. They seized on above a
thousand Wagons with Baggage, and pursued them toward Tirnau with so much
heat, that they forced some of them with great Confusion into the Woods, and
others into the Danube. The fear was such, that they fled on all sides until
they had passed the Waagh.

Tekely, upon the Advice he had of the march of the Imperialists, by the Party
he had beaten the Night before, he retired in the Night with the greatest part
of his Horse and all his Foot, leaving but few of his Men with the Turks, who
would retire as he did, resolving to expect the Germans. This Action produced
some misunderstanding betwixt the Tekelists and the Infidels, who separated
with little satisfaction from each other; but they reunited since by order of
the Grand Vizier, as was found by their intercepted Letters. The Duke in the
mean time caused the Timber, the Planks, and the Boats prepared for the
Construction of the designed Bridge to be destroyed; and afterward returned to
the Marck.

The Siege, Barbarians, and ask them in scorn to give them part in the
Divertisement of their Ball, being they had given them that of their Music.
And the Ball did truly follow, but the Leapers were on the Christians side: For
these Infidels having sprung a Mine, which they had newly dug, under the Posts
and Pallizadoes of the Counterscharp, the Earth, with a good part of the
Pallizado, and about ten of the Defendants were blown up, The Turks taking
advantage of the Opportunity, used all their might to render themselves Masters
of the Counterscharp, by the breach they had made in it. The Fight was hot, and
the Slaughter great. The Confusion and Disorder grew high, but most amongst the
Christians, which being perceived by Count Serini, and St. Croix, Lieutenant
Colonel to Dupigni, they ran with a hundred Men to their Aid, and employing
them to throw hand Grenades, and other artificial Fires upon the Enemy, so
encouraged their Friends, that they fell with revived Courage upon the Enemy,
beat them back and killed a great number of them, planting the Heads of the
slain in rows upon their Pallizadoes, letting these Barbarians know that
Christian Walls would not tumble with noise of Instruments and showting, as the
Walls of Jerico once did.

A Messenger being sent to the Duke of Lorrain a second time with Letters in
Cyfer, was unhappily taken by the Turk, and his Letters being tied to an Arrow,
were shot again into the Town, with Latin lines affixed to them, intimating,
that they sent this Letter to the Besieged, being it was to no purpose to send
it to Lorrain; being assured, that in the ill Condition the place was in, it
would be taken before the Succors could arrive.

The Governor published an Ordinance, Tartars, being shaved, and in Turkish
habits, found means to save themselves, and escape into the City.

The Turks continued their Labors, and the Advancement of their Works; and to
hinder the Effect of the Bombs which were continually thrown out of the City,
they covered their Trenches with great Beams and Trees, upon which they threw
Sacks of Earth in abundance, which not only closed the chinks, but rendered it
proof against Grenades, as also Musket shot. When this Work was finished, not
only the principal Bassaes, but the Vizier himself came to view the Trenches,
and lodged in them, having their separate Apartments, paved with Brick, and
divided into Chambers, with all the conveniences of great Houses.

There arrived an Express in the Camp, Aug. 1.
which informed the Duke, that the King of Poland would not part from Cracovia
till the 16th Instant; that the Troops of Saxony would have their Rendezvous at
Dresden the 4th, and that those of Frankonia, would not begin to march before
the 11th: These Succors appearing remote, and the duration of the Defense of
Vienna uncertain, his Highness resolved to approach the Enemies Quarters. He
thought that he should be able by the Twentieth of August, with his Forces, as
well Imperialists as Bavarians, and the Troops of Polanders which should enter
into Silesia; to pass the Daunbe at Krembs, and advance with that Body toward
the Heights near the Camp of the Enemies, with design to maintain himself there
till the arrival of the Allies. During this, he might weary out the Infidels,
animate the Besieged in their Defense, and hold himself in a Condition to force
a Post for the relief of the Place, according to the necessity of Affairs. He
sent Count Palfi to Court, to acquaint his Imperial Majesty with the Design,
and press the march of the Troops, which might be got together by that time;
and some other disposal of Boats and Provisions necessary for that Expedition.

After he had dispatched the Count, he was informed, that Count Tekely had sent
Boats to the Turks, that he had passed the Danube, and that they were seen from
Entserdorff, a little Town seated upon that River where the Imperialists had
some Magazins. The Duke marched thither with four Regiments, and thence to the
Bridge of Vienna, where, having learned that the Enemy had possessed themselves
of a small Island, and that they had taken Boats from the Peasants, who had
retired into the said Isle, he ordered the Baron of Mercy to dislodge them
thence, and returned to Entserdorff. Mercy caused his Cannon to advance upon
the opposite shore to the Isle, with the Dragoons of Savoy which guarded the
Bridge, and having broken these Boats with his great Shot, he reduced the Turks
to an Inability of being able to get out of the Tabor or Leopold's Isle.

As soon as Tekely understood that the Imperialists were returned toward
Vienna, he summoned Moravia to pay him Contribution. The Duke being advertised
of it, returned to Ancren upon the Mark, to defend that Province against the
Malcontents. He was informed upon his arrival there, that a party of them had
repassed that River that day, and burnt some Villages. He detached presently
500 Polanders to pursue them, seconding them with some Horse and Dragoons, who
encountering them two Leagues from Ancren, laden with Spoil, they attacked
them so briskly, though far inferior in number, that they killed 500, released
the Prisoners, recovered all the Booty, and took ten or twelve of their
Standards.

The Siege was carried on with no less bravery than it was sustained; and being
several who were out of Employment were necessitous, an Ordinance was
published, intimating that Moneys and Provisions should be given to all such
who would inroll themselves, with assurance they should not be obliged to serve
after the Siege. Many accepted of the Condition, received three Patacoons each
advance Moneys, and were regalled with Bread and Wine, by the care of the
Prince of Swartzenberg, and by the Liberality of the Religious and the
Citizens. Wine never failed, nor indeed fresh Meat for the sick, store of
Cattle having been twice brought in by sally during the Siege. The Magistrates
had by the Governors Order taxed the Ecclesiastics, the Cloisters, the
Citizens, and the Peasants, who were refuged in the City, to furnish for the
use of the Soldiers the hundredth Pint, which was punctually executed, there
being none that refused to pay this Imposition: the greatest Lords and the
Emperors Officers not exempting themselves upon this Occasion.

St. Stephens Steeple, being very obnoxious to the Turks by reason of its
height, and the great extent of its Discoveries, was much shot at by them,
though Solomon, when he besieged Vienna, had declined ruining so noble a
Fabric, upon no other Terms, but that they should put a a Half Moon, the Arms
of that Empire, upon the Spire of it, which was still up. The Sentinel that was
there the 7th, perceived betwixt the River Mark and Moravia, on the other side
the Danube, Fire and Smoke, which lasted till eight a Clock; C. Starenberg
judged they were C. Tekely's Troops, who in passing the Waagh, had skirmished
with the Imperialists, and it proved so, as he found by the return of one of
his Spies, which he had sent to the Duke. The account he gave was, that the
Turks having detatched 3000 Horse to discover the Succors which were arrived in
the Princes Army, out of Saxony, Bavaria, and the Circles, these Infidels fell
into an Ambuscade which was laid for them, and where most of them were cut in
pieces; that an Aga, Count Tekely's Secretary, and an Hungarian Count, since
dead of his Wounds, were taken Prisoners; that the Imperialists had taken a
great number of the Enemies Wagons with Baggage, and that since this
Advantage, many of the chief of the Malcontents were come in to the Duke.

Colonel Heister having passed the Danube at Closternemburg, took four hundred
of the Enemies Horse. On the other side, the Malcontents continued to send
small parties into Moravia, who set fire by Night on the Houses and Villages;
and as it was a hard matter to remedy these Disorders by force of Arms, the
Duke judged that the best way to repress them was by that of Reprizals. He
caused Tekely to be advertised, that he would send Orders to Zatmar, and to all
the Emperors Garrisons, to burn the Palaces and Houses of all them of his
party. This threatening put a stop to these Incendiaries; for he thereupon sent
a Person to Chevalier Labormiski, under pretext of an Envoy to the King of
Poland, to the end he might inform the Duke of Lorrain that he had not
commanded those burnings, and that they should hear no more of them.

About this time, Count Albret Caprara, the Emperors Envoy at Constantinople,
had Permission given him by the Grand Vizier, to return to his Master, and
having passed by Tuln, he had in charge to propose to his Imperial Majesty,
that upon the Cession of Raab he would abandon the Siege of Vienna.

Kotlinski, a Lieutenant, upon promise of the first vacant Company, had been
dispatched from Vienna to the Duke, one from the Deputies of the Council of
State, and the rest from the County Caplier and Starenberg. The first, for they
were of several dates, marked the danger the Counterscharp was in, others gave
an account of the state of the Siege, minding him of the Necessities of the
place, and the Accidents that might happen, and praying him to hasten the
Succors, and these were writ by the Governor. Caplier's Letters
particularized the slain and wounded, finishing with earnestness for Relief,
praying him to consider the Officers, their want of Granados, their stock being
near spent, and the Disposition of the Citizens not to be relied upon. The last
Letter marked, that C. Starenberg was sick of a bloody Flux, and could answer
for nothing, unless Succors were great and quick.

The Duke, who was careful in informing the Emperor, the King of Poland, and
the Elector of Saxony, of all he could learn of the state of the besieged,
failed not to quicken the Auxiliaries, to communicate his Intelligence and
Letters to them. He dispatched Count Caraffa to the King of Poland with them,
and hastened the march of General Sinariski, who was come into Silesia six days
since. This Count had also in charge, to pray his Majesty of Poland to come
with the first Troops, as well for the esteem he had of his Merits, as because
he believed that upon the Kings advance the gross of his Army would follow with
more diligence. After he had dispatched C. Caraffa, he sent the Count
Schaffenberg to the Elector of Saxony, to provide Wagons and Carriages for the
Auxiliary Troops by the way as they should pass. As he did not doubt but that
these pressing Letters would quicken th advance of the Troops, he thought he
was obliged to provide also for the passage of the Danube, and in order to it
resolved to go to Krembs, whereof he advertised the Emperor by an Express.
About the same time C. Starenberg had News from his Highness of the defeat of
C. Tekely near Presburg, as also of the taking of a great Convoy that was going
to the Ottoman Army, and that the King of Poland was upon his march to succor
the Place. This good News infused Joy into the whole City, and was welcomed
with all the Artillery, and the ringing of all their Bells. As every little
Success encourages Soldiers at least to hope, so it fared here. A Scholar
having killed a Janizary, and ripped open his Stomach, found ten Ducats in
Gold in it; and a Soldier having after a stiff Combat disarmed a Janizary, cut
off his Head with his own Sable; Searching him afterward, he found a Girdle
about him full of Moneys, which he hid so well that his Comrades did not
discover it: Being returned into the City, having unstitch'd his purchase, he
found an 100 Sequins of Gold. He was so transported at the sight with Joy, that
he ran like a Madman through the Strees, clapping his Hands, and showing his
Gold to every body, making it appear by his Extravagancies, that he thought
himself happier than the Emperor. His good Fortune gave Courage to his
Companions, upon hopes of the like Adventure, making them good Anatomists and
diligent Waiters.

The Duke of Lorrain left Anneren encampt at Volgerdorp. He there received
Letters from the Count Caplier and Starenberg. The first pressed strongly for
Relief, by reason of the Diminution of the Garrison, and the Ammunitions of
War. The Style of the second Letter was upon the brave, and seemed of a Person
not greatly concerned; but in the three last Lines, being in Cipher, he
besought the Duke for speedy Succors, because the Retrenchments and cuttings
off in the Lebel Bastion were very slight; that his Ammunitions and Officers
failed him, and that he every day lost many of his Men. His Highness returned
him answers full of comfort, advertising him of the state of the advance of the
Auxiliaries, and the certitude of his Relief. In order to it, be quits
Volgerdorp, and marched to Stokerau, the better from thence to discover the
Isles of the Danube, and choose a place for making a Bridge for his Passage.

Some of the great ones were of Opinion, that Vienna ought to be relieved by
the Plain, passing the Danube at Presburg, this Opinion found many partisans,
their reason was that the Army posting it self above the City, would cut off
the Communication of the Besiegers with those Countries from whence they drew
their Provisions; which being done, they judged the Turks would retire, without
the Christians hazarding of a Battle. This reasoning did not want appearance,
if it could be done before the Besieged were too much pressed; but the Enemies
main force consisting in Horse, that of the Imperialists in Foot, the Duke
thought Enclosures preferrable to the Plains; besides, the Allies not being
able to meet at Krembs before the Month of September, many days would be spent
in marching thence to Presburg, and laying a Bridge over the River there, in a
time when the condition of the Siege demanded all their haste. Moreover the
Construction of a Bridge in that place was difficult, especially if the Enemy
detached any strong Parties to oppose them, as they might easily do; insomuch
that the Duke, who had in the beginning of the Siege looked upon the Mountains
of Kalemberg as the surest way for the Relief of Vienna, without any farther
amusing himself, resolved to pass the Army at Tuln and Krembs, disposing all
things accordingly for the Execution of this Design. He did not believe the
Enemy would come thither to oppose him, not only because part of his Army, and
of that of the Bavarians was already on the other side of the Danube, and
maintained themselves there, without attempts of the Turks to dislodge them;
but also because it would be dangerous for these Infidels to engage themselves
with a great Body of Horse beyond the Streights or narrow Passages of the
Forest of Vienna.

Many were the Messengers and Spies which past betwixt the Duke and Besieged,
his Highness being careful to encourage and inform them. He now again assures
them, that the Army composed of Bavarians, Saxons, Poles, and the Imperial
Troops approached Krembs; That the King of Poland Commanded it in Person, and
that he was accompanied by the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony; That the
Emperor was removed from Passaw to Lintz, to be nearer Vienna, so that now
there was nothing more required for the saving of Christendom, but a little
more resistance, being all the Troops were ready to march. He added, that he
himself was going to Krembs, to prepare the Bridges and every other necessary
thing, to the end that nothing should retard the Succor of the Place, assuring
moreover the Governor, that he would expose himself to all dangers to force
the Enemy from the Siege. Fortune did begin now to favor them, being Tekely
had been defeated at Presburg, and by the River of Marcka with great loss. This
News caused a sensible Joy in all the Inhabitants, and particularly the
Ecclesiastics, whereof many were troubled with bloody Fluxes, and very many
considerable Persons had been dead of it. The cause of this Disease may well be
attributed to the ill Diet, the richest sort being forced to eat salt meats,
differing from the Delicacies of their former feeding, besides the Meal they
made their Bread of was neither clean nor well ground.

The Duke in the mean time caused some Troops of the Regiments of Grana and
Baden to secure Tuln, Aug. 22.
where there was a stone Wall and a Ditch, for he designed to preserve that
Town, and make it one of the heads of his Bridge: the next day he went to
discover the Ilets of the Danube, and having found them useful for his Design,
he commanded ways to be made in them, and Boats to b^ ^rought thither. Upon his
return he found Count Palsi arrived from Lintz, with orders from the Emperor,
that it was necessary he should expect the arrival of all the Allies before he
approached near the Enemies.

About this time a noise was spread in the City, that the Turks, who
incessantly mined and moved the Earth, had made a Subterranean passage which
should open into the Emperors Cellars, by which they pretended to surprise the
Town. The Governor, howbeit he believed nothing of it, ordered the Emperors
Guards which were left for the Guard of the Palace, to keep watch and Sentinels
in the Cellars, which they did with no great regret. The same day there
happened an accident, which for the rareness of it may well be recorded.
Kimpler, an able Engineer, working in a Countermine under the Castle-Gate,
encountered, deep in the Earth within a walled Vault, Estani.
a Coffin of Tin, wherein he thought to have found a dead Corpse, but opening
it, he was dazzled with the luster of a great many pieces of Gold and Silver,
wherewith this Coffin was filled; he saw moreover rich Jewels enriched with
precious Stones. Having secured this Treasure, he found in the bottom a Box of
Tin, wherein was a Parchment where the following words were traced in ancient
Characters.

GAUDEBIS SI INVENERIS, VIDEBIS, TACEBIS, SED ORABIS, PUGNABIS, AEDIFICABIS,
NON HODIE, NEC CRAS, SED QUIA UNIVERSUS EQUUS, TURRIS ERECTA ET ARMATA, DIVERSA
ORDINATA ARMA SUBSCRIPTIO ROLLANDT HUNN. MOG. POSUIT.

Those who would divine the Sentiments of Rowland Hun of Mets, who had
deposited this Treasure in the Earth, pretended he had some Knowledge of the
future, and that by this Inscription he would manifest that he knew this
Treasure would be found during the Siege of Vienna, and that the Infidels
should be obliged to abandon it. Their Sense of the words follows. Rowland
speaking to Kimpler, says to him. Si inveneris, If thou do find what I have
hid from all others, videbis, tacebis, thou will consider these words, and
discover thy good Fortune to no body, sed orabis, pugnabis, but thou shall
render thanks unto God for reserving these Riches for thee, and, as obliged in
gratitude, thou shall fight against the Enemies of his Name; aedificabis, non
hodie nec cras, Thou shall employ the Moneys I designed for thee to build
Churches; but it shall not be when thy Native Country is desolated by War; it
shall not be neither to day nor tomorrow, sed quia universus equus, thou
would ill take thy time whilst the Ottoman Cavalry surround the Walls of the
City; Turris erecta and armata, but fear nothing, the Ramparts raised for the
defense of the City, and the brave Soldiers that Garrison it, will preserve it
from the vain attempts of the Enemy. Diversa ordinata Arma, The Arms of the
different Nations that thou see arrayed in these Plains, shall only serve to
render the Victories more glorious, their Triumph more splendid, and the flight
of the Turks more infamous.

Count Starenberg received new assurance by his Spies from the Duke, Aug. 24.
of being relieved in eight days, which caused an universal Joy, redoubled the
Care, and augmented the Courage of all men. On the other side, the Infidels
prepared for a general assault, whilst the Governor on the contrary did every
day invent new Engines, as Freize Horses bearded with Iron, turned Pikes, and
the like, to oppose in the Breaches. Five hundred Horse of the Besiegers
passing the River, burnt some Villages, but they were encountered and defeated
by a party of the Imperialists, commanded by Colonel Heister, who cut in
pieces the greatest part of them, the rest endeavoring to save themselves by
swimming being drowned in the River.

We lest the Duke of Lorrain marching toward Tuln, but upon advice that the
Malcontents were designing to make Incursions into Moravia, he detached
Lubomirski, and two Regiments of the Emperors Horse to march toward the
Frontiers of that Province. This Report was grounded upon the Grand Visiers
Order, who upon the Knowledge he had that the Imperialists and Auxiliaries took
the way of Tuln and Krembs, had commanded Count Tekely to enter into the
Hereditary Countries with Fire and Sword, thereby to oblige the Imperialists to
return back to their defense. But the Malcontents having no mind to engage
with the Duke, Tekely was contented to encamp upon the Mark; however, in
obedience to the Grand Visiers Order, he caused the Tartars and Turks that were
with him to enter into Austria, having promised to follow and second them with
his Army.

The Duke being advertised that the Infidels were burning the Villages toward
Eversdorf, changed his march, having sent orders to Lubomiski, who was in the
Avant-guard to hault, and instead of marching toward Tuln, he went to meet the
Turks, leaving his Baggage at Stokareau with the Regiment of Rokondi, leaving
to Count Lesley the Care of the Execution of those things which he had resolved
in order to the Passage of the Danube, and the Conjunction of the Auxiliary
Forces. The Duke being come to the height of Pisemberg about two of the Clock,
he could see the continuing of the Fires; he thereupon sent Parties out, who
made some Prisoners. They were questioned, and answered, that the preceding
Night they had passed the Marck with a Body of twenty five thousand Turks and
Tartars; that Tekely followed them, and their Camp was but half a League from
the Bridges of Vienna.

The Duke hereupon immediately commanded Baron Mercy, with some Troops, to the
top of the height to discover the Enemy. Upon his report he put the Army in
Battalia, extending his right Wing toward the Wood, under the command of the
Counts Caprara and Rabotta, posting the Dragoons there, and some small
Fieldpieces; and the left Wing was extended along the Plain under the Conduct
of Prince Lewis of Baden. He drew the whole into two Lines, and a reserve, on
the right whereof Lubomirski's Poles were placed. The Imperial Army was
composed of thirteen Regiments of Horse, and five of Dragoons, besides
Lubomirski's two thousand Poles. Whilst the Imperialists formed their
Squadrons, the Turks likewise ranged theirs, leaving the gross of their Troops
in the bottom of the Plain. They began a line upon the heights extending to the
left, as if designing to gain the flank of the Imperialists. As soon as they
were approached each other, they began to skirmish, and as the Armies grew
near, the Infidels detached two great Troops, the one of Turks, which moved
easily, and the other of Tartars, who advanced toward the left. Some Volleys
of Cannon which the Emperors Dragoons had on their right, did somewhat
disorder the Turks whilst they advanced, but did not hinder them to charge the
Poles with much firmness. They immediately routed two squadrons, and with a
surprising Vigor, or rather Temerity, passed even to the second Line, as well
by the way they had made, as by the interval which the Imperial Horse had left,
receiving in their Passage the fire of all the Neighbor squadrons which
flanked them in this charge. Notwithstanding that, some of them penetrated even
to the Reserves, and endeavored to return by the same way they came, and after
the same manner, but few of them came off.

On the left Wing, the Tartars having endeavored by small Troops to gain the
flank of the Christians, were not more luckey, for those that past were cut in
pieces by others that were sent against them, or obliged to return to their
main body; after which, the Imperialists advancing always in good order to
attack the whole front of the Turks, the Enemy separated before they could come
up to them. One part took the way toward the Marck, and the other toward the
Bridges of Vienna. They were followed some time without being overtaken. Those
that took on the Danube side, finding themselves pursued, that the Poles were
not far off, and that the whole Army marched that way, betook themselves to the
only expedient for their escape, which was to cast themselves into the River,
and endeavor a Passage by the remaining Posts and Pillars of the burnt Bridge,
leaving their Arms, their Horses, and their Equipage on the brink of the River;
but most of these were drowned, and the rest all killed or taken. The Night
being come on, the Duke camped where he was. On the morrow he was presented
with several Standards, Timbals, and Drums, and some Prisoners of note were
likewise brought to him. The Turks lost, as was discovered by their own
intercepted Letters, from a thousand to twelve thousand Men, many were killed
upon the place, but many were drowned. The Chams Son was hurt, but saved
himself by swimming upon his Horse. The Bassa of Erlaw was slain, with many
Officers. The next Morning some Prisoners were taken, found hid in the Hedges
and Bushes. Their Army consisted of near fourteen thousand Turks and Tartars,
all Horse, but that of the Malcontents stayed at the Marck.

The Duke came the same day to Cronenberg, to refresh his Horse which had been
upon Service twenty four hours, with design to go and fight the Malcontents if
they continued in their Post. He sent, for this purpose, to General Siemariski,
who was come to Nekelburg with a body of Horse, being the King of Polands
Avaunt-Guard, to meet him the next day upon the way to Volgersdorff; but being
upon his March, he had News that the Tekelists were retired to Tirnau; that the
King had sent order to his General to attend him at Nekelburg, and that his
Majesty would be at Krembs the first of September. The Duke hereupon returned
to his Camp at Cronenburg, to expect the arrival of the Polish Army.

They seemed in the Town in much distress, for the Governor had caused forty
Rockets to be fired from the top of St. Stephens Steeple, to advertise the Duke
of the straits they were in, and the necessity of being suddenly relieved. The
Grand Vizier seemed to scorn these signs, answering them with two hundred
Cannon shot. And yet it was observed, that the Infidels sent many Camels laden
with Baggage and several Servants toward Presburg, probably to secure them in
case they should be forced to raise the Siege.

The same day, the Duke sent the Chevalier Lubormiski to compliment the King of
Poland, who had also orders to inform his Majesty of the measures they had
taken for the relief of Vienna: and that it seemed to require all their haste,
as the Counts Capliers and Starenberg signified by their Letters, the Place
being reduced to Extremity, but writ in such Terms which made it evident they
would defend it with their Lives, but could answer for nothing else.

The Grand Vizier did in the mean time order the Walachians to endeavor to
rebuild the Bridges of Vienna, to the end that they might, by a diversion that
way, retard the march of the Imperialists, or employ a considerable body by
that means. As the Waters were grown extreme low since the Bridges were ruined,
insomuch that the Pillars which had been then burnt level with the Water,
appeared now three or four foot above Water which gave room for this
Enterprise. They were furnished with Timber out of the Neighboring Villages,
and the Work was carried on by the Walachians and Moldavians with so much
diligence, that near a third of the great Bridge was laid in two Nights.

The Duke having notice hereof, caused Boats to be prepared for the retaking of
those Posts which he had quitted in the Isles. The Count Archinto and Colonel
Heyster were employed herein, who on the Night of the 31th of August re-entered
their old Retrenchments, planting there some Pieces of Cannon. Upon break of
day they began to play upon the Turks, who were so greatly incommoded by the
continual firing of great and small shot, that they were obliged to quit their
Enterprise. They afterward applied Pitch and Tar Barrels to the Pillars that
remained, and so burnt them. The same day the Turks sent away many Camels,
Wagons laden with Baggage, and part of their Artillery, which they conducted
toward the Forest of Vienna. After Noon, those who were upon the Ramparts
heard several Musket shots the way that these Infidels marched, which made them
guess that they were skirmishing with the Pickeerers of the Christian Army, and
that consequently the Succors were near hand.

At the same time, the Duke of Lorrain being advertised that the King of Poland
lay at Heilbron, left the command of the Army to Count Caprara, and went to
give this Prince a visit. He met him at the Head of his Hussars, and alighting
from his Horse, when he was come within twenty five paces of him, moved toward
him, which his Majesty perceiving, he likewise descended, met him and embraced
him, and after some obliging discourse, he presented the Prince his Son to him,
saying, he would have him to be his Servant, as he was, and that he had brought
him with him to teach him betimes to serve the Emperor. The Senators, the
Palatines, and the principal Officers of the Crown, did likewise complement the
Duke. The King and Duke mounted on Horseback, and having passed the Troops,
continued their march, discoursing the whole time together. When they arrived
in the Camp, they entered the Kings Tent, together with the Prince and the
Grandees of Poland, where the Duke entertained his Majesty with the main
Discourses that tended to the Affairs in hand.

The Prince of Waldeck, who had no Opportunity to speak with the Duke in the
Kings Tent, went to attend him at Stokarcau, where he communicated all his
Thoughts, and agreed with him of the Manner and Method they were to use in
relieving the Place.

The Duke dined that day with the King, sitting at the upper end on the
Right Hand of the King, the Prince being seated on his left, all three in
Chairs with backs. Some Palatines and Officers of the Imperial Army were also
placed at the Table by the Kings Order. After this repast the Duke returned to
his Camp very well satisfied with the Civilities done him by his Majesty, who
likewise approved of all what this Prince had proposed to him, and upon his
reiterated Instances he made to him for hastening the Conjunction of his
Forces, he sent Orders to his Great General, who was stayed behind, to hasten
his march. The King himself resolved to be at Krembs the second of September,
where the Emperor was to come to agree about the Conjunction and Passage of
the Armies.

In the mean time the Emperor, who should have come to Krembs, not only to
animate and authorize the Expedition by his Presence, but also to allay the
infinite Difficulties which the Competition of so many Princes would occasion,
was retained at Lintz by an Indisposition of Health. Thus the Care of all was
left to the Duke of Lorrain; as also to regulate the Pretensions of the
Auxiliary Armies. Having at length found Expedients for all these Difficulties,
he went and acquainted the King of Poland with what he had designed, which
being highly approved of, he went thence to Otelsdorff, where at his entreaty
the Duke of Saxony, and all the Generals met him. After some Contestations, the
Passage of the Danube, and the Conjunction of all the Auxiliaries was resolved
upon, which was to be September 5. in the Plains of Tuln. It was determined
that the Polish Army, with that of the Emperors, should pass where they were.
That the Saxons should traverse the River upon the Bridge at Krembs, and
whereas the Bavarians with some German Troops camped there under the Command of
Count Lesley, they should all march in body to Tuln, to join the Imperial Army,
and that of Poland.

The Princes upon Consultation deferred the Execution of this Design till the
seventh. The King began to pass the sixth, in the Evening. The Duke of Lorrain,
after having detached the Contes of Lodrox, Riccardi and Herberwiller, with
their Regiments, and two Batalions of Lorrain, to join 3000 Poles, which the
King ought to add to them to form a Body to cover Moravia; he sent Colonel
Heyster with 600 Horse to Closterneuburg, with orders to make Fires upon the
heights of Khalenberg, to advertise the besieged by this sign, which was
concerted betwixt them, of the approach of their relief.

The besieged had been extremely pressed, for the Turks had finished their
Galleries, and attacked the two Bastions of Lebel and the Court, so that the
besieged did daily by Messages and Rockets advertise their Friends of the
extremity they were reduced to, the Enemy being now attacked to the very body
of the place, having made a great breach in the Court Bastion. The sixth at
Night they were greatly encouraged by the firing of five Fusees or Rockets upon
the Mountain of Kalenberg, which made them judge their help near hand, and
which they answered by the like Signal.

The Grand Vizier, not ignorant of the Christians motion, on the seventh
commanded a review of his Troops to be made, which upon enquiry were
represented to him by his Officers to amount to 168000 Men; a List whereof was
found in his Tent, as also in that of Reiz Effendi, or chief Secretary, the
which we have omitted here, not to puzzle the course of History with hard
Names: but shall however, to satisfy the more curious, subjoyn not only that,
but an exact account of the Christian Army that raised this celebrious Siege,
and also of those Worthies who deserve to have their Memories transferred to
Posterity, for defending their City with so signal Bravery and Constancy.

It did not seem that the Christian Princes in the Turkish Army did serve them
with any great good will. Tekely, who had been but once in the Camp to salute
the Grand Vizier, left but a thousand Hungarians with him upon his departure;
and Abassi, though often invited to the Port, excused his attendance by
manifold Pretenses. However the Vizier being entered Hungary, he could not
dispense with his waiting upon him at Javarin, though but with few Troops. He
was notwithstanding well received by this Minister, and sent back to guard the
Passages betwixt Raab and Ramnitz, and the Bridges which the Turks had built
upon those two Rivers, to secure a retreat in case Fortune proved their Enemy.
The Vayvod of Walachia, already mentioned, caused a Cross of Oak of a
prodigious bigness to be planted before his Tent in the Camp at Vienna; it is
seventeen foot in length, with this Inscription in Latin upon it;

Crucis exaltatio est conservatio Mundi. Crux decor Ecclesiae. Crux custodia
Regum. Crux confirmatio Fidelium. Crux Gloria Angelorum, and vulnus Demonum.

Nos Dei Gratia servamus, Canthacuzenus, Valachiae Transalpinae Princeps,
ejusdem perpetuus haeres and Dominus, etc. Ereximus Crucem hanc in loco quavis
die devotione Populi, and sacro honorato in perpetuam sui suorumque Memoriam,
Tempore obsidionis Mahometanae a Vizirio Kara Mustapha Bassa Viennensis
inferioris Austriae. Mense Sept. die 1. Anno 1683.

Viator Memento mori.


The Infidels, upon the approach of the Christians, were in no little disorder,
their whole Camp being in a tumultuous Motion, their Horse moved confusedly,
and the Servants were seen to load their Camels with Baggage, which made the
Besieged judge, that they designed to march to meet the Succors;
notwithstanding this Disorder, they did not discontinue their Approaches, and
the following day redoubled the firing of their Cannon and Mortars. That
Morning, a Prisoner being taken, reported, That the Turks were in a great
Consternation, because the Christians were already upon the Mountain of
Kalemberg. Those who were upon the Rampart saw their Enemies pull down their
Tents, and go and join their Companions, who were advanced to oppose the
Passage of the Christians, and about Noon they saw a great Body ranging
themselves in Battalia at the foot of the Mountain, whilst others joined them,
carrying with them all their Baggage and Provisions upon Wagons and Camels, as
if they designed to change their Camp, where they also planted their Pavilions
in the same manner, as if they intended a long stay there, probably to refresh
themselves, to be more brisk, and in a condition to fight the Succors when
they should descend from the Hills. During all these motions, the attack was
carried on with redoubled vigor, and though the defense was yet braver, yet at
Night they fired many Rockets to advertise their friends that the place was
reduced to the last extremity, and that they could hold out no longer.

But now the Christians were seen to cover the Mountain of Kalemberg, and to
salute their Enemies with several volleys of Cannon. To comprehend well the joy
of the besieged at so charming a spectacle, we need but represent to our
selves, how they had been close shut up the space of nine Weeks, being every
hour, indeed moment, in cruel apprehensions for their goods, their lives, their
Wives and their Children; and to see themselves now upon the point to be
delivered from these terrible alarms.

The Christian Army being assembled, as is already said, at Tuln, and that the
Duke of Lorrain had put an end to several difficulties which were again started
about the Rank, and the command of so many Princes and Generals, he brought it
to a conclusion, that they should march the next day, being the 9th, toward
Vienna. As soon as this resolution was taken, he sent Baron Mercy to Morbach
with 2000 Horse, to observe the countenance and motions of the Turks. The 9th,
at the point of day, he marched with all the German Army, and came and encamped
betwixt St. Andrew and Koningseck. In this Post he received advice of the
Cities being reduced to its last extremity, and that they fired with nothing
but Muskets. He sent to advertise the King of Poland, who was yet at Tuln, with
the news, and caused the Prisoners to be conducted to him, who confirmed the
advice. He writ also to him, beseeching him to advance and join with him.

The 10th, the Duke caused the Germans to enter the Mountains by three several
avenues, and left a fourth for the March of the Poles. He camped at Wilbleng,
and the Poles rested an hour behind to the right. The King himself came to
discover the heights where the Imperialists were camped. The Duke showed him
Kalemberg from thence, whither he would march next morning; and his Majesty
returned to his Camp. By favor of the night the Duke went in Person to
discover the passage of Kalemberg, and to take possession of those Posts he
judged necessary to assure their march. He also seized the Chapel of St.
Leopold, and having put 300 men into it to secure it, returned to his Camp,
having sent to inform the King of what was done; after this the Army was put in
Battel-array to possess Kalemberg by five differing ways, according to the
directions given by the Duke, and consented to by the King. The way on the
right was left to his Majesty, as the day before.

The Prince of Sax-Lawenburg, General of the Horse, took the next passage to
the Poles, conducting by that way the Right Wing, consisting of eight Regiments
of the Emperor's Horse, two of Dragoons, and one of Crauats, of all the Horse
and all the Dragoons of Bavaria and Francony.

The Infantry of Franconia and Bavaria took the third way, which was the
middle-most, being commanded by the Prince of Waldeck. The Elector of Bavaria
placed himself with the said Prince that day, and continued there all the day
following, advancing with much firmness in places of most danger, but without
any Fonction or command, he having declared at first, that he would only serve
as a Voluntier.

All the Emperor's Infantry, and that of Saxony, took the other two passages
to the left, whereof one was that of St. Leopold's Chapel, being the highway,
and the other went along the Danube. Prince Herman of Baden and Count Lesley
General of the Artillery were at the head of the Foot. Count 4 Caprara General
of the Horse followed immediately by the same ways with the left Wing, which
contained seven Regiments of the Emperor's, Lubomirski's Poles, to which the
King had joined some Squadrons of his, and all the Cavalry and Dragoons of
Saxony. The Elector of Saxony commanded the Auxiliary Troops, which, however of
differing tempers and Bodies, marched in Battalia, in as much as the ground
would permit it, and were computed to amount to 65000 men. About eleven of the
clock, the first Squadrons had gained the tops of Kalemberg, without any
opposition at all. They there extended the Front of the Army above a league and
a half, camping on the declivity of the Mountain toward Closternewburg, in
three lines, and some places more, as the ground would permit them, seizing
thereby seven or eight Avenues, by which they might descend and range
themselves for the combat.

They brought at the same time some small Fieldpieces to St. Leopold, and to
the Monastery of Camaldoli. The remainder also of the day and all the night was
spent in advancing the Train, which was not effected without great trouble, the
Mountain being so steep, that none but small Fieldpieces could be brought up,
nor they but in some time doubling and tripling the draught Horses.

The Turks seeing the Christians appear about the Chapel of St. Leopold, and
the aforesaid Monastery, drew out on their right, advanced to the foot of the
Mountains and extending thence to the brink of the Danube, they seized the
Hedges, hollow-ways and heights, from whence they might incommode the Enemy at
the descent of the hills and first filings out of their streights.

The Cannon being arrived at St. Leopold and Camaldoli, they-quickly obliged
the Turks to quit the Posts which they had taken, and remove out of their shot.
The Troops which they had advanced, consisted in Horse, and another sort of
Militia, which fights like our Dragoons on Horseback and on foot. Of these the
number was great, and they had brought but few Foot out of the Camp, and
without Cannon in all this detachment which they opposed against the Christians.

The space betwixt Vienna and the entry of the Wood is reckoned a League and a
half, the Country being very difficult, trenched with Vineyards, Ravines and
hollow ways. The Vineyard was enclosed by a great Dike which covered the Turks
Camp on the side of Helgstat. The Duke of Lorrain had chosen this march, to
make use of the advantage of the heights, and judging that in a situation of
this nature, he might secure his Flanks. His design was the next day to coast
the Danube, and to attack the Turkish Camp on their right. It was for this
reason, and because of the cuts in the ground, that he placed a great Body of
Foot to the left, this Wing being designed first to charge the Enemies.

The King of Poland, who stayed an hour behind, having encamped, came to St.
Leopolds Chapel, from whence the Duke showed him the descent of the Mountain,
the Camp of the Turks, and the Troops which were advanced to oppose the descent
of the Christians. Their Countenance made his Majesty of opinion, that they
would dispute all the passages, and that the Duke should do well if they could
the next day seize the first heights at the entry of the Wood. He moreover
desired some German Foot to join with his in the descent of the Mountain.
Having obtained four Battalions, he caused them to advance on that side,
whereby the Poles were to descend. Toward the evening of that day, the Duke
having surveyed the ground at the foot of Camaldoli, ordered Count Lesley to
command some Troops to take post at night at the going out of the Wood, and to
raise a Battery there, the better to secure the passage of the Army the next
day. At first there were but two Battalions sent Count Lesley, deferring to
send any greater number till it was with the Artillery. They labored all Night
at this work; but the Turks being aware of it, before it was finished, they
sent some Troops very early to hinder the Laborers, and posted themselves neat
them behind a Curtain, and behind Planks which well-nigh shut the descent from
the Mountain before the Christians Battery. Count Fontaine, who commanded the
Post, was quick in opposing their effort, and having called the men from their
work, and got his two Battalions together, he posted them betwixt his Battery
and their Barricado, yet so as not to be encompassed by them, who at the same
time began to stretch to the right and left, to gain the Christians Flanks.

The Duke, who observed from St. Leopolds Chapel the Turks motion, sent some
Battalions of the Regiments next hand to the relief of his men. These being
commanded by the Duke of Croy, arriving in time, the Imperialists extended
their line, and took a resolution to attack the Infidels in their Post behind
their blind. This was executed with so much vigor, that the Enemy were forced
to give way. They abandoned their Post, and retired to another, where the gross
of their Body remained. The Duke of Croy having his shoulder pierced with a
Musket Shot in this action, was obliged to retire, leaving the command to C.
Fontaine, who disposed all things for the defense of the Post, which the Enemy
seemed forward to attack again, but they contented themselves with shooting out
of their own station, the fire continuing brisk on both sides.

The Duke perceiving that the Turks made all that Body move which had camped
beyond Neudorff to support their advanced Troops, he first commanded all the
left Wing to march, and presently after he gave order to Prince Waldeck, and to
the Duke of Sax-Lawenburg, to rush out of the Woods upon the Enemies, who were
at the head of their Camp. He sent to advertise the King of Poland of all this,
and understanding that his Majesty came to St. Leopolds Chapel, he went to
meet him there, and showing the motions the Armies were in, he acquainted him
with all the orders that he had given upon this occasion. After they had agreed
upon all things, the King having performed his devotion at the Chapel,
mounting on Horseback, he went from Rank to Rank, exhorting his Officers and
Soldiers to do well, and spoke to them after this manner.

Generous Polish Cavaliers, It is not only to defend the glory which your
Ancestors, and your courage have acquired to you, of being esteemed the
invincible Bulwark of Christendom against the Ottoman Power, It is not the
defense only of your own Country, which the loss of Vienna by an infallible
consequence will expose to the cruel Invasion of those against whom you are
going to fight; but it is the cause of God, and to save the Empire of the West
which does us the honor to have recourse to our Arms; an honor which our
Ancestors did never presume to hope for, and which is reserved for your valor.
Think then of nothing but conquering, or to dye nobly in this occasion, to
which the glory of Martyrdom is concomitant. Think that your King fights in the
head of you, to partake with you of your perils and your victories, and rest
assured that the God of Battles, whose cause we are going to defend, will not
fail to fight for us.

Whilst this Prince endeavored by his discouses to inspire his Troops with
that generous ardour he was himself agitated; the Citizens of Vienna, who had
been advertised of the approach of their relief, saw with inexpressible
content, the Army of the Christians descend from the Mountains of Kalemberg,
being ascertained by the noise of the Cannon which was shot against the Turks,
who had parapetted the Passages with earth and stone, though to no purpose,
that their deliverance was near. And they would also contribute all they could
to it, by the discharge of all their Artillery from the Bastions and Curtains
of the wall. There was also an infinity of small shot discharged on both sides,
with many Grenades. The Turks had not as yet shot so many Bombs since the
beginning of the Siege, as they did this day, to retard the Christians that
descended into the Plain, and to annoy those who crowded upon the heights of
the City, to observe the descent of their friends and the combat.

Whilst the King of Poland continued his march at the head of his Army, the
Duke of Lorraine caused Heisters Regiment of Dragoons, and another of Saxony,
which Count Caprara posts to the left at the foot of St. Leopolds Chapel, to
descend. That of Heister received orders at eight of the clock to go and attack
the Enemies, who had possessed a place to the left, from whence they troubled
the Imperialists, and the Infantry had likewise order to advance upon the
Turks, who were retired behind their courtains and hollow ways. This motion was
made on both sides at once. The Turks made some resistance at first, but not
with Vigor enough to hinder the Christians advance, who obliged them to retire
behind another blind.

Count Lesley, who had brought down some Cannon, planted it at the head of the
Infantry. The Duke of Croy was also returned, for having used the first
Applications to his hurt, he had force enough not to quit the fight the whole
day. This advantage gave both time and room to extend the front of the left
Wing, as it descended and issued out of the Streights. In the mean time, the
first Line of Infantry, which in their march against the Infidels gave
continual fire with their Muskets, mingled with that of Fieldpieces, beat them
out of another Post, and a Line of Curtain which reached from the Danube Hill
over against the Carthusians. The Duke about ten a Clock made a halt, and
whilst the rest of the left Wing filled the ground which the first Troops had
taken, and that Count Caprara extended it to the Banks of the Danube; he sent
orders to the Prince of Waldeck, who began to appear upon th first heights to
the right, and to the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg, who was also got out of the
Wood, to continue their march until they were equal with the front of the
Troops commanded by the Duke of Croy, and to advance extending to the right,
until they came within shot of the Poles, upon their issuing out of their
Avenues which were on the right hand of all.

These orders being given, the Duke returned to the head of the left Wing, to
make the great Body of the Germans move at once. The Great Duke of Saxony came
and joined him, and continued always near him in the places the most exposed.
At Noon they saw the King at the Head of his Troops, who came and joined the
right Wing of the Imperialists. The Duke in the mean time took care that in
marching to the Enemy, the Subaltern Generals should rally and re-establish any
Disorders which might have happened by the Difficulty of the Passages, and that
all should advance with equality, firing continually with their great and small
shot.

The march was in this order, though slowly, by reason of the roughness of the
way, and the opposition of the Enemy, the left moving along the Danube as far
as the Village of Neudorff, carried it, after a considerable resistance. To the
right, upon the same Line, there was another Hill guarded by the Turks, at the
attack whereof a Dutch Batallion being disordered, was succored by Stirums
Dragoons, ordered by Count Dunewald. This Batallion recovered, took the Post,
and continued to advance.

The justness of this march, the Christian Armies order of Battle, and the
situation of the Place, which made the Imperialists appear as in a kind of
Amphitheater, presented a great and formidable object to the sight, which
astonished the Turks, and did not a little contribute to the Victory.

The King of Poland being yet behind, the Army halted near Newdorff, until he
was advanced upon the same Line, after which they continued their march. The
Imperialists carried, without very great resistance, the Post the Turks had at
Helgstat, and the Prince of Waldeck obliged those that opposed him to retire.

In the mean time the Infidels, who were in Battalia in their Camp, moved as if
they had designed upon the left Wing, but perceiving the Army of Poland upon
the heights, they moved that way, so that the Poles and Turks faced each other
almost in the same order, making more depth then front. The Poles seemed backed
by the Wood, and the Turks by their Camp.

The King, who was in the head of his Troops, detached some squadrons of his
Hussars, who charged the Turks, being all Lanciers, with great Vigor they bore
before them those that opposed them; but engaging themselves too far, they drew
so many Enemies upon them, that they were forced to run. The Turks followed
them to a Place where Prince Waldeck had opportunely posted two Batalions of
Bavarians. The fire of these Foot cooled the pursuit of the Enemy, and gave the
King of Poland time to cause his first Line to advance to re-establish the
Disorder of his Hussars. Count Rabata, at the Kings desire, joined the
Emperors Dragoons with them. But this body of Turks detached from their
Troops, did not dare to stand the shock of the Christians, but retired to a
height where they had Foot and Cannon, with more diligence then they were come.

After this advantage, the King continued to march with all his Army, and the
Turks endeavored to obstruct their Passage from the several Posts they had.
The fire of their Artillery and Muskets did some harm to the Poles, but did
not break them, and so they advanced still gaining Ground insensibly upon the
Enemy.

In the mean time, the Duke being far advanced toward the left of the Enemies
Camp, to divert their Endeavors upon the right, the Turks put themselves in
battalia upon the Ravine or -- before their Camp, and planting some great Guns
against the Christians, they made many shot, and seemed by their mien to
resolve to defend that Post which was the strongest of all, and served for a
Retrenchment for their Camp, but their firmness did not last long. The
Imperialists being advanced within Musket shot, they abandoned their Station
about five in th Evening, and left them the convenience of passing it without
disorder, and entering into their Camp.

It was then that the Duke, making use of this Advantage, wheeled all his left
Wing, and instead of continuing his way by the Danube, he caused it to march to
the right, to enter into the Enemies Camp, no Soldier quitting his rank to
pillage their Baggage which they had abandoned, and their Tents standing. This
motion being perceived by the Turks who were engaged against the Poles on the
right Wing, quite dismayed them, and they began to retire for fear of being
charged in the Flank. The King thereupon passed the Ravine with his Troops,
notwithstanding the firing of some Janissaries that defended it, and pursued the
Enemies. About seven a Clock he entered their Camp some little time after Prince
Waldeck, who passed into it with his Bavarians and Franconians. Half an hour
after, the Duke having gained the Suburbs and Counterscharp, commanded Prince
Lewis of Baden to advance toward the Trenches of the Turks with some Troops
that the Baron of Mercy conducted, but this Prince could not come there so
soon, but that the Janissaries that were in guard there had leisure to make
their retreat by favor of the Night that came on. They had begun it as soon as
they saw the Christians approach their Camp. They retired with no great loss,
having had the bravery before they abandoned their Trenches to attempt another
attack against the City, and to turn and fire the Cannon of their Batteries
against the Army. The Night suspended the Victory, and obliged the Troops to
make halt in that part of the Camp which was betwixt the Danube and the City,
the Turks being retreated on the other side of the River.

The Duke of Lorraine sent to complement the King, upon the happy success of
that day, which was owing to his presence. This Prince returned his complement,
confessing that every body had a share in it, but that all the honor was due
to his Conduct, and to the valor of the German Troops, who first entered the
Camp, and the Enemies works.

During the Night the Turks passed the River at Schunket, making their retreat
by the Rear of their Front, and quitted their Camp with so much precipitation,
that they left behind them in the great Visier's Quarters the Standard of the
Ottoman Empire, and the Horse Tail, the ordinary Ensigns of their dignity.
They left also all their Tents, and the greatest part of their Equipage, all
their Ammunition and Provisions, which they had in great abundance, all their
Artillery, amounting to 180 pieces of Cannon and Mortars, and they hastened
their retreat with so much diligence, that their foremost Troops had the next
day passed the Ra^b.

The Christians lost no body of consideration except Prince Thomas of Croy, the
Count of Transmandorff, young Poloski Captain of a Company of Hussars; and the
wounded, besides the Duke of Croy, the Counts Fontaine, Tilly, and Schalemburg,
were inconsiderable.

The 13th early, the Duke having appointed his Army to be ready, went to wait
on the King of Poland to regulate their march, and the immediate pursuit of the
Victory. But finding him little disposed to it, he omitted no instances to
persuade him to it, proposing to him to march with all the Army, or with all
the Horse only, or else with a great detachment; but the King opposed the
weariness of his Troops, and the necessity of refreshing them some hours. The
King thereunto being unwilling, the Duke entered into the City.

The Grand Vizier, before his flight, caused the Heads of five of the Women of
his Seraglio to be cut off, for fear they should fall into the hands of the
Conquerors. The Baron of Kaunitz, the Emperors Resident at the Port, who was at
present in the Visier's Quarters, was in danger of being killed by the
Christians in the heat of the Battle, as being habited after the Turkish
fashion. By day there was not a Turk left, though they were traced during the
obscurity of the Night by the Villages on fire, the Infidels having marked
their retreat with this last cruelty, after they had first burnt their Camp, as
far as the precipitation of their flight, and the fear which obliged them to be
gone would permit them. They retired also out of the Isle by favor of their
lower Bridge, the upper Bridge which they had laid being possessed by the
Christians upon their arrival. The same evening many Cavaliers and Soldiers
entered the City with great Droves of Cattle, which they found in the Camp and
near it, which continuing the following days, Beef became so cheap that they
were sold for five and six Florins each.

The Duke of Lorrain being now assured that he had no more Enemies to combat,
dispatched the Count of Aversberg, Son to the Prince of that name, to the
Emperor, to inform him with the happy success of that day.

On the morrow of the fight, being the 13th, the fire took in the Powder which
the Turks had left a League from the City, and confumed an infinite number of
Bombs, Grenades, and other artificial fireworks. This accident was attributed
to the negligence of some Christian Soldiers, and yet there were prodigious
quantities of Powder, Bullets, etc. left behind. It was observable that many of
the Cannon which the Turks had abandoned were marked with the Arms of the
Emperors Ferdinand the first, and Rodolf the second.

After the Soldiery had pillaged the immense Riches of the Camp, which
amounted to many Millions, the King of Poland entered into the City,
accompanied with Count Starenberg the Governor, many Commanders, and a great
number of the Polish Nobility, where Te Deum being sung, he, the Duke of
Bavaria, and several Grandees, were sumptuously treated by the Governor, the
People by their joyful acclamations eechoing the praises of their Deliverers.

In the mean time, the Duke of Lorraine was employed in giving the necessary
Orders for the Army, part of it beginning to discamp, and all together with the
Poles, designing to go in pursuit of the Enemy, which favorable conjuncture
was omitted in expectation of the Emperor, who also arrived that evening at
Vienna, where he was received coming out of his Boat, by the two Electors, and
the principal Officers of War and Justice. Having taken a view of the Enemies
works, He caused Te Deum to be sung with all the solemnity possible in the
Church of St. Stephen. That done, he caused the Crescent and Star, the Ottoman
Arms, to be taken down from the Spire of that Steeple, placed there since the
time of Solomon, being these last Turks did not cease shooting at it, and
raised the Cross in their place.

Wednesday being the 15th, the King of Poland sent his Grand Chancellor to the
Emperor with a numerous Train to complement him, and offer him a part of the
booty which he had found in the Grand Visier's Tent, and amongst other things,
the Standard which was always carried before him when he marched. It was made
of Horse-hair worked with the Needle, and embroidered with flowers, the staff
of it was guilt, as also the Apple which was of brass. They call it Tugh in
their Language, which is to say Horse Tail. The Chancellor made a very elegant
Latin Speech, and the Emperor answered it with Sentiments of esteem and
acknowledgment for his Majesty of Poland. After a quarter of an hours
conversation with this Envoy, and hearing Mass in our Lady of Loretto's
Chapel, he took Horse to ride to the Camp, where he was to visit the King of
Poland. There was some difficulty about the upper hand. This Prince pretended
it, and there were examples contrary to this pretension. In the mean time what
he had done deserved particular consideration. To conclude, it was resolved,
for the removing of these obstacles, that the Emperor should go see the Troops,
that they should be ranged in Battalia, and that these two Sovereigns should
advance within twenty steps of each other, which was performed in the manner
following. The Emperor, having seen the Bavarians in Battalia, continued his
way to Ebersdorff, where the first Squadrons of the left Wing were drawn up,
and thence he went to Swech where the right Wing was posted, and where the King
of Poland expected him. Being within Pistol-shot of each other, the King, with
the Prince his Son, upon a little gallop moved forwards, and then both Princes
uncovered at once, saluted and covered again in a moment. The Emperor spoke
first, and told the King, That he was extremely obliged to him, for leaving his
Country, and undertaking a long and painful voyage, to come and combat his
Enemies and deliver Vienna; that all Christendom shared in the obligation, and
that he had covered himself with glory by so generous an action. The King of
Poland answered him, that it was to God alone that we ought to render our
thanks for this Victory; that he had done nothing but what every Christian
Prince was obliged to do upon the like occasion; and that he would endeavor
for the future to do yet more for the Interest of Religion, that all his
displeasure was, that he was not in a condition to pursue the Enemy upon their
defeat, but that his Troops after a march of three days required some rest,
especially his Cavalry, the Horse being extremely tired. Prince Alexander, who
by order of his Father was clothed that day after the German fashion, kissed
the Emperor's hand, who thereupon returned into the City, and the King further
into his Camp. His Imperial Majesty in his return observed that all the
Villages and Palaces were burnt around, except the place where Solomon had
formerly camped, when he besieged Vienna; in memory whereof the Emperor Rodolf
had caused a house of pleasure to be built in that place, with Towers, which
were covered with guilt Copper in the same symmetry or figure that the Sultans
Tents were; so that the Turks being informed that this building had been made
after the Model of Solymans Camp, would not ruin it during the Siege, but had
made a Magazin of it, where was also found a great quantity of Bread and
Bisquet.

The Emperor employed the rest of the time that he stayed at Vienna, in
visiting the Retrenchments and Fortifications with Count Starenberg had made
behind the Bastions and the Walls, to defend the Ground foot by foot. The
Prince Elector of Saxony parted the fifteenth with all his Troops. His retreat
seemed precipitated, and supposed to be upon account of the Protestants of
Hungary, thinking perhaps he had done enough in saving of Vienna, whereto he
nobly contributed. The Emperor, willing to recompense Count Starenberg's
Services, made him Marshal General of the Field, and of his Privy Council; he
gave him 100000 Florins, and writ to the King of Spain to send him the Order of
the Golden Fleece. He also conferred the same Employments, and Honors upon
Count Capliers, and having presented Prince Alexander, the King of Polands Son,
with a Sword richly adorned with Jewels of great value, He returned back to
Lintz. The greatest part of those who fled upon the approach of the Turks,
returned to the City when they knew the Siege was raised. They began to rebuild
the Houses that were ruined, and amongst others the Emperors Palace and Scots
Church,

During these Triumphs at Vienna, the Grand Vizier, sensible of his misfortune,
and the malice of his Enemies, and knowing that the Bassa of Buda would render
him no good Offices at Court, upon the raising of the Siege of Vienna, resolved
to prevent him, and informed the Grand Seignior, by an express he dispatched to
him to Belgrade, that he had disposed all things to check the first onset of
the Christians, and engage them in Battle, which would undoubtedly have been
accompanied with Success; but that he was forced to change design, because the
Bassa retired with his Army, the Walachians, the Moldavians, and the
Hungarians, which did so mainly abate the Courage of his Troops, that it was
afterward impossible for him to bring them to fight; that so he had been
obliged to retire to conserve the rest of the Army, and not to hazard the
Person of his Highness. Nevertheless the Grand Vizier, having well examined the
Consequences which the ill Success of his Enterprise might have, did scarce
believe himself secure by this precaution, and he persuaded himself that he
must immolate the Bassa of Buda's Life to preserve his own. He caused him
immediately to be arrested, together with the Bassaes of Erseck and Poslega,
who he knew were of Intelligence with the former, and caused them all three to
be strangled. These proceedings furnished his Enemies with Pretexts to destroy
him, chiefly the Kisler-Agasi, a Creature of the Sultana Valide, to whom she
had recommended upon her Deathbed, to revenge her upon this chief Minister,
which he also did.

After the Death of these three Bassaes, the Grand Vizier continued his march,
but in his Passage by Raab, that Garrison fell upon his Rear-Guard, and killed
near 600 of them. At Gran he was joined by a body of 15000 Turks, who were
going to Belgrade. The remains of the Ottoman Army were dispersed some at Gran,
some at Newhausel, at Buda some, and the rest entrenched near Altemburg.

On the other side, the Christians discoursed of the rest of the Campania; but
as part of the Allies did think they had done enough in contributing to the
relief of Vienna, thought of returning home, many Councils were held to examine
by what means they might be stayed. The Duke of Saxony continued inflexible in
his Resolution, adn was marched for his Country. The Elector of Bavaria
consented to leave his Troops with the Emperors, but the Prince of Waldeck
gave them to understand, that he should want new orders for the undertaking of
new Enterprises with the Troops of Franconia, which he commanded. But the Duke
of Lorrain persuaded himself that these Difficulties had not happened if by a
quick engagement they had hurried the Allies to pursue the Victory, and this
was one of the chief reasons that moved the Duke to press the King in it.

Several Projects were made to divide the Army for different Occasions, many
Conferences were had with the Allies, and all the time was consumed in
Councils. In the mean time, the Duke, who thought of nothing but improving the
rest of the Summer, proposed every thing that he thought favorable, either for
the Reduction of Hungary, for the Siege of Newhausel, or that of Gran, or to
take the Posts of Barcam, and that of Pest for the settling of their Winter
Quarters, and made it appear that nothing of all this could be done without
great Forces, the Army of the Turks not being wholly deseated, however routed,
and that the Rebels Army was still entire.

He determined nothing, because he knew not what measures the Turk would take.
He only affirmed, that they ought to march forthwith into Hungary with all the
Dispositions necessary to act as the Enemies should direct.

The Emperor having approved his Propositions, and the King of Poland
conforming to them, they marched the 18th toward Presburg, and they encamped
the same day with all the Imperial Troops near Fichen; from thence they went to
Heinburg, and the 20th they approached Presburg, where the Duke expected the
Boats from the Bridge of Tuln according to orders. However the Bridge could not
be finished till the 25th, by reason of the great Winds, and the Difficulty of
getting Boats in a desolate Country. The Franconians continued camped near
Vienna, and the Bavarians came the 19th to Fichen.

The 22th, news came that Count Budiani, who upon the arrival of the Turks had
abandoned the passages which he kept upon the Raab, and embraced the party of
the Malcontents, after having warred against the Emperor's Troops with a Body
of Turks and Hungarians of his Generality, burnt and pillaged a great number of
Villages upon the frontier of Styria, had surprised and cut in pieces those
same Turks to which he was united, and had afterward joined with the Count of
Aspremont, to endeavor to incommode them of the great Army in their retreat
toward Buda.

The Bridge upon the Danube, to pass into the Isle of Schuts, being finished
the 25th, the Poles began to file over the same day, and being followed by the
Emperor's Army, they encamped the 27th at Gersdorff. The Marquis of Barch, who
in the Prince of Waldeck's absence, now sick at Vienna, commanded the Troops of
Franconia, advertised the Duke that he could not follow him with the Troops of
his Circle, and sent him the copy of an Order from Prince Waldeck, dated the
26th. He received at the same time another Letter from the Elector of Bavaria,
dated the day following, from his Camp at Ort, two Leagues from Vienna, which
gave him notice that the Franconians would not leave their Camp before they had
received Orders from the Princes of their Circle, which he judged would be
rather to recall, than cause them to advance. He added, that his Infantry being
extremely weakened and diminished by bloody Fluxes, and his Cavalry ruined, his
Troops could not so soon follow the Army of the Emperor; And yet if they would
undertake any great action, where they should be necessary, he would cause such
as were in condition to serve immediately to march.

The Duke apprehending that this separation might put him out of condition of
undertaking any thing considerable, sent Prince Lewis of Baden to the Elector,
who was gone to Bin, to change Air, by reason of some indisposition of health;
he was charged to persuade him to let his Troops follow, remonstrating to him
that it would be a great matter, now that the Forces of the Christians were
diminished, to hinder the Turks to take heart to oblige part of Hungary to
submit themselves, to take Post for Winter Quarters in the Enemies Country, and
thereby encourage the Franconians to follow their example.

In the mean time the Season advanced; these Negotiations consuming much time,
and the Duke could make no stay upon command of the Troops he was not sure of,
and willing not to lose the season, he persuaded the King of Poland to continue
the march of the Army toward Komorra, without the Allies. The King advancing
always an hour before the Imperialists, they arrived near that City the second
of October; they camped at Wismar, and a Council of the Generals of the Army
was held there, to know what the Imperialists might undertake, independent
without the Allies, in case of delay or being abandoned.

Intelligence was brought, that Tekely with his Army encamped at Lewentz; that
the gross of the Turkish Army lay about Buda; that the Grand Vizier had sent a
Detachment toward Gran, that he had put 4000 men into Newhausel to fortify
that Garrison, but that there were in the Enemies Army a great many
discontented Persons at the conduct of the Grand Vizier, by so much the more
dissatisfied, because that upon his return near Raab, he had caused the Vizier
of Buda to be strangled, as also some other Bassa's, and more than fifty
Subaltern Officers, whom he accused of not having done their duty in the late
Battle; besides that, he had also sacrificed a great number of those Run-aways,
who had preceded his retreat.

After the Council held at Wiswar, they were not of opinion to attempt the
Siege of Newhausel in a season so advanced, and in a Country full of Marshes,
the Garrison being strong, and a great Army in the Neighborhood; neither was
it thought reasonable to propound the King's going against the Enemy, because
the Troops of the Empire had not followed, and that they should be obliged to
pass through a Country where Forage would be wanting.

The attack of Gran seemed but little feasible before they were Masters of
Barcam, that the communication might be cut off. This inclined the Duke to
attempt the Fort of Barcam, which is the head of the Bridge of Gran, after
which they would further deliberate to pass to Pest, or besiege Gran, according
to the countenance of the Enemy. The Duke acquainted the King of Poland with
what had been resolved, whereuto his Majesty assented.

On the 3d of October, the King began to pass that branch of the Danube at
Komorra, called the Waagh. The Emperors Horse followed, and all the Cavalry
marched to Mose, where the Count of Starenberg was to be on the 7th with the
Infantry, the King having promised to stay for him there. The 7th day, which
should have been a day of repose, to give the Infantry time to join the rest of
the Army, the King sent to tell the Duke of Lorrain, that he would march
toward Barcham, desiring him that he would do the same. The Duke, surprised
with the change, having thereupon sounded to Horse, sent Count Dunewald to his
Majesty, to represent to him the necessity of expecting the Foot, and the
danger there was in separating in the neighborhood of the Armies of the Turks
and Rebels, and in the middle of their Garrisons. The Count found the King
already on Horseback, who answered him, that having advice that the detachment
of the Turks toward Barcam was not great, he saw no inconvenience to continue
his march. They seeing the King's resolution followed him, leaving but one
Company of Crawats to accompany the Infantry, which that day were to be at Mose.

The King being come within a League of Barcam, was advertised by his advanced
Parties, that some Squadrons of the Enemy did appear. He ordered a detachment
to charge them. They did not stand, but being relieved by a greater Body, the
Poles who attacqued them were repelled.

The King commanded other Squadrons to second them, which being engaged, he
advanced himself with all his Horse. The gross of the Turks Cavalry, which had
continued hitherto covered by a great hill, unexpectedly appeared six or 7000
strong, and briskly charging the Poles in Flank and Front, put them to flight.
The Turks charged them hotly in the disorder they were, and killed above 2000
of them, and amongst the rest, the Palatine of Pomerania. They took Tymbals and
Standards, and some Baggage, which by being intermingled with the march of the
Troops, did somewhat contribute to their defeat.

The Count of Dunewald, who had marched all day with the King, seeing the
encounters of the first Squadrons, sent to tell the Duke, that the Poles and
the Enemy were engaged, whereupon he marched swiftly, and filing through a
narrow passage betwixt him and the Plain, he saw upon his arrival that the
Polish Horse was quite broke, and that the Turks were close in their pursuit.
At this sight, his first care was to put the Emperors most advanced Troops
into Battalia, leaving room for the flying Poles, to avoid their running upon
him. As soon as he had some Squadrons of his first Line formed, seeing the
Poles still in disorder, he advanced upon the Enemy with his first Squadrons,
leaving Prince Lewis of Baden to embattel the rest. This motion stopped the
Enemies carreer, after which they retired with some speed under Barcam, to
avoid the Imperialists charge; whilst the Duke advanced, the Queen of Polands
Brother came to him, and told him, that he believed the King was lost, because
his Majesty was in the head of all in the places the most exposed, to animate
his Men by words, and inspire courage into them by his example. The Duke seeing
the Enemy retired, advanced toward the Poles. He found the King, who having
advanced with the first, would be the last in retiring. He told the Duke how
affairs had gone, and it being near Night, they thought of nothing but
encamping.

Fear and Terror had seized upon the Poles, as is usual in such Encounters,
they could scarce be persuaded to keep the Right, because of the Neighborhood
of Barcam, whither the Enemy was retired; insomuch that the King, for the
greater security of his Troops, made them take the Left, desiring the Duke to
march into the right with the Emperors Troops, which these last had always
pretended to; before they discamped, the Duke sent Orders to Count Starenberg
to make haste and come and join him with the foot. The next Morning he was
advertised that the Poles continued disquieted; that the loss they had suffered
was extremely sensible to them, that they would persuade the King not to
advance any further, but to retire to the Places designed for their Quarters;
that the principal Officers were much divided, and finally that many
Difficulties were alleged to the King to hinder the Execution of the
Resolutions which had been taken.

The Duke, who knew the Consequence of retaining the Polish Army, and in case
it separated, they should lose the Fruit and Honor of the Campania, the which
he desired to see finished with some handsome Action, and not upon a loss, went
to the Kings Quarters, and having found things as they had been represented, he
endeavored to persuade his Majesty to continue in the Terms they had agreed
upon. He demonstrated to him and his Generals, the unlucky consequences that
were to be feared if they changed design, how easy it was to force this
detachment if they did not delay to attack them, the importance of doing it
suddenly, for fear all the Forces of the Enemy might rejoyn them, and he
insisted that they should advance and charge them as soon as the Foot were come
up. The King explained this Discourse to the Senators and Officers of the Army
that did not understand the Language, and in order to it agreed to march the
next Morning, irresolute only upon the ordering of the Battle.

The Duke, who had been visiting the Ground, made a Description to the King of
it, and the Condition of Barcam, and afterward discoursed of several forms of
embattelling He proposed that which they had held at Vienna, offering the right
to his Majesty, or to march as they were camped, and divided the Poles into the
two Wings, which last proposal was accepted of, and the Resolution to march was
taken.

The Army being put into Battalia with the Day, Prince Lewis of Baden commanded
the right Wing, and under him Count Gondola and Baron Mercy, Count Dunewald was
in the left, and with him the Counts Palsi and Taff. Count Starenberg, Marshal
of the Field, conducted the Infantry, with the Prince of Croy and Count Serin.
This done, the Duke went to the King for the dividing of his Army. His Majesty
having been informed that the Enemies detachment had been augmented by several
Troops conducted by Haly Bassa of Aleppo, and by the Bassaes of Sylistria and
Caire; and apprehending that these Troops were followed by the rest,
deliberated anew upon the Enterprise; but the Duke represented to him many
motives which made him believe the Army could not yet be come thither. He
added, that if it were, he believed the Ground whereon they stood was so
advantageous, that they ought not to change their Design, being the Imperial
Army possessed all the Plain, the Danube on the right, and the Mountains on the
left, and that the Ground growing narrower toward the Enemies, they could not
make use of a great body, though they had it; these reasons being approved, the
Polish Army was divided. The King with a party of his Hussars, of his Foot, and
of his best Horse, placed himself in the right, betwixt the Emperors Horse and
his Dragoons. The Great General Jabloriski did the same in the left, and the
rest of the Polish Army made a third Line; they marched for half an hour in
this Order. About nine a Clock they saw the Turks drawn up in the Plain before
them. They moved justly, and by their firmness their Forces were judged equal
with those of the Christians. Being come near the Troops that appeared, made a
motion, putting themselves into three Lines, leaving only two great squadrons
on their right. They then came and charged the left of the Christian Army with
much fierceness, and searching the Poles, they attacked the Hussars, which the
Great General Commanded.

At the same time the gross of the Turks, who were in the middle of the height,
advanced toward the adverse Foot, as if they would have charged them, and
being come within half Musket Shot, they declined to the left of the
Christians, exposing their Flank to relieve their own men. The Duke, who was
gone toward his Infantry, seeing this motion, ran along the Line of the Horse
of the left Wing, and with all the party of the first Line, which had not yet
charged, he himself advanced at the head of the Squadrons, and charged the
Enemy in flank, which put them to a general rout, incapacitating them to make
head again. He ordered Dunewald to pursue with the whole first Line, and with
all the Poles of the same Wing, who followed them Pell-Mell to the very Gates
of Barkam, and the Marshes of Gran, where many of them were slain.

Whilst Count Dunewald chased the Enemy, the Duke caused the Army to advance in
Battalia toward Barcam. The King having seen the flight of the Turks, was come
from the right Wing to the left, to complement the Duke; the Generals and
Senators who accompanied him, did the same. Amongst the rest Jablorisky, the
Grand General of Poland, in presence of all, avowed, that his People refusing
to advance to sustain the Hussars, the readiness of Count Dunewald to succor
him, and the Vigor of the Emperors Horse had repaired that fault, and could
not be sufficiently commended. And now in the disorder the Enemy was in, they
resolve to attack Barcam.

The King caused some of his Cossacks to advance, and the Duke added five
Battalions of Starenberg, of Grana, and Baden, all under the conduct of Count
Starenberg. This detachment was scarce ordered, when the Duke, who was
approached to the Fort to inspect it, was advertised, that the Bridge upon the
Danube was broken by the precipitate flight of the first Runaways, and that the
crowding in Barkam, and upon the side to the River, were so great, that they
seemed to be packed upon each other. He hasted thither, and would lose no time
upon such an occasion. He gave Prince Lewis of Baden orders to dismount the
Regiments of Dragoons, of Schults, Comfettein, and Castle, and to march to the
Fort on that side to make a second Attack. The command was instantly executed,
and having sent some parties of Foot by Water, and five pieces of Cannon
charged with Cartrages; he ordered that the Fort should be assaulted, whilst
the great and small shot plied their Vollies upon the Banks of the River. The
Turks seeing themselves thus pressed on all sides, could not withstand the
Attack, the place being forced, the Foot and Dragoons entering at the same time
by the ways they attempted it.

The slaughter was terrible, though most of the defendants, to save themselves
from the fury of the assailants, precipitated themselves into the Danube, some
leaped in with their Horses, others tried to pass by swimming, holding by the
Mane and tails of their Horses, or some plank or piece of the broken Bridge,
and there were some who crept over the dead bodies which were held by the
cordage and pieces of wood remaining where the breach was. This slaughter
continuing long, the number of the dead was very great, all that part of the
Danube near the shore, not being very rapid, being filled with them; all the
surface of the River, where largest, being covered with clothes, and the
equipage of Men and Horses, and there did not escape above seven or 800 of all
this multitude, who found their preservation in the king of a Redoubt which was
at Barcam, where they had put themselves, and from whence they demanded
quarter, and had it.

The Town being garrisoned with Dutch and Poles, Count Staremberg, seeing these
two Nations were ready to murder each other for the booty, removed the
Imperialists, having only the Poles there, who awhile after burnt Barcam, and
all the Pallisado's that enclosed it, because the Turks had placed the Heads of
the Poles slain in the late Engagement upon the tops of them.

Count Tekely, who had orders from the Grand Vizier to join with the Bassa of
Buda at Barkam, was advanced upon the Mountains within two miles of it, but
being informed by those he sent to discover what the Christians did, of what
was passed, he retired with much diligence.

By Letters from Gran, as also by the relation of Prisoners, there were not
3000 men of all this detachment of 14000 Horse, and 1200 Janisaries saved. They
were the Hour of their Army, commanded by the Bassa of Buda, Haly Bassa of
Aleppo, the Bassa of Silistria, and some Aga's The booty was great, above six
thousand Horses being taken, and the Tymbals and the Baggage which the Poles
had left, were recovered.

This Victoty did not only re-assure the Poles, but put the Malcontents into
a despondency, and did so strongly increase the disorders in the Turkish Army,
that the Grand Vizier, unable to master them, was obliged to retire.

The next thing the Christians undertook, was the Siege of Gran, though the
Duke had need of all his Reasons and elocution to persuade the King of Poland
to it, but having at length consented, and the Bavarian Forces being come up,
three Batteries were forthwith raised; and ten great Guns were by force of men,
as also eight Mortars drawn up the Mountains of Martin and Thomas, deserted by
the Enemy. The Castle was strongly battered on the Gate, on the Buda side great
quantity of Bombs were thrown in, and the shooting lasted all day. The
Imperialists advanced to the Ditch, and lodged there on the side of the
Bavarian approaches. They advanced to the foot of the Wall, which looked toward
Barcam, and about five in the evening, some commanded Battalions of the
Imperialists attacked the City on the other extremity, and carried it without
resistance; for as much as the Enemy having retired, contented themselves to
defend it by their great firing from the Castle, from whence the very sills of
the Houses are discovered.

The Imperialists being masters of the City, the Bavarians in the Night gained
the foot of the Castle, where they fell to Mining, whilst the Imperialists
leaped into the Mote, and lodged there. Several men were lost there by the
defendants Bombs, Grenades, Stones, etc. which they continually threw amongst
them, whilst they were covering themselves. The Cannon beginning to make a
breach about Ten Clock, and the Miner at work, a Summons was sent in by a
Turkish Prisoner, with offer of goods and life, if they would surrender the
place before the day was ended. The besieged demanded till the morrow, which
being refused, the firing of the Artillery, Muskets, and Bombs were
re-doubled. They passed the Moat, made two Lodgments, by favor whereof they
attacked the Miner in a second place on the Martinberg side. This advantage
obliged the Turks to send an Officer about Eleven at Night to declare, that
they accepted the offer which had been made them, demanding Hostages whilst the
Capitulations were a making, and offering theirs.

The 27th, the Hostages being delivered, it was agreed, that the Garrison
should march out with Arms and Baggage, and that it should be conducted in
safety to Buda and Vicegrade; that the Artillery and Munitions of War and
Victuals should remain in the place, and that the Turks should deliver up their
Christian Prisoners.

The impression that the battle of Barcam had made; the vigor and readiness
wherewith they had gained the foot of the Walls, the Grand Visier's retreat,
the Bombs which were thrown without ceasing, into a place so full of People as
this, had caused so much terror and so much confusion, that though there were
above 4000 effective men in the Garrison, commanded by two Bassa's, a Bey, and
many Officers, we have seen a place reduced in five days, which in the two
former Sieges had held out several Months, with weaker Garrisons, against more
numerous Armies.

The season being too far advanced for further action, the Allies returned
home, and the Poles, together with the Imperialists marched into their
Winter Quarters.

In the mean time, the Grand Vizier being come to Court, told the Grand
Seignior the same things he had writ to him against the Bassa of Buda, and
persuaded him to approve of the rigor wherewith he had treated him. He also
accused Count Tekely of having ill seconded him; and finally, he knew so well
to justify his conduct with his Master, that he hindered the Widow of that
Bassa, who was his Highness's Sister, to complain against him for so barbarous
an action, and procured an Order to be sent her from the Sultan to go
immediately to Adrianople without seeing him. When this Princess arrived there,
she found the Sultana Valide dead, which caused her a sensible displeasure;
because she had relied much upon the credit of this Princess, who having a
great aversion for Cara Mustafa, would not have been wanting in countenancing
the vengeance she would take of this Minister; but she learned from Kisler
Agasi, or the chief of the black Eunukes, that Sultana Valide had charged him
upon her Deathbed, to tell the Grand Seignior upon his return to Adrianople,
that Cara Mustapha had a design to make himself Emperor of the West, grounded
upon a Prediction told him, that he should one day be Master of one of the
greatest Empires of the World. But whether this Prediction were true, or that
the Sultana Valide had invented it to destroy the Vizier, the news of it did
extremely comfort the Bassa of Buda's Widow, who waited the return of the
Sultan with impatience, to execute the design which she had against this
Minister, and revenge the loss of her Husband by his death.

The season being far advanced, the Grand Seignior, leaving Kara Mustapha at
Belgrade to take care of his Army, and the places in Hungary, during the Winter
quarter, returned to Adrianople.

As the Christians got every day some new advantages over the Turks, and that
the Grand Vizier did nothing to repel them, his secret Enemies, and
principally the Kisler Agasi, and the Kaimacan, who was jealous of his
greatness, took ocasion hence to decry the conduct of the Grand Vizier unto
their Master. At this time Count Tekely, who was accustomed to receive great
Subsidies from the Port, and who had his Spies near his Highness, by whom he
was faithfully advertised of all that happened, knowing that he had been
rendered suspect to his Highness, and that there was no more mention of sending
him Supplies as usual, did by his Letters omit nothing for his justification,
but to no purpose. His Letters did not disabuse the Grand Seignior, who
entirely believing what he had received from Kara Mustapha at Belgrade, was
persuaded that this Count was of Intelligence with the Imperialists. Tekely
seeing no middle betwixt his ruin and his justification, took the most
dangerous Party. He went Incognito to Adrianople, and having by the credit of
Kisler Agasi, who was his particular friend, found means of admission to the
Sultans presence, before whom, prostrated with his face upon the Earth, he
declared to him that he brought him his Head, and that he would rather lose it,
than be exposed to the calumny of his Enemies, and to the disgrace of his
Protector. Tekely's boldness looked well. The Grand Seignior gave ear to his
reasons, and judged by the relation that he made him, that all the misfortunes
that happened at the Siege of Vienna, and since, ought to be imputed to the ill
conduct of his Vizier. He permitted Tekely to return, assuring him of the
protection he demanded, and engaged himself to send him such powerful Succors,
that he should in a little time be in a condition to repair with advantage all
the losses he had suffered.

And now they begin to make complaints against the Vizier, and the loss of Gran
did not a little contribute to his ruin. The Janissaries, that the Visier's
secret enemies had caused to assemble tumultuarily, and demand his Head, under
pretense that he had abandoned their Companions in the Trenches at Vienna; and
this was a killing blow, so that the death of Kara Mustapha was resolved in a
Divan, which the Grand Seignior had caused to be assembled to that purpose.

This fatal Commission was given Chiaoux Bassa, and to Kapiglier Kiaia, who
immediately took Post for Belgrade. They arrived there the 25th of December,
and addressing themselves to the Aga of the Janissaries, they communicated the
Emperors Orders to him, which implied that he should give them all necessary
assistance. The Aga disposed such as depended on him to obey, and went with
these two Officers into the Grand Visier's house. Cara Mustapha, who perceived
them from his Chamber, did quickly suppose that his Enemies had taken advantage
of his absence to ruin him, and those that he saw coming were to execute the
Arrest of his death. Some Officers, who owed him their fortune, being then with
him, and having heard him say what he thought, proposed to him to refuse the
Door to the Aga, and them that accompanied him: they represented to him that he
was beloved by the Soldiers, and if he appeared but in his defense, he would
instantly see a number of brave men for his defense.

But this great Minister, whose life seemed odious to him after the affront
which he received before Vienna, and who knew well, he could but defer his
death for few days, being incircled with the Enemies of his Religion, who would
not fail to profit by the division of his Troops, believed that by his last
submission to his Highness orders, he ought to disabuse those who believed him
little attached to the Law, or rather he found himself so irresolute in so
pressing a danger, that the Sultans three Officers entered his Chamber before
he had taken his last resolution. He endeavored to hide the disorders of his
Soul, and after he had returned them their civilities, he asked the cause of
their coming. The Aga taking the word, told him, that his Highness had sent for
the Seal of the Empire, which he had entrusted him with, and showed him the
order in Writing. At the same time the Vizier opening his bosom drew it out,
which he presented to him with respect, asking whether they had any thing else
to require from him? he was obliged to render the Standard, which he did in the
same fashion; and having yet again demanded, whether they would have any thing
else, the three Officers answered him only with tears, letting him at the same
time see in writing the Buyurds or Command, whereby the Grand Seignior would
have his Head. Kara Mustapha was not affrighted, being already prepared for it.
He only asked, if the might not be permitted to say his Prayers. The Officers
answered him, that they had no orders to refuse him that consoiation. He
ordered his People to retire, that he might pray with less distraction, and
when he had finished, they reentered again. He then drew a Paper out of his
bosom, which he gave to the Aga, to render it to his Highness. It is believed
that it was a Billet, by which the Sultan promised him never to put him to
death, which he would make no use of, judging it useless, being he was too far
from the Grand Seignior to undrstand his intensions. He then sat upon the brink
of the Sofa, whereof he lift up the Carpet, to the end to be only upon the
Plank, demanding he might be strangled by his own Executioner, which was
granted. After a few Moments to dispose of himself, he called the Executioner,
and told him he should be quick, and not let him languish; he said also, that
the Grand Seignior would think on him after his Death. The Executioner having
put the string about his Neck, he himself disentangled it, saying, it was not
necessary they should hold his hands. As soon as he was dead, the Executioner
cut off his Head, and flead it, filling the Skin with hacked Straw, which was
put into a Box, and carried to Adrianople, and given to the Sultan, who
received it without any great Emotion, as he was coming from hunting.

The Visiers Corpse was carried out of his Chamber, and exposed under a Pavilion
to be seen of all Men. At the same time they seized on his principal Officers,
who were brought to Adrianople. Of these the Reiz Effendi was hanged, Mauro
Cordato his Interpreter put in the Castle of the seven Towers at
Constantinople, having first been spoiled of his Money and Jewels.

There were found in the Treasury of this Minister, ten or twelve Milions in
Money, Movables and Jewels, which is very considerable, if the prodigious
Expenses of Presents be considered; these Spoils, and those of some of the
Visiers Officers, and of the Tefterder, who was likewise strangled, amounted to
fourteen Millions, which came all into the Grand Seigniors Purse. He refused to
consent that this Moneys should be employed to pay the Troops, and reestablish
the Affairs of Hungary, although all the Divan was of that Opinion. The Sultan
would neither suffer them to open his Treasury, which is the great resource of
the Ottoman Emperors, and replied to them that represented to him the
necessity of doing it, that they must make use of the accustomed Revenues, and
if that did not suffice, it was for his Council to search out other ways to
supply it. And yet he was pleased to give all the Visiers immoveables to his
Children. This Humor of his Highness, and the Difficulties which were foreseen
to settle the Affairs of the Empire, diminished the heat of such who might
pretend to the Employment of Grand Vizier. The Kisler Agasi, who was always in
great Credit, and who fancied, though without any ground, that the Grand
Seignior had thoughts of placing him in this Post, declared before hand, that
he would not accept of this Office, knowing that he had not Capacity enough to
bear the weight of it.

Solomon Aga Selietar, who was his Highnesses true Favorite, and who judged he
should be always powerful enough whilst he had his Masters Favor, signified to
the Sultan, who offered to make him Grand Vizier, that all his Ambition was to
please him, and that he esteemed more the waiting upon his Person, than to
divide his Cares betwixt his Prince and the State, as he should be obliged to
do, if he accepted the charge wherewith he would honor him. So obliging a
denial augmenting the esteem and affection which the Grand Seignior had for
him, disposed him to name Ibrahim Aga, who was Kaymacan, and formerly called
Kara Kiaia, for this high Employment.

The Christians continuing their Progress in Hungary, obliged this new Grand
Vizier to assemble the Divan very often, to find a way to re-establish their
Affairs. He proposed the making of a Peace with the Emperor, and to continue
the Trevis which Kara Mustapha had violated without any lawful pretense, and to
carry the War into Poland, to revenge themselves on King John, for the ill
success of the Siege of Vienna. But the Sultan, who had promised Count Tekely
that he would not abandon him, was of a contrary sentiment. Kara Kiaia urging
his Opinion with too much heat, the Sultan grew so angry with him, that he was
judged lost, which gave room to that false report that ran of him that he was
strangled, and that Kana Houglou Camaikan of Constantinople was put in his
place.

Most of the Officers of the Garrisons being changed, the new Vizier employed
all his diligence to raise such Forces against Spring, as might salve the
disgraces of the last Campaign, which yet they could not compass, the People
being dejected even to Consternation at so many losses.

On the other side, the Christians having happily finished their Campaign, and
taken their Quarters in Hungary, used great diligence to procure Moneys, to
separate the Hungarians from the Port, and to make new Alliances.

There was but the Pope that could travel effectually in the first of these
things, seeing the other Princes of the Empire had enough to do for themselves,
as long as the differences with France were not accommodated, besides the
Protestants could obtain no advantage for their Religion.

To effect the second point, a general Act of Oblivion was published by the
Emperors command, with pardon to all that would return to their Obedience, and
Commissioners being sent to Presburg to receive their Submissions, very many of
the Nobility, Counties, and Towns were restored to their Duty as at the
beginning, though Tekely would not, and the chief Towns in upper Hungary for
fear of him, did not as yet dare to declare themselves.

But the third design had better Success, for however the Czars of Muscovia
would not give ear to the Emperors Invitation and Propositions of Alliance
made him by his Ambassador Blomberg, yet the Venetians, showing a great
Inclination to be revenged of the losses they had suffered by the Wars of
Candy, easily consented to the accomplishment of the League between the
Emperor, the King of Poland, and the Venetians.

This Alliance was to be offensive; none of the concerned should treat
separately upon any Conditions whatsoever; that this League shall tend to no
other thing but to make War against the Turks; the Emperor and the King of
Poland shall act by Land with all their Forces, and the Republic of Venice
with a Naval Army at Sea, and a Land Army in Dalmatia; that the War be made by
diversion, the Emperor shall endeavor to recover Hungary, the Poles Kaminiec,
and all the Vkraine, and Venice all she has lost, etc.

Whilst this was in concluding, there came News to the Imperial Court, of a
very great defeat the Cossacks had given the Turks and Tartars, the Chieftains
of the Tartars being both slain, and Haly Beg, who commanded the Turks, taken
Prisoner, who, though he offered a hundred thousand Crowns for his Ransom, was
slain by the quarrelling Cossack in the heat of their contest about him.

But now the Season did invite both sides into the Field, where the Christians
were chiefly Aggressors. The Christian Army in the beginning of June assembled
at their general Rendevous betwixt Schinta and Shella, to the number of thirty
thousand Men, from whence, after some stay, they passed the Danube near Gran;
it was believed that the design was formed against Newhausel, and the rather,
because it had been so greatly straightened by General Mercy, who had blocked it
up all the Winter, and reduced it to the Condition, as was supposed, of a
voluntary surrender. But it was at length discovered that Buda was at the
bottom of the Design, as a thing of greater Consequence, being therefore to
leave no Place behind them, the Army was transported to Vicegrade, a place
situate upon the Danube, having left their Baggage under the Cannon of Gran;
and having without much labor rendered themselves Masters of the City, the
Turks that were in the Castle surrendered the next day, marching out to the
number of seven hundred and forty men. In the mean time, the Turks of Alba
Regalis, and the Neighbor Garrisons, to the number of six thousand,
unexpectedly attacked the Baggage at Gran, but were so rudely received, that
having lost two hundred of their Men, and four Colors, they were forced to
give back. Major General Halloweil of the Imperialists was slain in this Fight.

But the Turks, sollicitous for Newhausel, and finding they could not
sufficiently relieve it with small Parties, resolved to attempt it with an
Army, and being advanced as far as Vacia, the Duke resolved to oppose them. To
this purpose he set forwards, and found them drawn up in Battalia upon the
heights near the Town. The place was of difficult access, having on the left
the Danube, and a large Morass, and the right secured by a Wood. The Duke
having embattelled his men, moved directly toward the Enemy, and about Eleven
of the Clock passed the Morass, without any great opposition, till being come
upon the heights, they were then charged with great fury, but the Turks not
being able to break them the first time, they bravely attacked them the second,
and third time; but with like success, still repelled, especially the third
time with great loss, and forced to save themselves by flight. The Foot saved
themselves in the Castle, but were forced to surrender at discretion, after
three hours resistance. Novigrade was hereupon quitted by the Turks, and as
soon possessed by the Imperialists.

This Victory animated the Christians to prosecute their march to Pest, Jun. 27.
whither being come, they cast a great number of Bombs into the Town, with that
success, that the fire taking in several places of it, frightened the Garrison
so, that taking their best movables with them, they fled into Buda, after they
had also reduced some Houses in the Town to ashes, and fired the Bridge behind
them. But the Christians taking possession of Pest, quenched the fire, repaired
the fortifications, and battered Buda with the Artillery they found in the
place.

Hitherto fortune had been so favorable to the Imperialists, The Siege of Buda.
that they began to think nothing insuperable to their courage. This opinion
made them pass the Danube again, and undertake the Siege of Offen, or Buda, the
Capital of the Kingdom, sometimes the Residence of the Kings of Hungary, and
now of the Bassa's, that govern that wealthy Kingdom with no less authority.
After some ruffling and skirmishes, the City was invested, and the Suburbs
taken without any great opposition. The Turks likewise quitted St. Gerards
Hill, and the besiegers began to batter the Walls with their Artillery.

The Turks abroad were not idle, for having got twenty thousand Men together,
they were resolved to attempt the relief of Buda. But the Christians having
left all their Foot, with what Horse was necessary to continue the Siege, they
marched with the rest of the Cavalry, one thousand Foot under the command of
Count Aversberg, and two thousand five hundred Hussars of Count Esterhasis. The
Duke marched all Night to find out the Enemy, who, though well trenched, at
sight of the Christians came out of their Camp, and embattell'd themselves for
their defense. The dispute lasted near four hours, the Turks making several
motions to gain the Flanks of the Enemy, which being perceived, the Christians
used all possible diligence to prevent them, and engaging at length, after a
sharp fight, the Infidels being disordered, were put to flight, and so closely
pursued, that not only their Camp and Cannon were taken, but at least four
thousand of them slain, and the great Standard, the badge of the Grand Visier's
dignity also surprised.

After this Victory, the Duke returning to the Siege, summoned the place, but
received for answer, that the Governor had in the presence of his Messengers
caused forty Christian Slaves to be hewed in pieces, saying, he wished he could
do as much to all the Christian Army. In revenge of this, the Christians
assaulted the place, but in vain, though upon a second attempt they carried the
lower Town, with their Swords in their hands, notwithstanding the opposition
they found was great. They raised a Battery there of twenty four Cannon, and
seventeen Mortars, from whence, as also St. Gerards hill, they battered the
City. Nor were the besieged idle, who made a brave sally upon the Besiegers,
wherein they slew some hundreds of them, with several considerable Officers,
besides the wounded.

The Christian Army beginning to want Forage, they made a Bridge to pass to
the Isle of St. Margaret, from whence they might be the better provided with
all things. Many were the attempts, the batteries, the sallies, and endeavors
on both sides. The Christians endeavored to hinder the Turks, though in vain,
from watering at the Danube. The Christians sprung a Mine by the great Tower,
which did indeed take effect, but it was found that the Turks were too well
provided to hazard an assault. About mid- August, the Governor, or Vizier of
Buda, Kara Mehemet, was killed with a shot he received in his face, a Person
very brave, and very knowing. Ephraim Bassa succeeded him in the Government,
but did not enjoy it long, being likewise slain with a Cannon Bullet, so that
the Chief command was devolved upon the Aga of the Janissaries.

As the attack was vigorous, so the defense was brave, the Turks continually
vexing the Christians with their Alarms and Sallies, who on the other side
continued their approaches with great resolution, but their Foot being much
spent, it was judged advisable not to hazard a General assault, before the
Bavarian Forces, which were daily expected, were come up.

In the mean time the Serasquier Bassa formed a design to make a diversion some
other way, in order to which he marches toward the frontiers of Croatia, where
General Lesley was camped, who had besieged Virovitza in July, beaten the
relief designed for their succor, and thereupon had the place surrendered to
him upon composition. Having now notice of the Serasquier's design, he went and
posted himself within half a League off his Camp, near a Bridge that was laid
over the Danube at Turanowitz. A while after the Turks approached, who charged
with great fury eight hundred Croats, newly come to the Imperial Camp, but with
their accustomed misfortune. They however returned immediately to the fight,
and forced the Croats to retire, leaving them three Standards for prise, so
that being animated with this advantage, they would attempt more, and attacked
the Imperialists in their Post; but they were so ill received, that they were
obliged to retire with the loss of five hundred men, which were killed upon the
place. The Christians lost two hundred.

Though this Siege, for the Greatness and Fame of it, deserves to be described
in all its particulars, the Approaches, the Attacks, the Mines, the Battles,
the Batteries, the Breaches of the Christians being carried on with so much
Valor and Constancy, that it amazed the wondering World; yet the Greatness of
the Garrison, the Situation and Strength of the Place, the reiterated Succors
that were brought in, a potent Army commanded by a Seraskier, within the noise
of their Guns, yea, oft-times their view; a vigorous and intrepid Courage in
the Defendants, frequent and furious Sallies, Countermines, and the advance of
a wet Season so favorable to them, rendered all the Endeavors of the Besiegers
fruitless, and forced them to a Retreat.

The Duke of Bavaria had indeed brought with his Person, a considerable recruit
to the Imperialists, and they performed all that Courage could suggest; but
being the fatal moment of the reducing of this Capital City of the Kingdom was
not yet come, we will transmit the History of it till then, when the same great
Achievements were in a manner acted over again, and indeed by the same
Generals on the side of the Christians, but with better fortune.

The Siege had lasted from the fourteenth of July, till the first of November,
at which time the Christians having transported their Baggage, their sick, and
some pieces of Artillery to the Isle of St. Andrew; the Army sending their
great Cannon, their Ammunition, and the rest of their Baggage by Water, for
want of draught-Horses, though well convoyed, followed themselves in a Body
uninterrupted, and marched to their Winter Quarters, the Bavarians into upper
Hungary, and the Imperialists into both the upper and lower Hungary, Bohemia,
Silesia, etc. according to their Repartitions.

The Turks attempted nothing upon the Army in their retreat, but brought near a
thousand Prisoners, which were left in the Isle of St. Margaret, into the City,
not singly triumphing for so signal a deliverance.

Such was the end of this bloody Siege, where, following the common Opinion,
the Emperor lost twenty thousand Men, and amongst them a great number of
Officers. Of those of most note were the Counts of Altheim, two of the
Starembergs, James and Lewis, Carlowitz, Richtari, Hoken-Zollern, Furstenburg,
Nassau, Durheim, Chriminz, and the young Counts of Harrah, and great quantity
of others.

The Turks recovered their Garrisons of Pest and Vacia, without any great
difficulty, but in exchange the Count of Zober took the Castle of Suran near
Newheusel.

The Republic of Venice had a more fortunate Campaign. The Venetians declare
War against the Turks.
Their Doge or Prince being dead, Marco Antonio Justiniano being elected Duke
in his place, the Senate sent orders to their Secretary Capello, at the Ottoman
Port immediately after the conclusion of the Alliance made with the Emperor
and Poland, to declare War against the Turks, and to save himself as well as he
could, which he did; for having scarce finished his Declaration, he retired
from Constantinople in the habit of a Seaman, and embarked himself upon a
French Ship. But two of his Domestics, and six other servants, had the
misfortune to be taken, whilst the Merchants of his Nation took Sanctuary in
the French Embassadour's Palace. The Kaimacan of Constantinople would search
whether Capello was not there also, but the Ambassador answered him, if he
came to re-search there without express orders from the Grand Seignior, he
should repent it, which so discomposed him, that after some excuses, he
proceeded no further.

The Council choosing their great Officers, made Morosini Captain General,
Mocenigo Procurer General of Dalmatia; the Prince of Parma General of the
Infantry, etc. General Strozoldo passed out of the Emperor's service, to that
of this Commonwealth.

The Morlacks did likewise, for the most part, embrace the Party of the
Venetians, holding the Turks in perpetual Alarms, making oft-times very
considerable Booty, perpetually pestering them with their ravagings and
excursions.

The General Rendezvous of the Venetian Fleet was at Corfu, where the Galleys
of the Pope, of Malta, and of Tuscany joining with them, consisting in all of
forty-six Galleys, six Galliasses, thirty-three Men of War, besides other
smaller Vessels, manned with above twenty thousand Foot, and five or six
hundred Horse. A General Council of War being held in presence of all the Chief
of the Auxiliary Squadrons, it was resolved to attempt the Island of St. Maure,
in pursuance whereof, arriving before the Island about the 20th of July, the
Army entered the Port of Dameta, on the East side of the Island, where also they
made their descent. Seignior Monetta landed first with one hundred and fifty
Men, being followed by General Strozoldo, with two Venetian Regiments, the
Popes, and the Infantry of Malto, the rest of the Venetian and Duke of
Tuscany's Forces landing on the West side. Having taken their Posts, the
Generalissimo sent a Summons to them in the Fort, to surrender it, which they
with contempt refusing, the Christians began to batter the Town from their
Galleys and Galliasses, whereby the houses and fortifications of the City were
greatly endamaged, as also a Mosque, which was ruined; and however the Turks
were not wanting in their defense, yet they would hinder the Christians to
lodge in the Suburbs, and to raise Batteries, which did greatly prejudice the
Walls, besides that the Bombs did very great harm in the City. The first of
August, a great Breach was made in the Wall, one of their Bulwarks being much
ruined, and four of their Pieces of Cannon rendered useless to the Besieged;
besides, the Town flamed in several parts, being fired by the Bombs; by favor
of which advantages the Venetians advanced their approaches so well, that they
began already to fill the Ditch, and making every thing ready for a general
assault. Things being at this pass, General Morosini, by an unaccustomed kind
of Clemency, sent them a second Summons, which they accepting off, hung out
toward evening a white Flag, and about one in the Morning, sent three
Deputies, to notify they were content to surrender, upon condition they might
carry all their goods with them, but they could obtain no more, than to march
out with their Families, and what they could carry. Hostages were next Morning
delivered on both sides, and all the Slaves were released, save that they were
obliged to serve as Seamen in the Galleys of the Commonwealth for a year. The
Garrison with their Army, seven hundred in number, marched out that evening by
the West Port, and the Venetians entered by the breach into the City, St. Maura
taken.
where they found store of Provision, and eighty Pieces of Ordinance, twenty
whereof had the Arms of St. Mark upon them. During the time of the Siege, which
lasted seventeen days, the Christians lost four-hundred men, and the Turks near
three hundred.

And thus this Nest of Pirates, (the Leucade of the Ancients) about seventy
miles round, and well peopled, and in the possession of the Turks ever since
Mahomet the second's time, was re-taken in less than three Weeks, with so
inconsiderable a loss. The General caused the Mosques forthwith to be
re-consecrated, and Te Deum to be sung in them for so happy a Victory, which
was also celebrated in Venice with great magnificence.

After the fortifications of this place were repaired, and the Garrison
provided with all necessaries, the Government of it being given to Laurence
Venier, as extraordinary Provider, and to Phillip Parictz in ordinary, both
Gentlemen of Venice, the General chose two thousand Venetians, the remainder of
those which were in a condition to march, by reason of the manifold sicknesses
that reigned amongst the Soldiery, and dispatched them with Colonel Angelo,
to assemble all the Grecians he could get together. and transported himself to
the haven of Pettala, in expectation of the said Collonel's enterprise. He went
thence, and ancred in the haven or Port of Dragomestro, where landing with two
thousand Venetians, and one thousand of the Auxiliaries, he joined himself with
fifteen or sixteen hundred Grecians. These Troops ravaged the Country, chased
the men which Saban Bassa, Governor of Prevezza, had posted to observe the
Christians. Having allured the said Bassa into the field, burnt some Villages,
and pillaged the Country five days together, they re-imbark'd at Pettala, and
sailed thence to the Haven of Dameta. There, at a Council of War, the
resolution of attacking Prevezza was taken, it being the only place that
covered the Island of St. Maur, being some twelve miles distant from it. In
order to this design, the General sent five Galleys, and six Galliasses toward
the Castles called the Gomenizze, within sight of the Fortress, to oblige the
Turks to divide their Forces, which also happened; for upon a supposition that
the Christians would attempt the Towers, they sent most of their Men thither:
The Army parted from Dameta the 20th of September, and came to anchor that
evening at the mouth of the Gulf of Arta or Ambracia, that City being famous
for the Residence of King Pyrrhus, and its Gulf, for the Victory of Augustus
against Marc Anthony.

The next day the Captain Monetta, who was come with twenty four Barks and
Brigantines, landed his Troops, being assisted by the approach of the Galleys,
which hindered the Turks from daring to appear upon the shore, before the
Venetians were drawn up into Battalia by General Strozoldo, and had forced five
hundred Spahis, who came to charge them, to retire. They took the Castle
without difficulty, and posted themselves upon a height which commanded the
City. The General thereupon summoned the place, but the Officer who commanded
in chief in the absence of Saba Bassa, refused the Letter and Messenger,
shooting at the later, upon confidence of being relieved by his Governor.
Several Mortars and Cannon were landed, and Batteries being raised, the place
was sorely canonado'd, in so much that all the Enemies Pieces but one were
dismounted. The twenty fourth, they carried their Approaches into the Moat, and
by Favor of the Obscurity of the Night, carried their Mine under the great
Tower. The twenty eighth they made a Lodgment in the Ditch, and the Breach
being very large, As also Preveza.
Order was given for the Assault as soon as the Mine had played; but the Turks,
sensible of their Danger, prevented it by hanging out a Flag of Truce. They
demanded the same Conditions with them at St. Maur, though but thirty of the
principal were suffered to go out with Arms and Baggage, the rest being only
allowed what they could carry about them. There were found in this place forty
six pieces of Cannon, and much Provision. The Winter advancing apace, the
Auxiliaries returned to their several Homes, and the Venetians to their Isles
to pass the Season there.

In Dalmatia the Venetians happily ended their Campania with the taking of
Narenta. And Narenta in Dalmatia.


The King of Poland did not take the Field this year before mid- August, after
the Troops which had been last year in Hungary, and a party of Brandenburgs had
joined his Army. He took a review of his Army near Buzac, from whence he sent a
strong detachment to invest Jastowitz but two miles off, whither he also came
toward Evening with the rest of his Army, The Poles take the Field.
and summoned the place; but the Commander having answered, that the place
being entrusted to him by the Grand Seignior, he would keep it to the last
Extremity; but he was not as good as his word, for after having been battered
two days, the Turks demanded a Parley. Hostages were given on both sides, and
the Articles quickly signed, according to which the Garrison marched out with
their Arms, to the number of five hundred men. The King turned hence toward
Swaniec, near the Niester, over which he caused a Bridge to be laid, and his
Army to pass it. But he quickly repassed it again, upon the advice he received,
that thirty thousand Tartars had passed this River, with design to make an
irruption into Poland. His Majesty going in quest of them, had the luck to cut
four hundred of them in pieces, but he could not engage them in a formal
battle, being they stayed no where, for this reason, and the season being
passed, Go into Winter Quarters;
he resolved to send his Army into Winter Quarters.

The successes of the Cossacks last year in December, which we have already
mentioned, encouraged them with their General Kunincky, betimes in the Spring,
to go in quest of new Adventures, and being reinforced with Moldavians and
Walachians, they marched toward Stravico, where the Danube disgorges it self
into the black Sea, but being assailed by the Hospodar Duka, they were obliged
to retire, and their General fled out of the Field with the Horse, but the
Infantry standing firm, recovered the day, routed the Turks and Tartars, took
Jas, The Cossacks assassinate their General.
the Hospodar's Residence, and himself Prisoner. But not being satisfied with
their General Kunicky, they deposed him, and put Mohila into his place; and
however that afterward the old General was restored by the intercession of the
King of Poland, and that the new had but a subaltern command under him, yet the
Cossacks mortally hating him, they at length assassinated him, and gave the
entire command to Mohila, after which they still continued their excursions,
without engaging before any strong Place.

The Ottoman Empire had been in no small distraction before the relief of Buda,
and that seeming in some sort to compensate their loss at Vienna, The state of
the Ottoman Empire.
they at least made use of it as an incentive to raise the well-nigh desponding
spirits of their People. It had been given out that the Grand Seignior himself
would in Person come into the field, at least to Belgrade, to countenanee his
Armies, though he was pleased to remain at Adrianople; and being the Forces he
had ordered from the several Provinces of the Empire were defective in the
numbers he expected, he caused several of their Leaders to be strangled. The
Troops of Asia did likewise mutiny, which so retarded his preparations, that
the Christians got into the Field before him, and necessitated him to a
defensive War. The Rendezvous of his Forces was at Belgrade, from whence they
passed by the Bridge of Esseck to Buda, whose fortifications they took care to
repair, for fear lest the Enemy might attempt a second Siege, placing twelve
thousand men there in Garrison, with Victuals and Ammunition for its defense.
The numerous Hoards of the Tartars, which never failed to attend their
Conquests, refused now to march, the Cham having sent the Grand Seignior word,
that he could spare none of his Troops this Summer, having himself need of
them, to secure his Country against the invasion of the Cossacks.

Newheusel had been blocked up all the Winter by the Christians, under the
command of Colonel Heusler, so that most of the attempts for its relief from
Buda, Agria, and other of their Garrisons, proved fruitless. The Turks seeing
no good to be done with small Detachmnts, drew a great Body of Men together,
betwixt Pest and Vicegrade, and having provided a great Convoy of Provisions,
resolved to attempt the relief of the place, which occasioned Colonel Heusler
to be daily reinforced with new Troops; who, ten thousand strong, posted his
Men along the River Gran, having taken care to secure all the Fords and
passages of it. His numbers daily increasing, the Ottomans who were gathered
together betwixt Pest and Vacia, having intelligence of it, retired, having
sent the Provisions, designed for the relief of Newheusel, back to Buda,
fearing they should be attacked by the Imperialists, if they stayed there.

The Christian Army, composed of the Imperial Troops, and their several Allies,
being much more forward than the Turks, had rendezvouzed, and were now encamped
betwixt Newheusel and Barcam, where, upon the Duke of Lorrain's arrival, it was
resolved at a Council of War to attack Novigrade, to cut off by that means the
communication betwixt Buda and Newheusel, and afterward formally to besiege
Newheusel. But he afterward altered his mind, being it might take up too much
time to besiege Novigrade, by reason of the distance, and would but little
contribute to the Siege of Newheusel. Besides, this last place was represented
very defective, through their wants and distempers.

Newheusel the Oywar of the Hungarians, is a large Hexagon, Newheusel besieged
by the Christians.
well bulwork'd and moated, the Plain about being Moorish and Fenny. The River
Newtra runs within Pistol-shot of it, furnishing the Town-Ditch with its Water,
by a cut or trench, which conveys it into it. The resolution of attacking this
important place being taken, Jul. 7th.
it was invested by the Imperial Army, the lines of Circumvallation were made,
and a resolution was taken to attack the place with vigor and conduct. Two
lines of approaches were advanced toward two Bastions; that to the right by
the Imperialists, and they of Lunebourg; and the other by the Imperialists, and
the Bavarian Troops; the one commanded by the Princes of Hanovre, and Croy,
byturns, and the other by Count Serini, with each three Master Generals to
assist them. The same night the Trenches were opened by three thousand Foot,
and the Approaches carried on seven hundred paces. Those on the Bavarian side
toward the Mosque were enlarged and deepened, so that three Men might pass
a-brest, and be covered. On the Imperialists side, the Duke caused two
Batteries to be raised, both on the right of his Approaches, whereon they
worked the whole Night; and though the Enemy continued to shoot their Cannon
without ceasing, there were but very few killed or wounded. In short, the
Approaches on both sides were carried on with such care, and industry, and
courage, the Duke seldom leaving the Trenches till very far in the Night, but
assisting and encouraging the Soldiery by his presence and authority, that
maugre all the brave opposition of the Garrison, and their perpetual firing and
sallies, the works were continued to the very Mote on both sides, strengthened
not only with Lines of Communication, with Redoubts, and with multiplied
Batteries, but the Water also began to be drained out of the Ditch, by a Canal
made for the purpose. The Besieged seeing themselves so sorely pressed, amongst
others made a Sally about three a Clock, with two hundred Men, and surprised a
Redoubt, wherein there were three hundred of the Suabian Troops, who together
with their Officers were all cut to pieces. The Turks were so joyed with this
success, that they testified it by a consort of Music, after their mode, that
Night. The Besiegers had endeavored to pass the Ditch in Boats, and so carry
over their Minery, but the said Boats were sunk by the Defendants, and many
slain; and now they begin to fill the said Moat with Faggots, and Sacks of
Wool, and several Galleries were in making for the securer passage, but they
were often burnt and broke by the Besieged, who omitted nothing in their
defense. They set fire on the Bavarians Gallery with their Arrows, at the sharp
ends whereof they had fastened a mixture of Sulphur and Pitch, which did not
only burn it, but communicating its flames to the neighboring Battery, burnt
it quite down, with the Carriages of four of their battering Pieces,
notwithstanding all the diligence and care to the contrary.

It was now the beginning of August, when the Besieged made a brisk Sally upon
them that worked in the advanced Posts over against the Gate of Gran, killed
fifty and hurt many, among which was Gallenfels Lieutenant Colonel, Pugerelli
a Captain, and several other Officers. The disorder was so great, that the
Dukes of Bavaria and Lorrain ran thither, the latter wounding sorne of the
Run-aways to stay them, and ill treating their Officers for their negligence.
Colonel Burgstorf was killed the Night following in the Approaches, and Count
Souches dangerously wounded in his Neck. The Besieged had filled up the Canal
which the Christians had made to drain their Moat, but it was opened again. And
now the Approaches, the Galleries, and filling the Ditch had been carried on
with such violence, that the Cannon of the Town were well-nigh all dismounted,
and the infinite numbers of Bombs and Carcasses which had been thrown into it,
had well-nigh consumed it. The Besieged had indeed made new Retrenchments in
the attacked Bastions, where they had re-mounted their Cannon, and used them
with success: but,

The Breach which the Christians had made was great, and the Gallery was
carried over. The Moat was filled equal with the largeness of the Breach, and
the Mines were a completing, the Traverses of the Ditch were much enlarged, so
that the Soldiers might go in a large front to the assault. And yet they
finish another Battery upon the brink of the Moat, where they planted
twenty-four Pieces of Cannon of twenty four pound Ball, to make the Breach yet
larger and easier. And now all things being prepared for the assault, they were
hindered for two or three days by the great Rains.

In the beginning of this Month, the Bassa had desired a Parley, but demanded,
in case of surrender, that he might march away, not only with their Arms, but
all sorts of Ammunition and Cannon, and take with him all the Christian Slaves,
etc. which conditions the Duke would not hearken to. The Bassa was indeed
animated by hopes of relief from the Seraskier, who, he knew, was preparing for
it, and had already in order to a diversion besieged Gran, which obliged the
Duke of Lorrain with the Elector of Bavaria, and forty thousand men, to rise
and go and meet him, leaving eleven thousand Foot and five thousand Horse, with
fifty-eight Pieces of Cannon, and eighteen Mortars, to continue the Siege under
the command of Count Caprara, Marshal General of the Field, and the Prince of
Croy, General of the Artillery.

But to return to Newheusel, the fatal 19th. of August being come, a resolution
was taken to assault the Town at Eleven of the Clock, to which end two Mines
were sprung that morning, one at the North Bastion, and the other upon the
neighboring Curtain, which, though they had not their wished effect, which was
to ruin some retrenchments of the besieged, yet they did much facilitate the
passage, rendering the ascent more easy, so that it was resolved to assault
the place at eight a clock, to this purpose three thousand were ordered for the
attack in two places, to each fifteen hundred, which were supported by a
Reserve of two thousand. The Imperialists, had the Van on both sides. Count
Sherffenberg commanded the right, being followed by them of Lunenberg and
Suabia, and Lieutenant Colonel Samoraski the left, with the Troops of Colen,
Bavaria and Franconia. Being thus prepared, they fired from all their
Batteries, and showred in their Granado's and Bombs from nineteen Mortars, with
that impetuousness, that they put them within into such a consternation, that
for some time they durst scarce appear. During this Tempest, Count Sherffenberg
first entered, and posting himself upon the Bastion, the Sieur Rummel about the
same, pushing at the new breach; the besieged were forced to give way on all
sides, and retreating upon a Cavalier of their Retrenchments, did now the
second time lift up a white Flagg, demanding quarter, but in vain; for the
Christians rushing on, put all they met to the Sword; this rendered the rest so
desperate, that four hundred of them precipitated themselves into the
Town-Ditch, who were all destroyed by the Horse, so that of all the Garrison
which was yet twelve hundred at the beginning of the assault, scarce two
hundred were saved. Hassan Bassa the Governor, desperately wounded in the head
and breast, was brought to the General, and some ten more of the chief Officers
were saved; but the Governor dyed two days after of his wounds. Is taken by
Assault.
This Hassan was a Renegade, Native of Bohemia, though a man of extraordinary
great parts and resolution.

There were found in the place eighty Pieces of Ordnance, and a great quantity
of Ammunition and Provision, so that the perpetual noise of their wants was a
fable, the Governor having always a great Magazin of Victuals, as well as
Ammunition, which he did not think fit to expose before the Siege. Of the
Christian Slaves there were but forty remaining, the Turks having consumed the
rest in their works, exposing them still where the greatest danger was. And
although the Besiegers did scarce lose one hundred in the storm, yet it is
supposed, that during the whole Siege, the number of their slain did at least
equal, if not surmount that of their Enemies, yet with this difference, that
the Turks lost all, and they but an inconsiderable part of a potent Army:
excepting the Prince of Wirtemberg, greatly lamented by the good and brave, and
some other considerable Officers.

The Seraskier, not imagining the fate of Newheusel so near, having with great
industry gathered a considerable Army, estimated betwixt fifty and sixty
thousand strong, resoved to attempt the relief of it, in order to which he
would try the way of diversion, Jul. 30.
as less hazardous, and upon that account marches to Gran, Gran besieged.
and though that very day of his arrival an additional reinforcement of five
hundred men, sent thither by the Duke of Lorrain, got into the Garrison, yet he
caused the Trenches to be opened, and began to attack the place with his Cannon
and Mortars, from Batteries raised on St. George and St. Thomas hills. They
also attackt the lower Town, but were repulsed with the loss of two or three
hundred men. Several other attempts were made upon the Outworks, but with loss
to the Undertakers, who understanding that the Enemy advanced, grew more
remiss, possessing themselves of all the Hills by which the Christians might
attack them, and thereupon quitted the Siege.

On the 7th of August, the Duke of Lorrain, with forty thousand men, passed the
Danube, upon a Bridge near Comorra, and arrived the 12th at a Village that was
burnt, where he found the Turks, who had abandoned the Siege of Gran, very
advantageously posted, having Mountains on each side, covered with thick Woods,
and a Morass before them, which reached to the Danube. Upon the arrival of the
Christian Army, they skirmished near the Morass, where several were killed and
hurt on both sides. The following Night the Christian Army camped in Battalia,
and continued so the 13th, but the Turks alarmed them about noon, and
skirmished all the day with the Christians right Wing, where the Hungarians
were, many being slain and wounded on both sides. About noon the Duke commanded
some Pieces of Cannon to be planted on a Hill behind his Men, from whence they
shot, and the Turks did the same with two great Pieces, from a height where the
Janissaries were. The 14th, the Turks advanced their Camp to the very Morass,
upon Mountains opposite to our advanced Guards, where they made three Batteries
with great Cannon, shooting into our very Camp.

The 15th, a Polish Slave escaped out of the Turkish Camp, and gave advice,
that the Seraskier, Ibrahim Bassa, was persuaded, that the Christian Army did
not exceed twenty thousand, and thought or a retreat, so that he might easily
rout them, if he suddenly fell upon them with his that was sixty thousand
strong. Upon this advice, the Duke and the other Generals resolved to feign a
Retreat, and then, by drawing the Enemy beyond the Morass, find a place to
fight with them in a pitched Battle.

The same day the Turks advanced toward a place in the Morass where they might
pass with the Horse, and took Post also in another, where they might make a
Bridge for the Foot. As the Christians had already resolved to march the day
following very early, toward the Bridge of Boats at Vyfali, they let fly some
Guns only to amuse the Enemy. In the mean time the Orders for the march of the
Army were given in the following manner. First, that the Baggage should part
that evening. The left Wing having the Avaunt-Guard, followed by that of the
right. Secondly, that the Army should be ranged in Battalia before day, and
march as the place would permit; the two Wings each in two Lines, but if the
way would oblige them to file, that then they should begin by the left Wing,
and enlarge themselves as the ground did permit, into their first order of
Battle.

That the second line should have the Avaunt-Guard commanded by Count Dunewalt,
which was to be followed by the first line in the same manner. At the right of
the first line Count Styrum was to march upon the Mountains (which he had
viewed the day before) with his Regiment, the Dragoons of Luneburg, and all the
Hussars, except those of Zoborra, with some Fieldpieces. That the Fauconets
should march before the first line, and every Regiment with its Fieldpieces, as
usual. And finally, that the Squadrons and the Battalions posted on the little
Mountain on this side the Morass, as also those on the Mountain to the right,
commanded by Major General Tungen, should march at the sound of the Tymbals.

About ten at Night they had News that the Turks were passing the Morass, The
Battle of Gran. Aug. 15.
whereupon all the Generals took Horse, Lorrain in the right, and the Elector
of Bavaria in the left, and all being in order, they began to march at the
sound of their Trumpets, Tymbals, and Drums, which was continued till the Turks
by Favor of the Night charged their left Wing, whereupon the whole Army facing
about, they marched to succor their engaged Troops, which done, they continued
advancing, notwithstanding the cries and howlings of the Turks, and their
continual Skirmishing till it was break of day, when a great Mist covered the
whole Field, that nothing could be discerned. Both sides made use of this
accident, ranging their Armies to their uttermost Advantage.

After seven in the Morning, the Sun having dispelled the Mist, the Turks
advanced upon the Christians, with the noise of their Drums and horrible Cries,
discharging some Cannon upon their right Wing, charged it with great fury, but
they were repulsed; the same happended on the Mountain where Tungen commanded,
who was hurt there. At the same time the Turks attacked with their greatest
force, and principally their Foot, the heights on the Christians right where
Count Styrum was, but he was so seasonably succored by some Imperial
Battalions and other Troops of the second line, that the Turks were forced to
retire, being indeed chased and repelled in all the parts of the Army. Being
fled by the Morass, the way they came, they seemed to make head again in their
Camp, but upon the advance of the Christians, who passed the Morass with their
Foot and Horse, the terror and consternation was so great amongst the Turkish
Soldiers, Gained by the Christians.
that it was impossible for the Serasquier, notwithstanding all his endeavor
to persuade his Men to oppose the passage of the Morass. They also abandoned
their Camp, Arms, Cannon, and other Instruments of War to the Pursuers, besides
forty Ensigns and some two hundred Prisoners which were taken. The Serasquier
was hurt in his Leg, and having left five thousand upon the place, secured the
rest by a timely retreat. The two Armies separating after the fight, the
Christians went back to Comorra, in order to their prosecution of the Siege of
Newheusel: and the Serasquier having rallied his Forces, and punished with
strangling some of his chief Officers, who had not well behaved themselves in
the Battle of Gran, and passed the Danube, declaring he would relieve Newheusel
whatever it cost, but soon after he received the news, as the Christians had at
Comorra, that the place was taken by assault.

The Serasquier however having formed a new train of Artillery of twenty
Pieces, which he took out of Buda, and being reinforced with several fresh
Troops, he marched toward Vaccia, incamping betwixt that place and Pest, but
hearing of the approach of the Christian Army, he abandoned Novigrade and
Vaccia, taking the Cannon and Ammunition with him that was there, demolishing
the said places, and setting fire to them when he left them. He also ruined the
Country about Pest, and having sent a Detachment to reinforce the Garrison of
Agria, he repassed the Dunube with the rest of his Army at Buda.

And now the Turks do not seem averse from Peace, the Serasquier having sent an
Aga to the Duke of Lorrain with a Letter, wherein he acquainted his Highness,
that he had full power from the Grand Seignior to treat and conclude a Peace,
which he conjures him to promote by offers of great advantage, as abandoning
Count Tekely, and delivering of the three Hostages, which were in the Grand
Seignior's hands. But the Duke answered him, that he had no Orders to treat of
Peace, and that a Victorious Army was not to be amused with such Proposals, but
that he would acquaint his Imperial Majesty with the Serasquier's desire.

The Serasquier having passed the Danube, the few Tartars he had, not exceeding
six thousand, left him and returned home. The Bassa's of Agria, Temiswar and
Waradin were sent back, with the Troops under their command, and went home to
their respective Governments, the Serasquier with the rest of his Army posting
himself betwixt Buda and Alba-Regalis to observe the Christians motion.

The Imperial Army had advanced in quest of the Turks as far as Vaccia, but
hearing that the Ottoman Army was separated in several Bodies, and marched as
above, as also toward the Frontiers of Styria and Croatia; the Duke resolved
likewise to send four thousand men to reinforce Count Lesley, and being the
Forage was destroyed, to return, having ordered a Detachment of five Regiments
of Foot, one of Cuirasiers, and two of Dragoons and Croats, to march unto
uppper Hungary, where Count Caprara was to command in Chief.

The Serasquier had made several other Attempts for Peace, but the Emperor
refusing pasports to his Aga, those overtures vanished. There had also been an
Armenian sent in the beginning of this year with overtures of Peace, but he was
sent back with this Answer; That the Emperor will not enter into any
Negotiation of Peace, but jointly with the King of Poland, and Republic of
Venice; insomuch that finding all his Endeavors for a Treaty fruitless, he
repassed the Bridge of Esseck, sending part of his Forces toward Zigeth, and
the rest toward Slavonia and Bosoria, whereby he also defeated Count Lesleys
Design upon Possega.

To all the Miseries of War was added that of the Plague, which raged much at
Constantinople, which, together with the account they had of the loss of
Newheusel, and the other ill Successes of the Ottoman Army in Hungary, Morea,
and indeed every where, had filled not only that City, but the Empire with
Consternation and Tumult; for the Janissaries, as is usual in all great
Misfortunes, mutined, threathed not only the Grand Vizier, but the Grand
Seignior himself, and were not to be appeased without considerable
Distributions amongst them; it being also given out, that his Highness would
himself command the Army in Person next Summer.

The Principal Armies of these potent Adversaries being in Winter Quarters, we
will leave them struggling there to enlarge their Accommodations, and transfer
our Pen to such Actions as have been remarkable in other Parts.

The Contests in upper Hungary were various betwixt the Imperialists and
Tekelites, General Schultz commanded the former, who had order to attack
Vngwar, and afterward to besiege Esperies and Cassaw. Count Tekely thereupon
passes the Tybiscus, assembling what Troops he could together, sending to the
Neighbor Countries to cause their Militia to march and to join him, which
Schultz endeavored to hinder, especially his joining against the Turks. And
now he lays close Siege to Vngwar, which was defended with no less Valor than
Obstinacy, insomuch that after the loss of several Officers, and a considerable
number of Men, he was obliged to raise the Siege. Some time after he laid siege
to the City of Esperies with eight thousand men, where he found no less
Opposition than at Vngwar, the besieged seeming resolved to defend the Place to
the last extremity, notwithstanding the offer made to the Rebels of a general
Pardon, which was intimated to the Magistrates and Citizens of Esperies by an
Officer sent from the General, but they, instead of taking advantage of the
Emperor's Clemency, barbarously killed the said Officer, which the General
resented so highly, that he caused a general assault to be given the place, but
in vain, being beaten off with the loss of several hundreds of their Soldiers.
The place had already held out six Weeks, but General Caprara being ordered to
command in chief in upper Hungary, and a Detachment of ten thousand men being
sent to reinforce the Siege, it made them stoop, and desire a Parley, which
produced a Treaty, Esperies surrendered.
and then a Surrender, such of the Garrison as would being entertained in the
Emperors Service, and the Magistrates and Citizens to enjoy their ancient
Privileges, and the Places and Employments they at present posses.

General Schultz marched from Esperies to Caschaw, and beleagured it, and
General Caprara toward Tokay, with a Resolution to take that place what ever
it cost, being it opened a passage betwixt Transylvania and Zatmar, nor did it
make any remarkable Opposition, but with other lesser Places surrendered
without resistance upon Conditions.

Count Caprara being come in Person before Caschaw, October 6.
Peterhasi, one of Count Tekelies chief Officers, being sent with six hundred
horse to reinforce the Garrison, made a show of accepting the general Pardon,
and entering into the Emperors Service; but being come near the Town, put
himself into it, with the six hundred men he had with him, which mainly
encouraged the besieged to defend the Place. Caprara sent to summon them, but
in vain, so that he was forced to use all the Formalities of a Siege. The
Garrison consisted of four thousand, commanded by Count Tekeli's best Officers,
who defended themselves with great bravery, making very many sharp Sallies into
the Enemies Quarters. The Imperialists notwithstanding carried their Trenches
to the Town Ditch, and began to thunder upon the place from three Batteries.
One of the Attacks being commanded by the Prince of Wirtemberg, who was slain
there by a Cannon Bullet. But this Siege did not last long, though the Capital
of upper Hungary, and provided with all things necessary for a long defense.
But the Reasons of their surrender, which happened by a very surprising accident,
is very excusable. Novem, 25.
Count Tekely, sollicitous for this Capital of this part of the Kingdom, having
writ to the Bassa of Waradin of the Consequence and Danger of the Place, and to
press him for speedy Succor in order to relieve it. The Bassa admitting of his
Reasons, assured him he would give him all the assistance he could, only he had
received some Orders from the Grand Seignior of great Importance to the common
Cause, which it was not convenient to communicate to him by Letter, therefore
desired he would repair to him to Waradin, that he might inform him of the
secret by word of Mouth. And for his greater Security the Bassa sent him a
pasport. Count Tekely betrayed by the Bassa of Waradin.
Upon this Invitation he resolved to go thither, accompanied with Petrossi, and
some others of his principal Adherents, and five hundred Horse. The Bassa met
him without the Gate, and received him with all the appearance of Kindness and
Esteem, and conducted him into the Town with some few of his Attendants,
causing all the Cannon of the Place to be discharged, with other marks of
Respects, and entertained him at Supper; but that being ended, an Aga with his
Janissaries entered the Room, and having told Tekely he had Orders from the Grand
Seignior to seize him, and carry him to Adrianople, caused Irons to be put upon
his Hands and Feet. At the same time, the Bassa told Petrossi, that the Grand
Seignior gave him the Principality and Commands which Tekely had had, and that
he would assist him with all his Forces. Petrossi, who was next to Tekely in
Power, seemingly accepted of the Honor, but being got out of the place and
Danger, he informed Tekelies party of what had happened, exhorting them to return
with him to their Duty to the Emperor, which they consenting to, Petrossi
marched directly to the Camp before Caschaw. Being kindly received by General
Caprara, he was sent into the Town, where he easily persuaded the Garrison to
accept with him of the General Amnestie, Caschaw surrendered.
so that the place was immediately delivered up upon Articles. After this the
General sent also to the Princess Ragotzki, Count Tekely's Wife, to surrender
her strong Castle of Mongatz to the Emperor's Service, which, contrary to
expectation, she absolutely refused to do. And this put an end to the Campaign
in those parts, except their Excursions, beating up of Quarters, and Surprises,
which were frequent on both sides.

Nor were the Turks more fortunate on the side of Croatia, July 28.
where Count Lesley commanded the Imperialists, for he burnt the Suburbs of
Canisia, and destroyed the Country four Miles round; and now understanding
that the Turks had left but three or four thousand men to guard the Bridge at
Esseck, the Serasquier having taken the rest with him to fight the
Imperialists, he decamped from the Place of his Rendezvous near the Drove, with
a Resolution, if possible, to burn the said Bridge of Esseck. Aug. 9. Count
Lesley burns part of the Bridge of Esseck.
In order to this he left his Baggage at Turanowitz with a Guard of two
thousand Men, discamping with four thousand Germans, and two thousand Croats,
all choice Men, each one being ordered to carry Provision with him for ten
days, by reason of the scarcity of Victuals by the way. Michalovitz being
surprised, expecting no Enemy, surrendered to his Avantcurrers upon his further
advance, the Country being alarmed, some Turkish Horse appearing, skirmished
with the Avant-guard of Croats, and had treated them ill, if they had not been
succored by the German Dragoons and Cuirasiers who had the Guard; they however
left a Captain-Lieutenant with near thirty Soldiers. They marched on, but no
Turks opposed, scarce appeared before they came to the Plains of Esseck. Then
there appeared a thousand Turkish Horse with some Foot at a distance behind
them, which obliged the Christians to range themselves in Battalia, and the
Turks suffered them to advance till they came within Musket shot; they then
begun to stir, and being charged on both Wings by the Croats, they were wholly
broke and routed, and many of them slain in the pursuit. The Infantry saved
themselves in the Town, and afterward in the Castle. The Christians advanced
in order to the Suburbs, which they took at first onset, and afterward the
City, both which they miserably pillaged and plundered.

The City of Esseck is great and populous, having at least five hundred shops
of Merchants of in it, many Mosques and Hacars, which are great Inns for
Passengers. All was crowded with Rice, Flower, Bread, Bisquet, Salt, etc. as
also Barley, Oats, and Forage in abundance, enough to furnish an Army. As soon
as they were Master of the City, they placed a Guard against the Castle, whilst
the General went to see the Bridge, the like whereof is not in the World. On
this side the Drove from Esseck to the said River, it is about eleven hundred
paces long, and on the other side more than eight thousand, all of Oak Wood. It
is twelve paces broad. The Drove is not large in this place, the Bridge being
supported by only sixteen Boats. The Turks brake it the preceding day, letting
the materials vogue with the stream into the Danube. Count Lesley caused
thirteen fair Mills upon the Drove to be burnt, and having in vain attempted to
burn the Bridge on the other side, consumed that on this with Fire in few
hours. The Imperialists knowing that the Inhabitants had saved their best goods
in the Castle, they would also attempt that, but having lost several Captains
and other Officers, they desisted, and Lesley returned back to his Camp at
Turanowitz.

The Wars aginst Poland were carried on with more Success, The Affairs of
Poland.
at least Equality, by the Ottomans, who, together with the Tartars, made
perpetual Incursions into the Vkrain, and the confining Provinces, burning and
ravaging the Villages and Country, carrying the alarm to the very Gates of
Leopol. Nor were the Poles forward in their Proparations, moving but very
slowly to their general Rendezvous, so that the King not going to the Field in
Person, it was very late in the year before they were come together, however,
entertained in the mean time with a very sad account from Podolia, Volinia, and
the lesser Russia, of the miserable Devastations of those Countries by the
continued Incursions of the Infidels.

The Grand Seignior had appointed Solomon Bassa, now Seraskier, to command his
Army against the Poles, which he endeavored to raise and form with all
imaginable Industry, being sollicitous for Caminiec, which he took care by
reiterated Convoys, though some sometimes miscarried, to provide for. He
hearing of the Christians advance toward the Niester, the Cham of Tartary
being joined with him, and both near forty thousand strong, posted himself near
the River to hinder the Poles from passing it.

And now the Armies drawing near, it was supposed they would not separate
without a Battle. The Poles passed the Niester with theirs, consisting of
betwixt twenty and thirty thousand men, on a Bridge they had made for that
purpose, advanced into Moldavia, where they encamped; and now the whole Army
being come up, the Crown General having summoned a Council of War, it was
determined to go and find the Enemy, and force him to fight. The Army marched
accordingly, and were three days passing the Woods and Streights of Boucovisia
without any Intelligence of the Enemy. Being come into a Plain, their Vanguard
was presently charged by a Body of Tartars. Ten Troops of Horse were sent to
support the Christians, but being overpowered, were forced to give way. The
Prince of Courland advancing with three Battalions, and some Fieldpieces, gave
the Christians Opportunity to rally, and returning to the charge, obliged the
Tartars to retire to the Hill from whence they came. The next Morning the two
Armies stood in view of each other, only some slight Skirmishes passing betwixt
them. The third, the Seraskier designing to fall upon the Enemies right Wing
with his main force, charged it briskly, but finding it strengthened from the
main body, retired and fell upon the main body it self, but with the like
success. The Poles left Wing was charged by the Tartars with some advantage at
first, but in the Conclusion were forced to retire. That day the Turks had been
incommoded by the opposite Artillery, composed of thirty pieces of Ordnance,
and the following day, having received Cannon from Camineck, they repayed them
in kind. The Christians continued encamped the two following days, securing
themselves with Trenches and Redoubts. On the ninth day, the Christian General
being informed that a great Detachment was sent to fall in the rear of the
Army, and shut up the Passages of the Forest, he resolved to retire; and that
he might do it with less trouble, he caused all their Wagons that were not
absolutely necessary, to be burnt. It was next Morning before the Turks were
aware of their march, when, descending into the Plain, they charged three
Battalions of foot which had not yet entered the Wood, but they being well
covered with turn Pikes, and each two Fieldpieces, they received the Enemy
with so great a Fire, that they forced them to retire. And yet they escaped by
their Courage and Resolution the danger that threatened them, forcing their
Passage back to the Niester by a very orderly retreat, which they likewise
passed, though the Turks were much stronger than they, and so were dispersed into
their Winter Quarters.

Nor were the Turks very unsuccesful in Dalmatia. The Christians had besieged
Singn, but were forced to retire by the joint Forces of the Turks in those
quarters with loss of some hundreds of their men, two pieces of Cannon, and
most of their Baggage. But the Wars being rather defensive in those parts, on
both sides, than otherwise, nothing of any very great Consequence, besides
Incursions and mutual Ravages, worthy of Memory did happen.

The traverses at Sea were of more noise and consequence. The Turkish Fleet was
affirmed to consist of sixty Galleys, and twenty men of War, who were at Sea,
though supposed not well manned. On the other side, the Venetian Fleet was
stronger, full of Seamen, besides thirteen thousand Landforces of several
Nations, all commanded by their General Morosini, who sailing for the Levant,
landed his Forces in the Morea, at the Fortress of Calamata, which he took, and
afterward sat down before Coron, where, having made large Breaches, and
extremely annoyed the place with their Bombs, the Bassa hung out a white Flag,
but all Conditions, except surrendering upon discretion, being refused him, he
put out a black Colors, intimating he would defend it to extremity, which he
also did.

The Bassa of Petrasso marched with eight thousand Men to his relief, but upon
consideration of the strength of the Christians, he durst not attempt it; but
contenting himself to reinforce the Garrison of Modon, and with falling upon
the Greeks (that avoured the Venetians) he made a great slaughter of them. The
Vizier of Morea, Kalil Bassa, having got together a competent Army of near ten
thousand, would re-attempt the relief of Coron; in order to which, he sent a
Party to attack a Redoubt somewhat distant from the Line of the Besiegers, but
were repulsed, but assaulting it again, they took it at the second storm.
Hereupon the Chevalier de la Tour, a Knight of Malta, hastening thither with
twelve hundred Men, recovered it from the Turks, with the loss of his own life,
and many of his Men. A while after, the Vizier made an attempt upon the main
Camp, but was beaten off with mutual loss. In the mean time, the Christian
General finding the neighborhood of the Turks troublesome, and foreseeing that
his Troops would not be able to subsist, unless they had the Country open,
resolved to attempt their removal; in order to which, drawing ten Men out of a
Company, to which were joined fifteen hundred Volunteers, with one of the
Regiments of Brunswick, and that of Malta, they, marching before day,
surprised, and fell upon the Enemy on all sides; the action was so sudden, that
the Turks before they could recollect themselves were driven out of their
several Posts, pursued, and quite dispersed. Of the Enemy there were near a
thousand killed in the action and pursuit, of which number was the Vizier Kalil
and Mehemet Bassa. All their Cannon and Baggage were taken, with nine pieces of
brass Cannon, seventeen Colors, and the great Standard, with three
Horse-tayles hanging at it. This Victory was some days after completed by the
taking of Coron, where the Christians, forcing the way into the Town, through
their very large Breaches, Aug. 11.
put all they met to the Sword. There were above three thousand of the Turks
slain in this storm, and four or five hundred of the Christians, among which
were two Knights of Malta, Prince Phillip of Savoy, the Prince of Brunswick,
the Marquess of Courbon and St. Paul, besides thirty Knights of Malta, with
several other Persons of Quality wounded. There were seventy-six Pieces of
Brass Cannon, besides great store of Ammunition and Provision, with Plunder,
reckoned at above two Millions, found in this place.

These Successes encouraged the Greeks to submit to the Venetians, and the
Province of Maina being also disposed to cast off the Ottoman Yoke, were
greatly encouraged to it by Morosini, who sending a Detachment with such
Maynots as were entered into the Service of the Re-publick, gave them orders to
attack Zarnata, a Fortress built to keep that People in awe. In the mean time
the Christian Fleet sailed toward Calamata, near which place the Forces landed.

The Captain Bassa, hearing of the ill successes of his Countrymen in Morea,
came with his Fleet to Napoli di Romania, where securing the Ports with great
Chains, he landed what Men he possibly could, and joining with a great Body of.
Horse and Foot, he marched toward Calamata, to keep the Mainotes from
revolting to the Ventains. Zarnata had been threatened into surrender, six
hundred Men that garrisoned it marching out with their Arms and Baggage, though
the Aga that commanded it, distrusting his conduct, stayed in the Christian
Camp.

The Captain Bassa being advanced, Morosini being reinforced with three
thousand Saxons resolved to fight him. Being met, the Turkish Horse fell upon
the Christians left Wing, and at the same time a great Body of their Foot
advanced toward their right; but found such brave resistance, that they were
forced to retire. They returned to the charge again, but with the same success,
and being pressed, fell into disorder and were defeated; though the loss was
not very great on either side. The Garrison of Calamata hearing of this rout,
fired their Magazin and quitted the place, leaving eleven Pieces of Cannon
behind them, which was immediately garrisoned by the victorious. The Maynotes
thereupon besieged Porto Vitulo, the which with Chielifa and Passavia are the
only places of strength that the Turks possess in that great Province, but
these likewise, as also Porto Vitulo, being forced by the Inhabitants to
surrender, came all under the dominion of the Venetians, from whence, General
Morosini having put good Garrisons into those places, marched toward Navazino.
But the season being too far advanced, having razed Calamata and Passava, as
not very defensible, he dispersed his Army into Winter Quarters, sailing
himself with his Galleys to Santa Maura.

A Fleet under the command of the Seigniors Molino and Delfino, had cruised the
whole Summer in the Archipelago, putting those Islands under contribution,
though no material action at Sea had passed betwixt the two Fleets of the
Christians and Turks.

The Captain Bassa, after these misfortunes, showed a great inclination to
peace, signifying his desire to set a Treaty on foot for that purpose, to which
end he signified the same to General Morosini by a particular Messenger, Novem.
who referred him to his Superiors.

There had likewise been an Aga some time at Comorra, who declared, that the
Grand Seignior did desire to re-establish a Peace or Truce betwixt the two
Empires, Attempts for Peace prove fruitless.
desiring that Commissioners might be appointed on both sides for that purpose;
that he had ordered the Bassa of Buda to cease from all Hostilities, and that
he caused Count Tekely, the Author of the War, and the Evils that attended it,
to be seized upon by his command. But all the answer he could get was, that the
Emperor would enter into no Negotiation of Peace, without the participation of
his Allies. And yet some Propositions were obliquely made in their names. The
Emperor demanded restitution of all the Places that are possessed by the Turks
in the Upper and Lower Hungary, and in Croatia. The Poles demanded Caminiec,
and the whole Province of Podolia; and the Venetians the whole Country of
Morea, To conclude, the Aga was sent back with this answer, That the Emperor
and his Allies will receive no Proposals, but such as come immediately from the
Grand Seignior himself.

The Cham of Tartary had also offered the King of Poland his Mediation by an
Embassy, and at the same time made Proposals of Peace, but his Majesty answered
roundly, that he would hear of no Overtures of accommodation without his Allies,
the Emperor of Germany, and the Commonwealth of Venice.

And now all thoughts of quiet being laid aside, all the great Parties made all
imaginable preparations, Jan. 1686.
by Leagues, by Levies, by amassing of Moneys as well as Men for the future
Campain.

Thus ended this year 1685, and the following was no less active or turbulent.
The Imperialists, as a prelude to their future Successes, beat a Party of the
United Garrisons of the Turks, consisting of about six thousand near Arach,
which place they also took, with eleven Colors, and three Kettle Drums,
besides much spoil.

This success was followed by others, St. Job being surrendered to Count
Caraffa, the six hundred Men which composed the Garrison of it, Feb. 12.
being conducted to great Waradin, and a Party from Comorra, Raab, Papa and
Vesprin, took the Castle of Sehwar, betwixt Vesprin and Alba Regalis, which had
much incommoded those Garrisons, upon as easy terms; the besieged being only
allowed what they could carry upon their backs.

Great were the disorders and consternation at Constantinople, and throughout
the whole Ottoman Empire, Disorders at Constantinople. Jan. 23.
for the late ill Successes of their Arms in Hungary and Morea; and being to be
unfortunate, is to be criminal in that Court, Cheitan Ibrahim, Seraskier, was
condemned to lose his head, the defeat at Gran, the loss of Newheusel, and the
burning of the Bridge of Esseck, being laid all to his account. His eminent
services in the former Wars against the Crown of Poland, and his valorous
defending of Buda in 1684 against the united powers of the German Empire, could
not obtain his pardon, being he was likewise blamed for having discontented the
Soldiers in defrauding them of their pay. Several other of the Chief Officers
being accused of not having done their duty at the Battle of Gran, were
strangled with him; and Solomon Bassa, who had so successfully commanded the
Army last year against the Poles, was by the Grand Vizier recommended to the
Grand Seignior, as a Person very fit for that Employment in Hungary, which his
Highness also approved of, but the Bassa being surprised at the choice was made
of him, sensible of the fate of his Predecessors, and the danger of the
Employment, taking his opportunity, threw himself at the Grand Seignior's feet,
and humbly prayed to be excused from so difficult a Province, being the
Campaign would not probably end, under the circumstances he was to undertake
it, but with the loss of his Head, which he would rather now sacrifice at his
Majesty's command, than dye hereafter in his displeasure. The Grand Seignior
wondering at what he heard, and that he should scruple at so eminent a command,
demanded his reasons: He replied, that the misfortunes of the last Campaign
were occasioned by the ill payment of the Troops, many other things of great
importance to his service having been likewise omitted, not obscurely hinting
at the Grand Vizier, he would notwithstanding take the command upon him, if his
Majesty, according to the example of his Predecessors, would himself appear at
the head of his Forces. The frankness of this discourse wrought so much upon
the Grand Seignior, that he immediately sent to the Vizier, who was, or
pretended to be indisposed, and consequently kept his bed, to know, whether he
was in a condition of health to attend him into Hungary, where he purposed to
go himself? But the Vizier excusing it, by reason of his indisposition, his
Majesty sent to him for his Seal, which being delivered, he immediately gave it
to Solomon Bassa, making him by that eminent mark of dignity Grand Vizier in
the others room, who yet had his life granted him, and part of his Estate to
subsist upon, being now in his House on the Canal of the black Sea, near
Scutary.

The Treasure of the Seraglio was opened, Officers were sent into all the
extent of the Empire, and the utmost diligence was used to raise men, not only
to recruit their shattered Armies, but to make new Levies, but with the usual
fate that attends unsuccessful Arms. The Christian Army Rendezvouz's at Barkam.
So that notwithstanding all their endeavors, the Christians were in the Field
before them, not only with the Imperial Troops, but the united Forces of all
the German Princes. The general Rendezvous was appointed on the 30th of May in
the Plains of Barkam, though the Saxons, the Bavarians, the Brandenburgers, and
them of the Carcles could not get thither so soon by reason of their distant
Marches. May 30. 1686.
The whole Empire seemed to move, and the Danube was so covered with Barks and
Barges full of men, provisions, and all sorts of Warlike Instruments, that it
yielded a prospect of terror and pleasure.

The Forces being come together, the Sentiments of the General Persons that
composed it were very differing. Some proposed the Siege of Alba Regalis, as
being a place that had much annoyed them, by protecting the Seraskier under the
Cannon of the place, when they besieged Buda two years ago. Others would have
Agria and Montgatz, the remains of Tekely's rebellion in Upper Hungary,
attempted, and the rest were for marching directly to the Bridge of Esseck, for
securing that important passage, and then to besiege Buda. Others were of
opinion, that these three designs should be enterprised at once, by dividing
their Army into two parts, for the two first Enterprises, and that General
Schults should with the Army of Croatia attempt the Bridge of Esseck. But they
were very few that concluded positively for the Siege of Buda, which had
already been absolutely resolved upon by the Emperor and the Duke of Lorrain,
upon a certainty that the taking of that place would vastly enlarge their
Quarters, and a supposition (though not so well grounded) that all Hungary
would follow the fate of their Capital City.

But this design was kept very secret, Jun. 10.
nor was it discovered until the arrival of Count Straatman, Great Chancellor
to the Emperor, who having in a Council of War prudently composed the
punctilio's and differences between so many General Officers about their
commands, to all their satisfactions; he showed them the Emperor's Commission
and Orders to begin the Campaign with the Siege of Buda, exhorting them to do
their duty in an enterprise of such great importance, whereon depended not only
the conservation of his Highness's Conquests, the security of his Crown, and
the good of Christendom, but also the ruin of the Ottoman Empire, being the
loss of this considerable place would be attended on with the surrender of the
other Cities and Fortresses of Hungary, which would return to the Obedience of
their natural Sovereign.

The Generals, who expected to begin with the Siege of Agria or Alb-Royal, were
overjoyed to understand that the design was upon Buda; and this News being
spread amongst the Officers and Soldiers of the Armies, they all testified
their Satisfaction by their forwardness, and their desire to see themselves
before a Place where they might signalize their Valor, and revenge the Death
of their Comrades, who had been interred in the Trenches of the former Siege.

The Volunteers, to the number of six thousand, of all Quality and Conditions,
which were come thither out of Germany, France, England, Spain, the
Low Countries, and other parts of Europe, to seek Honor in so pious a War,
showed much Ardour and Zeal to signalize themselves in so glorious an
undertaking. The Troops of the Circles were not yet come, and they of
Brandenburg, who marched through Silesia, and the Straits of Jabluncka,
advanced but slowly by reason of the difficulty of their way, and could not
come so soon as desired. But the Armies, to lose no time, discamped on the
twelfth of June by break of day, the Duke of Lorrain taking his way by the
Bridge of Gran, had passed it the thirteenth, the Troops of Saxony having the
Vauntguard. The Elector of Bavaria, marched on this side the Danube to possess
the City of Pest. Whilst the two Armies were thus marching on both sides the
River, Count Rabatta, who was Commissary General, had caused a prodigious
quantity of Gabions and Fagots, which the Soldiers had made as they came to
the general Randezvouz, to keep them from Idleness, to be embarked and sent by
Water toward Buda, together with the Artillery, Ammunitions, Provisions,
Forage, and other necessary things for the subsistence of Armies. The next day
the Armies advanced, the great one near Vicegrade, and the other by Vaccia.

The fifteenth, the Imperial Horse, followed by the Foot, and their Cannon and
Baggage, passed Vicegrade; some Prisoners having been made by a party that the
Duke had sent to make Discoveries. These unanimously declared, that they of
Agria and Alba Regalis fearing a Siege had refuged all their best Movables in
Buda, and that this Capital City was, as well as the other Places, furnished
with Troops and necessary Provisions to sustain a long Siege, in expectation of
Relief.

Being come within an hour of the Town without any encounter, the Horse made
halt, as well to repose themselves, as to expect the coming up of their
Infantry and Artillery, and now they begin to lay a Bridge of Boats at the Isle
of St. Andrew for the Communication of the two sides of the Danube.

On the eighteenth, the Baron of Diependal, General de Battalia, The Siege of
Buda.
invested the City of Buda, whilst the Infantry were marching up, and taking up
their Posts half a League from the place, they began to break Ground, and work
at their Line of Circumvallation. A great party of Horse and Foot appeared out
of the Garrison at the Vienna Port, but they returned again upon the advance of
a Detachment of Imperial Horse, who had Orders to charge them, contented to
welcome the Assailants with eight Volleys from their Cannon, though they killed
but one Pioneer, by reason of the too great distance.

The nineteenth, the Duke advanced with the Army as far as the hot Baths, the
Turks having abandoned that Post the day before. The general Quarters were
taken up within a quarter of a League of the Town. The same day the Elector of
Bavaria seized upon the City of Pest, which the Turks had quitted, retiring
with their Cannon, Ammunitions and Provisions into Buda, after they had broken
part of the Bridge behind them. The Croats, who scouted about the Country, took
a Turkish Chiaux, with a Convoy of forty Spahis, who was sent with Letters from
the Port to the Vizier of Buda. Being brought to the Camp, his Letters were
examined, which contained rigorous Orders to the Vizier, to be very careful of
the Places which depended on his Government, and to assure him of a quick and
powerful relief in case he were attacked.

On the twentieth, the Bridge over the Danube was finished. The same day a
party of Horse sallied out of the Town with design to surprise the Christians
advanced Guard, but the Duke being advertised of it in time, sent four
squadrons, to which many Volunteers joined themselves, with orders to charge
them; but they upon their approach retired without any engaging. The Artillery
being arrived, two Batteries were raised against the lower Town, where the Duke
of Lorrains Attack was, and at Night the Trenches were opened. A Janizary who
deserted, reported much after the same manner that the Prisoners already
mentioned had done; that there were but eight thousand men of formed Troops in
the Town. The Vizier having some time before sent two thousand Soldiers to
Agria, and as many to Alba-Regalis, upon a supposition that the Christians
would not think of besieging Buda, which had been so fatal to them but two
years ago. This Runaway affirmed further, that the Place was abundantly
furnished with all manner of Provisions and Ammunitions to sustain a very long
Siege, that the Vizier Abdi Bassa was no great Warrior, and therefore the less
considered by the Soldiery; that he had assembled all the Officers and
Soldiers of the Garrison together, had exhorted them to do their Duty, and to
support with Honor the Glory of the Turbant, adding, that he had Orders from
the Grand Seignior to defend the City with his Life, which he was resolved to
do, and expect the Succors which the Grand Vizier would infallibly bring them.
To this the Janissaries and Spahis replied, that they were ready to sacrifice
their. Lives in his Highness's Service, and for defense of their Laws, upon
Condition however, that the Vizier would immediately give them ten Crowns a
Man, that the Soldiers and Officers that were detained in Prison for what
Crime soever should be set at Liberty, and that he would not suffer things to
come to the last extremity, lest the same misfortune might happen to them, as
did to those of Newheusel, all which the Vizier promised them to observe
exactly.

I must acknowledge I am entering into a tedious Narrative, and somewhat against
my Humor, which affects lucid brevity; but the History of this Siege, perhaps
circumstantially the greatest upon Record, full of such strange Events; of
Emulation in the pursuit of Glory; of succesful Temerity, and an invincible
Resolution on the one side; as also the Fidelity, the Constancy, and the
unfortunate Valor of the other, hurries me on to a description of it in all
its particulars, which I will do with that Candor, that the very indifferent
Reader shall find nothing that may justly shock him, and the curious wherewith
to content him.

The Elector of Bavaria, having left a Garrison at Pest, and passed the Bridge
of Boats at the Isle of St. Andrew, came with his Army before the place, and
took his Post in the same place where he had commanded in the preceding Siege,
that is, on the Castle side, and the upper Town, to form the second attack, the
third being reserved for the Brandenburgers, who were expected in a few days,
and were to be reinforced with the Troops of Suabia and Franconia. That Night
the Turks fired mightily upon them that worked in the Approaches and Batteries,
whereof several were killed and hurt in the Lorrain Attack.

The Duke sent all the Imperial and Bavarian Horse, under the command of the
Generals Palfi, Gondola, and others, to camp in the Neighborhood of Alba
Regalis, on purpose to consume the Forage, and keep that Garrison in continual
alarms, there remaining in the Camp but three thousand Imperial and fifteen
hundred Bavarian Horse to secure the Trenches and Pioneers. The Night passed,
the Battery against the lower Town was brought to perfection, and twelve Pieces
of Cannon mounted upon it, which played all the following day with the loss of
five men slain, and several wounded, from break of day the Cannon continued
firing with such success, that they made a breach in the Wall of the lower
Town, which was found to be twenty paces large. In the mean time the Bavarians
on their side carried their Approaches on with great diligence, and had also
some killed and wounded.

The day following, the breach being enlarged, was assaulted toward evening,
the Walls being easily gained, for the Defendants retired into the upper Town
after the first discharge. The Christians lost a Captain of Foot, a Lieutenant
of Granadiers, some Soldiers, and six Volunteers in this attempt, besides
seven or eight hurt; and from that time they began to attack the Town in form,
it being resolved that the Trenches should be relieved every day by a
Lieutenant General, and a Major General, as well in the Duke of Lorrain's
attack, as in the Elector's. The 25th Count Souches and Diependal relieved the
Trenches, but nothing was done besides assuring the Lodgment upon the Wall of
the lower Town, and opening the Gate which the Turks had shut up on the right,
far enough from the breach where they took Post, and that the Laborers might
be less incommoded, General Souches caused fire to be put in the neighboring
Houses, where some Fuseliers did lurk, who were burnt with them. The Bavarians
finished the same day a little Battery upon St. Gerards Hill, which the Turks
had abandoned, from whence they threw some small Bombs into the City to try
experiments. They also finished another great Battery to beat the great Rondel
which joins the Castle to the upper Town. The same day Count Budiani presented
some Standards to the Duke of Lorrain, taken from a party of Turkish Horse,
which convoyed fourteen or fifteen Barks laden with the Wives and Children of
the Officers of Buda, who retired with all their riches to Belgrade, and which
his Heyduques and Hussars, reinforced with some Imperial Dragoons, had
surprised and beaten at the Island of St. Margaret. The booty was great, and
ninety-two Women and Children taken, amongst which was the Vizier of Buda's
Wife.

The 26th, they made several traverse Lines, and labored to complete the
Approaches to secure their Quarters in the lower Town, which was furnished with
two thousand Soldiers, and a good number of Pioneers. The Earth being rude and
stony, did much obstruct the Laborers. The great Master of the Teutonick
Order, which commanded the Trenches, observing that the Pioneers in the lower
Town might be easily insulted and beaten by the Besieged, had upon his demand
six Battalions sent him, which were posted along the Wall to countenance them.
Two fugitives, who said they were Hungarians, rendered themselves, and
confirmed that the Garrison was but eight thousand Combatants, who by order of
the Vizier had begun to untile the Houses, and unpave the Streets, to hinder
the effect of the Bombs. In the evening betwixt six and seven a Clock, the
Turks fallied out with great Cries, to intimidate them who were posted in the
Rondel by the Water side, but they were so well received, that they retreated
confusedly. Marshal Starenberg hastened thither seasonably with two Battalions
of them that had been posted the day before behind the Wall, without which
Succor the Turks would have made a great Slaughter amongst the Laborers. The
Enemy was pursued, and the Soldiers cut off some Heads, which they presented
to the Duke, who gave them a golden Ducket for each Head. A Captain was hurt in
this scuffle, and ten or twelve Soldiers killed, and as many wounded.

The Bavarians raised two Batteries for Bombs on the two sides of their great
Battery. They carried on their Trench above one hundred paces, and ran three
traverse Lines, with a place of Arms for the defense of their Battery. The
Turks fired much with their Artillery, but killed only two Soldiers.

The 27th, the Christians completed the works they had made in the Night, new
traverses were made, some Musketeers were placed in the Mosque of the old Town,
a Post was taken on the right near the Gate which makes the Angle of the Upper
Town, the Lines were enlarged, and deepned, and the great Battery was well-nigh
finished, with the loss only of one Man, and some few wounded. This Morning the
Enemy appeared where they had been yesterday, seemingly disposed to skirmish,
but seeing that the Christians were ready to receive them, they retired without
attempting any thing. About Eleven a Clock they sallied out, Horse and Foot,
with design to dislodge the Besiegers posted on the right, but having stood a
Volley, and seeing Count Hoffkirchen, Lieutenant Colonel to Dunewald,
advancing with the Guards of Horse, they returned into the City, leaving twenty
of their men dead behind them. Of the Christians there were but two killed, and
five or six hurt. Another Deserter came out of Town, who reported, that the
Governor was greatly perplexed, in that he saw the inevitable fall of the
City, which the Grand Seignior had committed to his charge, and that he lost in
the Sallies his best Soldiers, without being able to ruin the Enemies works;
but that he resented nothing equally with the captivity of his Wife, and those
of the Principal Officers of the Place, taken when they thought them past
danger. In the Bavarian attack they finished a battery to play upon the Castle,
and the Rondel that joins it to the City.

The 28th, in the Lorrain attack, a Line of Communication four hundred paces
long was drawn from the Post at the Angle on the right to the middle Gate, and
another Line was made to go to the new battery, upon which they planted twelve
pieces of Cannon. A little one was likewise in hand for four Mortars which were
carried thither that Night, with some Cart loads of Bombs. The besieged began
to shoot Bombs and Stones out of Town. A Captain and sixteen Soldiers were
wounded that Night, and some killed. The Duke of Lorrain, foreseeing that
Forage would grow scarce in the Camp, sent most of the baggage Horses to the
Meadows assigned them betwixt Gran and Newheusel. General Dunewald, who
commanded the Horse, camped near Alb-Royal, advertised the Duke, that the Turks
having abandoned the Castle of Bathyan upon the River of Zarvis, he had put men
into it, and that he was going to make a tentative upon Palotta, a place of
good strength near Alb-Royal.

The twenty ninth, they continued to complete their Works, and the Duke
augmented the number of the Laborers with an addition of six hundred more. The
besieged made no Sallies these two days, but they plied their Artillery more
furiously than ordinary to ruin the Christians great Battery. About five a
Clock they sallied upon the Bavarian attack, with two thousand Horse and Foot,
with so much Success, that they put the Besiegers into much disorder, and the
Janissaries leaping into the Approaches, were busy in throwing of them down,
when Count Hoffkirch flying thither with the Guard of Horse from the Duke of
Lorrain's Quarter, and the Bavarian Generals with their reserves, the fight was
rude on both sides, till the Turks were forced to retreat, being pursued even
to the Gates of their City, notwithstanding the continued fire from their
Cannon and Muskets from the Walls. Prince Eugenius of Savoy had his Horse
killed under him. Prince Lewis of Baden, and the Generals Fontaine and la
Vargne signalized themselves in this Action, as also the Volunteers, and
particularly the Prince of Commercy. Switterdael, a Bavarian
Lieutenant-Collonel was slain, as also six Volunteers, with thirty seven
Soldiers, besides sixty two wounded, one Captain, two Lieutenants, and an
Ensign. The loss on the Turks side was greater, being the Christians brought
away sixty of their Heads, besides what a fugitive Rascian reported, that the
Turks had had near two hundred killed and wounded. That Evening the four
Mortars placed by the great Battery began to play into the besieged Works. Six
Culverins were also planted upon the old Battery, wherewith they designed to
shoot into the Town Gate, to incommode the Sallies of the besieged.

The thirtieth, the Troops of Suabia and Franconia arrived in the Camp, and
took the Posts designed for them; all the Night and Day were employed to
advance the Works, which are so numerous, that they are scarce distinguishable.
Count Souches, who commanded the Trenches that day, having sent three
Granadeers to discover the distance betwixt the Approaches and the Rondel, they
brought word that it was no more than three hundred paces, and that the Turks
were making a Ditch at the foot of the said Rondel. Every Night great store of
Gabions, Fagots, Munitions, and Provisions, arrived in the Camp, by the care of
the Commissary General, Count Rabatta. Count Caprara parted from the Camp with
the Suabian Horse, to join those encamped near Alb-Royal, and to command the
whole in chief. Five Rascian Shepherds, feeding their Sheep without under the
Walls, slipped insensibly into the Bavarian Quarters with at least four hundred,
where they were well received and gratified. All they could say was, that the
Consternation was great amongst the besieged, who were yet resolved to defend
themselves, in expectation of the Succors they were in hope for. They added,
that the Bombs and Carcasses had fired the Town in several Places, though it
had been luckily enough extinguished.

The first of July, Count Starenberg showed General Schoning, who commanded the
Bradenburg Auxiliaries, and arrived in the Camp the Night before, the
Approaches and the Attacks which were reserved for his Troops, which was on the
Water side on the left of the Imperialists, after which he was magnificently
treated by the Duke of Lorrain, from whence he went to join his Troops which
were expected the next, or the following day. This Morning the Imperialists
began to shoot out of their new Battery, out of four Pieces which shot twenty
four pound Bullets. The five Mortars by the great Battery continued to play
upon the Rondel on the right, with such Success that the Defendants durst not
show themselves there. The Works were completing, and there were two Redoubts
made to secure the Communication with the great Battery. This Night there were
but five hurt, and one killed, and this Morning an Adjoutant General was hurt
in the Head with a Musket Shot, as he was carrying Orders into the Approaches.
There happened nothing in the Bavarian Quarters, where they only continued their
Labor and their Batteries, made a Breach in the outward Rampart. The rest of
the Troops of Franconia, consisting in fourteen hundred Foot, arrived there,
who were placed near the rest of the same Circle.

The second, the Lorrain Attack advanced within two hundred Paces of the Walls
of the City. The battery of twelve Guns of twenty four pound Balls was
finished, and four other Mortars that played without ceasing all the last
Night, fired the Town near the great Church, which lasted till Morning; the
Cannon was plied all this day against the two first Rondels, which are in a
manner defenseless. Two Battalions more were sent to reinforce those who were
camped under the Wall of the old Town. The besieged threw again many Bombs and
Stones, but with little prejudice to the Besiegers, killing them not above
three or four Soldiers. The Troops of Suaben began to work at their line of
Circumvallation, and purposed the following Night to raise a Battery upon a
height which they possessed. The Bavarians thundered furiously against the
Castle and upper Town, and had thrown many Bombs which had kindled a fire that
was not yet extinguished. The Duke apprehending that the Turks might when it
was dark, put, by the help of small barks, Men, and Ammunition into the Town,
went in Person to discover the suspected Places about Pest, commanding the
Prince of Savoys Regiment of Dragoons to post themselves there, to assist the
Hungarians who were already there, and had Orders to raise some Sconces along
the River side for their Security.

On the third of July, the Brandenburg Troops were seen to march on the other
side of the Danube. The Duke of Lorrain went to visit them, where he was
received by General Schoning with a triple Salvo of all the Foot, ranged in
battalia, with their Cannon at the head of the Infantry. His Highness was
treated there with much Gallantry, and afterward returned to his Quarters
extremely satisfied to see such a fine body of Men, so brisk, so well
disciplined, and provided with such a good Train of Artillery. The Imperialists
finished another line for to defend their Approaches. They made such great fire
with their Cannon and Mortars, that they did not only make a notable breach in
the Wall, but ruined also the batteries upon the two first Rondels, so that
there was no more shooting thence. The Bavarians carried their lines to the
very Castle, and made a new battery on the right toward the Danube, upon which
they placed nine Mortars with success. They shot also three days together from
another battery of seven Demy-Cannon upon the Rondel; whilst they played from
another with four Guns upon the Flanks. They moreover worked at another of
eight Cannon to batter the left of the Rondel. In the Lorrain attack there were
seven slain, and several hurt. Amongst the rest of the Deserters, there was an
Ensign of the Janissaries, who quitted the Town for having (as he said) killed a
Turkish Officer. He affirmed that there was but fifteen hundred real Janissaries
in the place, but that counting the Spahi's, Albamans, and other Troops, they
amounted to seven thousand Combatants; He added, that the Bombs and Carcasses
had already ruined many buildings, and occasioned a great loss of Men and
Cattle. He further said, that the besieged were busy in making Mines behind
the breach on the Lorrain side, and that no body had hitherto entered into the
place. General Dunewald had desisted from his design upon Pallotta, because the
place was provided with a good Garrison. The Turks there killed some of those
who were sent to discover. Those of Alb-Royal attacked and disordered also some
Foragers of Horse quartered in their Neighborhood, and amongst others killed
Count Papenheim, a Captain of Horse in the Troops of Bavaria.

July 4th, The Approaches of the Lorrain attack were run within one hundred
paces of the breach in the Rondel to the right. The besieged began to run a
Line out of the said breach, which they lengthned till within fifty paces of
the Christians, to render their approach more difficult; and however, they
fired continually with their small shot, and threw a multitude of stones, yet
they killed and wounded but thirteen men. The besiegers had now fourteen
Mortars mounted, out of which they perpetually tossed Bombs and Carcasses.
There was nothing done at the Bavarian attack, but securing the works, and
heightning the batteries. A Pole, who had served amongst the Turks, came over
this morning, and reported that the besieged were resolved to surrender, if
they were not relieved in a Months time. Another Runaway came this Afternoon,
and declared, that five Turkish Cavaliers were by the means of a little Bark
landed on Pest side, who were by several ways to endeavor to arrive where the
Seraskier was, and press the Succors which had been promised them. The Duke of
Lorrain dispatched some Horse toward Voitfar to consume the Forage there, and
watch the Enemies motion. A party of Tartars fell upon the Foragers on the
other side the Danube, and took some Horses, and two Grooms belonging to the
Prince of Baden, out of the Island of St. Margaret: the following Night, sixty
Granadiers with some Workmen were sent to ruin the Line which the besieged had
begun before the breach of the Rondel, which luck'd so well, that they filled
the Ditch with the loss of two Soldiers only. The breaches were every day
enlarged, as well on the Lorrain as the Bavier attack, and what the Turks
repaired in the night, was thrown down by day. All the Troops of Brandenburg
are at present arrived in their Quarters. The Turks made a sally upon them in
the Night, who, though they were well received, and pursued even to the Town
Gate, yet they killed many brave men of the besieged, and amongst the rest
Field-Marshal General Dorfeling's Son, two Lieutenants, and twenty-seven
Soldiers, with the like number wounded.

Jul. 6. A line of communication was made from the Lorrain attack to that of
Brandenburg, which is but fifty paces from the Rondel of the middle Gate, and
about sixty from the breach on the right. This morning they shot the Cannon
with that fury, that they quite threw down the two Rondels, and the Curtain,
and at night throwing Bombs and Carcasses without ceasing, they caused a fire
to burn on the right of the Rondel, that could not be quenched in less than
three hours time. The Brandenburgers advanced their works briskly, their
Generals of Battalia's keeping alternatively in the Trenches. They had eight
slain and six wounded, besides a Captain of Granadeers, Lieutenant Colonel
Fonk was also hurt in the Leg, and six more of the Lorrain attack, besides two
killed.

Jul. 7. The Night preceding, very many Bombs were thrown with success, being
they fired the Town in two places, but upon the arrival of the Engeneer
Gonzales, it was presumed the Town would be thundered with greater violence, he
is expected in two or three days in the Camp, where the Cannon, Mortars, Bombs,
Carcasses, and other artificial fireworks of his invention are already
arrived: The besieged made this morning a salley upon the Brandenburgers with
Horse and Foot, but to their prejudice, being beaten back with disorder.
Yesterday the Miners began to work in the Lorrain attack to widen the breaches,
and this Night the same will be done in that of Bavaria, where they have
finished two new Batteries, one of ten, and the other of seven Cannons, besides
a third on the Water side, to better the attacked Rondel, and a Post by which
the besieged used to creep out into a covered way which they had made before
the Rondel. Yesterday the Bavarians had carried their approaches to the very
foot of the Castle, so that they could come no nearer before the breach was
enlarged. The works in the Lorrain attack were so near the Wall, that they
could advance no further, but by lodging in the breach. There were about fifty
killed and hurt in the three attacks. The besieged shot a Bomb, which falling
upon one of the out-Batteries into a Barrel of Powder, killed nine Cannoneers
that attended there.

The 8th, Two new Batteries, each of three Demy-Cannon, were raised in the
Lorrain attack nearer the Walls, and on the left, where they were equally
advanced with the right, the approaches were advanced to the Wall of the
Rondel; and as these Works were so near, there were twenty-five hurt and
wounded, most with Stones and Grenades, amongst whom Major General Thungen was
one, Major Bischosshausen had his Arm broke with a Musket, and some other
Officers wounded. The Miners which were attacked to the right of the Rondel,
had not yet encountered the Enemies Mines. At night they will plant others to
the left of the middle Rondel. Some Peasants having found means to escape out
of Town, came to the Camp, affirming, that there were still above three hundred
men which worked continually at the Mines and Retrenchments which the besieged
made behind their Walls, for their retreat in case of necessity.

July the ninth, the whole Night was spent in shooting of Bombs and Carcasses
into the City, to keep the besieged in Action, and take away their desire of
repose, but these perceiving at break of day that the Enemy had made a Gallery
of Planks to pass the Miners to the middle Rondel, they rolled down many Bombs,
threw many Granados, and other artificial Fire, with combustible stuff in such
abundance, that the Planks were burnt, and the Gallery reduced to Ashes. At
five in the Morning the besieged sprung a Mine some Paces from the Wall,
betwixt the middle Rondel, and that at the Gate with Success, being it
overturned one of the Christians Mines, with the loss of seven or eight of the
Miners. They seconded this with a sharp Sally, disordered the Workmen, ruined
their Labors, and posted themselves betwixt the Imperialists and
Brandenburgers, but the reserve coming to their Aid from their place of Arms,
they forced them back into the Town. There were above eighty of the two Attacks
killed and wounded in this Adventure, one of their chief Cannoneers slain, and
several subaltern Officers. The besieged lost as many; Notwithstanding this
check, the Works were continued with the same Vigor in the Approaches, Lines,
and Galleries. On the Bavarian side they ruined the little Port from their
Battery with ten demi Cannons, and the breach there was very spacious.

July the tenth, At the Lorrain Attack they worked all Night to repair the
Batteries and the Approaches which the besieged had ruined in the former Sally,
and to redress the Gallery which they had burnt, and the Miners were again
fired that Night. At the Bavarian Attack the Miners worked under the Palizade
of the Rondel, and under the Wall, with hopes of completing their Mines in
three days; several were slain, amongst whom was Lieutenent-Collonel
Wachtenheim. The Christians had Intelligence by their Spies, that the Turks, to
the number of seven thousand, reinforced with some Tartars who ravaged the
Country, had a design to introduce a new Commander, with a recruit of Troops
into Buda, which obliged the Duke of Lorrain to command some Foot to post
themselves on the other side of the Danube, and upon occasion to join with the
Horse that were there already, and meet and fight the Enemies.

July the eleventh, This evening five demi Cannons were mounted on the two new
Batteries in the Lorrain Attack, and two Mortars planted in a little Fort, with
the loss only of two killed, and five hurt. The Brandenburgers placed three
pieces in battery, and would plant more the Night following to shoot glowing
Bullets into the City. The Bavarians fortified their Attack by two Redoubts.
Yesterday in the Evening four hundred Foot were ordered to raise some Defenses
on Pest side near the Danube, to hinder lest any thing should pass that way
into Buda.

July the twelfth, All the Batteries of Lorrain and Brandenburg were
completed, and the first lines of these two Attacks were so joined, that men
could pass from the one to the other undiscovered, by the Enemies Fire. And now
they were so near the Walls, the besieged did perpetually throw hand Grenades
and Stones to incommode the Workmen, but without any great harm. The Miner on
the left found himself much advanced under the Wall, but they met with more
difficulty on the right, and so they would enlarge the breach by force of their
Cannon. The Count de Souches inspected the breach by order of the Field Marshal
Starenberg, and it was found spacious enough to be assaulted: The
Brandenburgers began to shoot their inflamed Bullets and Bombs out of twenty
two Cannons, and two Mortars, but with no great Success, being the Besieged had
uncovered all their Houses. The Bombs and Carcasses invented by the Franciscan
Friar were highly esteemed. They now only plained and enlarged the Breaches,
and prepared themselves for the assault. There were nine hurt and three slain
with Grenades and Stones. The Breach in the great Rondel on the Bavarian side
was large enough, and the Miner was at work under the Pallizade of the Ditch.
The Duke having Intelligence that the Seraskier was advanced with some
thousands of Turks near Hatwan, commanded 3000 Horse, and six Battalions of
Foot, Imperialists, Brandenburgers, and Bavarians, under the Conduct of General
Mercy, to pass the Danube, and post themselves on the other side of the Bridge,
to hinder the Turks to put a recruit of Troops into the City, with the new
designed Commander, Achmet Bassa, who had the Reputation of being one of the
best Officers that the Grand Seignior had in his Service.

July the thirteenth, This morning the besieged sprung a Mine under the middle
Rondel near the Christians Mine, which was already finished, which Mine did
what the besiegers designed, by throwing down part of the Rondel, where they
had no breach as yet. There were two hundred Turks ready to fly into the
adverse Works as soon as the Mine took, but seeing it had a contrary effect to
what they designed, they retired. All things being disposed for an assault,
thereby to make a lodgment upon the Wall, Count Starenburg directed the attack
in the manner following. Count Guydo Starenburg commanded on the right of the
Rondel, Count Herberstein the middle of the Curtain, and Count Aversberg, all
three field Officers, on the left. They had each of them two hundred and eighty
Soldiers; the Engineers, Granadeers, Fuseliers, Carpenters, and Pioneers, were
posted betwixt two, and the rest, to the number of two thousand, were divided
into three bodies of Reserves to support the Assailants: the Volunteers who had
demanded the point, mingled themselves with the first. Betwixt seven and eight
a Clock the signal for the Assault was given, by a discharge from all the
Batteries, and a shower of Bombs and Carcasses which were discharged upon the
City, and the Retrenchments which the besieged had made behind the breach; and
notwithstanding all the resistance of the besieged, the Christians mounted the
breach, where the Combat was very rude and obstinate on both sides for three
quarters of an hour, with all possible bravery. The besieged sprung a Mine
under the Assailants first line, which buried Captain Kalkreiter, and some
Soldiers. But seeing they could not take post for want of Earth, that they
could not force the Pallizado'd Retrenchment behind the breach, and that the
chief Officers were already all hurt or slain, by the continual fire of the
besieged; it was thought expedient to make a retreat; five or six leaped over
the Turks Retrenchment, but being ill followed, got off with the rest. The
Regiments of Souches and Mansfeld suffered most in this Action, and that of
Starenburg was also ill treated. There were more than four hundred killed and
wounded, but the loss of so many brave Officers and Volunteers who lost their
Lives there, were particularly deplored: but few that were hurt escaped, which
begot a belief that the Turks shot with envenomed Bullets. Amongst the dead
were Count Herberstein, Count Kuffstein, and another Captain of the same
Regiment, the Baron Roll, three Captains more, and eight Lieutenants and
Ensigns. Of Volunteers that were slain there, or died of their Wounds, the Duke
of Vexar, a Grandee of Spain, who was one of the first upon the breach, was
one, a Son of Prince Roberts, with another English Lord, the Baron of
Scheyffer, the young Count of Courmaillon, a Conte of Dona, and seven or eight
more of Quality. Amongst the wounded, as well Officers as Volunteers, were
reckoned Count Guydo Starenburg, Count Aversperg, the Prince of Veldens of the
House of the Palatinat, Prince Picolomini, two English Lords, the Duke of
Escalona, a Grandee of Spain, the Marquess of Valero, Brother to the Duke of
Vexar, the Prince of Commercy, and more than thirty other Persons of mark. The
Spaniards and the English distinguished themselves by a noble Emulation,
opposing the greatest Fury of the Turks. The English were so ill treated, that
of twenty of them, all Persons of Quality, there were but six of them that were
not slain or wounded. The loss of the besieged was also great, for they had two
hundred of their bravest men wounded and killed. The Duke of Lorrain, and
Marshal Count Starenburg were present in this Action, giving Orders every where
as occasion required. It was believed that the Brandenburgers would have
attempted somewhat on their side, but they excused it because their breach was
not large enough. On the Bavarian side there was a notable breach made in the
Rondel and in the Wall that covers the Castle, which the besieged repaired by
Night with Gabions, Pallizadoes, and Fagots.

July the fourteenth, The whole Night and Day were employed in inhuming the
Dead, and repairing the Approaches, in planting more Cannon upon the Batteries,
and in advancing the Mines. Two Galleries were likewise framed betwixt the
second and third Rondel. The Duke of Lorrain having also sent for three
Regiments of Horse from Alba-Regalis to reinforce General Mercy, they passed
the Bridge this Morning to go on Pest side. The besieged sprung a Mine in the
Bavarian Attack on the left of the Castle Rondel, which succeeded ill. His
Electoral Highness having caused eight Parapets of thick Oaken Planks to be
made, shod with Iron, of a new Invention, each capable of securing a hundred
armed Men, they were thought proper to be used in Attacks and Assaults. The
same day the Bavarians discovered and disappointed two Mines of the Enemies.

July 15th, They continued to work in their Lines, and being lodged close to
the Wall, the Besieged were heard to work under the Breach. Gonzales the
Spanish Engineer being now come, Bombs and Carcasses were thrown into the Town,
which did great Execution. Upon the Advice that the Duke of Lorrain had, that
the Turks that had passed the Tibiscus near Segedin, were still encamped under
the Cannon of Hatwan, he caused two Regiments of Horse more to join Mercy to
oblige the Enemy to repass the Tibiscus.

July 16th, A new Battery was raised in the Lorrain Attack without the Wall of
the lower Town to the right against the great Rondel, the which was also
battered on the other side to render the Breach larger, and themselves Masters
of it. A Rascian, with Letters which the Governor of the Place had entrusted
him to carry to him of Alb-Royal, came and delivered them to the Duke; but they
being writ in the Armenian Language, and no Interpreter in the Camp, they were
sent to Vienna to be decyphered. Some Peasants got out of the Town reported,
that the Janissaries had begun to murmur against the Bassa, as designing to hold
out to the last extremity, but that he had by the Punishment of the most
mutinous, by his Liberality, and the assurance he had given them of speedy
relief, reassured them to that degree, that they promised to hold out with
their Lives. This Evening the Elector of Bavaria commanded 150 men, seconded by
a greater number to go and attack the Palizado which was in the Ditch at the
foot of the Rondel of the Castle. Lieutenant General Count Fountain was on the
right of the Attack, and General Count Aspremont at the left. They used three
of the above mentioned wooden Parapets for the first time with Success, and
they attacked this Post so vigorously, that they carried it with their Swords
in their Hands, cutting in pieces all them that defended it, but they sold
their Lives dearly, being the Assailants lost Count Fountain and 35 Soldiers,
and Volunteers. Count Aspermont received a Contusion in his Head by the stroke
of a Musket which knocked off his Steel Cap. The Captains Gottalinsky and
Vaubon were dangerously hurt, with diverse others. This Post gave access to the
Rondel.

July 17th, Yesterday the Besieged began to fire from a new Battery of four
great Guns, which they had raised upon the inward Wall; but General Starenberg
having commanded all the Cannon that could bear to shoot that way, they were
quickly silenced and disabled. About Noon twenty or thirty Janissaries appeared
upon the Breach of the Rondel to the right, as if they had designed a Sally,
but those in the Trenches having given them a Volly, they quickly retired. The
Brandenburgers and Bavarians did nothing but complete their Works, besides
their continual firing from their Batteries.

July 18th, A new line was advanced to the right, the better to cover the
Miners, and be of use in the subsequent Assault. The Brandenburgers augmented
their great Battery with three pieces of Cannon. Nor were the Bavarians idle,
their Miners working under the Wall behind the Pallizado Moat, of which they
were in possession. The Besieged did not much appear by day, but in the Night
time kept continual firing, killing a great many of the Besiegers with their
Stones and Grenades, which they threw into their Works.

Jul. 19. The Cannon was mounted upon the new Battery, and the Line was
strengthened with two small Forts. Last night the Besieged sprung a Mine behind
our Miners, who worked under the Wall, which endammaged our Mine, into which a
new entry was to be made to make it serviceable. Some of the Christian Miners
were covered with earth, most of which were pulled out again, except Libert
their Captain, who could not be found. Mr. Kerry, a Scotch Gentleman, with
seven or eight Soldiers were killed in the approaches, besides others wounded.
The Duke of Lorrain, assisted by the General persons of his Army, held a
Council of War this morning, but the result was kept secret. Some Deserters
assured the Duke, that the Besieged resolved to make no composition, but to
expect the Relief which the Grand Vizier would bring them.

Jul. 20. The new Line in the Lorrain attack was completed. There were three
false alarms given to harass the Besieged, by causing some Granadeers to run up
the Breach, and throw their Granado's into the place, upon which the Turks
hastening to the defense, they were saluted with Volleys of Cannon, Bombs, and
Carcasses, not without execution. These kind of attacks were frequently used to
keep the Enemy in continual alarms, and in ignorance of the time of the real
Assault. In the mean time the Mines were vigorously carried on, and a certain
German undertook a new one, which he undertook to finish in two or three days.
In the attacks of Brandenburg and Bavaria, the Miners hoped to be the following
Night under the Rondels, continuing to batter the Walls with great fury, and to
shoot glowing Bullets, Bombs and Carcasses into the City, which produced much
disorder. Upon advice that the Turks disposed themselves to attempt to put
relief into the Town, the Ditch of the Circumvallation was deepened, and
fortified with certain Redoubts, the better to secure the Besiegers, to which
purpose 200 Heyducks were added to the number of Pioneers.

Jul. 21. The principal working was now at the Mines, which were made in three
several places, and would suddenly be ready. Captain Libert, notwithstanding
all the diligence that had been used to dig and remove the earth to seek him,
had not been found. He was a Walloon by Nation, and was regretted by all the
Generals, and such who had skill of his knowledge in conducting of Mines. The
Miners were now within hearing of each other. A Battery was also raised for
four Mortars, near the three Spanish Pieces which beat upon the Rondel on the
right, and they resolved to approach all the Cannon and Mortars nearer the
Breaches, to batter them with more force, that they might enlarge them with
more ease, and ruin the Enemies Defenses, which were behind the said Breaches.
There were twenty-seven slain and wounded only at the Lorrain attack; amongst
the dead were Major Bacneburg a Dane, and Captain Lerneux the 5th of
Starenberg's Regiment. Gonzales's Bombs and Carcasses had the Success expected,
and by report of a Fugitive, one of those Bombs sunck into a House where a
hundred Persons of both Sexes were retired, who all miserably perished in the
Ruins of it. The Bavarians finished their Battery near the Rondel, and began
another on the Water side, to canonade the Flancks of the City on that side. At
present, being the three Attacks were advanced as far as the Breaches, which
were large enough, all things were disposed for a general Assault, two thousand
Ladders being got ready for false and seeming Attacks by scaling the Walls,
whilst others mounted the Breaches.

July 22th, There happened nothing at the Lorrain or Brandenburg Attack, the
Turks sprung two Mines this Morning, which did nothing but ruin a part of the
Curtain, where there was no Breach. The new Battery of four Guns upon the brink
of the Ditch of the Rondel in the Bavarian Attack being finished, the Turks
came there at break of day, and gave them a bloody Serenade, for a strong party
of them having slipped out by the Bridge on the right, they crept into the
Ditch along the Palisade, and being come to the Battery, before they were
discovered, by favor of the Darkness, they began to howl and make terrible
cries, nailing up three Cannon, and a Mortar, and ruining part of the Battery:
The Saxons of the neighboring Posts ran to the noise, but were disordered. The
Regiment of Prince Lewis of Baden, which was upon the Reserve, arrived
seasonably, and repulsed the Turks with the loss of thirty men, which was but a
sorry compensation considering the loss on the other side, where above one
hundred were killed and wounded, the most Saxons and Bavarians. Amongst the
slain, Colonel Lebel, a Saxon was one, besides several Subalternes, and
Geschwint, Colonel of the Artillery, was dangerously wounded with a Cymitar.
The Turks got no great advantage by this Sally, for the Nails being easily
drawn, they began in a very little time to play again, as if they never had
been nailed. And the revenge which was returned was sudden and fatal, for a
Bomb of the Bavarians falling into the Magazine of Powder in the Castle, The
Castle is blown up.
blew it up with such a terrible destruction and noise, that the whole City did
not only tremble with the blow, but also the whole Camp, and, as was afterward
reported by some fugitives, more than one thousand persons of all ages were
buried in the ruins, the stones being thrown up with the violence of the
Powder in such abundance, that they fell like Hail into the approaches, that
many of the Besiegers were hurt by them.

Jul. 23. The Duke of Lorrain, his Mines being now all ready, and all things
ready for an assault, sent the Count of Koningsec with an Interpreter to the
Besieged to summon them to surrender. In this interval there was a cessation of
Arms on both sides, which was employed in burying the slain. The said Count,
after two hours stay, returned into the Camp with a Letter from Abdi Bassa, in
a Purse of Crimson Damask, which he delivered the Duke. The answer was fierce
and arrogant, implying, that not being necessitated to surrender, he could not
be capable of so abject a thought, that he fought for the glory of his Prophet,
and the honor of the Musselmen; that he and his Garrison were resolved to try
the utmost extremity, and to defend the place with their latest breath. That
the Government had been entrusted to his care by the Grand Seignior, which he
would preserve for him, or lose his life; that when the Duke should come to
wrest it from him, he should find him upon the Breach to dispute his entrance,
and that he might order the assault when he pleased, he would expect him there
without stirring a foot. The Duke having read this brave answer, caused all the
Batteries to fire with more fury than formerly, and all the preparatives for a
general Assault to be made ready, for which purpose he sent for some thousands
of Hungarian Foot, who had voluntarily offered to be the first that should
mount the Breaches.

So fierce an answer and so brave a defense, makes it apparent, that the
impressions which the Run-aways had at the beginning of the Siege given of Abdi
Bassa's conduct, were very false, affirming he was despised by the Soldiery,
as being more a Merchant than a Man of War; and the Serasquier was in the wrong
in designing to remove him, for it is to be presumed that scarce any other
would have eluded the efforts of so great an Army so long time. A Pole was
observed by the Guards in secret conference with two Turks, but upon his return
to the Camp was seized upon, visited and examined, and being found to be a Spy,
he was immediately hanged. This evening a Bavarian Gunner was apprahended, as
he was going over to the Enemy.

Jul. 24th, This morning about eight a Clock a great Mine was sprung in the
Lorrain attack, and 300 men were commanded to lodge upon the Breach, together
with some hundreds of Hungarians, but the Mine had a contrary effect to what
was designed, for it ruined and overthrew part of their own Approaches, and
filled their Lines with Earth, besides the slaughters of 100 men killed and
wounded. The Duke upon this ill success, caused the firings of the Batteries to
be redoubled to enlarge the Breaches, to render them in a Condition to be
mounted without any new Mines. The new Battery which the Bavarians raised by
the Water side would be ready at Night, and that which they had already raised
upon the brink of the Ditch, had made a great gap in the Wall on the right. By
intercepted Letters he was also informed, that the Great Vizier highly
encouraged the Besieged to defend themselves, assuring them that by the eighth
or tenth of August he would come to their relief with a formidable Army.
General Caraffa who commanded the Imperial Troops upon the River Tibiscus, sent
an Officer to the Duke of Lorrain, and the Elector of Bavaria, with an acccount
of a great Advantage which he had had over the Garrison of Agria by the means
of two Ambushes which he had laid for the Turks, which luck'd so well, that
having drawn six hundred of the Garrison into them, he quite defeated them,
killed three hundred upon the Place, with Osman Bassa the Commander of Agria,
and took forty Prisoners, together with the Vice Bassa, who was dangerously
wounded.

July 25th, The whole Night was spent in repairing the Works ruined by the
Mine, which had been sprung with so much disadvantage. The Duke pressed forward
the Preparatives for the General Assault with all possible Vigor, having
ordered the making of Places of Arms, or Parades, as were necessary, within the
Lines and Approaches. Betwixt four and five the Besieged put fire to a Mine on
the right of the Rondel, in pursuance whereof they sallied with two hundred
Men, but were repulsed by the Guard that were in readiness with the loss of
fourteen men. A little after, they sallied again in greater numbers to the
left, where the Brandenburgers were, who likewise repulsed them. They returned
yet the third time with more Troops, and put the Brandenburgers Guards into
disorder, which obliged the Duke of Lorrain to order the Reserve which was
posted at the Wall of the lower Town to advance, which General Souches, who
commanded the Trenches, had divided into three parts, whereof one was placed to
the left on the Water side, another in the Approaches, and the third was
commanded to keep by the Mosque. The Duke moreover caused the Battalions of
Mansfelt, Salm, Souches, and Lorrain, to advance to the right. The Skirmishing
lasted a good time, the Turks retiring often, and as soon returning with great
fury and outcries. The Hayducks after the first discharge did also charge the
Turks, but gave way, occasioning much confusion amongst them upon the left of
the Mosque, from whence the Besieged gave brisk fire with their Cannon, though
without any great harm, so that seeing they could profit nothing by a longer
stay, they retired into the Town. Count Starenberg, who had signalized himself,
luck'd better than his Adjoutant, who had both his Legs shot off. The
Battalions of Souches and Mansfelt were ill treated, and had most dead. The
Baron of Asthi was hurt in the Foot, and the Baron of Hoghenworth slain, and
several subaltern Officers killed and hurt, besides above a hundred private
Soldiers. But the loss on the Enemies side was much greater, as was reported
by a Dutch Boy who run out of Town, where he had been since the Siege of
Vienna, having been sold by a Tartar to a Citizen of Buda. This Boy said
further, that the Turks made great Retrenchments within the Place, and that the
Garrison consisted still of at least five thousand fighting men.

July 26th, Never was more Diligence used since the Siege began in carrying on
the Lines and Approaches, than last Night, and all this Day to make the Places
of Arms, which are finished, and at present every thing is disposed of for the
general Assault, and posting themselves upon the Breaches, the Rondels, and the
Walls, and consequently to render themselves Masters of this important Place,
which had cost the Christians so much Blood. The Besieged made a little sally
on the Bavarian Attack, but having stood the first discharge, were forced to
retreat as fast as they came.

July 27th, Every thing being disposed for the general Assault, and the Troops
that were to be employed in it at their Rendezvouzes in all the three Attacks,
it was resolved that the Onset should be given at five a Clock in the Evening,
to which end the Duke had distributed his Orders to all the Officers high and
low, how they were to act. The Faggots, Gabions, Spades, Mattocks, Hatchets,
and Sacks with Earth, were there in great abundance, as well to break the
Enemies Retrenchments, as to cover the Assailants when they should be Masters
of the Breaches. The signal was given from Pest by some Cannon shot, and the
Assault was carried on in manner following. Forty Granadeers under the command
of a Captain, one Lieutenant, and one Sergeant, were at the head of the Rondel
to the right hand, they were followed by fifty Fuseliers and Soldiers, with
Hatchets, commanded also by a Captain-Lieutenant, and a Sergeant, with a
hundred men carrying Spades and Mattocks, supported by two Captains, two
Lieutenants, two Sergeants, and two hundred Musketeers, all under the Conduct
of the Prince of Newburg, Great Master of the Teutonick Order, who had the
Direction of this Attack. That of the middle toward the Curtain was directed by
Lieutenant General Souches; there were fifty Granadeers under a Captain,
Lieutenant and Sergeant, a hundred Fuseliers, two hundred men with Hatchets,
and to second them two hundred Musketeers, divided into two squadrons, which
were followed with a hundred and fifty more, with Shovels and Mattocks: The
Attack on the left of the little Rondel was ordered by the Brandenburgers after
the same manner. Behind the Sacks filled with Earth, Wool, and the like, in
the second line were posted a party of choice Harquebusiers, who were not to
stir thence, but fire continually upon the Turks, who stood there themselves in
the Breaches. The Heyducks, commanded by the Lieutenant Governor of Raab, were
posted on the Water side, where a great part of the Wall had been thrown down
by the fire of the Magazin already mentioned; they were only to make a false
Attack, being seconded by a Major with some select Companies. The chief
Officers were dispersed into several Posts to execute the functions of their
Employments; and thus Nigrelli, General of Battalia, Colonel Keth, Lieutenant
Colonel Rederer, and the Major of Staremberg assisted the grand Master of the
Teutonick Order. General Souches had for Assistants Diependal, Count Octtingen,
Lieutenant Colonel Jorger, and the Major of Crop's Regiment. There were above
1200 men of reserves in the covered way, commanded by General Thungen, under
twelve Captains, twelve Lieutenants, and other subaltern Officers, with all the
other Lieutenant Colonels and Majors, to succeed in the place of those that
should be slain or wounded. The 1200 Musketeers were to advance in small
parties in the Lines as the other gained ground; the rest of the Foot were at
their Arms ready to engage, and all the Generals in the Trenches. In this order
the Soldiers full of Hopes and Courage went to the Assault, and mounted the
Breaches. They found great Opposition, particularly at the great Rondel where
the Breach was high, and the Defendants very numerous and resolute. The
Christians were beat back two or three times, but returning still to the
Assault, they at length took possession of the Breach, and posted themselves in
it. The Brandenburgers took the Wall of the little Rondel. The Combat lasted
from five till nine a Clock with great effusion of Blood, not so much by the
Turks Arms as their Mines, and Powder which they had strewed in great
quantities in several places, which they successively fired as they were forced
from their Posts. There could be nothing more lamentable than to see two or
three hundred men at once tossed up by force of the Mines, which were most
killed, or grievously wounded. And yet the Besieged could not terrify the
Christians, nor hinder them by their obstinate resistance to lodge upon the
Rondels and the Curtain. The Hayducks apprehending the fire, failed in their
false alarming on the Water side. The Duke and General Staremberg were near the
Great Master with their Swords in their Hands, encouraging the Officers and
Soldiers to do well, and the Prince of Croy was in the middle near the
Curtain, where he was hurt. The Night being come put an end to the fight, and
it was spent in securing their Lodgments with two Lines of Communication from
the Approaches to the possessed Rondels, and the Miners were fastened to the
inner Wall or Retrenchment, where the Turks fortified themselves. This Assault
was one of the bloodiest, the most hardy, and best disputed that ever was seen,
whether we consider the bravery and intrepidness of the Assailants, or the
obstinate Valor of the Defendants. The number of the slain, amongst whom was
Adjoutant General Attein, was not very great, but that of the wounded very
surprising, of which Catalogue were the Prince of Croy, the Prince of Commercy,
General Diependael, General Thungen, the Baron of Asti, the Major of
Starenberg, Lieutenant Colonel Redere, Major Pini, Conte, Schlick, Baron Gera,
and many other Captains and subalterne Officers. On the Brandenburg side, Count
Dona, Colonel of Foot was slain, Major Marwitz, and the Prince of Curland
grievously wounded, with very many others.

At the Bavarian Attack the Elector had ordered the Assault in this manner. The
Palizades upon the Breach having been burnt the day before by forty choice
Soldiers, the Elector commanded a Lieutenant with 20 Fuseliers, a Sergeant,
six Volunteers, and ten Granadeers, and a Corporal, with six Carpenters to cut
the Palizadoes, an 100 Musketeers with their Officers were ordered to post
themselves at the Enemies Palizade, and to shoot without ceasing to favorise
the Pioneers to make the Lodgment upon the Rondel, amongst which there were
twenty five with Spades and Pickaxes and 75 with Hatchets commanded by a
Captain, and seconded by a Lieutenant-Collonel, a Major and a Captain, with
fifty men armed with half Pikes, Halberds, and Partisans, by a Lieutenant with
thirty Granadeers, and by 200 Musquetters under two Captains and two
Lieutenants. Things being thus disposed as well on the right as the left, the
two Neighboring Redoubts were furnished each with thirty Harquebusiers, and
three Battalions of Imperialists, Bavarians and Saxons, were to second the
Assailants. The Gunners had order to fire from all the Batteries, and to throw
Bombs and Carcasses without ceasing into the Castle, and betwixt the two Walls
on the Water side, as also to point their Cannon against the high Walls and
Windows of the Castle. All things being thus ordered, and the signal given from
Pest, they advanced toward the Breach, however difficult to mount on the right
and left of the Rondel, as also the Curtain, and that with so much Vigor, that
they became Masters of the Post, driving out the Besieged for all their
incessant firing, and a shower of Stones which they threw from their Castle
Windows. They also took the Swingher, which is a great Place in form of a
retreat betwixt the Walls and the Houses, but this Place being commanded by the
said Walls, whence the Turks annoyed the Aggressors with Grenades, Stones, and
Bombs which they rolled down; the Elector caused those that were there to
retire, being content to secure the Lodgments upon the Rondel, and the Wall of
the Castle by a Line of Communication from the Gate of the Bridge to that of
the Swingher, so that the Bridge remained in their Power, which was further
secured by traverse Lines, and two Redoubts. The Elector eminently appeared in
all this Action, and the Generals signalized their Courage, as did also the
Volunteers, Officers and Soldiers, who fought with all the bravery that was to
be expected from men of Courage. Nor were the Turks less commendable for their
Constancy and Fidelity, doing every thing that oppressed Valor could be
capable of. They who defended the Rondel and the Swinger were for the most part
killed and hurt. There were eight pieces of Cannon found there, and two Mortars
turned now against the Besiegeds second Wall and Retrenchments. In this
Assault, of the Bavarians there were slain two Majors, two Captains, four
Lieutenants, one Ensign, but the wounded were many; one Colonel, two
Lieutenant-Collonels, two Majors, 25 Captains, 16 Lieutenants, thirteen
Ensigns. The Generals Lavergne, Rummel, and Aspremont were of the number of the
wounded, as also the Duke of Escalona, a Grandee of Spain, and some other
Volunteers of Quality, making up with the Officers and Soldiers the number of
117 slain, and 972 wounded. Of the Troops of Saxony, a Lieutenant-Collonel, and
some under Officer were killed; one Lieutenant-Collonel, two Majors, two
Captains, one Captain-Lieutenant, and three Ensigns were hurt; of the Soldiers
there were seventy slain, and a hundred ninety nine wounded; so that the number
of the slain and wounded in this Assault amounted to above three thousand men.

July 28, In the three Attacks they were only employed in burying their dead,
and securing their Lodgments upon the Breaches. The Duke of Lorrain did also
apply the Miner to the second Wall, which was done in three several Places, as
did also they of Bavaria and Brandenburg.

July 29. The three Mines in the second Wall were sprung with that Success that
they made a new Breach there, and filled part of the Ditch with the Ruins. The
Bavarians advanced to the right of the Rondel, and seized two Mortars there,
which they turned against the Besieged. The great Cannon was advanced, and they
pretended to batter the City with an 100 pieces of Ordnance, and forty Mortars,
if the Turks continued in their Obstinacy. The Besieged howsoever made several
Cuts and Retrenchments behind the second Wall. The Duke seeing that well nigh
all the Generals of the Infantry were hurt and in no Condition to act, ordered
for the future that the Generals of the Horse should serve in the Approaches,
to wit, the Count of Stirum, and the Conte of Lodron, and so the first mounted
the Guard that Night with General Souches, and was to be relieved on the morrow
by the grand Master of the Teutonick Order, and the Count de Lodron. A Battery
of three Demy-Cannon, and another of four were finished. Some Rascians come out
of the place, reported, that the besieged were resolved to defend themselves to
the last extremity, but that some began to waver, saying, the further effusion
of blood ought to be prevented. A Council of War was held thereupon, and the
result was, that the Duke should send a second Summons to the Commander of the
place, to surrender whilst it was time, and that he might do it upon honorable
conditions, which if neglected he would not be answerable for the blood that
should be spilt, if they came to the last extremity, being in that case they
should spare neither Sex nor Age. Abdi Bassa civilly received his Highness's
Letters, and demanded a Day to consult with the other Officers of his Garrison,
which was granted him, with a cessation of Arms. The Deserters, who escaped in
great numbers, affirmed that the Besieged lost in the last Assault, in the
Bavarian attack, only 300 slain, and 700 hurt. They had that Night notice that
4000 Turkish Horse were seen within four Leagues of the Camp, to enquire into
the state of the place, but fearing a surprise, they presently retired.

Jul. 31. At nine in the Morning the Count of Launberg, Adjoutant General, was
commanded by the Duke of Lorrain to go with an Interpreter, and received the
Besieged's answer, which was to this purpose, That he neither could nor would
so easily surrender the City, it being the Key of the Ottoman Empire; but if
they would make a general peace, they would give another equivalent. After noon
the Besieged demanded a suspension of Arms at the Bavarian attack, and sent two
Aga's in Hostage to the Elector, who sent the Baron of Creuz Lieutenant
Colonel of Baden's Regiment with an Interpreter. The Turks received them with
great ceremony, and all imaginable civilities. He was not immediately conducted
before the Bassa, but to another House, the streets as he passed along were
lined with Soldiers in very good order, though no great number. Being entered
into the House, he was presented with Rice, a roasted Pullet, little Py^s,
Coffee and Wine. The Bassa excused himself, That he could not yet speak with
him, being he consulted the other chief Officers upon the propositions he was
to make to him. In this interval of time many Turkish Officers came to salute
the Baron: half an hour after the Bassa sent him word, That he would take it
for a favor if he would come over to him. Which he immediately did,
accompanied with a great number of Turks, being taken by the arms by the two
chiefest of them, according to the custom of the Ottomans, who led him thus
before the Bassa, who was in a Lodge of Wood over against his House, very well
furnished and hung with rich Tapistries. Having caused the Baron to sit down,
he used this discourse to him, That he was sorry to find himself in a place of
that importance, that had been so often besieged without success, and was now
so long abandoned without relief. On the contrary, that he found himself
pressed by the Emperor's Son-in-law, and the grand Vizier, that he wished he
were able to give his resolution concerning the surrender, but that being an
affair of the last importance, and as much as his life was worth, it was
impossible for him to resolve upon a surrender. Adding however, That if they
would demand any other place in Hungary, he would cause it immediately to be
evacuated for them: The Baron replied, That he had no Commission to discourse
of conditions, but only to know from the Bassa himself whether he would
surrender or no. That he might please to consider that the Christians were
already Masters of the Walls of the City, that it would be too late to
capitulate, if he stayed till another assault, that it would not be in the
power of the Generals to restrain the fury of the Soldiers, or prevent this
Siege from being as Tragical as that of Newheusel. At this discourse the Bassa
only lift up his shoulders, but the Baron being upon the point to take his
leave, he desired him to enter with him into his Cabinet, where, calling the
Mufti and three other Turks of the first rank, he remonstrated to him again,
That he could not upon any consideration do so great a prejudice to the Grand
Seignior, as to surrender a place upon which depended two hundred Leagues of
Country, and which is the Key of Turkey, but offered again any Town in Hungary
with its Appendances and Dependencies. Yet declaring finally, That if they
would give him assurances of a general peace with the Port, he would yet
resolve to surrender Buda. The Baron having no Orders to treat, took leave of
the Bassa, telling him he would make report to the Elector and Duke of Lorrain,
of the Declaration he had communicated to him, but that he could not assure him
that things would be so concluded. The Bassa desired this Declaration might be
published in Writing through the Camp; and invited him to stay all Night in the
City: But the Baron excused the later, desiring to be reconducted to the place
from whence he came, which was done with great ceremony, he being accompanied
with many Turkish Officers to the Gate. Nor the Baron, nor his Interpreter
could sufficiently demonstrate the ruins occasioned in the City by the Bombs
and Carcasses which had beaten down the greatest part of the Buildings. The
Cessation which had been observed during this Parley was broke toward Evening,
the Cannon beginning to fire with more fury than formerly. The Besieged sprang
a Counter-mine in the Lorrain attack, to ruin the Christians Mine made under
their Battery, opposite to the great Rondel, but without success. A while
after, two of the Besiegers Mines, which were designed to fill the Ditch, were
fired with execution. Count Starenberg looking betwixt two Gabions was hurt
with a Musket Shot, but without danger, 20 or 30 more were hurt and killed in
this and the Brandenburg attack.

Aug. 1. A Battery was finished in the Lorrain attack upon the Rondel, upon
which two pieces of Cannon were planted. A Mine was sprung in the Morning near
this Rondel, and though it succeeded well, there was no other attempt made,
because the Moat was not sufficiently filled, and so it was resolved to fill it
with Faggots, with Sacks of Earth, and the like Materials, which were carried
in abundance upon the place. The Workmen perceived so great a stink in this
Mine, that they could scarce endure it, two of them, who were suffocated with
it, being carried out of it. About Noon, intelligence came that 7000 Turks were
posted at Sexaritwan thirteen Leagues from Buda, and that the Grand Vizier had
begun to pass the Bridge of Esseck with the Army that he had formed out of the
Garrisons of Hungary, and the Neighboring places, and with other Troops which
he had got together, amongst which there were 7000 men drawn out of Bossina. It
was further assured that the defection amongst the Turks was very great, and
that of 8000 Janissaries, which the Grand Vizier had brought from the middle of
Turkey, 3000 had deserted upon the march: and yet he pretended his Army
consisted of 50000 Combatants, resolving to attempt the relief of Bud^. General
Dunewald returned this afternoon to the Camp, with the Regiments of Horse with
which he had been on the side of the Bridge of Esseck, to inform himself of the
march of the Enemy. The Generals Caraffa and Heusler arrived also from Zolnock
in two days, with 5000 Horse and some Hungarians.

All things were disposed for to assault the second Wall. The Bavarians had
thrown down a great part of the Wall with their Cannon, and a Mine, rendering
themselves Masters of the second Zwinger, where they at the same time seized
upon the Enemies Cannon and Mortars, which they turned against the City.

Aug. 2d. They continued to fill the Ditch: every thing was ready for the
assault, which was deferred, because of the continual rains. Upon the
reiterated news brought in by Scouts of the Grand Vizier having passed the
Bridge at Esseck, all necessary preparations were made to receive him well, in
case he attempted to relieve the Town.

Aug. 3. A Runaway, who pretended to be a Domestic of one of the most
considerable Officers in the Town, declared, that the Besieged had prepared a
Mine, and begun a second in the Brandenburg attack: That they expected with
great impatience their Succors, and that of all those which the Bassa had sent
out, not one had returned, which rendered him very uneasy and chagrin, and
that the number of serviceable Soldiers exceeded not 2000 besides the
Inhabitants. The Besiegers could not finish their great Mine because of a Rock
they met. Some small Banks and Parapets were made upon the Breach to secure the
Soldiers firing during the assault, which was ordered in the manner following.
At noon the Trenches were relieved, and those that went off were appointed for
reserves. The first attack was to the right of the Rondel. Fifty Granadeers
with a Captain, and Lieutenant, and a Sergeant followed by 20 men preceded,
these were followed by 50 Fuseliers Officer'd as the first, and 50 men which
followed them with Hatchets. The same method was held by the Brandenburgers on
the left, and the Hungarians fell upon the Curtain in the middle, preceded by
30 Germans, and followed by 60 with their necessary Officers. The assault began
betwixt 5 and 6 a clock in presence of all the Generals, the Great Master of
the Teutonick Order commanding the Trenches. The design, by reason the Mine had
not the desired effect, was but feigned, but the Duke of Lorrain being
advertised by an Adjoutant, that the Elector of Bavaria had already effectively
began the assault, did also command the false attack to be converted into a
real one. The Fight lasted two hours. There were 1000 Troopers on foot, 300
whereof were employed in the assault, who behaved themselves well, as the
Hungarians also did; but the Breach being of difficult ascent, the Besieged
very well covered with Palisado's, and defending themselves like desperate men,
the Duke would not risque more of his people, contenting himself to make a
Lodgment at the right of the angular Rondel, where 40 men immediately
entrenched themselves. There were not many killed by the Besieged's fire, but
about 200 wounded by Stones and Arrows, which were shot in such abundance that
it resembled a shower of Hail. Count Leopold of Herbersteyn, a Lieutenant
Colonel, Major Bischophawsen, etc. were of the number of the hurt. The
Bavarians were not exempt from the same Artillery of Arrows and Stones, besides
Bombs which were rolled upon planks out of the windows of the Castle. The
Prince of Savoy was hurt in the hand with an arrow, together with 3 Captains,
some subaltern Officers, 7 or 8 Volunteers, and 90 Soldiers as well killed as
wounded. Prince Lewis of Baden going in the morning to view the approaches, was
shot with a Musket-bullet which burnt his Coat, and made a great contusion upon
his Breast, but his Arms being of proof saved his life.

Aug. 4. The firing from the Batteries was redoubled from the three Attacks to
enlarge the breaches, and ruin the Defenses of the Besieged. The Line of
Circumvallation was strengthened, being furnished with many Redoubts and Forts
to flank the whole work. All the heights and eminences about the place were
entrenched and possessed by the Besiegers. The Heyducks took their Post along
the inner Wall of the lower Town, and so the attacks were continued with the
same vigor as before. The Bavarians raised a Battery of nine Guns of 24 ball
upon the Rondel of the Castle, wherewith they beat the Flanks and widened the
Breach, but the Earth being very narrow and straight, so that but few could
pass a breast, the Besieged might the better dispute the access of the
Assailants.

The Scouts brought advice that the Grand Vizier had effectively passed the
Bridge of Esseck, and that he had 20000 men with him, which with the Troops by
Alba Regalis amounted to 40 or 50000, most old Soldiers, taken out of their
Garrisons and Fortresses, into whose places they had put their new Levies.
There came also advice, that the Bassa of Agria, having assembled some
thousands of Turks out of the Garrisons of upper Hungary, was advanced near
Hatwan, where he had commanded a great many Charets out of the Neighborhood,
to carry Pontoons to the Danube side, by means whereof he pretended to put
relief into the Town, at the same time that the Grand Vizier should attack the
Lines on the other side. This advertisement obliged the Christian Generals to
use such necessary precautions which might secure them on Pest side.

Aug. 5. In the Lorrain attack the approaches were advanced from the great
Rondel toward the second Wall, where they had posted themselves in the assault
of the 3d. instant. The Miners were busy at the right of the Breach, the
better to attack the Enemy in flank, as also under the Curtain, to blow up the
Besieged's Retrenchments behind the Breach. A Gallery was begun on the right of
the Battery, to go into the inward Ditch, and the better to assure the attack
the Flanks were pallisado'd. The besieged spent the whole Night in throwing of
Bombs, Granado's, and Stones, to incommode the contrary Workmen, but without
much harm, save the killing of 3 Heyducks, and wounding 5 or 6 other Soldiers.
This afternoon one of their Bombs falling into a Barrel of Powder upon the
Besiegers Battery, killed five, and hurt three.

Aug. 6. A new Battery of two Demy-Cannon was raised in the Lorrain Attack
behind the great Rondel, by means whereof the Defense of the little Rondel was
ruined, which the besieged had hitherto used with great advantage. The
Christians continued to fill the inward Moat with Fagots, Tuns, Sacks with
earth, and the like, and made a Redoubt behind the great battery to secure the
Workmen. The Brandenburgers and Bavarians continued their attacks with vigor,
nothing else considerable intervening.

Aug. 7. Last Night several false alarms were given, as if the Turks were come
to attempt succouring the place. The Christians continued to deepen the Ditch
about their Lines, and to fortify their Posts to make the Enemy despair of
forcing their Camp. The Mines were also carried on with great industry, and
would in 3 or 4 days be ready for execution. The Heyducks undertook to fill the
Ditch of the second Wall in 48 hours time, upon the assurance of a recompense
of 4000 livers, which was promised them by the Generals. The breach which was
made in the second Wall was very spacious, and as soon as the Mines were
finished, they will again assault the second wall. They found much difficulty in
the Bavarian attack to render themselves masters of the Castles, by reason of
the various Walls and Defenses which were to be forced, and of the obstinacy of
the Defendants. This obliged the Elector to redouble the fire of his Cannon to
throw down these Walls, and in effect they did little else, besides beating the
Castle from their several batteries, which played upon the Flanks and Curtains
with so much fury, that they hoped in a few days to see them quite down. Thirty
Hussars meeting with as many of the Turks, killed one of them, and took 4
Prisoners, which they brought with them to the Camp. Amongst these was an Aga,
who four years since was ransomed out of Raab, where he had been Prisoner, for
8000 Crowns. These reported that the 6th instant the Serasquier should arrive
at Alb-Royal with 26000 Horse, and was to be followed by the Grand Vizier, who
assembled his Army about Esseck, which was not to be inferior in number to
that which was last year employed at the Siege of Gran. They added, that the
Seraskier had express Orders not to hazard a battle with the Christians, for
fear of losing the City and Army at once, but to endeavor to put Supplies of
Troops in the besieged Town one way or other, or to perish in the attempt.

Aug. 8. Four thousand Turkish and Tartarian Horse appeared upon a Hill near
the Bavarian quarter, and retired after some light Skirmishes with Count
Budiani's Hussars, reinforced by some commanded Men and Volunteers. The
Prisoners taken there deposed, that the Seraskier was camped under the Cannon
of Alba-Regalis with 20000 Combatants, and that the Grand Vizier with the Grand
Army was expected there; but the Duke, by the report of his Spies and Scouts
knew that the Grand Vizier was uncertain whether he ought to proceed with all
the Army, or continue about the bridge of Esseck, with a great part of his
Forces, capable to oppose the Croats, which might ruin the said bridge, if he
abandoned it, and so cut off his retreat. The mines in the Lorrain attack would
be ready in two days. The fortification of the Camp was continued, as also the
perpetual discharge of the Cannon and Mortars against the besieged.

Aug. 9. Some thousands of Turks posted themselves not far from the Camp, in an
advantageous place, as if they designed to prepare themselves there for some
attempt; but the Generals had taken such good measures, they apprehended
nothing, and the Soldiers seemed full of courage. All the retrenchments about
the Camp were near finished, but being the Turks did frequently alarm them, the
Duke ordered, that all the Foot that were not in the Approaches, should be
placed in the Lines, and particularly in the Spurs. This morning, a Bomb from
the Town falling unhappily into a reserve of Granado's, fired them, killing 3,
and wounding 13. This evening some Turks did again appear upon an eminence to
the right behind the Bavarian Camp, toward which two Squadrons of them did
move in good order, to brave the Besiegers, but some Volunteers riding out to
pickeer with them, they retired with the loss only of one man slain.

Aug. 10. The Imperialists continued the finishing of their Mine, the two
others of the two other Attacks being ready. The Duke caused the Hungarian Foot
to be posted along the Wall of the lower Town, from the Water Rondel to the
very quarters of the Germans, where they entrenched themselves with a Ditch and
a good Parapet to secure them against surprises; and as the Danube is deep
there, they sunk two Barks full of stones, and made several Spurs of Palisado's
along the brink of the River, to take away all hopes of the Turks relieving of
the Town that way. This morning the Infidels gave another alarm on the Bavarian
quarters, whereupon all the Cavalry was commanded to Horse, but the Enemy
retired at the same time. It seems that their design was to make a passage that
way, but the Bavarians were sufficiently entrenched to hinder them. The Prince
of Croy being recovered of his wounds, did reassume the exercise of his charge
in the approaches. Four Hussars very well mounted, advancing against some
Turkish Horse of the place, made as if they would charge them, but being come
up with them they discoursed them and shook hands together, which being
observed by the Musketeers of a neighboring Redoubt, they sallied out and gave
fire upon the Husssars, who ran away, hurt one, which they took, as also
another of them, the third got away, and the fourth entered into the City. The
Prisoners were examined, who said they did nothing but enquire of the Turks, if
they would not yet surrender the place, but they were to be interrogated more
strictly.

Aug. 11. Some Turkish Troops did again show themselves upon the Mountains on
the Bavarian side toward the way of Alb-Royal. The precise number of the Turks
is not yet known, some Spies certify that there are 40000 Ottomans, and 20000
Tartars. In the mean time every necessary prevention is put in practice to
receive them, if they will attempt to force the Camp. Preparations are made for
a vigorous assault upon the second wall, if the Mines will answer expectation.

Aug. 12. All things being ready for the assault, the three Mines on the
Lorrain attack were fired, which had no other success than the turning up of a
few Palisades, the Miners not having pierced deep enough under the Wall of the
second Rampart, which made it evident that they did not well understand their
trade, although they had been sent for from all quarters, to have good ones,
for they were the Mines that contributed the most to the reducing of this
important place. The assault that was designed if the Mines had taken, was
deferred, and new ones were gone in hand with, in hopes of more favorable
success. In the skirmishes of this day, there was an Officer of the Turks
killed, who doubtless had engaged himself to enter into the place, being they
found Letters about him to the Bassa of Buda, marking the order the Turks were
to observe to relieve the besieged; by which it appeared, that the Grand
Visier's design was to force a quarter, and so put in a Supply into the place
without hazarding a battle; and that 8000 Tartars should harass the Country as
far as Gran, to cut off provisions from the Besiegers, and infest them with
continual courses. Upon this advice the Duke called a Council of War, where it
was resolved, to leave part of the Army in guard against the Town, and to march
with the rest of the Imperial and Auxiliary Forces against the Enemy, who
according to the said Letters were above 60000 strong, although they had it
from good hands, that they did not exceed 40000 Combatants.

Aug. 13. The whole Army marched out of the Lines the night past, except 20000
left there for the Guard of the Works, and to hinder the Enemy from putting
Supplies into the Place. Oats and Forage were distributed for three days for
the Horse, and the Volunteers were formed into a fine Body under good Officers.
The Duke of Lorrain posted himself out of the Camp in sight of the Enemies,
4000 Hussars and Heyducks having the Avantguard. This night the Spies and some
Deserters assured them, that the following night they would be attacked in
Battel-array upon break of day, which obliged the Christians to dispose of all
things for the Battle.

Aug. 14. The Turks before Sunrising formed a Body of more than 8000
Janissaries and Spahi's, the most brave and most resolute of the Army, who being
divided into diverse Troops, marched from 6 in the Morning till 8 a clock,
curvetting behind the Mountains on the side of Alba Regalis, and entered into a
Plain the better to approach the Camp by the favor of a Valley. The Duke of
Lorrain having observed the Enemies countenance, commanded Count Dunewald,
General of the Horse, to take possession of the ground to the left with nine
Imperial Regiments, Cuirasiers, Dragoons, and Croats, to which he added some
Companies of Hussars; and General Heusler had order to post himself with his
Detachment upon the height on the right. The Hussars who were with General
Dunewald charged first, and though they fought with all imaginable bravery, they
were notwithstanding forced to give way, but seeing themselves supported by the
Germans, they took heart and returned to the Charge again. The Turks seeing
they had routed the Hussars, thought to have had the others as good cheap; upon
these hopes, they advanced with great fury and horrible cries against the
Christians, who received them without moving. Heusler, who had placed himself
upon the height mentioned, charged them smartly, so that the fight was rude and
bloody, and however the Turks saw themselves charged in their Flanks and Front,
they did not desist to make use of several efforts to break through the Enemy,
and have room to execute their design, but all was in vain, being every time
repulsed, until they were at length broke and forced to fly. The execution was
bloody. The Janissaries being abandoned by the Spahi's, and environed by their
Enemies, throwing away their Arms, sought to save themselves by flight, but
were most of them slain. The Turks had above 3000 dead, most of them
Janissaries, all chosen men, who had undertaken to force a quarter, and enter
into the City, or perish. The Grand Vizier had promised 20 Ducats to every one
that should enter into the City, whereof he gave each undertaker 5 in hand:
every one carried besides his ordinary arms 3 Hand-Granado's, a Mattock and
Spade, to break the Retrenchments and fill the Ditches. The Prisoners were 500,
there being also taken 30 Ensigns and Standards, 11 Pieces of Cannon, and 10
Wagons laden with Ammunition. This great action cost the Christians but
little, the slain not exceeding 60, and the wounded but 33. After this fight
the Turks made several movements, and drew up in a Plain which looked toward
the Bavarian quarter, and keeping their Wings upon heights, they made mien as
if they would come to a decisive battle, or relieve the Place with all their
Forces. Hereupon a Council of War was called, where it was resolved to follow
the Enemy, which was done by the Elector of Bavaria in the head of his Army,
but the Turks apprehending an Engagement, retired. The Generals Dunewald and
Heusler pursued them beyond the Mountains, and the Hussars had another skirmish
with a great Party of Turks which stayed behind to amuse the Christians, and
favor the retreat of their Army. The booty the Christians got was
considerable, for they had all the spoil of the Enemy, whereof there was not
one that had not the 5 Ducats which the Grand Vizier had given him besides his
own moneys. The Besieged thinking they were already relieved, made great fire
upon them that kept the Approaches, and supposed they might ruin some of the
Enemies works, but in vain, for they were so briskly received, that they lost
the desire of risking further. They however made a very furious sally on the
Bavarian attack, which was fatal to them, for they were not only repelled by
the Regiments of Baden and Aspremont, but the retreat being cut off, there was
great slaughter made of them. The Turks being retired without coming to a
decisive battle, the Army returned into their Lines, and immediately dispatched
young Count Palsi to the Emperor with the news of this great advantage, and to
lay 28 Colors and Standards at his feet, that were taken in the late
engagement. The rest, for some were taken in the pursuit, were planted upon the
great Rondel, to make the Besieged comprehend the defeat of those Succors that
they had expected with so much impatience.

Aug. 15. The Germans and Hussars scouting abroad brought some Prisoners in,
who all agreed in this, that the Grand Vizier notwithstanding this check, would
not desist making other attempts to put relief into the Town, though with the
hazard of his whole Army. And in effect, however he was retired, he did not
cease to alarm the Camp every night. This Afternoon a signal was made to the
Besieged for a Parley, to inform them by the Janissaries Prisoners of the rout
of their Succors; but whether they perceived this within or not, they answered
by the fire of their great and small shot.

Aug. 16. The works of the three Attacks were pursued with vigor, and in the
Morning the Besieged's Palizadoes and Defenses of Wood upon the Breach were
fired in the Lorrain Attack, and partly consumed by the Flames, notwithstanding
all the diligence of the Turks to extinguish them. In this Action they threw a
prodigious quantity of Stones, Grenades, Sacks with Powder, and other
combustible matters upon the Assailants, insomuch that four of them who fired
them were burnt, twelve Crowns a man being given to each of those who engaged
themselves in this Service as a recompense, and yet they could not clear the
way for an Assault, the Besieged having taken their time in the Night to plant
other Palizadoes and repair their Defenses. In the Bavarian Attack, the Castle
and the great Tower were incessantly beaten, which were as it were overturned
by the force of the Cannon.

Aug. 17. All things were ready for the Assault in the Lorrain Attack, but the
Besieged having repaired their Defenses, and planted double rows of Palizadoes
behind those that were burnt yesterday, they were obliged to defer it. The
Prisoners that the Hussars brought to the Camp reported, that the Grand Vizier
was extremely in choler against the Commander of the Spahi's, for not having
done his duty in the fight on the 14th instant, by abandoning the Janissaries,
and added, that of the ten thousand men which were appointed for that
enterprise, but very few returned to the Camp.

Aug. 18. The two great Mines in the Lorrain Attack were fired, but neither
with that Success that the Miners had promised, which extremely retarded the
Reduction of this important Place. The Duke seeing they advanced but little by
Mining, resolved on Sapping, for which end, preparation of Faggots and Sacks of
Earth were made to fill the Ditch, and certain Engines were devised to approach
the Enemies with less peril, and drive them from their Post. A new Battery was
raised on the right to beat down the Besiegeds flanks of Palizadoes on the
Breach; and to do it more effectually they were to shoot from the Battery on
the Curtain with chained Bullets. A Fugitive from the Turkish Army reported
amongst other things, that the Grand Vizier was encamped at present at
Ertschin, 4 Leagues from the City, but that he would not desist from attempting
the relief of the Place, being only removed to that distance for want of
Forage. The Bavarians seized a Country Fellow who had swum the Danube, having
Letters from the Governor to the Grand Vizier and the Aga of the Janissaries,
in which he conjures them by the Law of Mahomet to succor him, adding he would
expect the last extremity.

Aug. 19. The Besieged defending themselves with obstinate Valor, spent this
whole day in thundering with their Artillery upon the new Lorrain Battery, which
had been raised to beat upon the flanks of the Palizadoes, and whereon they had
mounted 4 great Guns, which they so ruined that it was rendered useless for the
present. The Detachments from the Grand Visiers Army continued to alarm the
Christians Camp every Night, who to prevent Surprises, were continually upon
their Guard. General Scherfenberg was expected in few days with those Troops he
commanded in Transylvania. As soon as this body was arrived, they pretended to
go and attack the Grand Vizier in his Camp, who by report of Prisoners and
Run-aways, did not exceed 46000 men, whereof half were new raw Fellows without
Discipline or Order. Strong parties were every day sent out to observe the
Enemies Countenance, who often shock with theirs, but always with Advantage.

Aug. 20. The Grand Vizier resolved to make another attempt to introduce
Supplies into Buda, would do it with fewer Troops than before, the better to
pass undiscovered, and be able to approach the Christian Camp. He chose for
this purpose the bravest Officers in his Army, who promised to execute his
order or perish. They began their march in the Night with 2000 Spahis, and the
like number of Janissaries, who were mounted for the greater Expedition, and
this Morning at break of day they appeared in the Valley of St. Paul, where
having been put in order without being perceived, rushed, as their manner is,
with great Cries upon the first Guard, which they defeated easy enough, and
forced upon two squadrons of Horse of Caprara and Heuslers, who received them
courageously, giving others time to hasten to their assistance, and chase the
Turks, who fled. The Janissaries, whereof part had quitted their Horses with
design to traverse the Trenches, and get into the City, were ill treated, they
were pursued by General Heusler to the very Gate, and met by the Guard of
Bavarian Horse, who hastened to the allarm, so that their slaughter was there
very great, and few had the fortune to enter into the City; and though some
make them amount to 150, they were scarce 100 that got in, which may be easily
judged by the abandoned Horses, which did not surpass the said number, so that
this feeble supply was of no great use to the Besieged, and if those of the
advanced Guard had done their duty, not one of them had passed the Trenches.
The Turks had 400 slain, and the Christians not above 15; and 26 hurt. General
Heusler, who behaved himself with his accustomed Gallantry, was hurt in the
foot, but not dangerously. General Maigret was handled worse, being severely
sabled, and Marquis Santini, a Knight of Malta, was taken Prisoner in the first
heat of the fight. The Besieged, to testify their Joy for the arrival of these
Succors, flourished three red Colors in token of Victory, and fired three
Salvos with all their Artillery and small shot, which gave the Besiegers a
guess at the smallness of their number, which the Renegadoes yet affirm surpass
the number of 2000 serviceable men. During the late shock, some squadrons of
those of the Grand Vizier, who had followed the other to second them, appeared
in Battalia toward the Bavarian Attack, as if designing to try their fortune
that way, but they retired without engaging: and yet they returned about ten at
night to the same place they had attempted the passage that morning, but they
were repelled, and retreated in disorder. In the Bavarian attack there was a
new Battery raised of four Pieces: and the besieged mounted a great Gun upon
the high wall of the Castle, with which they beat all the covered way, as also
the Battery of the Bavarians upon the great Rondel.

Aug. 21. Notwithstanding the Grand Vizier caused 5000 Tartars to pass the
Danube, who ravaged the other side of the River, and incommoded the adverse
Forragers by their courses; All things are in abundance in the Camp, and the
Convoys arrive there securely by Water. General Scherfenberg is expected in 7
or 8 days with 10000 men, having orders to mount his Foot in Charets, for fear
of tiring them with so long a march. Twelve hundred Suedish Foot are likewise
expected, being the remainder of the Troops which the King of Sweden is obliged
to send, to assist the Emperor against the Infidels, upon account of his quota
for those Fiefs which he possesses in Germany. This morning a Redoubt was built
in that place which the Turks forced yesterday; it was further fortified with
two pieces of Cannon, and Troops capable to defend the passage. There was also
another Redoubt built on the Mountain on the left, where the Regiment of Lodron
was camped. This day the Besieged did yet give some Volleys of rejoicing,
whereof the reason is not known, unless it be some particular feast. The Sieur
Rummel, General of the Bavarian Troops, being in the approaches, was slain
there with a Musket bullet. He is much regretted, having distinguished himself
in all the occasions where he might acquire glory.

Aug. 22. The Elector of Bavaria caused the great Tower to be assaulted, which
is in the middle of the Castle, and for the most part ruined by his Cannon. He
took it with the loss of 73 Soldiers, and the like number wounded, amongst
which, the Duke of Saxe-Mersburg was hurt in two places. Whilst this assault
lasted, there was a false alarm given on the Lorrain side to divert the enemy,
and much firing there was with Cannon to ruin the Defenses which they had made
upon the breaches of the inner Wall. This evening about 10 a clock, a Turk, who
had swum the River, was taken near the Isle of St. Margaret, he had thrown his
Letters into the water, and yet confessed that he had been sent by the Bassa,
to give advice to the Grand Seignior of the state of the place, and press for
relief: adding, that another was also gone with the same condition.

Aug. 23. The besieged made an attempt upon the Bavarian Attack, to recover the
great Tower of the Castle, which they had yesterday lost by assault, but they
were repelled and beat back to their Retrenchments. At the Lorrain Attack four
pieces were planted upon the great old Battery, wherewith they began to batter
the new Palisades upon the Breach of the inner Wall. The Night past the
Besieged sallied upon the Saxon's quarter, but they were so well received and
repulsed by Lieutenant Colonel Pletze, who was upon the Guard with 100 horse,
that they had much to do to recover their second Wall, where this Officer was
slain with two Musket Shot, and the Turks had yet the leisure to drag his Corpse
into the City.

Aug. 24. The Turks appeared in two separate Bodies, the one at the Lorrain,
and the other at the Bavarian attack, but without attempting any thing, and
retired about noon into their Camp, which they had advanced a League nearer the
Christians than they were before. A Renegado out of Town reported, that the
Besieged began to speak with more licentiousness against the Bassa, who
endeavored to keep them to their duty, telling them, that the Grand Vizier
expected one of the first Ministers of State from the Port, with full power
from the Grand Seignior, to treat and conclude a Peace with the Generals of the
Christians, and that upon his arrival there would be a suspension of Arms;
exhorting them not to degenerate from the bravery and virtue of true Musselmen,
whose glory they had hitherto so generously supported, but to expect yet some
few days before they talked of surrendering.

Aug. 25. The Duke of Lorrain being advertised, that the Turks might contrive a
passage on the Danube side, behind the hot Baths, to put Succors into the
Town, ordered some Squadrons of Horse to second the Guards, which were at the
same time reinforced, and to the end the access might be rendered the more
difficult for the Turks, he caused Palisado's to be planted in the most weak
places, and caused some Squadrons and Battalions of Germans and Hungarians to
be posted in such manner, that if the Turks would make some other attempt, they
might easily be transported and hasten to the Alarm. Some change was also made
in two Batteries, the better to incommode the Besieged, and destroy their
Parapets, Palisado's, and other defenses which they had raised upon the breach
of the inner Wall. In the Bavarian attack they got ground foot by foot, so that
they will in a little time be Masters of all the Castle, notwithstanding the
opposition of the bravest Enemy imaginable, who never lose an inch of ground
without disputing it, and endeavor to recover it by often reprisals, making
use for this purpose of Bombs, Granado's, Stones, Sacks with Powder,
Stink-Pots, and other arts which courage and despair are capable of inventing
to break the measures of the Agressors, and obstruct their violence; and as
they have made diverse holes and caverns under the places, in possession of the
Christians, by which they play these sorts of inventions, the other were
constrained to fill them with earth, stones, and the very ruins of the Castle,
to damp and hinder their operation, without which they could not maintain
themselves, but with great difficulty.

Aug. 26. The Prisoners brought in the Camp by Parties, and the Deserters which
ran away reported, that one of those which was sent to the Grand Vizier by the
Bassa of Buda with Dispatches, in which he gave him an account of the state of
the place, which he can no more defend at present, that the Castle is well-nigh
all in the hands of the Christians, who on the first assault cannot fail to
carry the place. That in the last assault of the Castle he had lost more than
100 of his best Soldiers, that the Recruits that were sent him were but little
considerable, not mounting to 200 men, amongst which, more than half were
wounded, and consequently unserviceable. That for his part he had acquitted
himself of his duty, by letting the Christians see, that after a defense so
obstinate, during so long a Siege, pushed on with so much fury and bravery both
on the one side and the other, that the Musselmen knew well how to support the
cause of their Sultan, in doing whereof he pretended to his share of glory,
professing finally that the Grand Vizier ought to give an account of the ill
success of the Siege, and be responsible for a loss so considerable, which he
could not avoid, if the Imperialists attempted another assault, no more than
the blood of his valorous Soldiers, and his own, if he delayed their relief any
longer. The Bassa did further mark the places in his Letter, which appeared to
him the most proper to attempt the relief by, and if he took his measures well,
that he would succeed in his enterprise. Upon this advice the Duke visited in
person the place marked to the Grand Vizier, and gave orders for every thing to
hinder the introducing of supplies. The Spies which were sent to the Enemies
Camp, reported, that the Grand Vizier had again promised 40 Crowns a man to all
them who would undertake to put themselves into the place, promising moreover
that they should be exempt from the War during their lives, and enjoy their
ordinary pay without the obligation of any service. At noon advice was given
that the Turks advanced with 12 great pieces of Cannon, and a while after they
were perceived in sight of the Camp ranged in order of Battle, but as the Duke
of Lorrain disposed his Army to fight, they retired.

Aug. 27. The Lorrainers having finished their work in form of a Bridge, it was
extended to the adverse Palisades to be made use of in the assault. It was
covered with earth to secure it from the fire, as had been done the day before
in the Bavarian attack, which had obliged the said Bavarians to retire, but
this morning they recovered their Post again, and to secure them from the fire,
they made use of Planks covered with Tin, and yet when they thought themselves
safe from this devouring Element, the Besieged, who want no industry to their
valor, threw toward evening an immense quantity of artificial and combustible
matters with that success, that they pierced even to the said Planks, and
reduced them to ashes; they also flung such a vast quantity of Granado's,
Stones and Arrows upon the Bavarians, that they forced them to abandon this
Post with the loss of twenty Soldiers.

Aug. 28. In the Lorrain attack, they thundered with extreme violence from their
Cannon upon the Flanks of the great Breach, as did also the Brandenburgers to
overthrow the Besieged's defenses. The Bavarians regained their Post, and
covered themselves so well in it, that the Enemy would be much troubled to
dislodg them. Major Staben, who commanded the Assailants, was killed there, the
slain and wounded not otherwise exceeding 20. Upon the Report of some
Renegado's that the Grand Vizier was resolved to come this Night with all his
Forces, the Duke ordered all things for his reception, and all the Army stood
in Battalia, but to no purpose, for no Enemy did appear.

Aug. 29. Being the Decollation of St. John Baptist, and a day which the Turks
have always superstitiously observed as fortunate to their Empire, 1000 Spahi's
and 2000 Janissaries commanded by two Bassa's, and seconded by 1500 Tartars,
came at break of day to make another trial on the Water side, but seeing the
Post too well provided on that quarter, having received a discharge from the
Musketeers that kept the Walls, they retreated, and judged it easier to try the
passage by the same way that the last Supplies entered; they went by the Valley
of St. Paul, and charged fiercely with their accustomed shouts upon the
Regiments of Mercy, Heusler, and Newburg, who received them with so much
bravery, that they killed a great number of them, whereof some of the most
determined were rash enough to push through to the very Lines, where they were
all slain except 4, who were lucky enough to get into the City. The number of
the dead in this action amounted to 600, besides the Prisoners, which were not
many; and there were taken 25 Standards and Colors which were red, intimating
thereby, that they would enter the City or perish. On the other side some 30
were killed and wounded, Mercy was of the number of the last, but without
danger, and his Adjoutant of the first. During this Tentative the Besieged made
a sally upon the Bavarians, but the Heyducks attacking them in Flank, they had
much a-do to retire, leaving 17 dead upon the place. The Grand Vizier showed
himself with his Army all day on the Bavarian side, ready to engage, but seeing
3 Regiments of Cuirasiers, and two of Dragoons, being the Avant-Guard of
General Scherfenberg's Army, he quickly retreated back to his Camp.

Aug. 30. Scherfenberg arrived this day with the rest of his Body, proper men,
who seemed eager to signalize themselves. The Deserters reported, that the want
was great in the Grand Visier's Army, and that the famished Soldiers had
plundered some Barks which had brought Provisions, the Officers not being able
to hinder them.

Aug. 31. The Lorrainers took a new Post in the Ditch before the Breach in the
inner Wall, but 3 fadom distant from the Pallisade, and the place being very
deep, the Turks could not much hurt them, where they had but 2 Soldiers
wounded. This Morning the Duke of Lorrain went, accompanied with most of the
Generals, to the Elector's quarters, where they held a Council of War, and
having dined there, the Duke returned to his Quarters, after which, the Works
were ordered to be enlarged and deepned for the easier ascent to the Assault,
which was resolved upon in a day or two.

Sept. 1. Three thousand Turks appeared before day by Moonlight on the
Bavarian side, but seeing the Christians in good order and ready to receive
them, they retired without any Engagement. The Great Chancellor, Count
Straatman, being arrived yesterday at the Camp with a secret Commission, called
a Council of War, in which the Duke of Lorrain, the Elector of Bavaria, and all
the Imperial and Auxiliary Generals did meet. The Chancellor exposed his
Commission, which contained his Imperial Majesty's desires to put an end to
this bloody Siege, and that they should consult on the means the most proper
and expedient for the terminating of it. Two points were chiefly deliberated
upon, whether they should go with the greatest part of the Army, leaving a
sufficient number to guard the Lines, to force the Grand Vizier, or should make
a General assault upon the place, and that with more Forces than had hitherto
been employed. The later was approved by most of the Generals, and it was
resolved to assault the place the next day, for which purpose every thing that
was necessary was prepared, that the enterprise might not fail: and lest the
Enemy might know it, it was given out, that they would the next day go and
fight the Grand Vizier, which caused great joy amongst the Officers and
Soldiers, desirous of signalizing themselves. The Cannon of all the attacks
were in the mean time employed to enlarge the Breaches, and cast down the
Enemies fences.

Sept. 2. All the Generals mounted on Horseback, and the Troops put themselves
in order to quit the Lines, and go to their place of Arms, and march toward
the Grand Vizier, making as if they would go and attack them in their Camp. The
Duke of Lorrain, and the Elector of Bavaria, visited their Quarters,
encouragaing the Officers and Soldiers to maintain the cause of God, and the
Glory of the Emperor. The Infantry was ranged into Battalions whilst the
firing in the three attacks was redoubled, and a vast quantity of Bombs and
chained Bullets were shot against the besiegeds defenses, which were for the
most part thrown down; and as the Troops were put in order to march toward the
Grand Vizier, the motion of the Vanguard was instantly changed, and at three in
the Afternoon the Infantry that composed the Rear-guard was commanded to mount
to the assault, which was done in the three differing attacks of Lorrain,
Brandenburg, and Bavaria, besides which there were two false attacks to divert
the Enemy. And however that all imaginary precautions were put in use to render
the assault easy, they encountered so brave a defense in the besieged, that
they had much ado to surmount them; they defended themselves for three quarters
of an hour with Halbirds, Half-Pikes, Partisans, and threw such a vast number
of Stones, Arrows, and Granades, that they repulsed the Assailants more than
once, until the Christians, encouraged by the presence of their Generals,
returning with greater force, rendered themselves at length Masters of the
Breach in all the three attacks. The Turks defended themselves by retiring from
Retrenchment to Retrenchment, so that the slaughter was very bloody; and to
conclude, the besieged being beaten from all their fences, the Assailants
entered by force into the City, ran through the streets, killed all they met with,
sparing neither Sex nor Age, so that all was filled with the dead bodies of
these Infidels. The Bavarians, in pursuit of their point, attacked 1000 Turks,
who retired into a Redoubt at the foot of the Castle, where they defended
themselves with extreme Obstinacy, until despairing of their safety, they
hungout a white Flag, and demanded quarter; but as they had slain many of the
Aggressors, and had resisted two whole hours without submitting, the Duke of
Lorrain, and the Elector of Bavaria were of Opinion they should have no quarter
given them; but considering their number, that they might yet do much harm,
that the Night was coming on, and that the Soldiers were wearied, and ought to
rest, that the Grand Vizier was not far off with a formidable Army, and that
the fire was in several parts of the City, reducing all to Ashes; it was
resolved they should have their Lives given them; which being notified to them,
they, miserable Bravos, threw down their Arms. There were about 1000 more, who
being retired into Cellars and Caverns obtained the same grace. The number of
the slain amounted to 3000 besides the wounded, who were but few, so that the
Garrison was stronger than it had been reported by the fugitives to have been.

Abdi Bassa died bravely in the Breach, where he fought valiantly with his
Sable in his hand, without giving back or demanding quarter, not to degenerate
from the glory and heroic Virtue of the ancient Ottomans, nor falsify the
Oath which he made to the Grand Seignior to preserve him the place, or to end
his days gloriously in it. The Vice Bassa is also an Officer of great
reputation, he had defended the Castle, and seeing that all was lost, retired
fighting into the already mentioned Redoubt at the foot of the Castle, where he
thought to hold it out, and give the Grand Vizier liesure to come and relieve
him; but seeing that all was desperate, he chose rather to implore the Clemency
of the Conquerours, than suffer himself and those that were with him to be
massacred without any advantage to his party, and so he was made a Prisoner
with those with him, by the Bavarians. The Aga of the Janissaries, and some
chief Officers fell to the Duke of Lorrains share, so that the number of
Prisoners did not exceed 2000, of 13000 brave expert Soldiers, and the very
Nerves of the Ottoman Empire, which were in the place at the beginning of the
Siege. The Christians loss in this assault was inconsiderable, not above 400
slain, and half as many wounded, in which number were many Volunteers, but few
Officers. Colonel Spinola, an Officer of good merit, was killed at the head of
the Assailants, and Baron Asti, who had been twice already hurt during the
Siege, received now a third, which was feared would prove fatal.

The plunder which the Soldiers got was extraordinary, the riches of this City
were vastly great, which those of the other Cities of Hungary under the
domination of the Turks brought thither, as to a place of refuge and
impregnable. There were found Ammunition and Provisions sufficient for two
Months longer. The Arsenal was full of all sorts of offensive and defensive
Arms to arm 30000 men, Harnesses, Saddles, Boots, and other equipage for
Horses, besides 400 pieces of Cannon and Mortars, whereof 170 were mounted, and
no way prejudiced. It is impossible to particularize every thing, it may
suffice to say, that a City could not be better furnished to support a Siege
vigorously than this was, nor defended by a more brave Garrison. But if the
opposition has been surprising, so much greater is the glory of those brave
Officers, Volunteers, and Soldiers that signalized themselves there in the
forcing of it.

The Duke of Lorrain having put a stop to the slaughter, and ordered the
Soldiers to return to their Colors, commanded the fire to be extinguished,
gave the command of the place to Baron Beck, till the Emperor's pleasure was
known, with a Garrison of 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse. He farther commanded 10000
Horse and Dragoons with Badiani's Hussars to pursue the Grand Vizier, who
having seen the taking of Buda, discamped instantly with all his Army, to go
cover the rest of the Turkish Fortresses, put good Garrisons into them, and so
secure the Bridge of Esseck, where it was resolved to go and attack him, if
they could not overtake him, for which end the Infantry was embarked upon the
Danube for their easier transport, whilst the Cavalry marched by Land.

And thus this great and strong City, after 145 years of Bondage under the
Turkish Yoke, was now at length, after having been six times besieged in vain,
taken, and restored to the dominion of the Emperor. It had been of great
service to the Ottomans, as being their principal place of Arms, from whence
they sent their Forces and Munitions of War into the other Cities and
Fortresses of their obedience, for they still kept there a numerous Garrison of
8 or 10000 Janissaries and Spahi's, as in a Nursery, and ready upon all
occasions.

BVDa SeXto IneXpVgnabILIs SeptIMo FIt CaesarIs. A Detachment, as we said, of
10000 Horse being sent in pursuit of the Grand Vizier by Land, and 12000 Foot,
with 30 Cannon, Mortars, Ammunition, and all sort of Provisions, were sent down
the Danube in large Boats, with order to fortify themselves in some convenient
Post near the Bridge of Esseck, whilst orders were sent to the Forces in
Croatia to join them, in order to cut off the Enemies retreat. The main Army
did also follow, but the want of Forage in a wasted Country forced them to
separate, and to pass the River some 12 Miles below Buda, with design to
besiege Segedin, whilst the rest continued their march toward Esseck, and join
with the Croatian Forces, a Party of which had insulted and burnt the Town of
Quinque Ecclesiae, or five Churches, forcing the Turks into the Castle.

The Duke of Lorrain having caused a Bridge of Boats to be laid over the Danube
at Paxi, several Parties of Horse were sent out, who met with no Enemy, the
Turks having abandoned the small places they were possessed of on both sides
the River, after having removed their Cannon and store, and laid these places
in ashes. Count Caprara is designed to besiege Segedin, but the design upon the
Bridge of Esseck could not be executed at this time, the Country being so
extremely ruined, that the Troops were not able to subsist in their march
thither. The Turks had likewise abandoned Tuln and Hatwan, the Garrison of the
last being removed to Erlaw or Agria, after it had been most miserably
destroyed. The Duke, upon fresh advice that the Grand Vizier had not passed the
Bridge of Esseck as was reported, but had posted himself very strongly and
advantageously on this side, with 20000 men, seemed to alter his mind, and to
go and beat up his Quarters, before he were further recruited from Belgrade. He
had put 8000 of his best men into Alba Regalis, having given a Horse to every
Janizary, the better to make excursions upon the Christians in the Winter.
Prince Lewis of Baden was detached from the main Army, with 12 Regiments of
Horse and Foot, to go and besiege Five-Churches, but the measures were so
taken, that he might join his Forces to the Duke's in case it were requisite,
or that the Grand Vizier might be brought to a battle. He was encamped near the
Bridge of Esseck, having the Fortress of Darda behind him the Danube on his
right, and the Hills on his left, and his Front covered with the River Sarwitz,
over which the Duke of Lorrain had caused Bridges to be laid, to oblige the
Turks to repass the Bridge of Esseck, or to stand a Battle. But the season
being too far advanced, he encamped at Tuln, and passing no farther, leaving
part of the Army under Caprara, to pass the Danube in order to the Siege of
Segedin, he returned toward Buda, and being encamped with 10 Regiments not far
from Pest, sent a Party to possess themselves of Hatwan, entirely ruined, though
the Turks had left 17 Pieces of Cannon, which they wanted time and
conveniences to carry away. The residue of the Foot were put into Buda to
reinfore that place, weakened by the departure of the Brandenburg and Saxon
Troops, whilst the Duke himself after so glorious a Campain returned into
Germany. The remaining Horse and Dragoons were sent under General Veterani to
reinforce the Imperial Forces before Segedin, upon advice that Achmet Bassa was
marching with a Body of Turks and Tartars to relieve it. General Wallis, who
commanded the Imperialists, hearing the Infidels advanced toward him, ordered
Major General Veterani to march toward night with 7 Regiments of Horse, the
Croats of Lodron, and the Dragoons of Castelli and Magne, which they did, and
at break of day surprising the Tartars, Oct. 20. 1686.
easily routed them; nor did the Turks make any considerable resistance, the
spirit of that People formerly so martial, being actuated by such a current of
misfortunes into despondency. The Christians, being upon their return to their
Camp with their spoil, were attacked by the Grand Vizier himself at the head of
above 12000 Turks, but with equal success, these being likewise utterly
defeated, without any extraordinary combating. Twelve pieces of Cannon, and all
their Baggage, with 3000 Horses were taken. The slain were estimated above
2000. Segedin, seeing their relief defeated, capitulated, being admitted to
march with what they could carry, except their Arms, to Temeswar.

But the strong Castle of Five Churches had not so good quarters. Oct. 22.
They had quitted the Town upon the arrival of the Christians, and retired into
the Castle, but after 4 days battery, surrendered it at discretion, the Women
only and Children being conducted to Valpo, whilst the Bassa, 600 Janissaries,
and 2000 others fit to bear arms, were made Prisoners of War. The Prince of
Baden, having put a good Garrison into the place, divided his Army into two
Bodies, one marched with General Scherffenberg toward Syclos, designing, after
having made himself Master of that place, to march toward the Bridge of
Esseck. Nor did they of Syclos detend themselves much better than the rest,
they only burnt the Town, not to keep the Castle scarce to terms of discretion.
The Prince marched thence to Darda, which he, although it were strong, being
seated upon the Danube, and covering the Bridge on one side, found abandoned,
the Turks being retired into Esseck, leaving only a few Horse to observe the
Enemy, who, upon their advance, fled immediately. The Prince, having taken
possession of Darda, sent Parties out to burn the Bridge of Esseck with
artificial fires, which they so happily executed, notwithstanding the Turks
played upon them all the time with their Cannon from Esseck, that they quite
destroyed the Bridge from Darda to the Drove, as likewise the Bridge of Boats
which the Turks had over that River.

The Prince of Baden, after this exploit, No. 3.
marched back toward Capeswar, with 1200 Prisoners of both Sexes and Ages,
which place he purposed to possess, and had delivered upon demand, after which
he resolved for his Winter Quarters. The Croats also that had hitherto joined
him, did likewise return home with Booty, and store of Prisoners.

And this was the end of this famous Campain in Hungary, so glorious to the
Christians, and so unfortunate to the Ottomans, so that these who used to give
and sell Peace at pleasure formerly, became now earnest Sollicitors themselves
for it, thinking themselves in such a condition, that nothing but a speedy
Peace could restore them. The Grand Vizier, being sensible of this, made
several efforts to effectuate it. He had lately made Overtures to General
Caraffa, who commanded the Imperial Forces in upper Hungary, but now Letters
are sent to Prince Herman of Baden, President of the Council of War, telling
him how desirous the Port was of Peace, and with what advantage to the Emperor
it might be concluded in this Conjuncture; proposing further, that a Place
might be appointed for Plenipotentiaries on both sides to meet, and that
Passports might be dispatched for that purpose.

And it is no wonder the Turks were so earnest for Peace, having been so
unsuccessful in War, and the disorders it produced. It Is scarce imaginable what
confusion and terror the taking of Buda, and the slaughter of that Garrison did
produce through the whole Empire, especially Constantinople. The People began
to murmur, and the Chief of them to Cabal, Disorders at Constantinople.
which so startled the Grand Seignior, that after having doubled his Guards, he
sent to them to know the meaning of their unusual meeting; they answered, that
seeing him and his Empire in such danger, they thought it their duty to consult
together how they might preserve both. They blamed the Mufti as an ill man, who
had fomented the War, not without some reflection upon his Highness himself, as
too intent upon his sports, and too little mindful of this his chief City. The
Grand Seignior thought it best to comply with these Reformers, in order to
which he immediately deposes and banishes the Mufti, choosing Hussan Effendi
Codilisk^r in his Place; and putting off a general hunting which he had
appointed, caused all his Greyhounds, the best his Empire afforded, to be
turned loose, a Prey to any that pleased; he daily now frequents the Mosques
instead of the Campain, giving out that he will himself take the field next
Spring against the Germans. This change, and the certainty of the Vizier Azems
coming to assist at the great Council for regulating the next Campaign, did at
present quiet the discontents of the People, though their fears seemed incurable.
There was also a great Reform made in the Seraglio, with a Retrenchment of the
falaries and perquisites of the principal Officers of it. There was also an
extraordinary Council held in the presence of the Grand Seignior to consider of
the way to put the Ottoman Forces, which are now extremely broken, into a
condition to oppose the further progress of the Christian Arms. And being Money
is the principal ingredient, the Grand Seignior made offer of all his Treasure
to be employed in the War. The Sultana Queen gave 4000 Purses of 500 Crowns
each, and the chief Officers of the Seraglio presented great sums. And yet all
this cannot cure their fears, nor remove the Plague, sweeping away 1000 a day
in Constantinople and Galata, to which Calamities the scarcity of Provisions
may be added, occasioned by the Cossacks disturbing the Commerce of the black
Sea, and the Christians that of the Alexandria and the Arches.

Nor was it with these hardships only that the Turks were to contend, they had
yet no less powerful Enemies, the Poles and the Venetians, whose Histories we
have for method sake referred to their proper Classes. What they did the last
year, is distinctly related, and we shall be no less particular in the actions
of this, which are of more noise, and no less lugubrious consequence to the
Ottoman Empire, especially the latter.

The Poles were much earlier in the field this year, The Assairs of Poland.
and stronger than the last. Their Forces consisted of 20000 Poles 15000
Lituanians, and 10000 Cossacks with a great train of Artillery, and being met
at their general Rendezvous at Trembowla, marched toward the Niester with the
King at the head of them. The Turks being inferior in their Preparations, July
14.
had abandoned Bar and Miedzibos, sending those Garrisons with all their
stores to strengthen Caminiec, where the Tartars had likewise lately conducted
a Convoy.

The King being come to the frontier of Moldavia, expected that the Hospodars
of that Country and Walachia should, July 24.
as they had promised, join their Forces to the Army of the Crown, which they
were inclined enough to do, but that they dreaded the Turkish Power. The Poles
having past the River, they advanced to the Forest of Bucovina, where they had
been engaged with the Turks last year; but to secure their passages now, the
King caused several Redoubts to be built to guard the avenues of the Forest,
and consequently secure his retreat. These being finished, he marched toward
Jassi, the Capital City of Moldavia, to give the Hospodar an opportunity to
join his Forces with him, as he had promised. But this Prince, thinking it too
soon as yet to declare, retired upon the News he had of the Kings approaching,
notwithstanding the assurances his Majesty had given him of his Friendship and
Protection. The King being come as far as Pererit in Moldavia, caused a Royal
Fort to be built on the side of the River Prutti, to secure a Retreat, and the
passage of Convoy, for it was very difficult to subsist in those harrassed
Countries, which the Turks and Tartars had near ruined. Whilst the Army was
upon its march, the Hospodar sent Deputies to the King to excuse his retiring
from Jassi, and his not joining Forces with those of his Majesty, seeing he
could not now openly declare without exposing his Children to certain
destruction, having been forced to deliver them as Hostages to the Turks. The
King replied, that he could never meet with a more favorable conjuncture to
shake off the Ottoman Yoke than now, Aug. 8.
being he was come in Person to deliver him from it; he expected now the
performance of his reiterated Promises, which if he did not make good, he
should be necessitated to treat him as a declared Enemy. The King continuing
his march, came to Jassi, which he found not only abandoned by the Prince, but
also the Garrison and principal Inhabitants. Those that remained opened their
Gates to the Troops his Majesty sent thither, and furnished them with some
Provisions.

Some Tartars taken by a party, reported, that the Seraskier had passed the
Danube near Axiopolis, with 15 or 16000 men, that he expected 6000 more, which
when come up, he intended to march toward Bessarabia to join the Tartars
commanded by Sultan Nuraden, reported to be 30000 strong. The Armies
approaching each other occasioned many encounters. The King continued his march
on this side the River Prutti as far as Falfyn. The Court Marshal, who
commanded the Vauntguard of the Army, encountering with a party of Tartars of
8000, engaged them, both fighting with great Courage, but the Tartars being
stronger, pressed hard upon the Poles, and had worsted them if they had not
been succored by some fresh Troops, who adding new Vigor to their Companions,
turned the Scales, forcing the Tartars to a disorderly retreat, some hundreds
of them were killed, and amongst others a near Relation of Sultan Nuradons, for
whose body he offered the liberty of 3 Polish Genlemen; some Prisoners were
likewise taken, and one of the Chams Standards, nor was this success bloodless,
diverse of the Polish Officers and Soldiers being killed and wounded.

The King having caused a Bridge near that Place to be laid over the River,
passed it with his Army, advancing into a great Plain with a Resolution to
enter into the Country of Budriac. But the Troops suffered much by excessive
heat, which had caused a great drought, and burnt up all the Grass, so that the
Horses were in great want of forage. Chevalier Lubormiski had likewise an
advantageous on set against the Tartars, but the News of the Moldavians having
contrary to their promise joined the Tartars, did not please. These were also
reinforced with further Detachments of Turks which had passed the Danube at Ken
and Smil. These Tartars had likewise taken a Convoy of 200 Wagons that were
going to the Army, and together with the Turks made an attempt upon the
Christian Camp it self, but finding the Troops in a condition to receive them,
they made what haste they could to retire, though not without some loss.

October. 4. The Poles obtained a Victory against the Turks and Tartars, of whom
some thousands were said to be killed upon the place, and 300 taken, with
several of their principal Officers, for which success Te Deum was sung at
Lemberg. The Poles also had 1500 slain, and amongst them diverse Persons of
Quality. After this, the King, weary of Moldavia, most commonly fatal to the
Poles, repassed the Forest of Buckovina, in order to put his Troops into
Winter Quarters. He had not only quitted Jassi, which had been in part
destroyed by an accidental fire, but had also caused the several Forts which he
had built to secure the Passages of the Forest to be demolished; from whence
People concluded, that the King had no design to return in haste that way
again, but rather attempt Caminiec, so ruinous to that side of his Kingdom, and
into which the Turks had newly put 500 Wagons laden with Provisions, the
Detachment of Horse that was sent to obstruct their Passage coming too late.
The Christians being gone to quarters, the main body of the Tartars did so too,
but some parties of them had lately made an incursion into the Vkrain and
Podolia, where they did much mischief. The Turks who served this Campaign
against the Poles, repassed the Danube and the Hospodar of Moldavia returned to
Jassi, from whence he had fled.

The Poles had been highly animated with the League Offensive and Defensive
which they had made the beginning of this last Campaign with the Muscovites,
which, though it had been published with great solemnity on both sides, the
Muscovites have not yet performed any one thing that was stipulated on their
side. The Great Dukes were obliged by this Treaty to employ their Forces this
last Summer against the Tartars, to divert them from joining with the Turks;
nor did they advance a step in it, though they now (the Campaign being past)
send Ambassadors to assure the King of their firm Resolution to observe the
Treaty of Confederacy so lately concluded at Moscho, and yet they start new
points which do so far perplex the Court, that they begin to have a great
Jealousy that the Czars do not seriously mean to enter into the War.

Great were the Preparations the Venetians had made to carry on the War this
Summer against the Ottomans, The Wars of Venice. March 26.
which they had been so successful in the last; and the fleet being now ready,
sailed from Corfu under the Command of General Morosini toward the Levant. In
the mean time the Turks having got an Army together composed of 10000 foot and
1500 Horse, sat down before Chielefa, a Fortress of importance, though tamely
delivered by them last year to the menaces of the Christians. They now batter
it with six great Guns, and had lain 10 days before it when the Army of the
Venetians hastening to its relief landed at Porto Vitulo, not far from it, and
sending a Detachment of 3000 Men, with 2000 Maynotes, the Garrison which
consisted of 1200 having orders at the same time to sally in their favor; the
Enemy, intimidated with the report of their advance, raised the Siege and
marched silently away in the Night, yet not so, but that being pursued by the
Christians, they left their Cannon behind them, the 500 men that conducted them
being also most slain and taken Prisoners. After this Defeat General Morosini
reinbarked his Forces at Porto Vitulo, and sailed toward the Gulf of Calamata,
and thence to Porto Clinno, where he was to join with General Koningsmark,
Commander of the Land Forces, lately arrived there with a great Convoy that
went from Venice. They had expected the arrival of the Auxiliary Galleys to
open the Campaign, which being at length come, and a review of the Forces taken
by General Morosini, which were estimated at 25000 men, they sailed the 25 of
May from Porto Trepana with a fleet of above 100 sail, consisting in 80 Ships,
14 Galeasses, and several Galleys and Galliots, taking their course toward
Lepanto, feigning a design to attack that Fortress, near which the General
caused 1000 men to be landed to allarm the Country, and leaving some Ships
there to countenance the feint, sailed the Night following toward Modon, then
ill manned, the Turks having drawn most of their Forces toward Lepanto. But
the Captain General thought fit to attack old Navarin, the Pylus of Ptolomy
first, which he did, 12000 foot, and 1500 Horse being landed for that purpose.
This Town is built upon a height, at the foot whereof the Haven is capable of
any number of Ships. The Garrison of this place was weak, not exceeding 200, so
that affrighted with the Fleet, the numbers, and the summons of the Christians,
they immediately surrendered, capitulating to march out with their Arms and
Baggage, which they did, leaving behind them 20 pieces of Brass Cannon, 23 of
Iron, and 7 Mortars, besides 200 Christian slaves, who obtained their liberty.

Count Coningsmark marched from thence to New Navarino, seated on a Rock, and
of very difficult access. He circled it by Land as well as the place would
permit, whilst it was beaten from Sea with 20 pieces of Cannon and 18 Mortas.
The Seraskier of Morea, being sollicitous for this place, advanced with 10000
men for its relief, destroying all the Countries as he passed. The Christians,
to prevent his advance, leaving a body of men behind them to maintain the
Works, marched to meet him, and endeavored several times to engage him to a
Battle, which he avoided by passing a River, and retiring to a very
advantageous Ground. Count Koningsmark being reinforced thereupon to 14000, it
was resolved they should pass the River in two Places, and charge the Turks in
Front and Flank, which was performed accordingly. The Victory was obstinately
contested for at least two hours, but then the Turks being disordered fled,
leaving 1000 of their men slain, wounded, and Prisoners, with all their Tents,
Cannon, and Baggage. The Christians had scarce 100 killed and wounded.
Triumphing with this Victory they returned to the Siege, where, upon a second
summons, the Besieged seeing their hopes of Succor defeated, and their Bassa
slain, being blown up, June 17. Navarino surrendered.
with 150 of the Garrison by a Bomb falling amongst Powder, they likewise being
1200 Foot, and 200 Horse, surrendered upon Conditions to march away with their
Arms, Bag, and Baggage, which they did, leaving behind them 64 pieces of
Cannon, and thirteen Mortars, with great store of Provisions.

After the taking of Navarin, the General resolved to besiege Modon, though he
knew the Seraskier had reinforced the Garrison, and provided it with all things
necessary for a just defense, with promise of certain Succors by a day. Modon
is seated upon a Promontory of the Sea of Sapienza, Art and Nature having
concurred to make it strong, though it held out but a Siege of 13 days. It was
indeed miserably torn with Bombs and Carcasses, and the relief not appearing at
the day appointed, the Bassa thought fit to capitulate, Jul. 7.
and marched out with near 3000 men, which were to be transported to
Alexandria. There were taken in the Castle and Town 90 Brass Guns, 8 Iron ones,
with 13 Mortars, and a great quantity of Ammunition and Provisions.

Morosini having stayed some time at Modon, as well to repair the
Fortifications as to refresh his wearied Troops, having held a great Council of
War, it was resolved to besiege Napoli di Romania, the better to secure the
conquests which the Republic had already made in Morea. All things being made
ready for so important an Enterprise, the Captain General sailed from Modon
with the Venetian Fleet and the Auxiliary Galleys, and at the same time sent
orders to the Captain Extraordinary of the Ships to approach toward that Coast
with the Squadron under his command, that he may join the Fleet if there be
occasion. As a prelude to this enterprise, 8 Turkish Ships that had carried Men
and Provisions to Napoli de Romania, endeavoring to escape by night out of
Port Malvasia, were taken. July 30.
In the mean time the General landed his Army at Ciara, six miles from Napoli,
the Nauplia of the Ancients, and possessed himself the next day of the Hill
Palemada, within Musket shot of the Town. The Seraskier of Morea being
encamped not far off with 8 or 10000 men, did put 300 Soldiers into the Town,
the Garrison before consisting of 2000 under the Command of Mustapha Bassa, and
advanced himself toward the Christians Camp; upon notice whereof, General
Coningsmark marched with his Forces to meet him, Aug. 6.
leaving some to guard the works against the Town; After some light Skirmishes
the Bodies engaged. The Turks scarce standing their Ground, retired in much
disorder, leaving 400 of their men behind them. The loss on the Christians side
was inconsiderable, not exceeding 50 men. General Koningsmark returning to the
Siege, sent some Troops to force the Castle of Argas which they found
abandoned, and had that of Tenioni delivered upon demand. In the mean time the
Siege was vigorously carried on, the Bombs and Carcasses occasioning great
Confusion in the Town. But the Seraskier being reinforced with 3000 fresh men,
raised their dejected minds, who at the same time that the Seraskier approached
the Christian Camp, made a great Sally upon the Besiegers, though they were
beaten back with loss, and the Seraskier so warmly received by the Cannon from
the Hill of Polameda, that he retired without making any attempt upon the
Lines. The Besiegers by this were lodged in the Town-Moat, so that the
Seraskier being reinforced out of the neighboring Garrisons to 12000, resolved
to make another attempt to relieve the place, by forcing the Camp. At the same
time 1500 of their best men sallied out of the City, so that the Christians
being hardly put to it, the Slavonians being overpowered, were forced to give
way, but General Koningsmark coming opportunely to their assistance with a
strong Party, rallied them, and beat back the Turks. In that instant of time,
General Morosini having landed 3500 men, charged the Enemy so seasonably in
Front and Flank, that they disordered them, and forced them to retire, but they
being much stronger in Horse, were not pursued far. The Turks lost in this
action 1500 of their best men, Napoli di Romania surrendered. Aug. 31
besides 120 that were taken Prisoners, and on the Christians side near 400.
The Garrison upon this defeat, upon consideration of the Mines and Breaches,
and danger of standing out an Assault, surrendered upon the same terms as had
been given to Navarino and Modon.

The Christians lost a great many Men by a Flux contracted by the heat, and
eating too much fruit, and among others, a Nephew of General Koningsmark, the
Captain of his Guards, and Count Bernabo Visconti a Milaneze Colonel.

The Bassa of Napoli di Romania, whether out of a consciousness of not having
done his duty in defense of the City, or out of a resentment that to be unhappy
is to be criminal, thought it securer to put himself into the protection of his
Vanquishers, than to expose himself to the candor of his Compurgators at home.
He therefore, with about eighty Turks more, having obtained leave of the
General, were shipped for Venice, where they were honorably received by the
Senate, presented, and permitted to take two fine Houses, with very fine
Gardens belonging to them, where they and their Families live at present. After
the taking of Napoli, above sixty small Towns and Burghs put themselves under
the protection of the Venetians; and the General having settled affairs there,
and dismissed the Auxiliary Galleys with their shares of the Booty to return
home, failed himself with the Galleys of Venice toward the Archipelag to put
those Islands, which he also in a great measure did, under contribution. The
Garrison and Inhabitants of Napoli being numerous, exceeding 10000, besides the
Jews and Greeks who were made Tributaries, were by Articles to be transported
to the Isle of Tenedos, which was also done in 12 Ships, commanded by Seignior
Venier. This Fleet did not only alarm those parts, but Constantinople it self,
affrighted with the report of a Venetian Armada so near the Dardanels: But upon
their return they were met, and fought by the Captain Bassa, who had 20 Galleys
and 10 Ships, but seeing he could do no good upon them, was obliged to quit the
fight. The Seraskier, in the mean time, was retired to Corinth, from whence he
sent some Troops to reinforce the Garrison of Petrassa, and very strong
Parties, who by their incursions, keep the Greeks in continual alarms, and
hinder them from openly declaring for the Republic. To this end, he has
seized upon diverse of the Principal of them, keeping them as Hostages, but
exercises all kinds of cruelty against such as he suspects to have any
correspondence with the Christians.

Cara Ibrahim, the late Vizier, being stripped of his Estate, Mar. 18.
was sent to Rhodes, where, within the compass of the year, he was strangled,
by command of the Sultan, the Caimacan of Constantinople being at the same time
put into the seven Towers, Apr. 28.
to satisfy the People.

Nor was the Venetian War confined only to Morea, and the Sea, though nothing
extraordinary happened in the later, that wise Republic having sent Cornaro to
command in Dalmatia, with such Forces as might endeavor to divert the Turks
from sending Succors either to Hungary or Morea, which they also in some
measure did. And yet scarce any thing worthy a place in History, which is only
pleased with great events, did intervene, the Forces indeed of neither side
being sufficient for great undertakings. Some inconsiderable Places were
intercepted on both sides, and the incursions of Parties into each others
Quarters were frequent; wherein the Morlaques, like the Tartars on the
Frontiers of Poland, did signalize themselves. The Bassa of Scutari had drawn
together 7 or 8000 Men, with a Resolution to attack the City of Budna, but they
were ordered to march toward Hungary, so that that design vanished. But
General Cornaro, and the Prince of Parma, who was Lieutenant General of the
Foot, having drawn together 1000 Horse, and 3000 Foot, and 5000 Morlaques,
commanded by the Chevalier Janco, with the Artillery and Ammunition necessary
for a Siege, resolved to attack Sign, situated upon a Rock, Sept. 23.
and fortified with a good Wall and strong Castle, but the Cannon opening a
Breach, it was assaulted and carried by force, the Garrison which consisted but
of 250 Turks, being cut in pieces. By taking of this place, the Venetians are
become Masters of the fertile Province of Zettina.

The Grand Vizier, upon his repassing the Bridge of Esseck, had sent home the
Troops of Bossina, so that the Bassa of the said Province, thinking himself
with this reinforcement, in a condition to make some attempt upon the Enemy,
was accordingly preparing for it, though watched narrowly by Cornaro. The Bassa
of Erzegovina had likewise got a competent Army together, and having burnt some
Villages, retired toward Clin, to put a Convoy of Provisions into that place,
Cornaro at the same time having taken his march toward Zsbenico and Sardona,
to cover those places. And thus this year, and the Campain, were finished,
except the usual excursions, both here, in Morea, in Poland, and in Hungary,
where the Parties are always busy, and infest each other according to their
power.

The desires of the Port for Peace were great. It was against their Maxims to
wage War with so many powerful Adversaries at once, nor could they tell how to
extricate themselves out of it. They had often attempted separate Treaties, but
the Allies were not to be disjoined, they therefore offered them Concessions
they durst not have hoped for at the beginning of the War. They would yield to
the Emperor all Hungary, as far as the Drove, to the King of Poland, Caminiec
and all Podolia, and restore to the Venetians the Kingdom of Candia, on
condition they would part with what they had gained in Morea.

FINIS.

