CHRIST'S NAPKIN: OR, A SERMON PREACHED IN KIRKCVBRIGHT AT THE COMMUNION, May
12. 1633.

By that Flower of the Church; Famous, famous, Mr. Samuel Rutherfurd.

Never before Printed.

Revelation 21: Chapter 4* 5, 6, 7* 8, Verses. And GOD shall Wipe away all
Tears, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither
shall there be any more Pain: For former Things are done away.

And He that Sat upon the Throne, said, behold, I make all Things New. And He
said unto me, write: For these Things are Faithful and True. etc.

THE TEXT.
Revelation 21. Chapter, 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, Verses. And GOD shall Wipe away all
Tears, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither
shall there be any more Pain: For former things are done away.

And He that Sat upon the Throne, said, behold, I make all Things New. And He
said unto me, write: for these Things are Faithful and True, etc.


THIS Text contains Three Things. First, The State of the Glorified, verse 4.
Secondly, A part of Christ' s Office, verse 5. Thirdly, A Description of His
Nature. Fourthly, The Promises. As, 1. Drink to satisfy the Thirsty. 2. An
Inheritance to the Overcomers, or Overcoming Soldiers. The 3. is a Threatening
of Eternal Wrath to Offenders against the First and Second Table of the Law.
And GOD shall Wipe away all Tears. When Friends meets, they give the Stranger
his Welcome Home. Here the Pilgrims Welcome Home that our Friend Christ gives
us: This was spoken from Heaven, and therefore it is True Doctrine. Then we see
that the Sufferings and Tears of the Saints shall be wiped away and removed,
but not fully, while the Life to come; For here is Christ's Welcome Home to
Poor Sinners: For they come all to Him with Wet Faces, and bleared with Tears
for Sin, and the manifold Troubles in this Life; And Christ meets them in the
Door with a fair Soft Napkin in His Hand, and puts up his hand to their Faces,
and says, Hold your Tongue, My Dear Bairns, ye shall never Weep again. And
indeed in my Judgment it is a Speech borrowed from a Mother that has a Bairn
with a broken Face, all Bloody, and all bleared with Tears, and it comes to
her, and woes her Heart to see him so, and she sits down, and wipes the Tears
from his Eyes, and lays her Hand softly on the Wound, and lays his Head in her
Breast, and dights away the Blood, and lays her two Arms about him, and there
is no end of Fair Words. So when Christ and we shall meet in Heaven, He will
Huss us, and wipe away all Tears, and lay our Heads in his Bosom: See how he
alludes to this Place, Isaiah 54. O thou afflicted and tossed with Tempest and
not comforted: behold, I will lay thy Foundation with Saphires, etc. It is
there to speak so, our Lord is Rewing that ever he had handled his Saints as he
did Isaiah 65. 18. Be Glad and Rejoice for evermore in that which I Create; for
behold, I Create Jerusalem a Rejoicing, and his People a Joy. Verse 19. And I
will Rejoice over Jerusalem, and Joy in My People, and the Voice of Weeping
shall no more be heard in her, nor the Voice of Crying. If ever there was a
Blyth Meeting betwixt Two, it must be betwixt the Bridegroom and the Bride in
the Marriage-day. And what a Meeting there is of Joy betwixt such a Bridegroom
and Bride cannot be conceived: For Christ that Day will have on all his Best
Clothes, and such a Bride as the Lamb's Wife, What a Welcome will She get? To
get a Drink at our first Meeting, and Incoming to Heaven of the Well of the
Water of Life, O Strong Comforting Water. When we shall be clothed, and not a
Wrong Pinn on us. A Fair Bride in Silks and Purple of Christ's own Busking; And
Christ our Lord shall Present his Bride to his Father, and our Father-in-law
the Father of our Husband shall take us by the Hand and Lead us benn the House
to the Dinning-hall, and set us down at a Table to feast our fill upon the Tree
of Life. O! Strong Comforting Water, the Well of Life, to feast upon the
Trinity for evermore. Now Mock and Scorn the Way to Heaven as ye please, ye
never heard of True Happiness till now: Here is a Banquet of Joy for evermore.
He shall wipe away all Tears: Christ our Lord here wipes the Tears from his
Bairns Faces; Yet after that they weep New Tears: He never wipes away all Tears
till now. Here shall be our Last* Goodnight of Death: Goodnight Mourning and
Crying, and Sorrow: We shall be on the other Side of the Water, over beyond the
Black River of Death, and shall Scorn Death: For Christ (Rev. 20. 14.) shall
take Death and Hell, and cast them in Prison: Former Things are done away. The
Mother that lost her Bairns shall get them; All the Lord's Widows shall get
their Husbands: The Old World which was the Mourning World shall be away: And
therefore, never while now shall all Tears be wiped away; for it is the Way.
The Kirk is half a Widow here; Her Lord is in an uncouth Country, far from her
here, and ilk Lown round about plucks at this Silly Widow, while she is in the
Valey of Baca, wherein is no Water. The Watchmen stricketh her, and takes her
Vail from her; And Christ writes a Love-Letter to her, and after she has read
it, she rejoiceth and wipeth her Face; But when the Letter grows old, and she
has lost the Letter, New Troubles comes on, she sheds New Tears, and she comes
under New Persecutions, and her Lord for her Sin goes in behind the Wall, and
hides himself, and lets her Mourn her fill: But in that Day He will wipe away
all Tears from her Eyes. See then how it goes here in this Life: First a Fair
Day, then again a Foull Day, while at last that Fair Day Dawn that all Shadows
shall flee away; and there shall never be a Foull Day after that; but ay the
long lasting Summer Day for evermore. Ye see a Man Traveling to his Home, here
is a Water, then a Dry Land, then another Water, then Dry Land, then a Water,
and only Dry Land between and his Home; Then he goes Home to his Wife and his
Bairns, and has no more Waters: But all our Tears are never dried till we come
to Heaven; For the Saints have a Liferent-Tack of the Cross of Christ, while we
are here, and ay Ill Weather, Matthew 16. ever the Cross. See John 16. Our Lord
compares our Troubles to the Pains that comes upon a Woman Traveling, now a
Shower, and then some Ease, a Shower again, and then Ease, ay while the last
Shower that she be Delivered, and then no more Showers; She remembers no more
Pain for Joy that a Man-Child is born into the World. We must be in Pain ere
our Birth be Born; but we will be Delivered of our Birth.

Use 1. Let us prepare, for Tears will follow us to Heaven* unto the very Entry
of the Door, our Face shall be wet, for we go out of this Life Sad and Groaning
for this Miserable Life, and to thrust throw the last Port, and to wade throw
the hindermost Water, it is a sore set: But be blyth Christians, and Grip to
the Promise: But ye that Laugh now (and so are far from Tears, that Mock the
Mourners of Zion) ye may Sigh and close the Bible, and say alas! I never shed a
Tear for Christ, yon Text is not for me; It may be Christ shall that Day gar
you VVeep and shed Tears for Evermore. This Sour Laughing World will away;
There is a Day of Tears coming on you, Greeting and Gnashing of Teeth. And when
a Man Gnasheth his Teeth one against another, he has no mind of Laughing: But I
would not have your Mirth for a World; be doing, we will see who will Laugh
fastest yon Day.

Use 2. There is an Ill coming on this Land; Sin is not come to a full Harvest.
GOD's Bairns that can now Mourn for their own Sins, and the Sins of the Land,
Rejoice in Heaven; there is never seen a Greeting Bairn there: GOD has a Napkin
to dight their Faces. It is the Laughing, Rejoicing People that GOD Destroys.

He that Sat upon the Throne. John hears more of Christ, a Sweet Speech.
Here Three Things, 1. A Speaker. 2. A Speech. 3. A Direction to keep the
Speech. Who spoke the Speech is not told; whether an Angel or an Earthly King;
For they sit on Thrones also: But it is He of whom it is said, Rev. 4. 2. And a
Throne was set, and one sat on the Throne. John tells not his Name. But he
thinks so much of him that he takes it as granted, that there is none Worthy
to be a King but He, and to sit upon a Throne but He. The Saints measures all
the Affections of others by their own Affections; As if one speared at John who
is He that Sits upon the Throne? He would have answered, what needs you spear,
Is there any in Heaven or Earth in my Estimation Worthy to be a King but He?
and to Sit upon a Throne but He? and to take a Crown but He upon His Head? The
Saints sets ay Christ His alone, they set Him ay above all: Speak of Kings to
them, but Christ is out of play. So Cant. 2. The Kirk Meeting with the
Watchmen, says, Saw ye Him whom my Soul loves? What kend the Watchmen Him
whom her Soul loves? For she might have loved a Lown, or a Harlot, or an
Idol-god, or the World: But she measures the Watchmen by her Self; there was
none in her Mind but Christ: And therefore she needed not to tell them as she
thought. So Mary Magdalen, John 20. 15: says to the Gardener (as she thought)
Sir, if ye have born Him hence, tell me where ye have laid Him: She tells not
what Him; taking as granted, none was so much in her Mind as Christ, Nay, I
pray you, let the same Mind be in you that was in John. Let Christ be to your
Soul the Pearl of the Ring. Amongst all Kings, to us Christ should be made High
and Esteemed as He, the Only He, that is Worthy to Sit on the Throne. So
Canticles 5. He is to the Kirk the Chief among ten thousand. Gather all the
Angels, and all the Saints in Heaven and Earth together, Christ is too Good to
be their Captain; And indeed what is all that sits on a Throne? It must be
Infinitely more in Him: And what Glory is in the World, is far more in Him? Take
all the Roses in the Earth, and put them all in one, that would be a Dainty
Thing and Sight; Now what are all these to Christ? No more than a Nettle to the
fairest Rose; Fie upon the Tasteless Love of Men that never Loves Jesus Christ,
and yet falls in Love with Lusts: They Love Gold, Riches and Honor, and puts
Christ to a Backside; ay Christ gets not his own amongst us, we Commend him
not, neither will we match with him.

Thirdly, I will make all Things New. This is as much as all Things were Old:
Sinhath made all things Old, Romans 8. They are like a Woman Groaning in
Childbirth with Pain and Vanity, because of our Sin; All the Creation are
sickned because of Sin; Because of our Sin, Vanity came on the Sun, Moon, and
other Creatures, they Sigh under this, and Pray in their kind a Mallison, and a
Woe to Man, for Sin has made us all Miserable, The Heavens that are the fairest
part of the Great Web of the World, waxes Old as an Garment. The Prophet says,
they are like an Old Clout* The Water says, Let me drown Sinners, they have
sinned against my Lord: The Fire says, Let me Burn him, let me Burn Sodom, for
they have sinned against my Lord. All Things has lost their Glory that they got
in their first Creation. Jesus sees all Things gone Wrong, and quite out of
Order: And Man fallen from his Lord; and He did even with the World, as a Pylot
once with an Untentive Man at the Rudder, stirring the Ship on an Sand-Bank, he
stepped in quickly and turned Her incontinent, or else, all would have gone to
Confusion. So our Lord steped in when the Great Ship of this World was running
on a Sand-bed; The Sun and Moon looked Sad like, and said, They would not Serve
us; Our Lord Renewed them by his Death, and made them all Laugh on the Elect
again, and gave them all a Suite of New Clothes Drunkards, Christ gave his
Blessing to the Wine that ye Spew on the Walls. Ye that Dishonours your Maker
with your Vain Apparel, ye know not what it Cost Christ; Our Lord bleed to buy
a Right of them that ye abuse in Vanity. All that sets the World in their
Hearts where the Lord should be, forgets that Christ bought the World to be
their Servant, and not to be as their Darling and Wife that lies in their
Bosom: Ye that makes the Earth and the broad Aikers of it your Souls Portion,
so as ye Desire no more but Land, ye forget Christ that bought the World, and
made it New to be a Footstool, and not a Chair for your Souls to sit down
upon: And if Christ has this Art to make all Things New, come to Him all ye
that are Old, ye that has Old Hearts come. Indeed Christ may get his Craft
among us, if we would go to Him, for He makes all Things New. The Devil borrows
another Man's Heart for Covetousness, and he has crooked it with the
Thorny-Cares of this World and holled it, and dung the Bottom out of it. O if
ye would put it in Christ's Hand, he would put it in his Furnace and Melt it
again, and by his Art bring it out a New Heart for himself to Dwell in: Alas!
Christ gets not his Trade or Calling amongst us: But why are not our Old Hearts
mended? Because we handle them as a Foolish Mother does a Datted Bairn; She
will not let him go to School to Learn, and why? Because she dow not want him
out of her Sight; She will therefore never let him do well, but feed him to the
Gallows. We dow not give away our Souls to Christ who would fain have them, and
easily Mend them; but Lust keeps them like the Foolish Mother out of Christ's
Company. And Pride keeps another Man's Heart, and Covetousness another Man's
Heart, that, that Dear Craftsman Christ that made the Heart and made the Earth
under our Feet New, and the Mountains New, yet we will not let Him make our Old
Hearts New; Our Souls are all hinging in Tattars, Worn and Old, with Sin, and
we dow not put them in Christ's Hand that would make them Whole and Cleanse
them. Fie upon thee that thy Garden was Cursed in Adam's Days to bring forth
Nettles and Thorns, and is Blessed to bring out Fruit in Christ, and thy Soul
gets not so much Good of Christ as thy Yard; It is made New, and thy Soul
remains Old, and Christ gets not his Craft among us. He bids John write these
Things about the State of the Glorified, and calls them Faithful and True. He
would not Entrust his Word to Man's Memory and Conscience; He will have it
written. Blasphemous Papists laugh not at this, nor call the Pope's Breast the
Bible; Here a Warrant for the written Scripture. But indeed it tells us that
Man's Falsehood wore his Conscience, had his Conscience been a Faithful
Register, there should have been no need of a written Bible: But now the Lord
has lippened more to Dead Paper than to a Living Man's Soul. Our Conscience now
under Sin has not been a Good Bible: Because Man is ready to run away from his
Conscience; because what is written on our Conscience as that there is a GOD, a
Judgment, a Heaven, or Hell: Satan and Sin comes in as Two False Witnesses and
blots our that, and writes that in the Fool's Heart, that says, there is no
GOD. And there is many Holes in our Souls, the Word of GOD comes in and runs
out again at back spouts, except Jesus make their Soul Water-fast, so that the
Word of GOD may Dwell in them plentifully, Colos. 3. 16. Is not our Hearts
compared to a Field, wherein the Preacher sows the Seed, Mat. 13. and the Black
Spirits of Hell comes and gathers up Christ's Wheat. O but there are many
running out Souls, and much need we have of a written Bible; and therefore make
much of the written Word, and pray GOD to Copy his Bible, and to write a New
Book of his Doctrine in our Hearts, and put it in the Conscience as he directs,
Jer. 31. 1. Of his Prophecy. 2. A Description. 3. A Promise of Matter. Christ
says to John, It is done. That is Exponed in Rev. 16. and 17. The World is
ended, so speaks Christ of the World, and Glory of it passes away in the
Twinkling of an Eye, and Christ cries to those that has the World in both
their Arms, It is done; It is a past Thing, there is no more of it. It is but a
word to our Lord, he said, Let all Things be, and they were. He said, Let all
Things be, and they are at an end. And we are beginning with the World, as if
it would be evermore ours; and our Lord says, in a Moment, let it be plucked
from them, and it is done. It is no for nothing that the taking down of this
Inns of Heaven and Earth is touched in so few words. It is done: For it is an
Easy Thing for the Almighty to take the Staffes in his own Hand that holds
up this Fair Tent, and when he pulls it, he Garreth it come down with a Titt.
So Rev. 4. 7. Four Angels is brought in holding the four Winds in their Hands,
as if they had the World in their Hands, and as if they had it ready to Fold it
up as a Sheet. And O! what a fighting and business do they make to get a Clout
of this Sheet; He starring out his Eyes, and he setting out his Neck, for a
piece of this Hollie Clout and Sheet, and for a Gloib of the Earth. But see
Rev. 6. 14. The Heavens shall depart away like a Scroll of Parchment that is
rolled together, and the Fair Stories thereof are like Figs, with the shake of
the Almighty's Arm they shall fall together to the Ground; and what more, with
a Touch of the Almighty's Hand, or a Put of his Little Finger, with the Blast
of his Mouth, saying, It is done. The Cupples of the Walls of the House comes
down. Now I cannot but speak of Fools that has their Heads full of Wind-Mills,
and cries it is beginning, and to Morrow shall be as this Day, and much more
abundant, Isaiah 56. And there is no end of Buying and Building; I came not
here to bide any Body be Unthrifty; but not to be like Bairns building Sandy
Bourocks at a Waterside, when presently a Speat of Water comes and spills all
their Sport, or a Shower chases them in from their Play. Men are even bigging
Castles in the Air. In very deed we are like Bairns holding the Water at a
Riverside with their Hand, they think (Daft Things) they hold the Water, while
in the mean time it runs throw their Fingers. And what says GOD of Honor,
Riches, Pleasure, Lands, Fair Houses, Sums of Money? Even that in a word, all
is done. Ask of them that had the World once at Will, and had broad Lands, and
what is to the fore? And what is to the fore of so many Thousands? Nothing but
their Name; And what if their Name he Lost too? What has the World of them but
their Name? And what is that? Ten or Eleven or Twelve Letters of the A, B, C;
and for their Bodies, howbeit they were Living, Kingdoms would not content
them, and yet the Clay in which the Bodies are Dissolved, would not now fill a
Glove. I think that a True Word, and a Strange spoken Word, Isa: 40. 22. GOD
sits in the Circle of the Heaven, and all the World are as Grasshoppers. We even
Creep like Grasshoppers up and down the Globe of this Earth, and cry to Men of
the Vanities of all Things, while Death come like a Little Common Thief without
any Dinn or Feet, and plucks them away, and there is no more of them, and then
they say, it is done. All Men will say, it is True that I say: But I think to
be Dead ere they believe it, or be brought to Hate the World. I think the World
is the Devil's Great Herry-water-net that has Taken Thousands and Slain them:
Ye say ye are sure of it. Then I say ye are a Dyeted Horse for Heaven.

The Second Thing that is in the Verse, is a Description of Christ, I Am Alpha
and Omega, the Beginning and the End. Our Lord here being to make an Offer of
the Water of Life: He first shows what He is, even the first and the last
Letter of the A, B, C; The Ancient of Days, the Eternal Son of the Eternal GOD.
It Teaches us that we may Crack more of our Old Holding, and Old Charter, nor
all the World can do: For why? When began Christ to bear a Good Will to a
Sinner? Even when he began to be GOD; and he was GOD from all Eternity. Suppose
the Sun in the Firmament were Eternal, the Light of it behoved to be Eternal:
For the Light of the Sun is as Old as the Sun. Love is a Beam of Light, and
Heat that comes from Christ the Sun of Righteousness: Therefore Ever-living
Christ and Ever-living Love; For Love comes not on Christ the Day which was not
in him Yesterday. Man's Love, and a King's Love are hunted for very much, and
yet they die, and their love dies with them, and often their love dies before
themselves: But who seeks Christ's Love that Changes not? Yea this is a Matter
of Admiration and VVonder that Christ should have thought on us Worms of Clay
ere ever we were, and that our Salvation is as Old as Evermore, and as Old as
Christ, and Christ is as Old as GOD: For indeed if GOD should begin at any
Point of Time to love Sinners, his Love should have had a Beginning; and if his
love should have had a Beginning, Christ himself should have had a Beginning;
Because love with him is one with his Essence and Nature: But it may be said,
Can the love of GOD be Older than the Death of Christ? Answer. Christ's Death
does not make GOD properly a Hater or Lover of Man; for then both his Will
should be Changable and his Love have a Beginning. How then? Christ's Death
does not only let that GOD may kyth the Fruits of his Eternal Love out upon us,
but after such a Way as he thought convenient for his Justice; and therefore,
we are said in Scripture to Reconciled to be GOD; and GOD is not said to be
Reconciled to us: His love is Everlasting; because by order of Nature it is
before the Seed, before we had done either Good or Evil; So that Sin should not
Change GOD's Mind, but only by the order of Justice; Sin stood in the Way to
hinder us of Life Everlasting which is a Fruit of his love: yea more, GOD with
that same love in Christ, loves the Elect before and after Conversion: And
therefore, we have to Rejoice in feeling any of God's love to us in Christ. It
is Old Acquaintance betwixt him and us; and therefore, as it is Folly in Man
(as Solomon says) to cast off his Old Friend, and his Fathers Friend: So let
us think it Madness to cast off such an Old Friend as Christ, and let our Faith
hold fast by this under Temptations and Desertions; Alpha and Omega Changes
not, the Change is in us.

The Third Thing in the Words is a Promise of the Water of Life to the Thirsty,
Isaiah 55. 1: and John 13. 7. Christ at the Mercat Cross cries the Well free;
But Learn, 1. The Thirsty and Hungry Souls are meetest for the Water of Life*
What, (ye will say) are not all Thirsty? all wants the Life of GOD and the Sap
of Grace, and are burnt and withered at the Root: But all knows not their own
Want: But indeed a special Comfort for the Weak Ones to say, O say they, I know
Christ does Good to Believers, to Repenters, and to such as love Him; But I dow
not nor cannot win to Faith and Repentance, Hope and Patience; I have too short
an Arm to Rax so High. Then say I, Have ye a Desire, a Hunger for Faith and
Repentance and Love? now upon your Conscience speak the Truth; I trow ye cannot
deny it. Then your Lord bides you come, the Well is open unto you; for Hunger
and Thirst being next to Motion, and are the Two Properties that begins first
with Life. So every Thing that is New Born is Lively and has a Stomach for
Meat and Drink. O but say ye, I am many Times in my Soul even at Deaths Door; I
have neither Faith nor Feeling: I am even at this, GOD loves me not, and the
Well is not ordained for me at these Times. Would ye fain be at the Well? Now
in my Mind ye cannot win away. The Children of GOD when at the lowest Ebb, even
when Faith, Comfort, Joy, Love, and Disposition to Pray is away, Is there not a
longing for a Presence? I speak to the Conscience of GOD's Child, Lie not. No,
David, Psalms 6. when he thought GOD struck him in his Wrath, was at how long
LORD? A cutted word. I think that he looked like a Poor Hungry Beast, looking
over the Dyke, who would fain have had a Mouth-full; he was even going about to
seek a Slapp to break over the Dyke of his Doubtings And so it is with GOD's
Bairns under their Thirst for the Well of Life. See Cant. 3. when the Kirk can
get no spearing of Christ, and has no smell of Him, and cannot find the Print
of His Foot; yet she is at this, Saw ye Him whom my Soul loves? and Chap. 2. I
charge you tell Him that I am Sick of Love. Then let me now speak to Weak Ones,
and I will tell you who are Christ's Companions that Drinks with Him, and shall
get their Heads and Hearts full of the Water of Life; even the Tender Christian
that is ay seeking; The Bairn in Christ's House that is most Cumbersome, and
makes most Dinn for his Meat, is the best Bairn that Christ has; The Bairn that
is Greeting ilk hour of the day for a Piece and a Drink: We say of such a silly
Thing he would fain love. Ay the Cumbersomer that Christ's Bairns be, they are
ay the Welcomer. Na, He loves the Bairns best that has no shame, and is ay
crying, alas black Hunger, Dear Lord Jesus, I am burnt with Thirst; O for an
open Cold Fountain. O it is a sweet thing ay to be whinging, and crying, and
seeking about Christ's Pantry Doors, and to hold ay an Eye upon Christ when he
goes into the House of Wine, into His Fathers fair Luckie Wine-Celler where
there are many Wines, and bout in at Christ's back. But in a word, Have ye a
Good Stomach? Much Hunger and Thrist: Well, ye shall get much Satisfaction of
Grace in Christ. Now who are they that are Debarred from Christ's Well? Answer.
These who has gotten an Ill Drink from the Devil, full of Lusts, Pride, and
Covetousness, full of Love of the World; Such are they that has no Stomach for
Christ: Alas and woes me, Christ stands at the Wells side, and cries, the
back of My Hand to you. The Lord Jesus give you a Vomite-Drink, that you may
grow Wholesome and Hungry again for Christ; For while then, ye are never meet
for Christ. Is there not a Time when you cannot get Presence, and ye have no
pith to put up the Door and bout in, but puts it half up, and blinks in? Love
ye to Pray, or desire ye but a Desire of Prayer? Hold on then there, ye are
Right; The True Desire is Absolute, and not Conditional; Not like the Sluggard
that wad have a Crope upon Condition he might have a Feather-bed to ly on for
fear of Cold: Even so they would have Heaven upon Condition they might keep
their Lusts, and take their Lusts with them. But, Secondly, Hunger is ay
seeking throw the whole House, for the Belly can hardly play the Hypocrite. The
Natural-Man is in Darkness, he is in a Sleep; it is Night with him, and he is
like a Cumbersome Bairn Greeting in the Night for a Drink, and crying, Psalm. 4.
Who will show us any Good Thing? and Satan is ready at his Elbow with his
Dishfull of the Dirty Myrie-Matters of Lust to the World, and he Drinks while
he Sweats and Tynes Breath, and Tynes a Sight and Desire of Christ, the
Fountain of the Water of Life, John 7. 37. It is true this Fountain of Life is
said to proceed out of the Throne of GOD, and from the Lamb: But it is all one,
for the Streams of the Water of Life, proceed from the Fountain Christ* How
then is the Water Christ? Christ-Man Dying and sending out His Heart-blood for
Quenching of the Thirst of such Poor Sinners as fi^deth the Fire of Hell at the
Stomach of their Soul, burning them up with the Fire of the Wrath of GOD for
Sin; this is the Well, Why He is called a Fountain of the Water of Life. As, 1.
Because a Man burnt with Thirst, nothing can quench him, no, not a World of
Gold is so Good as a drink of Pure cold Clean Fountain Water. In a word, a Soul
wakened under Sin, finds nothing in the World Satisfactory to the Souls
Appetite, but in Christ. Tell me, art thou a Thirsty Sinner after Christ, thy
Soul is Dead Sick, while thou get Him. Lay a Man down on a Soft Bed, dry the
Sweat off him, give him a Cold Refreshing Drink: Now ye cannot speak such a
word to a Soul bursten thing under Sin, as to lay it upon a Crucified Christ; O
that is a Soft Bed; his sinful Soul being stretched upon the open warm flowing
Blood and Wounds of Christ; O that is a Soft Bed. O but a part of Christ^s
Blood is a Refreshing Cooling Drink to him. To know a Slave of Hell that he is
made a Free Heir of Heaven, O that is Sweet: Hence it is that those that are
wakened with the Furies of Hell, howbeit they know not yet what Christ is to
them; Yet this World cannot Calm their Conscience, because for Men that are
Soul-sick, and Sin-sick, there is no Physic, but one only a Drink of the Well
of Life; and because they ken not the gate to this Well of Life, they loup out
of this Life out of Despair into the Fire of Hell, throw the Madness of an
awakened Conscience. For a Thirsty Sick-soul finds Two Things in Christ, never
to be found in all the World, or any Thing else. 1. Christ takes off the
Hardness of Sin: None has Power to do this but He: All the Pardons of Sin are
in Christ's keeping, and of Christ's making; It is His Office to forgive Sin. 2.
Besides they find in Him an Influence and Abundance of Happiness in Him; So as
what they sought before in the Creature, they find no where else but in Him;
Then speak to them of Gold, it is nothing to Christ; Speak of Lands and
Lordships a Savior, and such a Savior has and is another Name to a Sinner
that is wakened.

Again, The Text calls Him, The Water of Life. We see here, there is some Water
that is Rotten and Ill Tasted; Will a Thirsty Man Drink of it? he shall not be
the better: But the Wholsomest Water is the Running Spring: So all that Sinners
can get beside Christ is Standing-water. Let them Drink in Gold, and Kingdoms,
and Lands. they shall never be Satisfying to a Sick Soul as He will be; And who
have drunk in these at Death, they would be content to Spue them out again,
they ly so heavy upon their Stomach; But Christ is the Coolling Wholesome
Spring, the Well of Water springing up to Eternal Life. Now to make our Use of
this: Seeing Christ is such a Living Well of Water, How is it in the Gospel
that there are so many withered dried Souls? I Answer, for GOD's Part, indeed
GOD has not put an Iron-Lock upon the Well of Life; But Christ by His Word and
Sacraments opens the Well in the midest of us, and for Seventy Years and more
in this Kingdom the Well has been Open: Christ and His Messengers has been
Crying to Dry Souls: But now for ought we see, He will Close the Well again;
for He has been setting out the Means of Life, and opening His Booth-doors to
give us freely, even to such as will take it, but He gets no Sale: Therefore He
must put up his Wares and go away, for Men are not Thirsty for his Waters; but
Thirst for Court and Honor; Another for Lust and Moneys; A Third Lusts after
Sinful Pleasures. 1. There be few Stomachs gapping for Christ. 2. They have
not a Vessel to cast down in the Well, and take up the Water: This is a
Fruitless Generation. Oh we loath Christ, and Christ loathes us. We need speak
no more of the Call of the Word; All the Land, Court, King, Noblemen and
Kirkmen has spewed the Waters; by Despising Mercy, and Contemning the Gospel:
And in very deed, when we cast in Clay and Mudd in Christ's Well, and mixes His
Worship with the Poison of the Whores Well of Rome. What do we else, but
Provock the LORD to Close the Well. I will give it freely: So are all Christ's
Mercies given of Grace; His Mercy is for Nothing, and of free Grace. I grant
the Well is Dear to Christ; GOD's Justice dug it out of his Side, and
Heart, and Hands, and Feet: The Man Christ got not this Water for Nothing; Yet
He gives it to us for Nothing; Because He minds not to make a Gain of us: We
live upon Christ's Winning; For know ye that Christ Redeemed many, do so by the
Rule of Justice, since He gave Himself, and has bought all with His own Blood:
So that in this Sense Christ was bought to us with Blood, else we could not get
Him, for He was both the Price and the VVares: So that as far as we can see by
Order of Justice, it is Decreed by the Lord that Christ could not have lived,
and given to us the Waters of Life. It was Dear Water to him; for in the
Garden GOD Deserted him, and Blood came out on the Cross* GOD Bruised him, and
Blood came out, and that is the Well we have here: And we have here a Great
Impediment removed. We think we would have something to give to Christ for the
Water of Life, some of our own Righteousness, some of our own Worthiness. But
that is plaistered Humility, watered Copper; and in doing so, we Refuse Grace,
and makes Grace to be no more Grace; for if it be given for any Worth in us, it
is no more Grace: And therefore let Men here see then, that the Kingdom of
Grace is a Good Cheap World, where the Best Things are gotten for Nothing: And
therefore I think in this Dear World, wherein all Things goes for Money; when
Court cost Expenses, Lands are Dear, and Gold is not gotten for Naught, and
Laws are Dearer than ever they were: yea, Papet and Ink are now Dearer than
Jewels; and Gold Rings were long syne Nothing, now is bought for Naught: Yet
CHRIST for all that, will not Change his World; but all Things with Him are
given Gratis, and ye are Welcome when all is done. We get no Garments for
Naught; No Physic for Naught. Christ gives White Raiment, Eye Salve, and all
for Naught, without Money* Sinners says, LORD, What take ye for the Water of
Life? He Answers. Even Nothing, and yet VVelcome. Christ plays not the Merchant
with his VVares, he makes no Gain, but Cries, the Well is free. No, says the
Pope, not a Drope, till ye tell down Money. That Bloody Beast would Sell the
Water of Rome for Gold, as meikle Money, as meikle Gtace and Forgiveness. Want
ye Money? He answers, Ye shall not come here. Nothing in Rome without Money.
Fie, fie, the stink of the Devil's World. Nay, but CHRIST is for Nothing. Nay,
Justice gives Money, and Officers give Money; it is a Dear World: But CHRIST
and his World cares no more for Money nor before.

Verse 7. He that overcomes shall Inherit all Things. Still in this Book, John
urges Fighting and Overcoming for Heaven. We wonder much that GOD will not
have Poor Men going to Heaven, but by Fighting, seeing he might have sent us to
Heaven by a second Heaven; But this is but a thought of Men, that would have
made a New Back-gate of their own to Heaven: But GOD advised well, when he made
this Causay to it, and ordained all his Saints, and his own Sons to ^o that
Way; But it is easier for us to Complain on GOD's Decree than to Obey, and to
Dispute than Believe. Men has too Thin Skins, and for Health they will cut a
Vein, or let a Leg or an Arm be cut off for fear of a Feaster, and yet for Life
Everlasting, they are so that they dow not Venture a Moments Pain.

Secondly, There are Excellent Promises made to the Overcomers; To him that
takes Heaven with Stroke of Sword and Blood; For Heaven is a besieged City or
Castle: Armies of Sin with all their Armor, and the Deceiving and Malicious
World; The World has Evah's Apple in the one Hand, and Fire and Sword in the
other, and the Devil is the Captain of the Army. Now here is a Price set, and
an Offer made to him that overcomes, to him that will mount up by Faith and
Hope, and leap up in CHRIST's Chariot, and betide him Life, betide him Death,
he will go throw: But they are Cowards that take a Backside, and lets the Devil
coup them in a Gutter. But yet to lead Men on, here is a Promise of Two Things.

First, He shall Inherit all Things. Then ye see, that the Christian's Captain
is a Man of a Fair Rent, 1 Cor. 3. 21. For all Things are Yours, whether Paul
or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death: Things present, or
Things to come. And to let us see he bides by the thing he has said; He says
again, All Things are Yours. Ye see then, one has a Kingdom as Asa, but wants
Health, and is Sick of his Feet, he has not all Things. Another has Strength of
Body above any Living, yet had many Troubles, and wanted his Eyes as Sampson;
and therefore had not all Things. O the Business Adam's Sons are at for
Inheritances: Here a Mealline, there a Lairdship, there a New Lordship, that
they call their all Things. I think this is a Greedy Style, and Proud like,
Lordship, or Lairdship, that they call all Things: Yet Greedy Adam's Sons has
more Greediness here than Wit. They run all upon their Lordships, that they
call the Lordship of many Things, Luke 10. Martha, Martha, thou art troubled.
Worldlings, ye are ay troubled about this, to be called my Lord of many
Things. But we shall see if the Text be True. I Am Alpha and Omega; Then,
First, The Apostle here puts in Death. Death is the Wages of Sin. I think Death
an Ill Mealline; better want it out of the Charter. How then have they all
Things? I Answer, Death is also a part of the Lordship this way; because it is
my Lord of all Things, and a Coatch to Glory; CHRIST Himself being the
Coatch-man, and Driving the Horse; Death is the Servant; as the Wind serves to
bring the Seaman Home; So Death serves him that has the New Lordship. Death
is Christ's Ferry-Boat to Carry us Home; For in CHRIST he sets his Foot on
Death's Neck; It is a Bridge over the River of Hell that he walks on to
Heaven, and it is his: The Christian is advanced in CHRIST 's Court, and gets
the New Style, to be my Lord of all Things, the Prince, the Duke of all Things.
Yet I shall get you a Lordship beneath them all; but much sought for: The
Lordship of Vanity or Nothing, Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine Eyes on that
which is Naught: For verily Riches has Wings; He that is Rich has Naught.

Secondly, If he Inherit all Things, Then the whole World in his, and so he
wants Nothing.

A Third Question, How is it then that the Saints are Hungry and Poor? Answer,
This Promise is so taken from them, 2 Samuel 3, 14. Psalm. 89. 27, 28. I will set
His one Hand on the Sea, and His Right Hand on the River. Then see how broad
CHRIST 's Two Arms are. His one hand upon all the Sea, and his other hand upon
the River, and that Promise is made to CHRIST as Principal-Cautioner of the
Covenant: For it is said, Verse 26. He shall say unto Me, Thou art My Father
and My GOD, and the Rock of My Salvation. Verse 27. Also I will make him My
Firstborn Higher than the Kings of the Earth. Which is Exponed of CHRIST, Heb.
1. 5. Rev. 10. 2. He has his right foot on the Sea, and his left foot on the
Land. Put these Two together, and see how Wide his Arms and Legs, or Feet are,
they go over the whole World as his Inheritance which he Wan to himself, and
his Heirs after him with his Blood. Now CHRIST got Land not to himself: What
needs him Land to give his Blood for Clay? But he wan it to us, and took
Infeftment in the Earth in Name of his Friends. And now it is True, they are
not Possessors of all Things. But, Secondly, For Peoples Wants, ye see their
Interest is in and over all Things; Yet their Tutour lets them go with a Toom-
purse; He knows the Heir is a Young one, and cannot keep Gold, and therefore he
gives them Food and Raiment for their present Necessity; but keeps the Lordship
for the present. Our Tutour CHRIST is made of GOD our Tutour, our Purse-Master:
It is all one whether we have it in our Chist-neuk, or if it be in CHRIST's
Purse to keep while we need it, providing we want not:

Thirdly, A Third Question, and a Third Doubt is, at least, Seeing they are
under so many Troubles in this Life, and has no Ease, they have not all Things?
I Answer. Yet I must Defend it, and say, if they have the Inheritance, that
they have all Things; because the Sweet of the Comfort and Troubles are theirs.

A Fourth Question or Objection. They have not Heaven and Glory, at least, in
this Life, and therefore they are not Inheritors of all Things? I Answer. The
Promise is not fullfilled in this Life: Yet when a Man has shorn a Stouk or two
of Corn, we say he has gotten Harvest and New Corn. So the Believer gets Joy,
Hope, Faith, Assurance of Heaven and the First Fruits of the Spirit, are New
Corn. So in the beginning he gets all Things. 2. Having GOD and CHRIST they
have all Things: For ye see the Great- Ship Trailleth the Cock-Boat after her:
So the Great CHRIST brings all Things after him at his Back: So I say, having
CHRIST, they have all Things; They have the Father, and the Spirit, the Word,
Life and Death. Amen. Let us Pray*


