THE Sin against the Holy Ghost: Or, The Sin unto Death Briefly discoursed of

I. Proving what this Sin is. And, II. That all other Sins, how Great and
Heinous soever, may be forgiven unto Men; but the Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost shall never be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in the World to come.
To which is added, Some Instructions how a Man may walk and not commit this
unpardonable Sin.

Mat. 12 31. That all manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Men,
except it be the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

By Mr. Robert Russel

EDINBURGH, Printed by James Watson, for John Crossby 1700.

Of the Unpardonable Sin AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST: Or, The Sin unto DEATH.
1 John V. part of Verse. 16. There is a Sin unto Death.


THere is no mere Man since the Fall, that can live without Sin, for all are
Sinners: But yet there are Degrees of Sin; some Sins in their own Nature are
small, others are more great and heinous. Many Sins there are that are great,
yet pardonable, and one Sin there is unpardonable; and whosoever commits that
one Sin shall have no forgiveness, but must for ever bear the weight and
punishment, both of that and of all his other Sins. There is such a Sin as St,
John speaks of here in my Text; that this is a Sin unto Death. And now I come
to the Explication of the Words; from whence I shall raise this Point of
Doctrine:

Doct. That amongst other Sins committed by fallen Mankind, there is only one
Sin that is a Sin unto Death, and whosoever commits that, he has no
Forgiveness, neither in this World, nor in the World to come.

Now for my further proceeding on this Subject I shall lay open to you, First,
What the Sin unto Death is? Secondly, That all our Sins, how great and heinous
soever, may be forgiven. Thirdly, That this sin alone shall never be forgiven.
Fourthly, The reason why that Sin alone is unpardonable. And then, Lastly, I
shall conclude all with a few words of Application.


I shall begin first with the Description of this unpardonable Sin; where I
shall endeavor to make as plain a Description of it, as possible I can; and in
doing of it, I shall I. show you Negatively, what is not this Sin. II. I shall
show you positively what it is.

I. I shall show you Negatively, what is not this Sin unto Death; or in what
Degree a Man may Sin, and yet not commit that unpardonable Sin against the Holy
Ghost.

1. It is not every quenching of the motions of the spirit that is that sin, it
is true when the Holy Ghost comes with a still Voice and knocks at the Doors of
Sinners hearts for Entrance, he often comes and strives with them, and secretly
Wooes and beseeches them to leave their Sins, and be converted; yet they quench
and stifle all his Motions and bear up their Hearts against him and will not be
obedient to his Heavenly Calls, now such sin grievously against the Holy Ghost:
But yet this alone is not the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, for many
who have stood it out a long time, and have often quenched and grieved the Holy
Spirit, yet at last they have been wrought upon unto sincere Conversion.

2. A Man may commit many heinous and crying Sins, and yet not be guilty of the
unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. A Man may be an Idolater, a
Whoremonger, a Furnicator, a Murderer, and work Witchcraft, and sin with a very
high hand; nay he may live in all manner of Filthineness and Lewdness, and yet
not be under the Guilt of unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. Thus we read
2 Chronicles. 23. that Manasses sinned with a very high Hand; he was an Idolater, an
Inchanter, and worked Witchcraft, and dealt with Familiar Spirits, and wrought
much evil in the Sight of the Lord. And Mary Magdalen had Seven Devils cast out
of her, Luke 8.2. and yet both were pardoned.

3. A Man may sin presumptuously against great Light and Knowledge, and yet not
commit this Sin unto Death: For Peter, when he denied Christ, he did it against
great knowledge of Christ, he knew Christ to be his Lord and Savior, he was
one of Christ's beloved Disciples; and for all that how strongly he denied
Christ, and that with an Oath too; and yet for all that, Christ looked upon him
with a merciful Eye, and that he repented and was forgiven.

4. It is not every Malicious Sin that is the unpardonable Sin against the Holy
Ghost; for St: Paul certainly had great Malice in his heart when he went on so
furiously to persecute the Church of God; and yet was converted, and became a
Preacher of the Gospel of Christ, which before he persecuted.

5. And lastsy, It is not final Unbelief, nor final Impenitence, that is the
unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, tho some be of Opnion, that it is
because that Sin is unpardonable; and Christ himself has said, Mat. 12.31.
That all manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Man, except it be
the Sin against the Holy Ghost. But you are to take the words of our Savior in
their true sense and meaning; it is all manner of Sin and Blasphemy committed
within the compass of a Man's Life, that shall be forgiven, except the Sin
against the Holy Ghost; for the Sin of final impenitency, and final Unbelief,
is not completed until the very Moment of a Man's Death; and then you all
know, that there is no Repentance and consequently no Pardon after Death, for
Christ says, He that Sins against the Holy Ghost, has no forgiveness, neither
in this World, nor in the World to come. Now, why should Christ say, in this
World, if there be no space to be forgiven in, in this World? But a Man may
commit the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost even many years before his
Death. Besides there are many thousands that die in Impenitency and Unbelief,
and are damned, and yet never committed the unpardonable Sin against the Holy
Ghost:

Thus have I showed you Negatively, what is not this unpardonable Sin, none of
these Sins in particular is that Sin.

II. I come now to show you positively what this Sin unto Death is, and wherein
this unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost does consist. Now there are
several Opinions in the World about it; some hold one thing, some another: But
I have not time nor room to dispute concerning others Opinions about it, but I
will endeavor, through God's help, to lead you to the plain sight of it, by
the Light of the Holy Scripture.

Now in the first place you must know, that there are two sorts of People that
cannot commit this unpardonable Sin.

1. The true Believer cannot commit it, tho many times for their Trial, God
suffers them to fall foully into many grievous Sins; yet they being rooted into
Christ, they are upheld by free Grace and Mercy, that they cane not fall into
this unpardonable Sin,

2. The grossly ignorant cannot commit it, because it is a Sin against great
Light and Knowledge. Indeed the greatest part of the World shall be damned; yet
amongst the greater part, there is but few of them that can commit that
unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Some have both Light and Grace, these shall not commit the unpardonable Sin.
Again, some have neither Light nor Grace, these cannot commit it. But there are
some again that have Light and no Grace, these are they that are liable to
commit the unpardonable Sin again the Holy Ghost. Now there must be two
ingredients to make up this unpardonable Sin; that is Light in the head, and
Malice in the heart; without these two the Sin against the Holy Ghost cannot be
committed: For to sin against great light and knowledge, is not that Sin alone;
nor yet to sin ignorantly, out of that Malice, is not that Sin but they must
join both together, to make up this unpardonable Sin. This we see by the
example of St. Peter and St. Paul, Peter he denied Christ, and forswore himself
too, and that grievously against Light and knowledge; for he knew Christ to be
the only begotten Son of God, and he knew God in him; he was one of Christ's
Disciples, and one of his beloved Disciples too; he was taught of Christ, and
had experimental Knowledge of his Love and Favor, and yet he wickedly with an
Oath denied him. Now if Peter had done his out of Malice and Spite then he had
committed that Sin unto Death, for which there is no Forgiveness: But Peter had
no Malice in his Heart all this while, even at that time when he denied Christ;
as you may see Mat. 29. when Christ told him, Before the Cock crow, thou shall
deny me thrice. He answered, If I should die with thee, I will not deny thee.
And then denying him through Infirmity, and Weakness of the Flesh: When he
considered what he had done, he went out and weept bitterly, V. 75. And Paul,
he had great Malice and Spite against the ways and People of God; as you may
see Acts 9.1. Now here was a great Rage and Malice in Saul, against the Ways
and People of God; but doing it ignorantly he at last hearing a Voice saying,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And receiving of a Light from Heaven, that
it was Jesus that he persecuted, he was pricked at the Heart and trembling and
astonished, said, Lord what will thou have me to do! Now by these two places of
Scripture, you may plainly see, that Peter sinned against great Light. And Paul
out of great Malice, yet none of them both committed the unpardonable Sin again
the Holy Ghost. But whenever Light and Malice meet together in one Man, then
there is a Sin against the Holy Ghost. Now as all other Sins, so this Sin
against the Holy Ghost may be committed in Thought, Word, or Action.

1. In Thought, that is, when a wicked Man against his clear Light and
Knowledge, does but conceive a malicious Thought, or Purpose toward
persecuting the Gospel of Christ, or of the Saints of Christ to hinder the Work
of the Holy Ghost in them.

This Sin is to be thought, was the Sin of the lost Angels; for which Cause
they were lost without all Hopes of Pardon. Now some dispure whether their Sin
was a Sin of the thought; but I say with all likelihood it was: For the Angels
being only Spirits, without Bodies, and so have no use of bodily Tongues, it
could not be committed in Word; nor yet could they commit it in Action, because
they were cast out of Heaven, before they could bring it into Practice,
therefore it must be a Sin of the Thought.

Now their Sin was this, Their Habitation being in the highest Heavens, next.
under God himself, they had exceeding great light, and Knowledge; they had more
knowledge than all the Men in the World ever had, and were happy above all
other Creatures; but when not being contented with this Estate, they thought to
be as high as God himself; therefore maliciously sought to make War against the
Son of God, and put him out of his Throne; for which Cause they were immediately
thrust out of Heaven, never more to see the Face of Mercy: Thus their Sin being
of the same Nature with the Sin against the Holy, Ghost they were excluded all
hopes of Pardon.

2. This may be committed in Word too; that is, when a Man speaks blasphemously
and maliciously of Christ and his holy way: This was the Sin of the Scribes and
Parisees, Mark, 3.22. Therefore says Christ unto them, Ver. 28.29.

Now the Reason of this Speech of our blessed Savior, is showed in Verse. 22.
because they said, He has an unclean, spirit; which plainly shows, that these
Scribes had spoken Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. These Scribes were great
learned Men, and they could know no other but that Christ was the Son of God,
and they knew that he cast out Devils by the Spirit of God; and yet but of
spite to Christ maliciously and blasphemously said, That he cast ut Devils by
Beelzebub the Chief of Devils. Thus these Scribes committed the unpardonable Sin
against the Holy Ghost: And, that in a Word.

3. This Sin may be committed in Action too, that is when a Man being once
thoroughly enlightened, and entered upon a holy course of Life, and tasted the
Comforts of God's spirit, and had some forettaste of the Joys of Heaven, and
not only makes Profession of the Gospel, but teaches it to others; he at last
takes a dislike of these holy Courses, and through spite and malice, utterly
forsakes, opposes and persecutes those good ways of God, which he before
professed and taught. But to sum up this Point: This unpardonable Sin against the
Holy Ghost is fully described by the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap, 10.29.27.28.
Likewise, Heb. 6.4.5, 6.

Now the Sin against the Holy Ghost is briefly this: It is a wilful and
malicious Opposing of the known Truth.

1. This Sin unto Death is an opposing Sin; now to oppose a thing. is to
contradict it, or gain say; when a Man says so, and so denies it. and says it
is not so; when a Man says a thing must be done, he says again it must not, nor
shall not be done; but a Man may be an opposing Man, and yet cannot commit this
sin: Therefore:

2. It is the Truth that we must oppose; that is, we must utterly oppose and
reject Christ, who said, I am the Truth John 14.6. He opposes all his
Threatenings, and will not believe his promises, and counts him to be a Seducer
of the People, and counts the Blood of the Covenant to be an unholy thing; nay
he also opposes the Spirit of Christ, who is the Spirit of Truth: So that he
will not obey his Motions, and will not be led nor guided by him; but a Man may
oppose the truth, and yet do it ignorantly: Therefore,

3. It must be the known truth thatheopposeth he must be once enlightened: But
you must know, that it is not only a Notional Knowledge and Humane Learning. He
may know much of God, and of his will in the Letter of the Word, and yet not
capable of committing this unpardonable Sin: But he must be so far enlightened,
as to see the Evil that is in Sin, and the Excellency of Christ; he must taste
of the Heavenly Gift, and be made partaker of the Holy Ghost, and taste of the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, and by the Blood of the
Covenant, which he counts as an unholy thing, he is in part sanctified and
cleansed from many Sins; he must have sweet Comunion with God in his Word and
Sacraments; he must have some Taste of the Love and Favor of God, and Comforts
of his Spirit, and be refreshed by it, and taste of the Love and Favor of God,
and Comforts of his Spirit and taste of the Joys of Heaven, and have some
Fore-taste of the Happiness of the World to come.

4. He must oppose the known Truth wilfully, he must wilfully fall away,
after he has received the Knowledge of the Truth: Other sins are committed
through Infirmity, but this sin is wilful, the Will is the chief Actor in it:
And to complete and make up this unpardonable Sin, there is,

5. Malice in the Heart; without this, this sin cannot be committed; it must be
a malicious opposing of the known Truth.

Now a Man having gone thus far, he comes in the last place to be an Apostate:
Now for such a one wilfully, spitefullly, and maliciously to fall away, he so
falls, as never to rise more. It is true the Children of God fall and that
often, and yet rises again; but when they fall through Weakness of infirmity,
and not wilfully and maliciously; but these wicked Wretches fall wilfully and
maliciously, and so fall finally. Against such, the Door of Mercy is ever shut:
Concerning such, St. Peter says 2 Pet. 2:21, 22. There is such another
dreadful Place of Scripture against these Apostates; that is, Heh. 10 26.

Object But what is the reason then that this Sin cannot be forgiven.

The Reason arises from the Nature of this Sin; for this Sin, by whomsoever it
is committed, hardens the heart and fears the Conscience; so that there is no
place for Repentance to be wrought, neither for that or any other Sin. This Sin
is called the sin against the Holy Ghost, because it is a sin against the
Person of the Holy Ghost, so is all sin against his Person, but it is called
the sin against the Holy Ghost. because it is against the Office and Work of
the Holy Ghost. Now every one of the Three Persons have their particular Work:
The work of the Father is to create; the Work of the Son is to redeem lost
Sinners; and the Work of the Holy Ghost is to enlighten, convince, sanctify
and convert them. Now a Man committing this unpardonable Sin against the Holy
Ghost, rejects all this Work, of the Spirit. Now for a Man to be thoroughly
enlightened by the Holy Ghost that he comes to know the evil of Sin, and of his
lost and undone Condition without Christ; and that none but the Merits of
Christ can save him, then for him wilfully and maliciously to oppose him, and
the Work of his Spirit and Will not be beholding to him for Salvation, now for
such one to be forgiven, is utterly impossible.

Object. But why is it impossible? Nothing is impossible with God.

A Man through ignorance may deny Christ and maliciously fall from the
Profession of the Truth into all Wickedness, as did Saint Paul, and the Jews
that Crucified Christ, and yet not falling against Light and Knowledge, there
is room for the Holy Ghost to work upon him, to enlighten him, and to convince
him of his Folly, and so makes way for Conversion. And besides, a Man after he
has been enlightened, and yet falls back through Infirmity, and the weakness of
the Flesh, as Peter did, and does not fail wilfully and maliciously, then the
Holy Ghost, may work upon him, and work in him a deep sorrow, for abusing so
much Love and Mercy, and so carry on his good Work unto Salvation. But for a
man when he is once enlightened by the Holy Ghost, and has had some taste of
Gods love and favor, and some fore-taste of the Joys of Heaven, and then at
last utterly opposing this Illuminating Work of the Spirit, and wilfully and
maliciously to fall away, and so to reject the Spirits renewing Work. Alas then
the Holy Ghost has done, he has nothing more that he can work in him; for this
wretched Creature, has utterly rejected him; his enlightening Work his
convincing Work, his sanctifying Work, he has utterly rejected Christ's. Pardon,
Heaven and all. Now this poor Wretch is past all Hopes of Mercy, all hopes of
Pardon; nay, for such a one we are forbidden to pray; as you see in the Verse,
wherein my Text is apart. Now Christ praved for them who maliciously crucified
him, Luke 23.34. Saying, Father, forgive them for they know not what they do.
Alas they knew not what they were doing, for had they known it they would not
have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2 8. But if they had known and yet
crucified him, Christ would not have spent his breath to pray for them; for it
would have been utterly in vain: For when a Man has committed this unpardonable
Sin; neither the Prayers in Heaven nor Earth, can do him any good; for as the
Text says, There is a Sin unto Death.

I shall conclude with a few words of Application.

I. Watch very diligently against all sin; but above all, take special heed of
those sins that come near to the sin against the Holy Ghost; and they are
these: Hypocrisy, taking only the outward Profession of Religion, and so
dissembling and mocking of God, sinning wilfully against Conviction of
Conscience, and against great Light and Knowledge; sinning presumptuosly, and
with an high hand: These Sins, though none of them are the direct sin again the
Holy Ghost, yet they will come very near to it; therefore take especial heed of
them, lest they in time, should bring you to the committing of that
unpardonable Sin. And,

II. Labor to be sincere in Religion, and by a true Faith ingraft your selves
into Christ; for they that be with Christ, can never commit this unpardonable
sin: For know this, that amongst all the sins committed by fallen Mankind,
there is one sin, that is a Sin unto Death, which is the unpardonable Sin
against the Holy Ghost, which whosoever commits it, has no Forgiveness,
neither in this World nor in the World to come:

I desire you for to take your Bibles and search the places of Scriptures here
cited, And the Lord give you understonding in all these things.

FINIS.

