A WARNING TO England: OR, THE Nations Looking-Glass.

WHEREIN They may plainly see what are those Good Things, that are withheld by
the sins of the Nation.

ALSO, What are those National Sins, which withhold Good Things from us. Some
of these have been lately endeavored to be surprest by Act of Parliament.

To which is Added, An earnest Exhortation, to break off our Sins by a timely
Repentance, least the Lord break forth in wrath against us.

By Robert Russel, in Sussex, Author of the Book of the Unpardonable Sin
against the Holy Ghost.

Hosea 4.2. By Swearing, Lying, Killing, and Stealing, the land mourns.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for J. Blare on London Bridge.

A Warning to ENGLAND, etc.
Jer. 5.25. Your Iniquities have turned away these things: And your Sins have
withheld good things from you.


AMongst the many Books, that I have formerly wrote, I think it now very
necessary, at last, to write a Book, whereby people may be convinced of their
evil ways, and wicked practices; hoping that by the special Blessing of God,
the Inhabitants of this Nation may reform their lives, and turn to God by
unfeigned Repentance, so that God may avert those judgments which the sins of
this Nation do daily cry aloud for, and are continually hanging over our heads.

Many there are (as I have told you in my book of Joshua's resolution to serve
the Lord) complain of the badness of the times, because trading is so low,
money so dead, taxes so great, and the wars continuing thus long, still
expecting the end of the wars, and the coming of good peaceable times. But
Friends, deceive not your selves, you cannot expect good peaceable times, so
long as wickedness abounds so in the land, as it does: For I verily think, that
since the time that England has been a Nation, there never was more
profaneness and ungodliness than there is now; there never was more swearing,
cursing, cheating, oppressing, lying, profaning the Sabbath, and all manner of
uncleaness, as there reigns amongst us in these our days: this Land certainly
is like another Sodom, for wickedness; therefore instead of hoping for better
times, we have just cause to fear that (except there be a timely Reformation
amongst us) some sader stroke of Vengeance will fall on this nation, than yet
has befallen us. People complain because the times are bad; and because these
troubles are continued so long among us; whereas they themselves are the cause,
it is their sins that stands as a cloud, and ^tops good things from descending
upon them: As the Prophet tells us in the words of my Text; Your Iniquities
have turned away these things, and your sins have with-helden good things from
you.

The Doctrine which I shall raise from these words shall be this: That it is the
sins of a people or nation, that keeps back Mercy, and hinders good things from
coming upon it. This whole chapter contains a discovery of God's judgments upon
the Jews for their transgressions; the substance of which is sum'd up in short
in the Text, Your Iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have
withheld good things from you. Now from the Text we have considerable these
two things: First, To show you what are those good things which sin does
withold from a people or nation. Secondly, What are those sins which do keep
back mercy, and hinders good things from coming unto a people or nation: And so
I shall conclude all with a word or two of Application.

I begin with the first, to show you what are those good things which sin does
withold from a people or nation: Now those good things that sin does
withold, I shall reduce into these three Ranks, First, Spiritual good things;
Secondly, Tem^^^ good things, Thirdly, National good things.

First, Sin does withold from a people or nation spiritual good things: Now
those spiritual good things, which sin does withold from a people, are such
as the pardon and forgiveness of all their sins; the special love and favor of
God through Jesus Christ, revealed to their souls, in the full and free pardon
of their sins; the saving graces of God's spirit to change them and renew them;
these are those special and excellent good things which sin does commonly
deprive a people of. God has in his great mercy to our souls given us all his
ordinary ways and means, whereby these spiritual blessings might be procured;
he has given us his Word, his Gospel, his Ministers, his Day, and Ordinances.
Now in the careful and diligent use of these means, God has promised to give
his Son, and with him all the saving graces of his spirit; b^^ if a people will
slight and contemn the Ordinance of God, and will love, and delight in their
sins, and follow the lust and carnal desires of their own hearts; God many
times in justice leaves them to their own hearts lust, that because they love
and delight to be wicked and unclean, and will be so, and never care to seek to
the Lord by fasting and prayer, and by using the means, prescribed in his word,
for the graces of his spirit, to change, and renew them: Therefore it is God's
order and way, in justice, to give such over to obdurancy, and hardness of
heart, so that they will be wicked and unclean still, For this cause, says the
Apostle, Romans 1. God gave them up to vile affections, and to uncleanness, to
follow the dosires of their own hearts. Thus God dealt with his own people the
Jews, Psa. 81.12. that because they would not hearken to his voice, and would
have none of him, therefore he gave them up to their own lusts, and they walked
in their own counsel. Friends, it is our sins, our wilful fins, our continued
rebellion against God, that hinders spiritual good things from descending into
our own souls, it is our delighting and living in sin that hinders our prayers
from being granted, and that hinders our services from being accepted: If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. says David, Psa.
66.18. God declares himself not only willing, but able to bestow the choicest
of his blessings upon those that seek him in the use of means, Isa. 59.1.
Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save, neither is his ear
heavy that it cannot hear; But, says the Prophet, in ver. 2. your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins has hid his face from
you that he will not hear. It is a peoples sins that withholds good things
from them, even spiritual good things.

Secondly, The sins of a people or nation, keeps back from them temporal good
things also; our blessed Savior has promised, Mat. 6. that if we s ek first
the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, that then all outward good
things shall be added unto us. But our seeking to please the flesh, and to
satisfy our lust, and living in sinful ways, this hinders the stream of God's
blessing from descending upon this our land. Have we not seen within this year
or two, several tokens of God's wroth against the inhabitants of this land, for
their u^g^dly doings, even in keeping back from us these outward good things,
which we have expected, some times God seemed to manifest the tokens of his
anger, by stopping the influences of the Heavens, and threatening to dry up our
Corn and Fruits, by sending of a drought upon the land; at other times, when
our Corn has been come to perfection and ripeness, then God was pleased to
manifest the tokens of his anger in threatening to deny us the enjoyment of it,
by sending of excessive Ruins in the time of harvest; and now this last year it
pleased Almighty God, as a token of his anger against our evil doing, to send a
blast upon our Corn. Friends it is our sins, our iniquities, that procures
these judgments; Beloved Friends, let us not murmur at God's dealings with us,
but rather let us admire his patience and bounty toward us, in that he has but
only sent to us the tokens of his anger and wrath, the least mercy that we
receive at his hands is more than we deserve: If we consider what oppression,
cheating, lying, swearing, cursing, drunkenness, and uncleanness, reigns in
this Nation, we have reason to wonder at God's patience and long suffering
toward us, in that he bares with us so long, and does not send a Famine, or
some utter destruction. Let us consider, that it is our sins and evil doings
that with holds the Rain from coming in its season, and causes a drought upon
the Land; it is our sins that brings violent and unseasonable floods of Water
to destroy the fruits of the earth; it is our sins and iniquities that brings a
blast and mildew upon our Corn and Fruits. O therefore let every one of us turn
from our ways and evil doings, if ever we would delive God to turn from his
fierce indignation, that is gone forth against us, but I fear there may be as
just a complaint taken up against the inhabitants of this Nation, as there was
against the Jews in a verse or two before the Text, That this people has a
revolting and rebe^ious heaert; neither say they in their heart Let us now fear
the Lord our God, that gives us both the former and the latter Rain in its
season, he reserveth unto us the appointed Weeks of the harvest; But (says the
text) your iniquities have turned away these things from you, and your sins
have withheld good things from you, even temporal good things.

Thirdly, and lastly, The sins of a people or nation keeps back and with holds
from them National Good things. When God's judgments hangs over a people or
nation; when wars, troubles and confusion are abroad; and when their Enemies
are at their backs ready to invade them; then when the same people go
onstubbornly and perversely in their wicked courses, and will not be reformed;
and when God is working mercy and deliverance for them, and they then take the
more liberty to wollow in their abominations, and to sin the more against the
Lord, and spurn against his mercies; these doings makes themselves unsit for
mercy, and do as it were stay the hand of God, and stop him in his proceedings.
The Lord our God is a God of Marcy, it is his Nature to show mercy, and to work
about deliverances; but yet a wicked people many times pull down Judgments upon
their own heads, by their ungodly and wicked doings. Alas how, loath is God to
destrey a people or nation, if there be any probability that they will at last
Repent, and turn from their evil ways. How often did the Lord's own people
Israel provoke him unto wrath by their many Rebellions against him, and yet the
Lord was gracious toward them and spared them, and would not pour out all his
wrath; one time when they had provoked him so much by their sins that God was
about to destroy them, then Muses stood before him in the broach, least he
should destroy them; At another time, when the people had provokea the Lord by
their Inventions, he sent the plague among them; the Lord was graciously
pleased upon the prayers of Phinchas to Repent of that evil, and remove his
stroke from them, Psalm. 106. Yea, not withstanding they provoked him time after
time with their Rebellions, yet he wrought many deliverances for them. But yet
consider this, the Lord did not always bear with them, his patience was at last
worn out, his longsufferance at last had an end, he at last was provoked to
swear in his wrath that they should never enter intohis rest. We read that when
God speaks of a stubborn and rebellions people, he tells them that h^ is weary
of Repenting; thus he speaks to his own people here, the people of Jerusalem,
Jer. 15.6 After their many and long provocations, and wearying of his patience:
Who shall have pity upon thee O Jerusalem? who shall bemoan thee? thou has^
forsaken me, says the Lord, thou art gone backward therefore will I stretch
out my hand against thee to do stroy thee, I am weary of repenting, I am weary
of Repenting. Behold here how the Lord speaks after the manner of Men, when the
Lord is pleased b^ his providencial dispensation to threaten a people (...)
tokens of his wrath and indignation again them, and then in the midst of
Judgment thinks on mercy, and so withdraws his hand, and forbears to strike,
and works about deliverance for them, then the Lord is said to redent; but then
after a long time, after many repentings of God, after many turns of
providence, if that people or nation will not turn from their evil ways, but
will still continue resolutely and obstinately in their sins, though they have
many warnings, threatenings, mercies, and judgments, until Gods patience is
quite worn out, then God is said to be weary of Repenting, thus it was with
Gods people of old, and thus God seems to be dealing with the Inhabitants of
this nation. When God has many times sent tokens of his wrath and displeasure
against us for our sins, and has been ready to strike, then the Lord has been
pleased graciously to call back his shroaks, and has seemed to repent of the
evil he was about to bring upon us; thus God did gracibusly deal with us in the
days of Queen Mary, when many thousand poor souls suffered Martyrdom, and when
the whole Nation was next door to ruin and destruction, then the Lord seemed
to repent, and wondersully stepped in for our deliverance. Thus in the time of
King James the II. Gods hand of Justice was then up ready to strike the final
stroke, then there seemed in all outward appearance to be nothing but utter
Ruin and destruction, but yet in the very nick of time, the Lord seemed to
repent of the evil that he was a bringing upon this nation, and in the midst of
^dgment thought upon Mercy, and mercifully brought in our gracious Sovereign
King, William, to be the happy Instrument of our deliverance And many a time
when our malicious enemies ha^^ been a plotting and working about our
destruction God has been a working about our deliverance, and bringing to
naught their wicked devices, but ye^^ let us assure our selves, that if we
donot in time repent and turn from the evil of our ways but continua still
provoking him to wrath, his Repentings will have an end, his patience will be
worn out, and the he will pour out his wrath to the utmost, and destroy us
utterly, for if after all his smiting of us, (...) delivering of us, we will
still walk contrary to him He will walk contrary to us, and will punish us
seve^ times more for our sins, until he has consume us, as he has threatened,
Deuteronomy. 26. Therefore now, whilst the I ord is going forth against us (...) a way
of wrath, it would be our wisdom to me^^ him by true and unfeigned Repentance,
and the he will meet us in love and mercy, and delight (...) do us good, for
God declares himself the Lord God gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and
(...) great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

Alas, how loath is God to destroy a people (...) nation, if there be any hopes
at all of their (...) turn: O how does the Lord expostulate with (...) phraim,
when he is going to destroy them, h^^ does his Bowels seem to be troubled, when
he about to smite, saying: How shall I give thee (...) Ephraim? how shall I
deliver thee I srael? how sh^^ I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
(...) boim? my heart is turned within me, my Repent is are kindled together; I
will not execute the fiercen^^ (...) mine anger; I will not return to destroy
Ephraim, For I am God, and not Man, He sea 11.8, 9. Thus ^ere, when Popery and
Slavery was coming upon ^^s apace, and our gracious King William was step^ing
in for our deliverance, then the Lord seemed ^o be bemoaning of England,
saying: How shall I ^ive thee up England? how shall I deliver thee up ^^to the
hands of thine Enemies; my Bowels are tur^ed within me, I will not destroy
England. O therefore Friends, let us not run on in sin after such a ^ate as we
do, offending and grieving so gracious (...) God, lest his patience should be
quite worn out, and he be weary of Repenting, and so be provoked ^o deliver us
over into the hands of our Enemies, and consume us utterly. Consider what great
things the Lord has already done for this sinful ^ation, and greater Blessings
he would yet bestow upon us, if our sins did not stop him. Almighty God seems
now to be expostulating with England, ^s once he did with his people of old,
Psa. 81.13, 14, 15. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and England had
walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my hand
against ^^eir Adversaries, the haters of the Lord, should have submitted
themselves unto them, he would have fed ^^em, and satisfied them with the
finest of the Wheat, ^^d honey out of the Rocks. O that England would once
repent and turn from her evil ways! how ^^ickly would the Lord turn away his
anger from (...)? how quickly would he put an end to our wars and Troubles? how
soon would he bring (...) a lasting Peace and Tranquillity amongst us, ^^d would
rejoice over us to do us good; but it is the sins of a people or nation that
withhold good things from them, even national good things.

Thus I have dispatched the first part of my text which was to show you what are
those good thing that the sins of a nation or people do withold from them,
they are Spiritual Good Things, Temporal Good Things, and National Good Things

Secondly, The second part of my Text is to she^ you what are those common sins
that withold Good Things from a People or Nation: No^ the Prophet Hosea gives
us a Catalogue of some (...) them, Hosea ^. 2. By Swearing, and Lying, and
Killing and Stealing, and committing Adultery, they break o^^ and blood touches
blood, therefore shall the Land mour^^ Now the sins of England which withholds
Good Things from them, are such as these: I sh^^ name some few of them, which
are the chief, First the first sin which I shall here mention, that with holds
Good Things from a Nation, is Swearin^ and Cursing. O how dreadful it is to
hear ^^cked Wretches, when they are drinking in a A^e-house, and at other
times, belch out the Hellish Oaths; O it many times makes ones hea^ach to hear
how they swear at almost every wo^^ they speak, by the Name of God, by Blood
and Wounds, and such like horrible Oaths, notwithstanding that Act of
Parliament which has late come out against the sin of Swearing, yet I cannot
see that people are much more afraid to swear (...) Oath, Surely, as the
Prophet says, Jer. 23.10. Be cause of swearing the Land mourns; And if ev^^
this our ^and mourned under this grievous by ^len, it mourns now at this day,
nay, and if Swearing be not bad enough, many in their Rage and Fury fall a
cursing of one another, yea, cursing of themselves too, nay, and that which is
worst of ^ll, many have been heard to curse themselves to the pit of Hell, and
wish damnation upon themselves. I can tell you of a man, which I saw but a
little while ago, being a little in drink, I heard him call upon God to damn
his soul at almost every word he spoke. O what a most dreadful Impre^ation this
is? that people must wish eternal ^amnation upon themselves. O Sinner, what if
God should indeed take thee at thy word, that as ^oon as the word Damn me is
out of thy mouth, he hold send some sudden stroke of vengeance or other upon
thee, and send thee immediately out of this world into Eternal Damnation, I
tell thee ^nner, it is just with God to do it, and indeed thou have great cause
to expect, every time the like imprecation comes out of thy mouth, that he
should clap the like Judgment immediately upon ^^y head; and then thou can
not but acknowledge that God has given thee no worse than thou did wish upon
thy self, and did call upon him for; ^ay some there are that are so
inclinable to the ^ns of Cursing, and Swearing, and Railing, and ^vil-speaking,
that they infect their Offspring with the like Vices; there poor Children, as
soon is they come to be of any bigness, how quickly ^o they learn these Hellish
Arts of their parents and elders, so that in many Towns and Streets where
children are playing together, they have ^een heard to curse and swear one at
another in a dreadful manner, and some have been heard to call one another all
to naught, as Dog, Rogue, and I know not what, as I gave a hint of in my little
Book, being a second part for children.

Obj. But many Parents will be ready to say, that it is not they that teach
their children, but the children learn one of another.

Ans. To this I answer: It is true that young ones having a vicious nature,
which they brought with them into the world, they are naturely backward to
learn any good, but very inclinable to learn evil even one of another; but pray
consider where the foundation lies all this while, it is the Parents many times
are the first Instructers in evil, we have had in our days many proofs of this,
for some ungodly Parents have been many times heard to gape at their own
children when they would not come at their call, and would not do just as they
would have them, they have been heard to curse and swear at them, and call them
all to naught, and so the poor children think that they may use the like words
and expressions one to another, and then if these children happen into the
company of those children whose parents are godly, and who labor to bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, yet how quickly do they learn
vicious and foul language of the others, and so by this means ordinarily young
ones learn one of another. O Friends, are not your children prone enough to
evil of themselves, but you must infuse sinful Vices into their corrupted
Nature? O you that are parents and governors of children, let me beseech you
to consider what you are doing when you are mouthing at your children, and a
using foul language in their hearing, that you are a doing your endeavor to
infect whole Towns and Families with wicked Vices, nay, and the whole Nation it
self, and so hasten God's wrath and Judgment upon the whole Nation.

Secondly, Another National Sin, which keeps Good Things from us, is
Oppression, Deceit, Treachery, and Unjust Dealing, and indeed there is so much
of these sins reigns in this our Nation, that it is to be feared that
Oppression, Treachery and Deceit, will at last be the utter Ruin of this
Nation: Behold how God complains of his Vineyard, the Land of Israel, Isa. 5.7.
He looked for Righteousness, and behold Oppression; for Judgment, and behold a
cry: Oh! may not the Lord justly complain the like of this Nation? that he
looked for Righteousness, Justice, and Equity to be in it; and there is nothing
in it but Oppression, Unjustness, and Deceit. The poor and needy beg at the
Rich Men's doors for Relief, but the most had rather consume pounds upon their
Lust, than to spare one half shilling for the Relief of the Needy. And many
Farmers there are in the Nation, Oh! how do they wish for a Dearth, and watch
for an opportunity to raise the price of their Corn, and thereby oppress, and
grind the faces of the poor and needy, that they might hoard of Riches unto
themselves, and the poor Laborours, they must be oppressed of their wages;
there are many poor Laborers now a days are fain to toil themselves early and
late to get a poor maintenance for themselves and their Families, and in the
mean time those that hire them, study how to abate them in their wages. And
likewise what a deal of Oppression and Deceit there is amongst us in buying and
selling, the Buyer he will Oppress the Seller by debasing his wares, and will
not give so much as he knows they are worth; and the Seller he will endeavor
to oppress the Buyer by exalting his Ware above the worth, and will tell the
Buyer that his Wares cost him more than they really did; and the Buyer cries
out, it is naught, it is naught; and when he is gone away, then he boasts,
Pro. 20.14. I verily think that there never was so much Oppression, so much
Deceit as there is now in these days, deceitful wares, deceitful weights,
deceitful measures, deceitful money, and deceitful doings, that sure it is for
our Oppression, Injustice, Treachery and Deceit, that the Lord withholds good
things from us.

Thirdly, Another National Sin is Drunkenness, and I think never did this sin
so much abound in this Nation as it does now in these our days, many men
complain that every thing is dear, and that they can hardly get money for their
necessary use, and grutch to spare a penny for a deed of Charity, and yet can
find shillings to consume in an Ale house; many times I have been at places
where there has been drinking, playing, singing, and ranting almost a whole
night together, now there is a woe pronounced against such, Isa. 5.22. Woe to
them that are mighly to drink Wine, and Mon of strength to mingle strong drink.
O how sad it in to see how Drunkenness abounds in every City, in every Town and
Street in this Nation, O how much precious time is wasted away in Drunkenness,
Voluptiousness, and the works of the Flesh, surely these sins of Drunkenness,
Volupteousness, Fornication, Uncleanness, and all other Works of the Flesh, are
a means to withold all good things from us.

Fourthly, Another National Sin is neglect of Family Dutys, most that are
Governors of Familys scarce so much as pray in their Familys once a Week, they
are careful to call upon their Servants to do their work, but never mind them
of the concern of their immortal souls. There is a severe threatening goes
against such, Jer. 10.21. That the Lord will pour out his fury upon the
Heathens that know him not, and upon the Nations that call not an his Name. But
I have wrought something of this in my book of Joshuas Resolution to serve the
Lord, therefore I will say no more of it here.

Fifthly, Another National Sin is Unfruitfulness under the means of grace,
though they have Reproof upon Reproof, Sabbath upon Sabbath, Line upon Line,
Preceipt upon Preceipt; though they enjoy Sermon Opportunitys, Sacrament
Opportunitys, Praying Opportunitys, yet for the generality of them they are
never the better, they go on in a Customary Road of Dutys, but take no care to
reform their hearts and lives; now we that are unfruitful under all means of
grace, what can we expect, but that the Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from
us, and given to a Nation, bringing forth the fruit thereof. And to be cu^ down
by the A^ of Gods judgments, because we are but cumbers of the ground, Luke 13.

Sixthly, Another National sin, that I shall here mention, is Pride, especially
pride in Apparel, and sure never did this sin reign so much both in City and
Country, as it does in our days, and if England be destroyed, is is thought
that pride will be a great cause of its Ruin; for how do our Ladys and great
Ones invent new fashions, some must go with powdered hair, some with spotted
faces, and some again with high heads, so that they appear more like Moorish
Dancers than like sober devout Christians. But some will be ready to say that
pride lies not in the dress, but in the heart. To this I answer, that as meat
may be known whether it be sweet or sower by the taste, even so pride in the
heart does often discover it self by the outward gestures of the body. O let
the great ones of this Land have a care that they do not lie under that
threatening denounced against proud persons, Isa. 3. from ver. 16. to the end,
That because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
weeks, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet,
therefore in that day the Lord will take away their bravery, their chains,
brasless and mufflers; their Rings and changable suits of Apparel, their
mantles, wimples, and crisping pins, their glasses, fine linen hoods and
vails, etc. But this is not all, there is a worser judgment threatened in the
two last verses: Their Men shall fall by the sword, and their mighty Men in
War, etc. O that the Inhabitants of this nation would break off this sin by
Repentance, least the like Judgment should speedily fall upon them, for sure
pride is a great sin that hinders good things from us.

Seventhly, and lastly, I will name but one National Sin more that withholds
good things from us, and that is Sabbath-breaking, and this is a sin that
reigns very much in this land, tho 'there has been good and wholesome Laws, set
out by Act of Parliament, against the common profanation of the Lord's day,
yet I think the generality of people now a days do but little regard either the
laws of God or Man, and a great many there be, tho they dare not work at their
callings on the Lords day, yet they will besure to choose that day above all the
rest, to go and visit their friends, and to make merry amongst their sinful
Companions, and sometimes ride abroad about unnecessary ^u^iness, because they
cannot spare time on other days. O how careful are a great many to pise early
on the week days, and work later than ordinarily on Saturday nights, thinking
that when the ^ords day comes then they may that morning rest themselves in
their beds, never considering to what end that day was given them, nor what is
to be done on that day, and when the King and Parliament was graciously pleased
to set a part days of fasting and humiliation for the sins of the nation, that
by fasting and praying God might avert and remove those judgments that bang
over our heads, yet these days were but little minded by a great many, for when
a fast day came, they could not spare time from their worldly employments to
attend on God in public, and many others though they do go to church, as soon as
public exercise is ended away they go to the Alehouse to drinking; thus they
seem to keep a fast, but it is but a mock fast, instead of keeping that day in
offering up unto God an humble and contrite heart-for their sins, and the sins
of the nation, and importuning of God, by their earnest prayers, to remove
those Judgments which hang over their heads; instead of that they must go to
satisfying of their lust. Ah sinful people, ah nation laden with iniquity, will
you thus continue to provoke the Lord at all times, will not the Lord be
avenged on such doings as these? but praised be the Lord, that there are many
in this nation, that do keep a sincere fast unto the Lord, and by their fervent
and hearty prayers stand in the gap, and stop God s Judgments from falling upon
this sinful nation, otherwise, Woe had it been to us long before this time.
Beioved people you that are the inhabitants of this land, if our gracious King
and Governors will be pleased to set a part at any time another day of
humiliation, for the Lords sake let me prevail with you to spend that oue day
wholly in exainining your hearts and lives, in confessing, and mourning for
your sins, and for the sins of the nation, and resolving to break off your sins
by repentance, as the people of N^nive did that God may yet turn away from the
sierceness of his wrath that we perish not.

A word or two of Application and I have done.

Beloved Friends, you have seen here what those sins are that withold good
things from us, and not only so, but pulls down most heavy judgments upon our
heads, and I think these sins never so much abounded in this nation as they do
now, never was there so much swearing, lying, oppression, cheating, pride,
drunkenness, and Sabbath-breaking, as there reigns among us now in these days.
Beloved Friends for the Lords sake, let us set upon the reforming of these
sins, and break them off by a timely repentance, I say for the Lords sake, who
is still patient, and is loath to strike, but forbears to the very utmost, if
it may be that we will yet turn to him; methinks the Lord at this day is
bemoaning England, as once before I told you he bemoaned Ephraim: How shall I
give thee up England? how shall I deliver thee up into the hands of thy Enemies?
O that thou would once reform and amend, that my wrath may not yet break
forth against thee. Consider how the Lord has timely given us warning by his
word, by signs and by his servants, and still he forbears to strike, and shall
not we yet take warning until destruction comes at our backs? O for the Lords
sake reform and amend, if not for the Lords sake, yet let us do it for our own
sakes, nay for the nations sake; what pity is it that we should by our sins
pull down vengeance upon the whole nation; nay lastly, Friends, let us all be
prevailed with to break off our sins by repentance, and amend our lives for the
sake of William our King and Governor. A few years ago, when we were even at
the brink of utter ruin and destruction, and he out of tender love to these
nations, was graciously pleased to leave his habitation (...) Holland, and did
venture through many difficultys and l^wgers, and did hazard his own life that he
might ^ome to deliver us from bondage and slavery, and ^et must we take this
love and good will so unkindly, and so unthankfully, so as to do what in us
lies by our sins and iniquities to pull down Gods judgments upon his head and
the whole nation besides, O what a dreadful thing this is to consider of.
Friends, we have provoked God so much by our sins, that God has threatened
several times to remove him from us; how often has he been very near to have
been shot, and yet for our sakes he preserved him, and praised be his name
still preserves and shields him from the hands of his enemies. It was but a
little before the Queens death that there was a day of thanksgiving appointed
for the Kings return home, which was on the Sabbath Day, but O how sad it was
to behold how the Lord's day was profaned, in many Towns and Citys, by Ringing,
shouting, and making of bonfires; but alas! how soon was this our mirth and
jollitry turned into mourning; and truly friends, I cannot out look upon the
death of our gracious Queen, which happened soon after, no other wise than as
part of Gods just Judgments to this nation, as for their many other
provocations, so-particularly for that one abuse of the Lord's day, and yet
people will take no warning, but run on still in the same profanation of the
Lord's day: beloved Friends, and inhabitants of this nation, we have, if I may
so speak, but one string to our how, and if the Lord should be provoked by our
sins, by any means, to remove from us our gracious King, what can we look for
then but utter Ruin and Destruction: my Friends, if ever the King and
Parliament should appoint at any time another day of thanksgiving, he exhorted
to spend it in public prayers and praises, and the rest of the day spend both
in meditating, and also in discoursing one another concerning God's wonderful
works, his mercies, and miraculous deliverances in all Ages of the world,
particularly of our Redemption by Christ, and of God's mercys to this nation.
And toward the end of the day, let it be concluded in reading in your familys,
in expounding, in singing Psalms, in praying and praises; now a day thus spent,
would resemble the life of the Saints in Heaven. If, this day of thanksgiving
be on the Lord's day, for the Lord's sake do not profane it by drinking,
ringing, shouting, and bonnring, as the custom has been, and if our Rulers
would be pleased to set a part a day in the week time, which I think most
convenient, pray let it not be spent in such vanity and sooleries, but in
spiritual exercises, and what money you intend to bestow in drinking and
ringing, and faggots, you intend to give to be consumed in bonfires, be
exhorted to offer up these as a thanksgiving offering to God, by beslowing them
upon the poor and needy, to feed and warm them; with such sacrifice God will be
well pleased, such a thanks offering as this, will ascend up as a sweet savor
unto God, whereby God's wrath will be pacified, and will remove his Judgments
from us, and delight to do us good. To conclude, let us be exhorted to break
off our ^ins by repentance, and to amend our lives, and then God will bless and
prosper our King, and the whole nation, and deliver us from all our Enemies,
then we shall yet see Happy Days, and be blessed with a lasting Peace and Plenty:
Which the Lord of his Insinite Mercy grant, Amen.


