The speech and CONFESSION OF William Lord Russel who was EXECUTED FOR
High Treason against his Majesty, and conspiring the Death of his Royal
Highness James Duke of York. Saturday the 21th of this instant July the Lord
Russel was beheaded in Lincolns-Jnn-Feilds.
THe Report and True account, of the late Horrid and Damnable Plot contrived
against our most Gracious Sovereign, and his Royal Brother James Duke of York.
I doubt not but is by this time spread throughout the Nation to the amazement
of many, and the wonder of all who have but the least ^incture of Loyalty lodge
in the Breast of of obedient Subjects, but that William Lord Russel, once
thought a Pattern of Gentility, should be Treacherous, is as wonderful to some,
as lamented by many, but not to digress from my intended purpose. Let me
acquaint you with the Gradual Proceedings at the last Sessions, where my Lord
after a fair Trial Received his Sentence of Condemnation. Great Endeavors were
used for his Remission, but the Fact wherewith he was charged, savoured so much
of Disloyalty, and Conspiracy of Treasonable Contrivances, that sueing for
pardon was as insignificant, as his Crime Abominable: but after all Endeavors
used to keep him from the Fatal Stroke, order was given for Erecting a Scaffold
in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, there to be the last Stage he should tread, and become
an Example to all persons who so unadvisedly, will entangle themselves into
such a Labyrinth of Confusion.

My Lord in the time of his Confinement seemed to be much concerned, for his
(then) present State, deploring his sad condition, and much like a Christian,
repenting his ill undertaken enterprise. Never was man more applauded for
Generosity to the poor, for Tenderness to all persons in distress, and ten
thousand pitties, it is that a person of such Rare Qualifications, should by
any indirect means be so wrought upon, as to be concerned, in such a matchless
conspiracy* But Heaven that always frowns upon such Deeds of Darkness, will by
some means or other, bring to light the accursed Stratagems of premeditated
Murder.

But having received an unchangeable Sentence of suffering for his great Crime,
he like a Christian, prepared for his sudden change, and I doubt not but his
true penitencie, for his rash undertaking may prove advantagous to his immortal
Soul: and that though he dies as a Malefactor here, yet through the Mercys of
Jesus Christ, he may live eternally in the World to come.

But the day of his Execution being come, and on Saturday July 21 1083. He was
conveyed to the place of Execution, which was appointed in Lincolns-Inn-Fields,
(...) his (...) Habitation, being accompained with thousands of wondering Eyes,
and aching Hearts.

He mounted the Stage, where by his amazed looks, it was easily to guess the
sorrow of his afflicted heart, while his poor Lady, and the rest of his nearest
Relations, were ready to sink under the burden of their Calamity, but as he
was a Gentleman, whose Education was inferior to but a few, so he deported
himself, that he begat pity in the hearts of the Spectators, all pitying his
deserved punishment, and lamenting his sad Fate Thus Traversing the Fatal
Stage, he at last made a worthy Oration acknowledging his crime, for which he
was justly condemned, advising all to be Loyal and True, and that his untimely
end might be a warning to all others, never by hopes of future advantage to
lodge the least of disloyalty in the most secret Closets of their Hearts; since
Heaven has forbid the shedding of Innocent Blood, which without doubt, drop
for drop must be accounted for, with watery Eyes. Thousands beheld this dying
Gentleman, and none so obdure as not to grieve at his unfortunate overthrow.

But after some speech made by him, having the good admonitions of some
Devines, which he kindly received, he prepared himself for the block, and with
unwilling willingness submitted to the severity of the Law, while aching heart
could grant him no redress, but with volums of sighs, sent forth palpable
signals of their unexpressable sorrow.

But to come to a conclusion. After he had delivered himself Verbally to the
Auditory, and directed his prayers to the creator of all things, he took veiw
of the block and having fitted himself for the stroke, he laid down his head,
and paid dearly for his conspiracy, the executioner doing his business by
severing his head from his body at 2 or 3 Strokes

God grant that this his death may be a warning to all, that they may never
become guilty of such Diabolical conspiracies, since the world can not but
admire the insolency of such offenders who Sayter like seek the destruction of
their lawful Prince.

What incouragment can Traitors have, to undertake such dangerous attempts, or
what can they purpose to themselves, since murder is absolutely forbid by the
command of the Almighty But to Murder a King, is without doubt a crime so
detestable in the common sense of the very Vulgar that nothing is sufficient to
expiate its abominations.

In what a flourishing condition might England be, could they but be unaonimous
among themselves and loyal to their Prince, till then we cannot expect but
continual troubles and an end thereof shall be the unfeigned prayer of your
nameless Friend

LONDON Printed for R. V. 1683.


