A Looking-glass for England:

Wherein is shown God's Mercies and Judgments on this sinful Nation; with an
earnest Invitation to poor Sinners to Repentance: wherein is set forth the
great folly and madness of forsaking Christ their Redeemer, and neglecting the
care of their immortal Souls, and setting their Cares upon the Vanities of this
World; with some serious Persuasions for Sinners to forsake Sin, and to close
with Christ Jesus, that they may avoid God's Wrath that will be poured forth
against them at the last Day; with some Hints of the present Judgments that now
hangs over our Heads, which will suddenly fall on us, if we neglect to return
our Thanks to Almighty God for our late Deliverances, and the speedy reforming
of our Lives.

To which is added, The great Joy and Comfort of the Godly that have harkened
to the voice of the Lord, and have Fasted and Prayed to God for his Blessings,
and given Thanks for all Mercies received.

By Robert Russel, in Sussex,

The Childred of Issachar, which were men that had understanding of the times,

1 Chronicles. 12.32. Behold, now is the accepted time, etc.

2 Cor. 6.2. London: Printed for the Author, and sold by J. Blare, at the Sign
of the Looking-glass, on London Bridge.

All the small Books of this Author Bound together, Price 1 s.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR ENGLAND, etc.
Jeremiah V. XXV. Your Iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins
have witholden good things from you.


MY last Book I made which is intitul'd, A Warning to England; this Book has
been so well excepted of, that I have been persuaded by some of my Friends to
make an Addition to it, which accordingly I am about to do, and through the
Assistance of God, I will make a short Addition, and add a Second Part to
England's Warning; considering how the Judgments of God are abroad still among
us, how near we have been of late to Ruin and Destruction, how our Enemies of
late has been plotting the Destruction of our gracious King and His Nobles, and
with them the whole Nation, and how wonderfully God has delivered us, and
brought to light all their wicked Plots and Contrivances, and to consider how
little Reformation there is yet wrought amongst us, and how few mind the hand
of God's Providence herein; these Considerations has moved me to make an
Addition to my former Works, and that from the same Subject which my last Book
run upon: Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have
withholden good things from you. The Doctrine which I have observed from these
Words, has been this: That it is the Sins of a People or Nation that keeps back
Mercy, and hinders good Things from coming upon it; from whence I showed you,

First, What are those good Things that Sin does withhold from a People or
Nation, and they are, First, Spiritual good Things. Secondly, Temporal good
Things. Thirdly, Natural good Things.


Secondly, I showed you what are those Sins that withholds good Things from us,
and amongst the many Sins which the Inhabitance of this Nation are guilty of, I
named these few which are the chief, as Cursing, Swearing, Oppression, Deceit,
Treachery and unjust Dealing, Pride, Drunkenness and neglect of Family Duties,
and the Unfruitfulness under the means of Grace, together with a sad profaning
of the Lord's Day, and not regarding those days of Fasting and Humiliation,
which our King and Govern^rs have been pleased to set apart, for us to join
together in wrasling with God, by our Prayers and Humiliations, that God might
remove his Judgments from us, and turn away from the fierceness of his Wrath
that we perish not. These things I have sufficiently wrought about, and made
some little Application of it, and exhorted us all to repent, amend, and reform
our Ways and Doings for the Lord's, and for the King and Nation's sake, that
the Lord do not break forth in Wrath against us. Now what I have to write more
in addition to the former Book, shall be by making some further Application,
and there are only these two particular Uses that I shall make of it: First, Of
Reproof. Secondly, Of Exhortation.


First, I shall speak by way of Reproof, these may justly come under Reproof,
who slight or profane those Days of Humiliation and of Thanksgiving which are
published by Authority; our Governers have been graciously pleased to set apart
Days of Humiliation, that by our earnest Prayers, and humbling of ourselves, we
might stand in the gap and stop God's Wrath from coming forth against us, and
indeed it is a very great Mercy that it has pleased Almighty God to put it into
the Hearts of our King and Rulers to set apart Days of Fasting and Humiliation,
whereby we might beseech God to remove his Judgments from us; but, alas! how is
this great Mercy slighted and contemned, especially among the poorer sort? many
poor People I myself have seen on a Fasting-day in the Fields at work, and if
they are told of it, they will say, Why it is not Sunday, and I have a Family
to maintain, they must have Bread to eat, and I hope I may pray to God with as
good a Heart, that he might make the King succesful in his undertaking, that
God would Bless and Protect him, and deliver us from our Enemies; I hope I may
do it with as good a Heart at my Work, and God will except it as well as if I
went to join with others in public; such Replies as these some will make,
just like unto those who were invited to the great Gospel-Feast, Luke 14.18,
19, 20. Every one had his Excuse to make, one had bought a piece of Ground, and
I must go and see that, another had bought a yoke of Oxen and he must prove
them, and another had Married a Wife and therefore he could not come; now see
how the Lord was wrath against them, ver. 24. he resolved that none of those
which were bidden should taste of his Supper; so Friends it may be with you, if
you slight and contemn that great Good and precious Mercy, that God has made
our Rulers Instruments of setting apart Days of Fasting and Humiliation, as a
means that God may be pleased with to remove his Judgments from us; I say if
you thus slight and contemn this great Good, and will plead Poverty and
Necessity, and will not spare so much time as to join with the Assembly of
God's People, and spend one Day with them in pleading with the Lord in the
behalf of this sinful Nation; you must not expect that God should hide you
under the shadow of his Wings in times of calamity; and if it please God to
bless this Nation with a lasting Peace and Plenty, which the Lord grant, yet in
respect of your own particular cases, the Lord may in his Wrath justly Swear
against you, that you shall never be made Partakers of those Blessings and
Benefits, which he is pleased to bestow upon the Nation, nor yet to partake of
those eternal Blessings which he has prepared for his true Worshippers, and
Followers in the World to come, and for ever shat out of his comfortable and
blessed presence, into that place of Darkness where is weeping and gnashing of
Teeth.

Beloved Friends, if when a Fasting-day comes, you do sot a part yourselves
from the World, and from all your worldly Business on that Day, and spend that
one Day in waiting on the Lord in public, and also in private to humble
yourselves, and to plead with the Lord for Mercy both to youselves and the
Nation: I will asure you that you shall be no loser by it, but rather a great
gainer, for God will prosper your Labor the better on other days, and will
bless you in all your Undertakings; God has past his Word for it, that there
shall be no Lake to such that fear him, that serve and worship him, Psa.
34.9.10. and though the Lions do want and suffer Hunger, yet they that seek the
Lord shall not want any good thing; and godliness has the Promise of the Life
that now is, as well as of that to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. and yet will you mistrust
God's Promise; but if you will not on a public Fasting-day, or
Thanksgiving-day, set apart yourselves from the World and your worldly Affairs,
to join with the Congregation of God's People; you cannot expect God should
prosper your Labor on other Days, and then you will have Losses, Crosses,
Vexations and Disappointments, and if you have you must thank yourselves for
it, because you grudge to give any part of your time to God, when you are
called to it by Authority, though it be for your own and the Nation's Good.

Beloved Friends, our King and Rulers will be pleased to set apart Days of
Humiliation and Fasting this Summer, (as I hope they will, for I think never
was there more need then now) for the Lord's sake don't slight and contemn them
lest God should slight and contemn you in times of Judgment and Calamity.
Friends, many of you, when there comes any Holyday-time, as Christmas, and
Easter, many of you then can spare time to indulge your Flesh, and to enjoy
your selves, and yet cannot spare a Day to worship God, and to seek to him for
Mercy for yourselves and the Nation, when your called off from your Employments
to do it by Authority: O! what cause have you to lay Shame upon your selves for
so doing, that you should prefer your own Prosit, nay, your own Pleasure before
the Honor of God, and the Public Good? Friends, as for Saints Days and for
Christmass-holydays, Easter-holydays, and Whitsund holydays, only Christmas
Day excepted, as for all other Holydays and Saints Days, if you have a mind to
improve your time to the best advantage for the getting a Livelihood in this
World, why then follow your worldly Employments then and welcome, but for the
Lord's sake, and for your own sakes, and for the sake of the Nation, don't be so
eager after the World as to slight God's Mercies, and to grutch to keep holy to
God such Days, as our King and Governors are pleased to sot apart, for Days of
Fasting, Humiliation and Thanksgiving: O be not such a Dispiser of God's Laws,
nor such a Rebeler against the King and Country; but I have heard some People
say on a Fast Day, that they had thought to have gone to Church and to have
joined in the public Congregation, but that they saw so many go to Work, and
some to that have not so much need to Work as them^^l^es, and therefore they
think that they may safely. Work too, and do as they do. This I have heard some
say or to the like effect; why Friends this is just the course of the Country,
some will go to the Alehouse to be drunk, because they see others go to the
Alehouse; some will take liberty to live loose, lacivious, debauched Lives
because they see others do the like; many will walk the broad way to Hell and
Destruction, because they see Multitudes besides them walk in that broad way,
just like unto a flock of Sheep, because one leaps into the River and is
drownded, therefore all the rest will follow after; but Friends it is our duty
to walk by Rule and by Example; if we see many others sin against God, rebel
against their Prince, and transgress the good and sacred Laws of the Nation,
does this make that we do so too? My Friends, if we will do as others do, we
must look in time of Desolation and Calamity to speed as they speed. And now,
my Friends, if our gracious King and Rulers will be pleased to set apart Days
of Fasting and Humiliation this Summer, let us thankfully except of them, and
observe them to those precious ends for which they are set apart: O for shame,
for shame be not in the Fields, or in the Woods, or in the Barns, or in your
Shops at work, when you should be at Church among the Congregation of God's
People a confessing and bewailing your Sins, and the Sins of the Nation, a
begging pardon for them, a hearing God's Word, and interceeding and pleading at
the Throne of Grace, for Mercy for yourselves, and for the whole Nation; but I
am afraid that there are many that would presume to Work in there Callings on
the Sabbath Days if the Laws of Man did not restrain them, and if so, no wonder
then if they so little regard those days of Humiliation appointed by Authority:
But in the second place, there are yet another sort that must come under
reproof, that is some that are not of the poorer sort; but those that are rich
Men and Farmers though they observe to keep a Fast Day themselves when it
comes, yet herein they are very much to be blamed, in that they will let their
poor Day-labourers alone, and will give them their liberty to do what they
please, they may work or not, which thou please, but as for themselves they go
to Church, and will cause their Servants both Men and Maidens to go to Church
with them. Now, my Friends, in doing this, so far you do well, but then you
ought to compel your Day-labourers to go to Church with you and not give them
leave to Work if they will, but compel them to go along with you to Church, and
to join with you in public, to plead with you at the throne of Grace, for
public Mercies and Deliverances. Friends, let me prevail with you to compel
not only your Servants but also your Laborers to go with you to the throne of
Grace, in public as ever you would desire that they partake of public Mercies
with youselves, and as you desire they should be in times of Calamity as well
as you.

But then, Thirdly, there are another sort may justly come under Reproof, that
is, there are some that when a Fast Day comes, they will go to Church and join
themselves in public Prayers and Exereises, and whilst they are there they
seem very devout in Prayer, and diligent in attending on the Word; and then
afterward the rest of the Day they spend in the Alehouse among their sinful
Companions, and perhaps at night they come home more then half Drunk from the
Alehouse, and so they sin to keep a Fast, but it is but a mook Fast, and so
instead of standing in the Gap to stop God's Judgments from coming upon
themselves and the Nation, they by their hypocricy and dissimulation and wicked
doings, provoke God to hasten his Judgments upon them, and these sort of People
are as bad or worse then those that Work all day and keep no Fast at all; these
Men are like unto those the Peophet Amos complains of, Amos 6.6. That drink
wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not
grieved for the affliction of Joseph. Thus many Men will drink and sing, and
indolge the Flesh, but don't consider what a distressed and afflicted condition
poor England is in: but perhaps some may be ready to say, How shall we do to
keep a true and excepted Fast to the Lord. I answer A true Fast does not
consist in fasting from corporal Food, but it consists chiefly in mourning
for Sin, in crucising and mortifying Sin and fleshly Lust, and turning from it
and forsaking it; but if you desire indeed to keep a true and acceptable Fast,
I shall be willing to give you di ections how to do it in a few word; when a
public Fast Day comes, resolve with yourselves to set apart yourselves from
the World, for that Day as on a Sabbath Day, and in the morning, as soon as you
awake, consider with yourselves what a worthy Work you are a going about that
Day, and lift up your heart to God in Prayer, that he would enable you to go
through with it, and this done, then look back upon your Life past, search and
examine diligently your Hearts and Lives to find out your Sins, together with
the time, place, circumstances and manner how they were committed, and then
spread them all before the Lord by a hearty and sincere Confession, search
diligently to find out all your hypocracy and rottenness of Heart, all your
beloved and flesh-pleasing Sins, and then labor to bring them close to your
Consicience, and then confess them with as much contrition and brokenness of
Heart as you can, and then be earnest with God at the throne of Grace, that he
would give you a full discharge, that he would pardon them and wash them away
in the Blood of Christ, and then likewise be earnest with the Lord for strength
and power to overcome them, and then make a firm resolution with yourselves, in
the strength of Christ to forsake them and to endeavor to lead a new Life, and
this Work, if done thoroughly, will take up your Morning time, and then when
this is done, go to Church amongst God's People in public, in confessing and
bewailing your Sins, and the Sins of the Nation, and pleading with them at the
Throne of Grace, that God would look in mercy upon this sinful Nation, and that
he would remove his Judgments from us, and also that God would prosper the King
in his Undertaking, and shield and defend him from all Plots and Conspiracies
of his blood-thirsty Enemies; and then when public Exercise is ended, let not
the evening of the Day be spent in vain Pleasures and sinful Delights, but
after you come home to refresh your Bodies with the good things of this Life,
for until that time it is convenient, if you can bear it, to fast from Food all
the Day besides, until you come home from public Exercices, so that you be not
thereby disenabled to perform the Work of the Day, that by fasting you might
afflict your Bodies as well as your Souls; but however, after public Exercises
is ended, and when you come home and recruited yourselyes with Food, let not
the evening of the Day be spent vainly and idly, but go every one in private,
and those pour out your Souls to God, and wrestle with him for pardoning and
renewing Grace and Mercy to your own Souls, and for public Mercies to this
Nation, and let the rest of the Evening be spent in Reading, Prayer, and such
holy Exercises. And now let me speak a word or two to the Rich, and such as are
blessed with the good things of this Life, I desire you not to think that you
have done enough when you have distributed something to the Poor in a way of
Collection amongst the Congregation, but let me beseech every one of you that
daily employ poor Laborers, that when public Exercises are ended, that you
would invite them home to your Houses, and also their Wives and Children, and
others of your poor Neighbors that live near you; be persuaded to invite them
home to your Houses, set them at your Tables, and cause them to partake with
you of those bodily Refreshments as God in his Mercy has given unto you, and
then you will find that you will be no looser, for this is the way to bring a
Blessing upon your Heads and upon your Stores, this is to keep unto the Lord a
true Fast indeed, this is that Fast which the Lord has chosen, as the Lord
spoke by the Prophit, Isa. 58.4, 5, 6, 7. It is not to take our own pleasure,
and to smite with the fist of wickedness. But faith the Lord, This is the fast
that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the opprissed go (...) and that you break every yoke (...)
It is not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that
are cast out to thy house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and
that thou bide not thyself from thine own flesh? Now this is the Fast which the
Lord will except, and he will reward you abundantly, both in this World and the
World to come; you have a faithful Promise for it in Scripture, Prove. 19.17. He
that has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord; and that which he has
given, will he pay him again.

And now as I have spoken by way of Reproof and Exhortation, to such as
profane Days of public Fasting and Humiliation, so also I must speak or write
a few words by way of Reproof and Exhortation to such as profane Days of
public Thanksgiving for Mercies and Deliverances; but you may say, How are
Days of public Thanksgiving profaned: Now to answer this Objection, It is a
general course amongst us here in England, that when there is a Day of
Thanksgiving appointed by Authority, to return Prayers and Thanks to God for
public Deliverance or public Preservation; it is, I say, a general custom
among us, especially in Cities and great Towns, after public Exercise is
ended, to profane the Day by Drinking, Ringing, Shooting and making of
Burnfires, and if a Day of Thanksgiving be appointed to be on a Sabbath Day, it
is all one with most People, they regard no more God's own Day than they do any
other Day in the Week: and now I must take occasion to write something against
a great Evil that has of late years been done in the Land, whether it be
occasioned by the Bishops, or whoever they be that are the occasion of it. I
cannot but think it to be a very great Evil, and therefore I must venture to
write something against it, and it is this, that after a delivering or
preserving Mercy vouchsafe to the King and Kingdom, and our Rulers has been
pleased to appoint a Day of public Thanksgiving, to return Praise to Almighty
God for his Mercies: this Day of Thansgiving of late Years has been cellebrated
on the Lord's Day: Now I take this to be a great Evil provoking to God, and
that in these two respects,

First, Because, in so doing, we change God's Institution, for the Sabbath was
instituted and ordained by God to be a Day of Thanksgiving upon a higher
Account, and we are required to spend it in Prayers and Thanksgiving for a
greater deliverance than any temporal deliverance, even our deliverance from
Sin, Hell, and Damnation, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: now for us to
make use of the Lord's own Day to return Thanks and Praise only for a
Temporal-deliverance, this is to change God's Institution, and to dishonor his
own Day by using of it to a lower end than God instituted it for, sure there
are Days enough in the Week for us to Praise God for National-deliverance; but
ptay mistake me not, I grant that we ought to praise Almighty God on the
Sabbath Days, and on the Weekdays, and at all times for National-mercy; but
that which I write against is the setting of the Lord's Day apart, and
instituting of it to be a Day of public Thanksgiving whith was instituted by
God for a more high and nobler end. Friends, consider that the Sabhath is the
Lord's Day, and if we cannot afford to set apart a Day in the Week, one of our
own Days, to render Thanks and Prayers to God for national Mercies, we show
ourselves to be ill diserving of those Mercies and Deliverances which God has
bestowed upon us, and may justly expect him to leave us, and withdraw himself
from us.

Secondly, For us to institute the Lord's Day to be a Day of public
Thanksgiving is a great Evil, also upon this Account, because it occasions a
most dreadful prosanation of the Lord's Day, by Drinking, Ringing and making of
Burnfires, this is a vain way of rejoicing at any time, but it is much ^^re
abominable on the Lord's Day, and when a public Thansgiving is appointed on a
week Day, how many there be that go to Church to hear God's Word, and to praise
him for the first part of the Day, and then when public Exercises is ended,
away they go to Ringing, and then to the Alehouse to Drinking, and the Boys
they must run from House to House begging for for Faggots to make a Burnfires,
when as many poor People are ready to ^arve so a cold Winter because they
cannot get wood to burn, and I verily think that there is as many Faggots
wasted away on a public Thanksgiving-day, in England, as would suffice many
hundreds of poor People for a whole Winter, and then there must be Shooting and
slinging of Squibs and Firebrarnds one at another, and many times there is some
mischief done to one another before they have done. Pray Friends consider what
a provoking thing this must needs be, for People thus to play the Hypocrite
with God, they will go to Church on a shanksgiving-day in the forenoon to bless
and praise God for his Mercies, and then in the afternoon they will abuse him
to his face with his own Mercies; this is just as if a Friend of yours should
do you some great Kindness, and then you to gratify him for his Kindness,
should pretend to give him many hearty Thanks, and use many kind Speeches to
him, and then as soon as you have done, take a lump of dirt and sling in his
face. Why Friends, thus many of you deal which God in your way of giving of him
thank, for your Mercies and Deliverances, the Apostle tells us, Rom 14. (...)
that regards the day, regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not the
day, to the Lord he does not regard it: So he that observes a Day of
Thanksgiving to the Lord, he spends it in holy Meditation, Hearing and Reading,
Prayer and Praises, and singing of Psalms; but he that observes a Day of
Thanksgiving only to Drink and Sing, and Rlog, and make Burnfires, he does not
observe it to the Lord, but to his Lust, and the Apostle bids-us rejoice in the
Lord, Pill. 4.4. but to rejoice by Drinking, Singing, and making of Burnfires,
this is not to rejoice in the Lord, but in your flesh-pleasing Lust. Beloved
Friends, when a Day of public Thanksgiving comes to be prevailed with, to
spend the whole Day both in public exercises of Religion, in Meditation,
Prayer and Praises, and singing of Psalms, and after public Exercises are
ended, if it be on a Weekday, and you have a desire to ring a peal in token of
joy, for the the safe deliverance from your Enemies, you may do it so it be in
a civil sober way, without going to the Alehouse to drinking; pray keep
yourselves from the Alehouse at such a time as that is; but besides all this,
whatever you do, pray don't let no more Bunrfires be made in England, there is
no way of rejoicing can be worse than to rejoice by Fire; this is the Papist
way of rejoicing, they triumph and rejoice by Burnfires, and I know you profess
yourselves to hate Popery; and if you do, why do you imitate the Papist so much
as to follow their Actions?

Beloved Friends, If you have such a delight to make Bunrfires, it may please
God to give your Enemies the upper-hand, and then they will make you Burnfires,
even such Burnfires as they made for the Protestants in the Days of Queen Mary;
and now in the close of all, let me write a few words to the Rich, and to such
as use to give Fagots toward making of Burnfires, let me prevail with you,
that when public Exercises is done on a Thanksgiving-day, that you would
invite all your Neighbors that are poor and needy home to your Houses to
dinner with you, and spend the afternoon with them, in discourse about the
Sermon you heard, and of God's miraculous deliverance of his People in ancient
Times, and spend some time in Reading and Praying with them, and then when they
are a returning to their homes, so many Faggots as you use to give toward
making of Burnfires, be persuaded to bestow upon them, to carry home with them,
to warm and comfort them in a cold Winter, and do not let them be burn^ and
consumed in waste, in Burnfires, to (...) no body no good, but to please young
Peoples foolish fancy, and Wood is so dear that many poor People are like to
starve in a cold Winter, because they cannot get Wood to Burn: therefore let me
desire you to bestow your Faggots upon those who are poor and needy to warm and
comfort them, and in so doing you will offer up such a Thanks-offering to the
Lord, as will ascend up a sweet Savor unto him, whereby he will turn to us in
Mercy, and will bless this Nation, and us all with a lasting Peace and
Happiness: Now consider on these things, and the Lord give you Understanding.

FINIS.

