A SERMON Preached at St. Mary-Le-Bow, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of
Manners, June 28. 1697.

By JOHN RVSSELL, Rector of St. John of Wappin.

LONDON, Printed by J. Darby, for R. Mount at the Postern on Tower Hill. 1697.

TO THE READER.
HE that will look over the Histories of the most famous Kingdoms and
Governments of the World, will find that they have been raised and carried on
to their most exalted Heights, (although estranged to the Knowledge and Worship of
the True God) by the Rules and Practices of Moral Virtues: And that when the
Babylonian, the Persian, the Grecian and Roman Monarchies fell to decay, it was
Luxury and Vice that opened the Door to let in that Ruin which transplanted the
Scepter from one Kingdom to another People.

For as long as they kept to their Ancient Virtue, which laid the Foundation,
and also built up the Edifice of their Strength and Grandeur; they maintained
their Power, they continued their Empire: but as soon as they grew loose and
vicious, when Bribery and Corruption, Softness and Flattery seized upon the
Court, and Debauchery and Fraud, and contempt of Religion (although a false one)
had infected the People, they quickly grew ripe for those Judgments which swept
them into that Pit of Destruction, which their Immoralities had been digging as
the Grave of their dying Glory and Greatness.

And tho I do not affirm that Dominion is founded on Grace; yet I assert, That
all flourishing Kingdoms are established by Virtue: And that what People soever
depart from that, they cut down the Props, and remove the Pillars that support
their own Strength and Felicity. And this is not only historically true, in
respect of the Ages that are past and gone, but actually so in respect of our
selves, and the very Age and Day in which we live: and it is not only so, in
respect of the Nature of Virtue, which gives Men a noble and elevated Mind,
carries them through the greatest Difficulties, and by Justice and Honesty must
necessarily cause the Sun of Prosperity to shine upon them: And on the other
side, in respect of the Nature of Vice, which enervates and softens those that
are its Vassals, takes away their Courage, brings on Fear, and creates those
Jars and Jealousies among a People, which makes 'em divide, and become an easy
Prey to the next bold Invader. I say, Ruin is not only the Consequent of Vice
and Debauchery, in respect of the thing it self; but much more in respect of
God, whose Justice and Holiness cannot allow, that a wicked People should long
be happy or flourish in the enjoyment of those Favors which they have
forfeited by their Impieties.

And to render this applicable to our selves, it is too apparent that we are a
People fallen into a most wretched and degenerate State, extremely debauched
both in Principles and Practices. And notwithstanding God has gone on in a long
course of Mercy toward this Nation, in delivering us; 1st, From Idolatrous
Worship, (I mean that of the Church of Rome) when others are still blinded with
it. 2dly, In saving us from Despotick Tyranny and Arbitrary Power, which has
preyed upon some of our neighboring Countries. 3dly, In rescuing us from our
late Fears and Dangers, (from the sad apprehensions of the breaking in of both,
I mean, Idolatrous Worship, and Arbitrary Power) when we had little hope of
preserving our selves from either. Tho we have enjoyed these Favors, and have
pretended too to be sensible of them; yet we have behaved our selves under
these Deliverances and great Enjoyments, with great Ingratitude, and loud
Provocations; so that we seem by our Deeds, to say with the Jews of old, Jer.
7.10. We are delivered to do all these Abominations. For where is there any
public sense of our preservation to effect a change of life, from Profaneness
to Holiness, to testify we are grateful to our Deliverer? And that we look upon
it as the Hand of Heaven that has saved us from our Fears? Should one enquire
after the Returns of Repentance and Reformation, in respect of the main Body of
our People, I am too sensible they cannot be found or perceived amongst us: But
on the contrary, that we are as lewd, as vile, as vicious as ever; and that in
some Sins we outstrip the Iniquities of our Fathers, in that the Hireling is
oppressed in his Wages, and we sell the Poor for Silver, and the Needy for a pair
of Shoes; we make merchandise one of another, and have no farther any regard to
the Public Interest, than as it is subservient unto our own Private: We have
lost that public Zeal and Affection which every Man ought by Nature to express
to the Land of his Nativity. When I have read some Sayings of the old Prophets,
describing the great Degeneracy of the Jewish State, (in that Age of the World)
I have been affected with melancholy thoughts, that our Condition is but too
near a Copy of that foul Pattern.

But however, if by Melancholy, and the Cries of the Poor, (which are very loud
and clamorous in all our Streets, I am sure, at lest, in those that I daily
walk) I may be mistaken; yet the scandalous Debaucheries, which are too
notorious, and all are sensible of; all, I mean, that are the Friends of Piety
and Virtue; give a just cause to fear that (notwithstanding we whisper to our
selves Peace and Safety) some heavy Judgments from the Justice of Heaven are
yet approaching. And since nothing but Reformation can fit us for Mercy, since
it is not our being Protestants that can screen us from the Fire of Destruction,
if we are reformed only in our Doctrines, but not in our Lives: Therefore it
has, and will be the Eternal Honor and Reward of some among us, whose Names
are written in the fairest Characters in the Book of Life; That God has made
them sensible of our Degeneracy, and has stirred them up to undertake this
great and noble Work of checking the predominant Vices in and about this great
City; Such as profanation of the Lord's Day, the execrable Sin of Cursing and
Swearing; Houses of Lewdness, and notorious Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Whoredom,
and the like; by endeavoring the execution of those good Laws which have
piously been enacted for this End and Purpose.

And this Undertaking, which at first was but like Elijah's Cloud, no bigger
than a Man's hand, has, by the Divine Blessing, so enlarged it self, that there
are now above twenty Societies in and about this Great City, who have dedicated
themselves to this Good Work. And that it might be made the more manifest, to
the terror of evil doers, it has been resolved, that Four Sermons a Year, viz,
One on the Monday next ensuing after the four usual Quarter-Days, should be
preached by some Minister of the Church of England, to show and justify the
Excellency of this Design, and to encourage to a resolution in its execution.

And being requested to perform this Office, and also to make public what I
delivered; I have now performed both, tho I must acknowledge my performance has
been by far too mean to recommend so glorious a Work.

And having thus given an Account of the Occasion of this Discourse; I shall
only add, That after this Design was begun by Members of the Church of England,
(be it spoken to their greatest commendation and praise) many Dissenters did
join with them, and have been very zealous and vigorous in prosecuting this
GREAT END, without the least animosity or jarring about the unhappy difference
that lies between us. May the great and good God in his due time close up our
Breaches, and make us all sensible, that Real Holiness is the only Badg of True
Christianity.

And now, Gentlemen, I come to address my self to you who are Members of those
truly honorable Societies for the Reformation of Manners: It Is a particular
Instance of Divine Love, as well as a Mark of Immortal Honor that the Almighty
has conferred upon you; that he has stirred up that noble Zeal in you, to
endeavor to stop the notorious Profaneness and Wickedness of the Age in which
we live.

It being an Undertaking so just in its Design, so commendable in its End, that
it carries before it in the plainest Characters, That it came down from God;
and as I hope it is a cheerful Instance, notwithstanding our great degeneracy;
that the Almighty has not abandoned us, as altogether incorrigible, to Judgment
and Ruin: So I pray it may not be the last effort of Divine Admonition, trying
if we will by these Methods be reclaimed, and render our selves capable of the
Favors we desire: Or if it be, That it may not be rendered fruitless, either
by a general Contempt cast upon it, and so this holy Fire be quenched by an
overflowing general flood of Impiety; or else by your growing weary, and
cooling in your Zeal, and fainting in your Work, and thereby give occasion to
the Children of Wickedness, not only to triumph over you, but over Religion it
self, and so open a door to those terrible Judgments to seize upon us, which we
have too much cause to fear as the consequence of our Sins. The design of this
Discourse is to prevent the latter; and the Justice, Honor, and Goodness of
your Undertaking having been so well justified by my Reverend Brethren who have
gone before me, and whose Discourses are made public, I thought I could not
insist on a more proper Subject, than to recommend the continuance of your Zeal
in this so good a Work which you have undertaken. And to what has been
delivered in the ensuing Pages on this account, I shall only add, That it had
been much better you had never set about this glorious Work, if you shall at
last fall back and desist from it, since nothing can more amate the spirit of
Piety, or encourage Vice, than your declining and sinking from a Cause which
you have so openly espoused, and by so many Overt-Acts avowed.

I write, Gentlemen, to you conjunctly, and to every particular Member of your
Societies severally, and therefore am not solicitous if any should take an
impious occasion to burlesque the Comparison, or ridicule the Application of
it, taken from so low an employment as that of the Plow; since the plainness
and closeness of the Similitude, as well as the Authority of Him that gave it,
cannot displease any that are not Atheists, or that contemn not the Wisdom of
the Blessed Jesus, the Author of it.

I acknowledge that some do undervalue your Undertaking, by urging the meanness
of it, in allowing ('it is true) that it is a good Work to suppress the abominable
sin of Cursing and Swearing, of profaning the Lord's Day, and Houses of
Disorder, etc. which are too numerous about this City. But what is all this to
the rooting out of that spirit of Selfishness which is broken loose among us,
that Bribery and Corruption that has almost eaten out the Vitals of the Nation,
and which are the blackest symptoms of approaching Destruction? To which I
answer; I wish there were no occasion for this irregular Objection, and I daily
pray that the Lord may pour forth a public Spirit upon us, that we may not
answer the Character which he gives of the last days, That Men shall be lovers
of themselves; but that such a (...), such a generous Love to our dear Country
may be raised up in the Hearts of all in Authority, of all that are entrusted
with the administration of public Affairs, that every Man may prefer the
public Interest before his own; and that all who wear the badg of Power, may
be Persons answering Jethro's Character, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness.

But since it is allowed even by the Objectors, That it is a good Work which you
are engaged in, although it does not reach all the Ends that they desire;
therefore surely it is your Honor, your Interest, and Duty to be zealously
affected in so good a thing. And who knows but that God may be pleased, (seeing
you sincere and zealous in his Cause, where it lies within the verge of your
Power, in suppressing Vice) to bless us in suppressing, by the Acts of his more
immediate Providence, those Disorders which are so far out of your reach, which
are so destructive unto our common National Interest? I am sure it is the only
way to avert Judgments, and obtain Mercies, to repress Sin: and in doing our
duty where we can, we may expect Assistance, and a Divine Hand to help us in
those things where we cannot.

There are other Objectors who urge, That you move in a Sphere that you are not
placed in, and that you stretch your selves to a Line beyond your Measure,
since you meddle in what concerns public Officers. But I hope the ensuing
Discourse may help to convince such, that every Man is concerned in the common
cause of Virtue, and is listed as a Soldier to fight the Lord's Battles.

And as to others who oppose you by Scorns and Derision; they must be such who
by their Lives are contrary to the regular Courses you endeavor to enforce,
whose Mouths must (and I hope shortly will) be stopped.

Since therefore you are engaged in a field of the greatest Honor, in a Cause
so beneficial to the Souls of Men hereafter, and to their Bodies here; May the
great God inspirit you with Zeal, with Prudence and Industry, consonant to your
worthy Design. This is the Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant and Welwisher, J. Russell.

Luke ix. 62. No Man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is
fit for the Kingdom of God.


THE Service of Jesus Christ, and the Work of Religion, is a Business of that
Honor and mighty Importance, that it deserves our most sedulous and constant
Endeavors, and commands a most strict adherence to it from all its Professors.

It requires of all those that engage in it, a resolution to persevere and go
through all its Stages, and to hold on to the end of its Journey; and to think
nothing dear in comparison of the Love of their Master whom they serve, and the
Crown of Glory which is proposed as their Eternal Reward. For those that draw
back at any little Difficulty, and faint in the hour of Trial, and time of
Temptation; that have not spiritual Strength, nor Courage sufficient to buoy
them up against some Shocks and Oppositions which they must expect to meet with
here in the World: Such Persons shall never, at the great Day of Account, be
adjudged faithful, or worthy of that incomprehensible Felicity, which shall be
the Portion of all those that are truly the Servants of Jesus Christ.

Religion carries with it such a Grace and Loveliness, it appears (even to the
common Persons of the World) with such a Majesty and Advantage, that he must be
strongly engaged in the Work of Sin, and closely fettered, even from his
Infancy, in the slavery of Satan, that never had any Purpose or Resolve to be
one of its followers. And I am apt to believe that the far greatest number of
Mankind have at some particular times, in their wisest and most considerate
hours, (being convinced of its Worth and Excellency) made Resolutions to set
about Godliness, and to walk in the Paths of Virtue and Religion.

But when they have found it a Business of difficulty to quit their Sins, to
deny their Lusts; and that the power of Holiness would abridg perhaps their
Profit and worldly Advantage, and deny them the Excursions of sensual
Gratifications; that the way of Piety would sometimes be attended with Taunts
and Reproaches, and the Thorns and Briars of Affronts and Indignities: Then,
like those whom our Savior describes by receiving Seed on stony Ground, They
are presently offended, their Warmth decays, their Zeal grows cold, and they
falter and stumble, and at last desist from their good Resolutions.

And tho they have often, on a new fit of Zeal, springing from a restored sense
of the Excellency, Benefit, and absolute Necessity of a holy Life, renewed
their Attempts to proceed in Piety: Yet Satan and the World returning again
with strong Allurements to the ways of Sin, All their good Purposes, like an
evening Cloud, have vanished away, and they have easily returned to their
former Follies, put on their old Fetters, and been bassled and beat off from
all their Religious Undertakings. Like the Children of Israel, when delivered
out of Egypt, and pursuing their Journey to the promised Land; yet by and by
their Appetite (tho they fed upon Angels Food) gave them an hankering for
Melons, and Cucumbers, and Garlic, and Onions; and this (tho an Argument of
prodigious Folly, yet) made them in their hearts return back to the House of
Bondage. So These not being constant in heavenly Resolutions, have looked back
with eyes of Affection on the Pleasures of Sin, and the Delights of the World,
and could not keep up to the just tenor of their own good Purposes.

But yet notwithstanding, being still perhaps under the sense of Conviction,
and the strugglings of Conscience; in order therefore to silence That, and to
rebate its edg, they have at last fallen on the same Project with those
Strangers planted by Shalmaneser the King of Assyria in the Cities of Israel;
who when Lions were sent among them, because they feared not the Lord, (2 King.
17.13.) in order to remove the Plague, and yet not wholly quit their Idolatry,
they made a mixture of Religion, and served God and their Idols. And so the
Persons, which fall under the Character which I have been now describing, will
endeavor to reconcile their temporal and spiritual Interest, and carry on
both, mix the Concerns of Time and Eternity, and be moderately religious, and
moderately wicked: And reply to the inward Arguings and Reproofs of their own
Mind, when that checks them for the decays of their former Zeal, and their
state of Lukewarmness, and declining their first Love:

Why should I attempt a Degree of Holiness above others, by appearing in a
singular Zeal in the Cause of Religion? And not only concern my self for my own
Salvation, but also for the Salvation of the Souls of my Neighbors, as if I
were made my Brother's Keeper? And perhaps after all, my Zeal may be no better
than folly, in procuring the Frowns of Superiors, the Loss of a Customer, the
Coldness of a Friend, the Shyness of an Acquaintance, because I am now still on
the Rebuke, and pressing the Duties of a rigid Piety on all occasions. And it
may savor of Presumption too, and a sond conceit of my own Abilities, to
attempt the Reformation of the Age, and to amend the World. My Zeal may be too
hot, as well as too cold; and Moderation and Self-preservation too is good in
all things. And therefore since Piety ought to be mixed with Prudence, let me
not exceed the Rules of Discretion.

Such Returns as these to the Calls of Conscience, are very apt to stifie it,
when the Will and Affections remain unsanctified, or in a mere moral State. And
Men may please themselves that all shall do well, and that Heaven and Eternity
may still be gained, and Salvation secured without so much ado as some Persons
make, and that they themselves have been more warm than wise in the Business of
Religion: And worldly Interest, and mundane Designs, and sinful Pleasures,
egging on such thoughts, and urging such false and sinful Arguments; it becomes
a snare and a stumbling block to multitudes, who still may think their eternal
Welfare secure enough under the decays and apparent wanings of their former
Zeal and Holiness.

But that such Persons as these are in a dangerous state, and altogether unfit
for the Service of Jesus Christ, and the Glory of his Kingdom, and to have
their Names inserted in the Book of Life, our Lord informs us here in this
Chapter, by the observation which he himself made on the comportment of some
who pretended a great desire to be his Disciples. In the 57th Verse of this
Chapter we read, that a certain Person applied himself unto our Lord with very
great (seeming) Zeal and Affection to his Service, Lord, I will follow thee
whither soever thou go. But on our Lord's telling him, that if he would
engage in that Undertaking, he must not expect any secular advantage, but
rather the contrary; in regard that tho the Foxes had Holes, Dens wherein to
lodge; and the Birds of the Air bad Nests, places to retreat to, to roost in all
the night: Yet he (tho Lord of all things) here in the World, had no where to
lay his Head; no House, no Bed, no place of his own to receive him; and
therefore none were to expect the Advantages of this World, by an entrance into
his Service: on which we read no farther, and hear no more of this great
Pretender. And calling to another, v. 59. to come and follow him; he desires
first, that he might have leisure to bury his Father. He did not absolutely
refuse to obey our Lord's Command, but he was willing to procrastinate and put
off the time. And a 3d seeming willing to be his Disciple, yet would excuse
himself from the immediate attendance on his Service; Lord, I will follow thee;
but let me first bid them farewell which are at home. To whom our Lord replies
in the words of the Text, No Man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking
back, is fit for the Kingdom of God: i.e. No Man having engaged himself to my
Service, and after turning back to his secular Concerns, with a regard had
first to those, is fit for the Kingdom of God. The words are allegorical,
pressing a constancy to the Service of Christ, from the diligence of him that
tills the Ground: As if our Lord had said, He that holds the Plough, must keep
to his Business, not look behind him, or neglect his Work, to trifle about
other things that come into his head; if he does, he is unfit for such an
Employment as requires a constant attendance on it. So those that enter into my
Service, they must put on Resolution, and not make vain and trifling Excuses to
return back to the Affairs of the World, but be constant and sedulous,
otherwise they are not qualified to be my Disciples; and so by consequence are
unfit for the Glories of my Kingdom, which are only designed as the blessed
Rewards of the sincerely Faithful, and constantly Laborious.

The Text appears to be a severe Reproof levelled against the coldness and
negligent carriage of too many who profess to be Disciples of Jesus Christ; who
having engaged themselves by their Character and Vows, by their Office and
Order, by their Profession and Pretensions, to be his Followers, to espouse the
Cause of Religion, and Piety, and the Interest of Holiness; and yet after all
these solemn Declarations, by a sad Tergiversation return to the World and the
things thereof, and to a remiss and loose state of Life: And like Lot's Wife by
Sodom, tho they were once, by themerciful hand of convincing Grace, brought out
of that supine and sinful Condition in which by Nature they lay, after all
those Enlightnings and Lectures of their own Consciences, do return again like
the Dog to his Vomit, to their former Corruptions; or at least with longing
Desires and incurved Hearts, look back to that state which will become a Prey
to Fire and Brimstone.

In speaking therefore on this Subject, I shall endeavor to do these following
things.

I. To show what it is to put our Hands to the Plough. II. To show what it is
to look back. III. To show the Danger and sad Consequence of such a dreadful
Retrospection, after we have been engaged in so good a Work; which is, That
such Persons are not fit for the Kingdom of God.
I. For the first, What it is to put our Hands to the Plough.

Since our Lord himself is pleased to make use of this so plain and homely a
Metaphor; I hope it cannot savor of Clownishness or Rusticity to follow his
Example; and since he applies it to those who make a Profession of being his
Disciples, and afterward withdraw themselves from his Service, I am sure it is
safe and easy too to follow such an Expositor. The Plough, we know, is an
Instrument of Husbandry, and they that hold it render the Ground fit for Seed;
and this applied spiritually, signifies all those that labor to make the World
fit to bring forth fruits of Peace, that strive to reform the deplorable state
of Mankind, and to render Men's Hearts capable to receive the Seed of the Word.

To put our hands to the Plough therefore, is to declare against Sin and the
Kingdom of Satan, and to act against it in our Station: It is to engage in the
service of Jesus Christ, to endeavor to render the Church fruitful of good
Works: it is to commence an holy Warfare against the state of Darkness, to
suppress Vice, and encourage Holiness, and to do what in us lies to carry on
the Cause and Interest of Religion. It Is with an holy Zeal, and an
undauntedness of Mind to make opposition against that torrent of Vice which is
breaking in upon the face of the Church; and not only to reform our selves, and
bring our own Lives into a conformity to the Divine Pleasure, but also
strenuously endeavor to reform others; to break up that Soil which is crusted
over with a Callus of Sin, and to render it fit for the ingrafted Word of the
Gospel to enter. It Is, in a word, publicly to espouse the Cause and Honor of
Religion, and to give a check to the growing Progress of the Synagogue of Satan.

And since the Church of God, in holy Scripture, is compared to a Field, as our
Lord himself delivers it in that Parable ( Mat. 13.) of the Wheat and the
Tares; let us consider how much every particular Person is concerned in the
Tillage and Cultivation of it, in order that a bountiful Crop of Righteousness
may be brought forth to the Glory of God, and the Salvation of those that
labor in this holy Employment.

1st. Every Man by Nature is a barren Ground, in which only the Seeds of Sin
spring up and fructify, to the dishonor of God, and destruction of himself.
And since by that infinite Love of God, in giving Jesus Christ, and contracting
with us on conditions of Love, he has rendered us capable of bringing forth
Fruits meet for Repentance, and reaping, as the effect of such a gracious
Harvest, eternal Life: And since on our entering into this contract of Peace (I
mean, the Covenant of the Gospel) we have sworn to our great Master to become
his Subjects and Servants, to labor in his Vineyard, to be diligent in his
Work; the neglect and breach of which awful Vow, will terminate in Destruction:
Every one therefore that is baptized into Christ, and has put on Christ, and
has received the Seal of the Covenant of Grace confirmed by our Redeemer
between God and Us, has put his Hand to the Plough: He has vowed himself to be
the obedient Servant of Jesus Christ, and has declared himself an
irreconcilable Enemy to all Ungodliness; he has promised, according to the
Prophet, Jer. 4.3. To break up the fallow Ground of his Heart, and not to sow
among Thorns: and agreeable to Hosea 10.12. To sow to himself in Righteousness,
and thereby to reap Mercy, to break up the fallow Ground, since it is time to
seek the Lord, till he come and rain Righteousness upon him. But,

2dly. Since we are not designed by our great Creator for our selves alone, but
made for Society, and therefore for the Good and Comfort of others: And since
in this regard there must be a discrimination of Persons, in respect of
Superiority and Inferiority, it will be fit to consider, how far we have put
our Hand to this good Work in the behalf of others, and who those are that are
more particularly concerned in it. And in doing this, I shall briefly consider
the three great Divisions into which all Men are ranked, viz. Those of
Magistrates, Ministers, and People; and show how far each are more than others
obliged, and have more immediately set their Hand to the Plough.

1. As to Magistrates. A state of Government among Men is appointed by the
Light of Nature, as well as by the Law of God: and since those that are
Governors ought to be Copies and Patterns for the Governed, therefore are
Those more especially concerned in directing others by wholesome Laws, and just
Sanctions, whereby the Honor of God, and the present and future Good of
Mankind may be supported.

Magistrates are the Representatives of God; and if they will not render
themselves altogether unlike the Majesty of Heaven, and unfit for, and unworthy
of the Character they bear, they must more especially imitate God, in bestowing
Favors and Encouragements on the Virtuous, and by inflicting Punishments on
the Vicious.

It Is their more immediate Duty to enact and execute such Laws, as may be for
the suppressing of Sin, and encouraging Holiness. And since the highest
Magistrate in this our happy form of Government, I mean our Sovereign, (on
whose Head the Almighty pour down streams of Mercy) is obliged by the solemnity
of an Oath, to administer Justice in Mercy unto all his People; I hope all
those that are delegated by him to be his Substitutes, are, and will be so
conscientious in the performance of their Duty, that That Justice which we owe
to God in obeying his Laws, as well as That which we owe to Men in preserving
their Right, may be truly and impartially executed, according to St. Peter's
Rule, 1 Pet. 2.14. For the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well: Since they cannot bear the Sword in vain, but it must be drawn
forth by them to establish Righteousness, or else will be drawn forth on them
to strike themselves into eternal Confusion.

And since God has called Magistrates to such an high degree of Honor, that
they are his Vicegerents; they therefore by virtue of the acceptance of their
Office, have put their Hands to this good Work, being called to be nursing
Fathers of the Church; and they bear the Sword of God for this very purpose,
not to be a terror unto good Works, but unto the Evil. And if Any should remain
idle and negligent, or take up this Office for any sinister Ends, to serve
themselves rather than the Public, to sit down in sloth rather than to
cultivate the field of God's Church, such Persons become guilty of a most
wretched Sacrilege; and have the greatest Cause to fear, that their Swords,
which have not been employed in the Cause of Virtue, Justice, and Piety, shall
be turned into Darts, and levelled against themselves in the day of eternal
Wrath and Vengeance.

All Magistrates therefore, whose business it is to put in execution those
excellent Laws which are enacted for the propagation of Godliness, and
correction of Sin; Those on the account of their Honor and Office, have put
their Hands to the Plough of God.

2. Another sort of Men who are more especially engaged to this good Work, are
Ministers; Those I mean, who are called to preach the Gospel, and to declare
the glad tidings of Reconciliation between God and Men, by the Man-Christ
Jesus. And We indeed of all Men are more immediately concerned, since our whole
Life ought to be dedicated to this heavenly Work, to labor for the Conversion
and eternal Salvation of Men's Immortal Souls; to show them the danger, and the
fatal event of an ill-spent Life, and a Conversation employed in the works of
Sin. The Lord has shown us our Dignity and Duty, by the Prophet Ezekiel, chapter
33.7. O Son of Man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel;
therefore thou shall hear the word at my Mouth, and warn them from me. And if
we who are called to this Sacred Dignity, of hearing the Word at the Mouth of
God, of having his Oracles committed unto us, who are made Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ, to declare God reconciled to the World on the Terms of the Gospel: If
we fail of rebuking, reproving, and exhorting, with all Gentleness, Meekness,
and Love; if we fall under the Character of idle Shepherds, neglecting the
Flock, through our want of Zeal in the Cause of Jesus Christ, and by ceasing to
declare the whole Counsels of God for Men's Salvation: we shall find our Account
so heavy at the great and general Audit of the World, that no Doom will be
equal to the Condemnation of such who have thus prevaricated, and wretchedly
slighted their Office and Business, Ezekiel. 33.8.

It Is the greatest Honor we are capable of, in being brought nigh to God, and
entrusted with the Ministration of the Word of Life, to be appointed principal
Laborers in raising the glorious Building of the Church of Christ; to be
dignified with the Character of the Legates of Heaven, sent in the blessed
Errand of inviting Men to become reconciled to God. And as the Reward of such
shall be infinitely great, who shall with Conscience and Zeal discharge this
Duty, they shall shine as the Stars in the Firmament for ever and ever: So the
Punishment also of those that neglect this Duty, shall be inconceivably great,
the Blood of Souls shall be required at their hands, and the Smoke of their
Torments shall ascend up for ever and ever.

Ministers therefore are another sort of Persons, who have peculiarly engaged
themselves to labor in God's Field, to carry on the Design and Interest of
Holiness, who have put their hand to the Plough of God.

3dly. Not only Magistrates and Ministers, but every Private Christian, by the
Ties of Humanity, and the Obligations of Religion, is bound to this Work. For
since the Cause of Religion is the common Cause of every Member of the Church
of Christ: Since we are obliged by our Baptismal Vow, to fight against Sin, the
World, and the Devil; and are bound, by virtue of our Allegiance to our
Redeemer, to endeavor to exalt his Kingdom, and to increase the number of his
Subjects: Every Man therefore is concerned for his Neighbor, is obliged for
his Brother, to do what is possible to pluck him out of the Power of Satan, and
to bring him into a state of Mercy through obedience to Jesus Christ. And since
there is a principle of Love and natural Compassion in all Mankind, which is
wonderfully improved and sanctified by Grace; so that every one that comes to
consider the worth of his own immortal Soul, will have a concern of Charity for
the Soul of another: Therefore we ought to be (and indeed we shall be if we are
our selves regenerate) solicitous for the Salvation of all Mankind; and every
Man will become a friendly Monitor unto his Neighbor, and will come to him in
Prudence, in Kindness and Secrecy, if he see him negligent in the important
Concern of his eternal Welfare, and will request him to beware of his heedless
Condition; that he would take some cognizance of the way in which he is walking,
whither it tends, and where 'twill end; that he would not rush into the Gulf of
everlasting Destruction through folly and incogitancy, but consider the Weight of
Eternity, the Worth of his Soul, and the Love of God, and the Value of Heaven,
and the dreadful State of Eternal Vengeance; and that he would labor earnestly to
obtain the one, and avoid the other. And this is a Duty which we owe to
Mankind, both as we are of the same Nature, and as we are commanded by the
Divine Word, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not
suffer Sin upon him. And so St. Paul, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily,
while it is called, To day: And (in another place) let us provoke one another
to Love, and to good Works. And farther, We are not only to Persuade our
Neighbors, and to use all the Methods of Love and Kindness to engage them to
their Duty; but also, since some are so abominably vicious, that nothing but
the terror and punishment of the Magistrate can restrain them from the open
violation of the Law of God; therefore it is the Duty of every Man to detect
Such unto the Magistrate, that where the Force of Persuasion cannot prevail,
there the Power of the Sword may restrain. And that it is our Duty thus to
discover all such Persons who are the Open and Notorious Opposers of Piety, and
endeavor to bring upon them legal Inflictions; not only appears from the
nature of the thing, but also from a consideration of that general Duty which
lies upon us, to labor for the support of the Kingdom of Christ, and the
suppression and destruction of the Power of Satan. And since there are Many so
deplorably wicked, that the whole Bent and Stream of their Conversation is
scandalous and vicious, offensive to God, destructive to Themselves, and
pernicious to Others: Therefore every Man is bound in Conscience to God, and in
Honor to Virtue, to make such Persons public Examples, by laboring to
inflict those Penalties upon them, which our good and wholesome Laws have
determined.

It Is our great happiness, that we live under a Government where Iniquity is so
far from being established by a Law, or so much as left Neutral, that it is not
only forbidden, but also punished. But our Laws are nothing but dead Letters,
and Justice holds but a wooden Sword without execution; for it is that which is
the Life of the Law it self, and the Honor of that People which enjoy such
wholesome Constitutions. And since Magistrates, to whom the execution of our
Laws are committed, cannot do it, without information of the Persons and Crimes
of Offenders; therefore it is every Man's Duty, as he tenders the Honor of God,
and the Glory of the Gospel, the Increase of the Church, and the Good of the
Weal-Publick, and as He would not be a partaker of other Men's Sins in hiding
and concealing them, to detect such as openly and commonly affront the Majesty
of God, and the Authority of Man, by notorious Vices, and those scandalous
Impieties which make us stink in the Nostrils of the Almighty, and bring down
his Plagues and Judgments upon us.

But this Point having been formerly so well proved in this place, and on this
occasion, in former Discourses, I shall therefore proceed toward a conclusion
of the first head of the Text, That Magistrates by their Power, Ministers by
their Office, and every Christian by his Character as such, has put his Hand to
the Plough of God, has given in his Name as a Labourer in the Field of the
Church of Christ, in order to root out the Weeds of Impiety, and to sow and
cherish the good Seed of Grace, that we may all grow up to Eternal Life.

But besides all this, more particularly God has stirred up the Hearts of Some
in and about this Great City, whose Numbers God of his Mercy increase, and
whose Zeal God of his Goodness augment, who have united themselves in Religious
Fraternities, for the more effectual carrying on of This Glorious and never to
be enough commended Work, of giving a check to Vice, and reforming (if
possible) the corrupt and depraved Manners of the unhappy Age in which we live.
And You who are entered into this Noble Design, whose Hearts God has more
especially touched with a sense of your Duty, You have in a more than ordinary
manner put your hand to the Plough. And to encourage you in it, I shall truly
affirm that this Work, and the Undertakers of it, are the great springing Glory
of our Church, and a comfortable Testimony that God has not utterly left us off
to Judgment.

This is a Design worthy of Men, as we are the Image of God; and worthy of
Christians, as we are the Disciples of Jesus Christ. It Is the Cause of God that
you have undertaken, in opposition to the Devil; and the Cause of Virtue, in
opposition to Vice; and of Religion, in opposition to Atheism. It Is an
Enterprise that is every way praiseworthy; and I may speak it with a
sufficient degree of Reverence, It Is worthy of God to own, and Men to
prosecute; and I hope it is carried on by Means that are agreeable unto the
noble End which it designs. And certainly no Man can oppose it, or become an
Enemy unto it, that does not first by his own Life render himself obnoxious to
it.

But now, my Brethren, if after you have thus begun in a Divine Work, and have
increased your Numbers, and diffused your Design throughout the Parts of this
mighty City; and you have seen many good Fruits of these your Endeavors, In
cleansing many Augean Stables of Lust and Filthiness; In making many, who made
no conscience of profaning the Name of God, to set a bar before their Lips; In
repressing the Disorders which are too frequently committed on the Lord's Day;
And (in charity one may hope) of bringing several to a sense of their Sin, and
to a sincere Repentance, and to bless the Almighty for this your Undertaking:
Now if after all this, Satan should become so mischievously successful as to
stifle your Zeal, and to baffle you in your Work by the little Mocks, Scoffs,
and Taunts of those that are his Agents; If you faint at the opposition that
you must expect to meet with from the Frowns of Some, and the Threats of
Others: If this beat you out of the Field into which you have entered in order
to work: It would not only be a sad Omen of your own Spiritual Decay, but be
also a great Discouragement unto Others; and would give the greatest blow unto
the Cause of Religion, by adding the Trophies and Ensigns of Success, to the
black Triumphs of the Prince of Darkness.

But this I shall farther insist on in the next part of the Text, which is,

II. To show what it is to look back.

As the putting our Hand to the Plough intends the engaging our selves in the
Cause and Interest of Holiness, and endeavoring the repressing of Sin, and
propagation of Piety; so to look back signifies, a withdrawing our Affections
and Endeavors from it, and a relinquishing this so glorious and commendable an
Enterprise.

And in speaking of this, I shall briefly take notice, 1st, of the Persons; and
2dly, Of the Temptations inducing to this sinful Retrospection.

And in the first place, as to the Persons; I cannot but briefly remark with a
melancholy Reflection, that not only vast Numbers, who are engaged by the awful
Obligations of Baptism, have no more sense of their Duty and Interest, than if
they had been brought up in a Land of Darkness. Not only great Multitudes hear
the Gospel every day, and themselves also read the Holy Scriptures, and yet
they are to 'em as a Book sealed; they neither feel, nor understand their Power
and Life.

But also there are others, who have had a sight and sense of their Duty, have
been under Convictions, and taken up Resolutions for Heaven and Eternity; and
yet all their Purposes, like Ephraim's Righteousness, have been but as a
morning Dew, which is presently consumed with the heat of the next approaching
Temptation. And this is very sadly to look back, after we have set our Hands to
the Plough: when we have felt the warmings of the Divine Spirit in our Hearts,
the incubations of the Holy Ghost brooding on our Souls, in order to bring
forth the Image of God in a state of renewed Holiness; when we have made some
advances in Piety, and have begun in the Spirit, yet after all to end in the
Flesh; this is miserably to look back from our Employment, and solemn
Engagement.

But 2dly, to carry on my Application.

You, Gentlemen, who have promised to become the Servants of Jesus Christ, not
only by the Vow of your Baptism, but also by the Rules of those Religious
Associations into which you are engaged, to encourage one another to walk as
becomes the Gospel, and to declare your selves the Opponents to Vice and
Ungodliness, and to repress Profanation, Debauchery, and Excess, within your
sphere and knowledge, by endeavoring to give Life and Vigor to those good
Laws, which our Pious Legislators have established for this End: Consider, you
have put your Hand to the Plough of God; for it is his Cause that you are
engaged in; and if upon the account of some little opposition, you withdraw
your Assistance, or stop in your Duty, this is the looking back here intimated
in the Text.

I beg, Gentlemen, I may not be mistaken, as if I was afraid you were weary of
that good Work which you have set your Hands unto, and were about to relinquish
it; my Discourse proceeds from another Design, namely, That by showing the
great Mischief which must attend your forsaking this Cause, I might the more
effectually recommend it to your Selves, and persuade Others to engage in it,
and encourage your Zeal to all the prudential and vigorous Methods which are
needful for its Prosecution.

But yet, since it is not impossible, but some who have set their Hands to this
good Work may look back, may flag in their Diligence, and cool in their
Affections; I shall briefly take notice of some of the Temptations tending to
it; and these fall under one or the other of these 3 Heads.

1st. Fear. 2dly. Shame. 3dly. Sloth.

1st. Fear. When a Person that has not first sat down and counted the Cost,
what it will stand him in to be the Soldier of Jesus Christ, and what degree of
Valor and holy Resolution it requires to fight in this glorious Cause, and to
labor in this Work; that he must be sincere and impartial, not afraid of the
Reproaches of the Small, or the Frowns of the Great, or any diminution of his
temporal Interest: when such a Person finds that the Cause he has undertook may
eclipse his Profit, and that there is indeed greater Opposition than he
expected; then he begins to faint, and to chill in his Warmth, and to find
excuses for his Recession. But let such consider, that St. John tells us, That
the Fearful, as well as the Unbelieving, shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21.8. i. e. Such who faint in the
spiritual Warfare, and have not courage enough to stand up for the Cause of
Jesus Christ, in opposition to the Conveniences and Friendships of the World,
such are unfit for the Kingdom of God. And as Solomon observes, That the fear
of Man brings a Snare, Prove. 29.25. a Snare on the Conscience, and an
intangling hindrance to religious Duties; so He that ventures upon the
displeasure of God rather than Man, or whom sordid apprehensions of worldly
loss, or the breach of carnal Friendship, or the browbeatings of the Powerful,
can beat off from his Work; such a Person does hereby render himself unfit for
that blessed Sentence, of Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into
the Joy of thy Lord. For he that cannot venture himself on the Cause of Christ
Jesus, and whose Faith is too feeble to shore him up from sinking under the
fear of Men; such a Person is a miserable Bondsman to the World, how fair soever
his pretensions may be to Regeneration and Holiness of Life. But, Beloved, I
believe and hope better things of you, and things that accompany a zeal of
Sincerity, and a vigorous prosecution of your glorious Undertaking.

2dly. Shame is another Temptation to induce Men to look back.

It has been the chiefest Policy of Satan, ever since God has (in wonderful
Mercy unto his Church) been pleased to stop the violence of his Rage and
Persecution, to oppose Religion by Scoffs and Mockings at those that will not
still remain his Vassals. And our Age and Nation has been so unhappily
exercised by this stratagem of Hell, that one would be tempted to think, that
the Prophecy of St. Peter looked at these Days, 2 Pet. 3.3. Knowing this, that
there shall come in the last days Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts. For
how has Holiness of Life been ridiculed, and the Power of Godliness, and the
Life of the the Spirit, and a state of Conversion and Regeneration, been made
the subject of impious Derision, and scornful Reproach, insomuch, that Some
have been even ashamed to own themselves so good as they really were, for fear
that some name of Ignominy and Contempt would be cast upon them?

And indeed I do not find any Opposition greater than this, to balk you in the
way of your virtuous procedure. But to counterpoise this, remember that you are
engaged to own the Cause of a Crucified Jesus, of him that was numbered among
the Transgressors, and who endured the Cross, and despised the Shame; and if
you have not constancy enough to bear a little Reproach for the sake of our
great Master, and to be contented to undergo the name of Informers, and busy
Fellows, or such who make a noise to get your selves a Name; if you cannot
patiently endure the Reproaches of the Agents of Hell, and the Lies and
Scandals they will cast at your Doors; if you faint at this Trial (as Syracides
says) your Strength is small.

And if this should induce any Member to look back, let him be afraid of being
hereby made unfit for the Kingdom of God: for remember what our Lord tells us,
Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this
adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed,
when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels.

3dly. Sloth may be another inducement to look back: For He that applies
himself to this good Work with that fitness which it requires, ought to be a
Person of Industry and Diligence, he must dedicate some part of his time for
fighting the Lord's Battles against the public Goliahs of the Armies of Hell;
he ought to appear personally in the Cause that he has undertook, and not think
it enough that he has been a Contributor toward the Charge of this glorious
Fabric of Reformation.

For tho I do not question but that every Penny that is bestowed on this
Account, is as true Charity, as feeding the Hungry, or clothing the Naked, and
has also in it something of an excellency far beyond it, as a Compassion on
Men's Immortal Souls does exceed the pity that is expressed to their Bodies; yet I
cannot choose but deliver my Judgment in this matter, although it should happen to
be contrary to the Sentiments of some here present, That the poorest Member of
these Societies, who by a personal endeavor labors in this Work, who
sacrifices his Time and Pains at this Altar, his Offering is greater, and he
casts in more to his Corban, than they who of their abundance bestow many
Pounds yearly: Not that I blame, no, I commend the One, but I highly praise and
extol the Other; and I do it in order to give all possible Encouragement to a
personal, zealous, and avowed Prosecution of this Heroic Undertaking.

Lastly, To conclude this Point, I shall add a word to encourage to an
exemplary Holiness of Life.

And this, if You who have undertaken to be the Patrons of Virtue, and
supporters of Piety, shall fail in; if you shall sink down from your exalted
Post, to the Temptations of the World, and be taken in the snares of Vice and
Dishonesty, this will be such a Tergiversation, as must not only be satal to
your selves, but also to your Design; and will cast the blackest Cloud on the
honest and sincere endeavors of those that are joined with you. It will open a
Door to all the foul Reproaches that Hell can invent, and the Agents thereof
inject upon you; which will not only fall with the greatest weight on the Heads
of the Guilty, but will also affect those that are Innocent.

It therefore becomes every one that is engaged in this Holy Work, to walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, considering the Eagle Eyes of all
your Adversaries await your steps; and nothing can give them such an occasion
of impious Joy, as your stumbling and faultering at the same Stones which you
endeavor to remove: and this will indeed be the worst sort of looking back
which possibly you can commit. Be therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as
Doves: And as glorious Designs must be managed with the highest Prudence in
order to secure 'em from the reproaches of their Enemies; so let this be
attended with a Wisdom and Circumspection agreeable to it, such as your
Adversaries cannot gainsay or resist. And to obtain this, be instant in Prayer,
that That Great God, whose Cause you have undertaken, would give a particular
Blessing, in directing every Member so to walk, that you may be blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a perverse and
crooked Generation, among whom ye shine as Lights in the World, and as Patterns
of Piety, Humility, and Meekness, and every thing that is praiseworthy.

III. I come now to the last part of the Text, which is, to show the Danger and
sad Consequence of such a dreadful Retrospection, after we have been engaged in
so good an Employment, Which is, that such Persons who look back, are not fit
for the Kingdom of God.

And having already in my former Discourse, given frequent hints of this, I
shall be very brief on this Topic, that I may oppress your Patience no longer.
In order to which, I will not enlarge what is here meant by the Kingdom of God,
in regard the sense is obvious to every Capacity, it signifying the Enjoyment
of all that Happiness which Jesus has purchased, and is gone into Heaven to
prepare for his Church and People. And as those who are not fit for the Glories
of this Kingdom, do not only miss of Happiness, but fall into Misery; so That
shows something more than the loss of Heaven, there is an implication of the
Punishment of Hell.

The loss therefore of Eternal Life, and the Condemnation to everlasting
Vengeance, must strike Terror one very one that considers the worth of his
never-dying Soul, and what it is to undergo the Wrath of God for ever and ever.
But yet this must kindle a greater fire of Torment in the Consciences of Some,
than of Others: for he that never had the Means of Salvation, or on whom they
never came with Power and Efficacy, the Reflections of Such can never be so
bitter, so sharp, and stinging, as of Those who have had the clearer
discoveries of Divine Light and Love. And therefore for such who have been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the
Powers of the World to come, if They fall away, it is not only impossible to
renew them again by Repentance, but also to render their Condemnation half so
tolerable as of those who had never those participations.

Consider therefore, You who have put your Hands to the Spiritual Plough, in
order to cultivate both your selves and others; if you, after both the Vow of
your Baptism, inward Conviction, and outward Profession, and a more than
ordinary obliging your selves to the Service of Christ Jesus; If You look back,
of all Persons in the World, you are most unfit for the glorious Kingdom. The
Backslider in Heart (says Solomon) shall be filled with his own Ways, Prove.
14.14. i. e. shall reap the fruits of his own Folly. But as I hope you have
well considered the weight of the Work which you have undertook, so I trust
your Perseverance in it will become a Pattern to succeeding Times, and other
Places. And that your Zeal, your Wisdom, and Prudence, will be still more and
more Illustrious, and fit you for the love of all good Men here, and for
greater than ordinary degrees of Glory hereafter. And agreeable hereunto this
Observation shall shut up my Discourse, That as he that looks back is unfit, so
he that goes on and prosecutes his Work, that has an eye of Resolution, looking
forward on his Duty, such a Person is through Jesus Christ fit for the Favor and
Kingdom of God. And your being Such, will add to your Crown another day, and
will advance you above the common Blessing of Heaven, and of eternal Life; your
Zeal and Constancy will be rewarded with a double Portion of everlasting Glory.
For the God that you serve, is not unrighteous to forget your Works and labors
of Love, but will be a Master of the greatest bounty, in liberally requiting
all your diligent and faithful Services.

And that you may All be set down in the number of those that have endured to
the End, and have finished your Work with Joy and Faithfulness: This the
Almighty grant, by the Assistance of his Holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

