A Physical Treatise, Grounded, not upon Tradition, nor Fancy, but Experience,
Consisting of Three Parts.

The First, A MANVDVCTION, discovering the true Foundation of the Art of
MEDICINE. The Second, An EXPLANATION of the general Natures of DISEASES. The
Third, A PROOF of the former POSITIONS by PRACTICE.
By WILLIAM RUSSELL, Chemist in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXIV.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
MY Blooming years, happening to be in that sullen Time, wherein nothing here
but Storms and Tempests appeared were so blasted; that little else was manifest
in me, but what those sad Disturbances had impressed; so that, at the One and
twentieth year of my Age, I found Ambition to outweigh my Natural Inclination:
which I had never discerned, had I not been overwhelmed by the Providence of
the Almighty, and by his great Judgments (both on Mind and Body) brought to
submit to his Government. Whereupon, it was clear to me, that the Actions of
Childhood had not so blemished my Understanding, as youthful Ambition had done:
from hence, a Strife arose in me, which ended not, until (through Mercy) a
right Apprehension was given to me again; by which, after some series of time,
I could and did willingly turn out this Unnatural and Haughty Guest. Hence
proceeded my Private Life, which has now continued for about Thirty three
years; and given being to my Principles, and Practice; and by Consequence birth
to this Treatise, which is a brief Account of my frequent Experience, That
being an unquestionable Ground; and every Thing, that has not its Original
from some such undeniable Principle, can never have a certain Effect.

To fear GOD, and love our Neighbor, are Precepts, so universally adhered to
(as the Summary of Divine and Moral Acts) that Jews and Christians, Turks and
Pagans, have ever subscribed to them; notwithstanding the various Forms, and
Figures, wherein they have been represented. Therefore do I think, that there
is no sensible Man, but must say, that Remedies of an Universal Tendency, in
which all Apprehensions and Inclinations agree, are more efficacious, safe,
certain and speedy, than any particular Remedy whatsoever, whereof there are
Doubts and different Opinions; in as much as Nature never varyes, in all her
Endeavors, from the Capacity, Ordination and End of every Individual; and
that, which all concur in, must needs be true: so that, whatsoever Seed she
manageth to Generation, that still produces the uniform Figure and Virtue,
according to its Primitive Appointment; unless by some accidental Cause
impeded. Nevertheless, although I seem in this whole Treatise, to mind nothing but
Universal Dispositions; yet I have bid fair for Particulars also, as my Seven
years living upon Vegetables has sufficiently demonstrated, and in that time
my Examinations of their particular Virtues; not by Reading what others have
Written thereupon; but by experimenting their Operation on my own Body, and on
others also. But, since I do not find them useful, except particularly to some
Persons; and tho specifical to Diseases of each kind, yet unable to supply the
Defects of Nature so well as Things of an Universal Tendency; being seldom
singularly serviceable, till after other Medicines are given: I presume no
ingenious Man will think I wholly decry their use, but rather exalt them in
their proper place, intending (in my Explanation of this Treatise) to write
more fully of them, whereby it may be known I have endeavored to understand
the use of Particulars, as well as of Generals.

But, let not any one think, the Doctrine here asserted to be Novel; for it is
as ancient as Physic, or Physicians; which Hermes Trismegistus his Smaragdine
Table sufficiently declares, where he says, As is that, which is above, so is
that which is beneath; and all is by the Mediation of One Thing. Which true
Position of his has been so far from being denied by those Men, who have
observed Nature in her secret Meanders, from that Time, unto this very Day,
that None of common Reason will or dare contradict the same: for the Egyptian
Learning plainly enough demonstrates Hermes to be their Prince; and their
Hieroglyphics show, that not Tradition, but Natural Sagacity should be the
Guide of all Inquisitive Minds, whereby to understand their Powers and Actions.
This was so certainly believed in that Age, that all the neighboring Nations,
even in the Times of the Greeks, sought knowledge no where, but in that Place;
and from thence the same has been derived to Us, as appears by the Romans
first admitting thereof, and bequeathing it to our Climate. For, from
Esculapius his time, to Hippocrates (the 14th in Descent from him) it does
appear, Nature was always allowed to be the Physicianess of Diseases; and from
that time, unto this Day, none have denied it; except such Men, as sought
Innovation, and thought they could govern Nature better, than she could govern
her self. But since that Age, there have risen a sort of People, that did not
so ingenuously follow Nature and Reason, in the Investigation of Truth, as
their Predecessors did; but have (for Interest sake, or else out of Ignorance
espoused, and imposed upon the World false Doctrines suitable to their
Ambitious or Covetous Designs; whereby they have clouded the Understandings of
Men, and introduced erroneous Positions, to the shame of Sciences, and
prejudice of Mankind.

Aristotle, having a Monarch to defend him, presumed to burn the Books of his
Ancestors; yet could not fully confute, nor wholly smother the Truth therein
contained. By these, and other like Means, the very Tract of the Ancients is
almost wholly lost; and now Nothing, but Nature her self, can restore that to
Man of which there are no plain Presidents, or evident Footsteps. For, when
Christians had forsaken that Simplicity, which was the Crown of Religion, and
became Asserters and Ascribers of Infallibility to themselves; then arose the
Roman Vicar, as their Dictator, the Limiter, Bounder, and Measurer of all
Divine and Natural Things which they themselves (being seized with Egyptian
Darkness) could not distinguish; so that, if any new Matter was apprehended and
declared, which was not affirmed by this Governor, death ensued; as appeared by
that German Bishop, who (endeavoring to prove the Antipodes) was condemned to
dye; because he had presumed to assert That, which was not approved by this
Head of the Church; and the Learning which many Academicks (at this Day) boast
of, is not so much the Result of Natural Sense, as of that Politic Government.

Nevertheless, these Men own and acknowledge Hippocrates to be their Patron; but
did they (as they pretend) truly consider, and imitate him, they would not
force, but follow Nature. For, it appears (by his Rules and Sayings) that
Nature was his Guide; because he taught, that Matter, while crude, was not to
be expelled out of the Body; which is a perfect Indication, that he would have
Us to expect a due time 'till Nature showed what she would have performed, and
when she expected such assistance; and not to precipitate her into Actions,
unto which she had no tendency; and by taking her off from her own work, to
take part with the Disease.

The same Hippocrates long since declared, that the Man, who in all his Life
brought forth nothing, which was of Service or Benefit to his Neighbor,
deserved no remembrance among Men. Therefore, if I have herein aimed (according
to my narrow Talent) to be serviceable to Mankind, I am thereby but a Disciple
to that great Master: yet, if what is contained in this Treatise, be of any
advantage to Others, the thanks thereof is not so much due to me, as to my
Opposers, whose Provocations have excited me to this Vindication of my
Proceedings; like the Philosopher's contranatural Fire, which (in destroying
the outward Form) excites the inward Spirits to unite, and concenter, for their
own Preservation; to the begetting or bringing forth of some new Substance of
another Species.

Charge not on me the Scribe's, or Printer's faults,
Who see with Others Eyes; but they whose Thoughts
Vulgar Opinion governs, are worse blind:
In me the Organ's dark, in them the Mind.
The First Part.
A Manuduction, DISCOVERING The True Foundation of the Art of Medicine.
THE Practice of Physic being various, (and in the Judgment of most very
uncertain) because the Galenists have one Theory, and Chemists another; I
cannot perceive any thing herein more serviceable to the Public, than to
distinguish their Foundations, and what use I have made of them.

The Galenists have 4 Humors, 4 Complexions, and 4 Qualities, to raise their
Structure on: And when either of these exceed their due Temperament, they judge
a Disease present; and to that apply their Remedies; never so much as thinking
of a Mover, or first Cause of these Disorders.

The Chemists, according to Paracelsus and Helmont, establish their Theory on
the first disturbance given to Nature in her own Inns, and Acts; not so much
respecting Effects as Causes, nor the Matter disturbing, as the Spirit
disturbed: and to this they apply their Remedies.

This later Foundation, with me (under great trouble of Spirit) at last
overcame all doubtings, and I readily adhered to these sublime Conceptions;
having for their Basis such perspicuity as the Light of Nature did really
demonstrate, and Hippocrates, their allowed Patron, does attest, saying; Nature
is the Physician and Curer of Diseases. Yet, upon Examination of their Remedies
against this Spiritual assault, or first being of Diseases, I perceived they
depended not upon any particular known Medicines, but on universal
Dispositions, drawn from Metals, Minerals, Salts, Animals, or Vegetables.
Hence, I began to despair of arriving at any certainty to attain Remedies so
gifted, as to be capable to reduce Nature to her Primitive Unity with and in
the Faculties of the Body. For, I well knew, that all the known Remedies of
these Times, were not the Medicines of our Famous Progenitors, nor capable to
answer to those Ends; being the Products and Offsprings either of unfound
Hearts, or ignorant Heads, too much devoted to Gain and Applause; who, having
forsook the Substance, embraced the Shadow; and gave Names to Remedies, as
Paracelsick, which have as much difference from his in Disposition, as Light
has from Darkness. All their Medicines were either endued with particular
Faculties, and hostile Dispositions, (as Purging, and Vomiting, the Sound as
well as the Sick) or else curtailed by Fire, and fiery Spirits, and so rendered
Diaphoretical; under all which Considerations, they became wholly unfit to
answer that great End of Nature, Curation.

I did not think those supreme and general gifts were wanting in Nature; but
(because I knew not the Artifice, by which they might be attained) they were to
me as things of no value or concern: having therefore suspended my thoughts,
till I better understood them, I greatly bent my Mind to Animals, Salts, and
Vegetables; and from them endeavored (as far as in me lay) to separate their
Terrestreity, and by Mistion, their Specificality; and having spiritualized
them, I found they were not unfit to be administered in any Case, so far, as
communication of Strength was needful: And so great a Blessing attended for
some space of time, that they seemed to answer the utmost desires of Nature.
Yet, my Mind being not idle I allways feared, that this Success might arise
from the smallness of the Malignity, or the happy Genius that prompted me to
these Endeavors: Nor was it long before my suspicions proved truths. For, when
I found some Persons not cured, tho the Principal Parts were not perished; and
that continual strife stirred up by Nature, ended in her own Conquest; I
positively concluded, that those Medicines, that were fit to stir up Action (if
not also endued with a Vitality, to keep Nature in Union with and in her own
Organs, to act unto the time of Death without loss of sensibility) were far
short of what a true Physician should endeavor to compass.

Now was I again bewildred, my Grief renewed, my Ignorance seemed greater then
at first, and my Labors I undervalued as things of no Moment, Books could not
help, and Counsel (at that time) among Men was not to be hoped for. Therefore I
accused my self as rash in attempting that, which seemed impossible to be
attained; and even despaired thereof. But, considering in my self, that these
my endeavors had not their Original in me by Education, nor by any
Consideration of Profit or Honor, that might accrue from the pursuit of the
same; but from a natural Propensity, strongly overweighing my other
Inclinations, which (at that time) to my outward Man were pleasing enough, and
not without great strife fully subdued; I resigned my self to the good Pleasure
of the Highest, and endeavored Stilness more then Understanding.

Indeed I plainly viewed all things, but would not discuss them so far, as to
raise any Foundation therefrom, or to bring thoughtfulness in my Self. For, I
perceived a Disquisition of ought, that stood not in Unity with all things,
would be particular, uncertain, and dangerous; yea, utterly unfit to answer the
ends of Nature: because I found it wanting to the attainment of true Healing:
and in this way of simplicity I was found of What I knew not how to search for:
Nature, in stilness, brought forth that, which Reason (without Light) could
never have acquired, even under its most acute Scrutiny; For, it not being
sensible, there was no ground for Reasoning.

In this opening, I saw, that every Universal Remedy had its Root in the first,
or second Life of Minerals and Metals; the last Life of them being either
over-compact, or venomous. This Aspect was grateful to me, and gave me strong
hope, that Time and Stilness might produce more Evidence. Nor was I deceived:
for the way of destroying the last Life of some Subjects (endued with an
Universal Tendency) was in the Properties of Nature made manifest to me. Then
did I see, as in a Glass, the wonderful Gifts implanted in Metals, Minerals,
etc. by the Pleasure of the Most High, as a Relief to Mortals, in this latter
Age of the World; wherein Diseases are increased and heightened by various
Venoms (the Relicts of popular Distempers) and complicated through the Vices of
Life, and want of an unspotted vitality in our original constitution. Besides,
it appears that the World it self waxes old, the Powers thereof are much
altered, all the external Virtues of its Superficies are declined; but Metals
and Minerals, that have not known the force of the external Air (the great
Propagator of Life and Corruption) are less Partakers of the Universal
Debility, than those Things which exist chiefly by that Air. Not that they have
not their Air also, but it is otherwise qualified; rather to forward their
Compaction, and concentrate their Virtues, than to corrupt them. By which means
they seem to be appointed (since, as to our Air, they share an unspotted,
unchangeable Life) as true Succors, to withstand the Impressions of our
external Air, and the many Changes and Complications of Diseases, that reign
amongst us. But Vegetables, by reason of a seeming decay of Vigor in the
Elements, or the declining State of the External Virtues of the Worlds
Superficies, (tho they have many Excellent and Peculiar Endowments, which
wisely used may be sometimes serviceable in the Cure of the Sick; when freed
from their Terrestreity and Grossness, that in their Reception, they put not
Nature to too much trouble of Digestion) yet, if they be not so universalized
by Unition, that they no longer serve under their particular Gifts, they indeed
cannot contribute any thing to Nature in her most deplorable Cases: Whereas,
Mineral and Metalick Virtues, being more concentrate, have more universal
Dispositions; and so are more fit to serve Nature, to all intents, than the
other. For, Minerals and Metals are not specificated to this or that Person, or
to this or that Disease; but to the Properties of Nature, in her first
Operation in Bodies: by which indeed, as to the noble parts of principal
Members, one Mineral or Metal may be more suitable, than another; but, as to
Diseases and Persons, there they solely act according to Nature's deficiency
and so become true Succors: because, when they are prepared as requisite, they
are not transchanged in the Body, the Light and Vigor, or Ray of them being
the Medicine. So that the Substance of them passes away unaltered as to
weight; and therefore not being touched by our Ferments, brings less trouble
to Nature, than one spoonful of Wine would do; And this is, because there is no
reaction of Nature upon them, as in other Medicines: but if they be administered
in so weak a state, as before separation of the form they are cast out by the
Draught, then they are altogether useless.

Minerals and Metals have their Gifts from GOD, not from Man's Art: For Art
does not confer Virtue, but by separating the Shell discovers the Kernel: And
their implanted Virtues are for our benefit; posited there and not to be
concealed, neglected or slighted, as things not to be used; because Envy and
Ignorance have condemned them: for, by that means, the End of their Creation
would be frustrated; which will seem to the Rational an evil conceit. Shall
Wheat be contemned as unfit for nourishment, because it has husks? or Almonds
for their hard Shells?

I write not of the external Properties of Minerals and Metals, but of their
inward Parts, in which is concentred a more vital Air than in other things, by
which they famously manifest their Universal Disposition. Air, we see, above
all things visible, refreshes Man; Now, the Air enclosed in them is of an
unsearchable power, purity, and penetration, beyond what is in any single
Concrete; more friendly than ours, wherein we breath; for though it be liable
to it is Laws for transchangement, yet its Virtues in order to Sanity are
thereby not diminished. But, the external Parts of Minerals and Metals are
indeed venomous, and may justly be censured as altogether unfit to be relied
on, for Succor in Diseases; because they compel Nature to Expulsion, and are
not subservient to her, in exciting natural Vigor, except against their own
poisonous hostility. Therefore, what has been, or shall be writ, concerning
this, must not be understood of the Exterior Parts of Metals or Minerals, or of
the Medicines made thereof, which are commonly known; but of such Medicines, as
truly perform what I have specified, by assisting Nature, and are so vastly
different from those of Common Use, that their subsequent Operation can never
be declared, before they are taken: to day they have one Action, to morrow
another, and the third Day another, as the Diseases happen to be changed by
their Virtues. As for Instance;

In all Acute Diseases, if much material, Vomits, Stools, or Urine are largely
provoked; and then afterward, Sweats; but after the Fevers are extinguished,
then Stools again, till the Relicts are removed. But in acute Diseases, where
there is more depression of Spirit, and less Matter, there Sweats arise at
first, and continue daily till the Evil be overcome; and then Stools for a Day
or two, according to the Relict, and so they cease acting. And all this is
effected by the same Medicines; which, if continued from the Beginning to the
End of Distempers, will clearly manifest these Properties.

Now, can any One imagine, that this variety of Actions, in one and the same
Medicine, in the same Body, and in the same Disease, is any thing else, than
the Action of Nature? seeing it is evident, that Vomiting and Purging Medicines
never become Sweaters or Binders, except Nature, through Incapacity of
expelling them (falling under the Burden of their Venom) sends forth Sweats,
as Signs of an evil Guest.

Whatsoever therefore does so directly fortify Nature, as to make her act every
way suitable to her own Necessities, cannot be any other than Virtue; and
seeing it has pleased GOD to implant such Virtues and Powers, in Minerals and
Metals, no unbiased person will say it is unfit they should be inquired into.

Medicines thus endowed are more safe than others, as never performing ought
that can be injurious, seeing Nature only manageth them, and they Purge not
when they should provoke Sweat; nor do they Vomit, when purging by Urine or
Perspiration is required; they leave no Relicts in the Body, for they are
clean, having all unnatural Impurities removed. The Child new born, the Woman
new laid, the most aged and most weak safely take them, without any the least
damage ensuing therefrom.

I write not this conjecturally, but from the Experience of more than Twenty
Years. For, these Remedies, having an universal Tendency (not working by Vomit,
Stool, or Sweat upon the sound) do only in the Sick Operate, as Nature finds
most convenient, and so are only her Servants: but other Medicines, that have
not so universal a Disposition, tho in former Ages (when Diseases were more
simple, and had rarely any thing extraordinary in them) they might be very
profitable, yet now they cannot be used without Danger. For, where Nature her
self is undetermined, a Remedy, that has not a Gift to reach the Life, and
strengthen her to compose those Confusions, that cause so great a Complication,
and indetermination, may indeed by its particular act alter the Scene, but not
the Tragedy; and change the Seat of a Disease from one Bowel to another; but if
any do impartially observe the Event, they will soon perceive; that the change
of Place has rendered the Disease (before easily cured) not curable, unless
with great difficulty; and not at all, but by General, Remedies. Yet, let no
Man mistake me so far, as to think these Medicines (I mention) to be very
easily obtained: No, the Common Preparations have no such Endowments; Nor can
the converting of a Vomitive and Purging Medicine, into a Diaphoretick, render
its Gifts more splendid: nay, rather, what before in it self had an universal
Disposition, is now become only a particular Bemedy, being no otherwise
serviceable, than where Sweats are needful. And it is clear to every skilful
Labourer in the way of natural Medicines, that every universal Being, tormented
by Fire or fiery Spirits, is not bettered tho changed: For every direct Change
is a diminishing of the Natural Gift; And whosoever spends his time this way to
alter General Medicines, will injure both himself and his Neighbor, and shall
never arrive to any certainty in the true Matter of Medicine.

The outward Life of Metals or Minerals is poison, which unless overcome, with
Conservation of the Species of them, they cannot exhibit their natural Gifts.
For Mineral Virtues are like Lillies among Thorns: if a Man remove not these,
he will be wounded with their Prickles, before he can attain the Sweetness of
those. The outward life of Minerals must dye and be annihilated; their middle
Life is Medicine, Antidote against Poison, an Exhilirator and Server of Nature,
without any determinate Action; a great Light, impressed with a Divine Seal,
capable to extirpate the Characters of diseasy Images, or at least to subvert
their Acts; having a natural faculty to remove every occasional Matter, by
Nature's own Power; not compelling but exciting Her, as has been sensibly
experimented. This proved to me the Truth of Helmont's Theory, which tho
believed, yet without this Testimonial Act, I might (with the generality of
Searchers) have ruined my Self, by adhering to what was visible, and supposing
what I enjoyed not, as impossible to be attained. For every true Natural
Medicine works not by its own Power (which is ever inimical to Nature) to
Vomit, Purge, Sweat, provoke Urine, etc. but by Nature's dispose; being such as
never operates on Bodies well and in health, although taken in a six-fold
quantity; nor on the diseased and sick, but in the way Nature finds most
conducent to health. Because Nature is the Physicianess, and all that is
ministered to her, ought to be at her Dispose. And that she knows how to use
Medicines of an universal Disposition, appears, in that she does by them
Purge, Vomit or Sweat, where occasion is; and that as forcibly and sensibly, as
the strongest direct Medicines can do; yet with so different Success, that
Sweats, tho endured for many days, do not weaken so much as others (tho only
for some hours) excited by a forcible Diaphoretick; Nay, the Patients* each day
grow stronger and stronger, than the first Day of taking them. So likewise, in
Vomiting and Purging, there is no debility of Nature, tho they work many Weeks
together, in such a measure, that the gentlest of direct Purgers (if used so
long, and wrought after the same manner) would bring to Death's door, if not
totally extinguish Life: but these separate the occasional Matter only, and
weaken not. Besides these Properties mentioned, that prove their Subserviency,
(which is but the dark part of Universal Remedies) there are other more vital
Separations, which manifest their Endowments; insomuch, that the very same
Medicines that did provoke, do also stay Vomiting, repress unnatural Sweats,
stop Fluxes, cure the Dysentery and Gripings of the Guts, as also all Fluxes of
the Womb, white or red; stay the Menses if inordinate, and bring them down when
stopped; hinder Abortion, further the Birth when ripe; prevent the After-pains,
yet cleanse more securely, than any Specific whatsoever; dissolve or ripen
Imposthumes, transmit seemingly fixed Tumors from one part to another, so as
sensible Tumors of the Womb, have by the use of them become Imposthumes of the
Abdomen: an Action, if well noted, of no small Advantage to the Sick, and of
great Comfort to an honest Ingenious Physician. I have also known Urine (in a
great Obstruction thereof, contrary to the Common course of Nature, yet
naturally) vented through the fleshy parts about the Kidneys; and that in such
a Quantity, as was not inconsiderable, had it been voided the usual way: tho
this continued no longer, than the Obstruction was separating; for then Nature
assumed her usual Passages. And for a Crown to the Reality of Universal
Medicines, I shall add; They more powerfully excite Nature by insensible
Transpiration, than by all the usual Passages; which Operation (If Physicians
be not stark blind) is of more service a Thousand fold, especially in our days,
than Purging, Vomiting, Sweating, etc. were it not the grand unhappiness of
Mankind, to measure the offices of their Living Spirits, by the Effects and
Consequences of their intemperate Lives. For these Remedies of an universal
Tendency, exciting Nature to Insensible Transpiration, perform that part of
Medicine, which is least minded, tho of greatest Concernment; and although of late
years it has been conceded to, as true, because sensibly experimented; yet the
Medium, by which it is performed, is a mystery to the greater part of
Physicians.

But to proceed to more sensible, and less disputable Actions, (what has been
already specified being most certain, because so often known by my Self)
Nothing, below an Universal Tendency, is capable of such different Operations,
nor can it be so disposed, as Nature may be capable by the same, to extravert
the introversate, and that without Damage to the Parts or Organs, since it is
not given to Nature to create Gifts, but to use them.

For every particular Remedy, tho most pure, cannot be extended beyond its
Gift: As for Instance; The purest Stomachical, that has Gifts to fortify, to
cleanse and separate the Impurities of that Part, not being endowed with an
Universal Disposition to strengthen Nature (to war against those dark Images
she has conceived, and by that means impressed on another Digestion) and also
a Capacity of removing occasional Causes; it shall indeed corroborate the part
for the present, but at the same time shall separate the Impurity thereof to
other Digestions, and so rather render the Party worse: because, the Root of
the Disease being in the Archeus, and that Specific is incapable of
communicating ought thereunto (except what concerned that particular Bowel) the
Disease it self must necessarily be increased in the place to which it is
transferred, and never be subdued, until the Darkness, overwhelming the Spirit,
shall be driven away; or the occasional Matter (in which those Idea's are
impressed) nullify'd.

Whence it is clear in the Light of Nature, That Remedies of an Universal
Disposition are essential to true healing. Not that I judge Specificks
altogether useless; because I certainly know, that the great Art of Physicians
consists in finding out and fitly applying the same: yet with this Proviso,
Viz. That they suit to Parts and the Operations thereof, and be universalized
as to Persons, so, that the sad, the merry, the cold, and hot Constitutions may
thence reap a like Benefit; which is no such hard matter to accomplish: For, if
a Specific be fermented with an Universal, by this means it is made more
general, and minds not Constitutions, but the offended Part, in the
Operations thereof. Yet these Remedies must be used with great Judgment;
because all Specificks have a direct Action, (whether they be Acidums or
Alkalies, Aperitives, Diuretics, Diaphoreticks, Vomiting, Purging, Resolving,
Separating, Contracting or Coagulating Medicines) and if unduly or unseasonably
applied, are direct Evils. For, whosoever gives a Diaphoretick in the beginning
of a Fever, before any Digestion happens in the Febrile Matter, does by the
same indeed produce Sweats, but to the great disadvantage of the Sick: because
that Action of the Medicine, contrary to the disposition of Nature, carries
the more subtle parts of the occasional Cause into the Blood. And besides, the
Sweating Remedy, because not gifted to strengthen Nature, and incline her to
her own Acts, leaves the more gross and oft-times uncoctable diseasy Matter in
the Stomach; which proves fatal to the Patient; or at least renders the Disease
difficult to be healed. Therefore Specificks, tho never so pure or certain, and
having an universal Ferment, but not having thereby universal Gifts, cannot be
used generally without apparent danger: tho, in defects of Parts and Faculties,
where Nature indicates her own Wants, they act more swiftly and certainly than
Remedies more general. Yet it has been obvious to me by manifold Observations,
that direct working Medicines, given in the beginning of Diseases, have
generally injured the Persons afflicted; by removing the offensive Matter to
places, where Nature (without that force) would never have done.

Let any One but observe the Progress of Malignant Fevers, Small Pox, Plague,
etc. and he must necessarily discern, that any Purging Remedy, tho but a
Clyster, (because Nature endeavors to make separation another way by the Skin)
does notably hinder the then needful and necessary Expulsion; and, by
attracting inward, brings Death, or a very great danger thereof. Now, although in
these Acute Diseases, by reason of their swift Motion and sudden determination,
Errors are more obvious; yet are they as certainly committed in the Chronical
and more slow Distempers, and attended with the same Consequences, tho longer
before they be manifested. For, whenever, by direct Remedies, the
Diseasy-Matter is transmitted from one Digestion to another, must it not
unavoidably be rendered worse? and what was Originally an Evil in the Stomach or
Spleen, if carried to the Gaul or Liver, (and there hurting the Actions and
Parts of the same) shall it not be more difficult to cure, seeing those Bowels
are remote from the Stomach, and have a different Digestion, and are not so
easily reached by Physic? For, as Mustiness in a Barrel affects Wine, Beer, or
Vinegar, with the same Odor; so does it in like manner affect any urinous
Liquor. How much more shall diseasy Ferments, if by separation, without being
overcome (which no Purgative Remedy can do) they be carried to the Duodenum,
necessarily infect the adjacent Parts? Also, if I understand any thing in
Nature, the original of all Chronical Diseases, that are not seminal, proceeds
rather from the Errors of Physicians, or the unruliness of Patients, than from
the Weakness of Nature, or strength of increasing Diseases. For, it is almost
daily seen, that one Disease is changed into another; not as progressing
naturally thereto, but through irregular Practice, by Purging, Bleeding,
Sweating, and other direct Actions; whereby acute Diseases become Chronical,
and Chronical Acute; by the one making the Life miserable, and by the other
inferring sudden Death. Which may easily be demonstrated, and I intend
something thereof, when I shall treat of the Progress of Diseases.

Moreover, it is very manifest, that particular Medicines (how prevalent soever
to any particular Part, and the Disease thereof) where a Complication of
Diseases is present, act rather against than with Nature; because they cannot
be employed by Her against the Complication, or the Original of the defective
Part, for such Remedies, acting particularly, and not generally, by cleansing
the Part render it more fit for Reception of the Complicating Evil. So that, by
such irregular Practices, Diseases of the first Digestion consequently become
Distempers of the second or third, etc. And this is, because Diseases of the
first Digestion, not being there subdued, but carried thence to the second or
third, put on another Nature; and sometimes become complicated, tho simple
before, through a natural disposedness to receive all depending Evils of the
Place the diseased live in, or of the time or season of the Year, or of the
Parts they possess. For, when Diseases once degenerate, they are excited
(Nature growing weaker) by every adjacent Evil: whereas in their first assault,
one Digestion alone being concerned, Nature can much more easily overcome them.

If I thought what is here expressed were not sufficient to prove the Truth of
this Matter, I could easily demonstrate the same, by the Practice, either of
Patients not timely using Remedies, or of Physicians using things improper.
For, I do not find Chronical Diseases (in their beginnings) to have took Root
in Us, except from the above specified Errors. And although some seminal
Dispositions derived from Parents (laboring under the same Affects) may beget
diseasy Inclinations; yet they, not being able to act without Matter, may well
be subdued, or at least kept from further Increase, if General Means be timely
used; unless some principal Vessel be naturally deficient.

Every seminal Disposition is incorporeal, till Matter (through debility of
Nature) be conjoined with it; for then it becomes active and a Disease: but if
the Matter, which is the occasional Evil, be removed, the Action cease. Now,
this Matter at the first is easily expelled in a short time; because, every
such occasional Matter is first manifested in the Stomach. But when the seminal
Disposition and that Matter have moved each with other any time, strange
F^rments are begotten, and the Actions of diverse Parts injured thereby. Then
indeed Medicines, tho never so speedy in the beginning, cannot do much, but
require length of time, by reason of the Complication, which happens through
the many Digestions damnified. For, in the first Motion thereof, the first
Digestion is but begun to be defiled therewith, and strives against it: then
Universal Medicines can easily contest with the Matter, and in small time
overcome; because the Disease is yet undeterminate and floating; no Disease of
any denomination having Existence in the Body (except where some Vessel or Part
is hurt) till the first Digestion submits to it, as an admitted Guest, and
ceasing to strive against it, sends Superfluities (as Nourishment) thereunto.
This is apparent in every true Gout; Before the Paroxysm begins, Loathing at
the Stomach, and a restless Disposition is perceived for a Day or two, and the
Pain never approaches, till the Burden be thence removed; tho indeed, the
Torture which happens afterward, does many times cause, as it were, a Loathing:
Yet that is rather the Effect of Anguish, than of Matter. For, whereas at the
first, these Universal Remedies work upon the Matter, by Vomits, Sweats,
Stools, or Urine, and when the Pains exist in the Joints, have no action at
all; yet when the Dolours are removed, then they operate the same way again.
And this is a sufficient proof of the possibility of keeping even Hereditary
Diseases, from growing, or increasing to any great height, by General
Medicines, if seasonably applied.

These General Dispositions of Medicines here treated of, are singularly
useful, to keep Physicians from Error; because Medicines of an Universal
Tendency do manifest the Distempers of particular Parts; and (as with the
Finger) point at the Seats of Diseases, beyond the Imagination of Any, that
have not proved them: for they most sensibly act on the diseased Part. And,
where such Medicines are first administered, there particular Remedies, that are
specific to Parts, have afterward the greater efficacy: because Nature being
assisted in General, does readily dispose of the Particular, according to its
Gift also. For, although they cannot cure every Disease, yet their clearing the
first Digestion, by strengthening and removing the Evil thereof, cause the
particular Medicine to act, without any stop, upon the affected part. And by
this method it is, that Distempers accounted uncurable, have often been cured.

But the great Occasions of Errors committed in the Medicinal Faculty, are:

1. Ignorance of Nature, what she is able to do.

2. Want of Knowledge of the possibility of Remedies to be so universal in their
nature, as to do, or leave undone, as it most conduces to Nature's help.

3. The grand mistake of Practitioners, touching the Causes of Diseases;
judging all Distempers to have their Original from Humorous filths, and in the
mean while never thinking of Venoms arising through Ferments* much less of the
Spirit that makes the Assault. For, although they hourly see the Effects of Anger,
Sorrow, Envy, Fear, etc. yet, when they apply Remedies, the first obvious
Cause, that turns the whole frame of Man, is not considered by them; and only
what they produce is the Subject against which their Medicines are directed.

As for Example: When Rage kindles Choler, they seek to allay Choler, that is
only the product of Rage. Choler makes not Men angry, but Anger conceived
makes that sensible; For Nothing lives, but has enough of that Juice (so
called) to be in Rage sufficiently, yet unless the Spirit be defiled by a
wrathful Image, there is no sense of it apparent.

So also, when our thoughts are greatly exercised with a strong desire to
attain what is unknown, the Constringing Fiat presently ferments the Chyle with
so great a sharpness, through the Contraction of the Spirit in that Exercise,
that it is manifest in the Gust, or sensible Taste, and is in Nature the Cause
of what is called Melancholy; but, if persevered in so long till Separation
happen, without great helps, a certain distraction is produced, or some
violence that is worse.

Envy and Malice have not much different Effects, for the former cause, when
they are conjoined with a strong desire, except that Madness hence does more
rarely happen; yet in that Cold dark harsh fire they impregnate the Chyle, and
induce great Leaness on the Body, harshness and darkness in the Skin and Hair,
and are not curable any more than the other, by any Means applied to the
Humor: For, although that be altered by the force of Physic to day, and wholly
separated; yet if the Spirit strenuously persist in the same Design, the
Disease (in the twinkling of an Eye) is generated again: because, what is once
done, may be done a second time, and needs not any intervening Agent. Although
it is true, that Matter once generated, augments the Evil, and increases the
Darkness so largely, that the Spirit is thereby more materiated, more
exasperated, and in greater Anguish.

Fear stagnizes the Blood, brings Coldness, Sighing, intermittent Pulses,
Convulsions, and (if strongly persisted in) sudden Death, or great Stupidity.
Now, it is true, that in case the occasion of Fear be removed, it is no hard
matter to conquer the Effects; And so, it is consequently true in other Idea's:
but if continued in, tho but in a mere dejection, or sinking of the Life, they
are rendered more difficult to cure, than the more evil and active Passions.

Sorrow is accompanied with debility of Faculties, a pining away of the Body,
and a wasting of the Spirits; and is a Causer of Pains in peculiar Vessels,
through the alteration of Chyle, (the Parent of manifold Evils) yet if once
overcome, the Effects are not long in expelling, tho they have altered almost
all the Constitution.

Now, in as much as it is evident, that Disturbance of the Spirit is the
Generator of defects in the Body; can it be thought, that real Venomes (whether
Epidemical, Endemical, or Artificial) shall less distaste then the
aforementioned Conceptions; since they absolutely assault the Spirit, and
endeavor the Extirpation of Vital Light? the former arise as well from feigned
as real Objects; the later only from real, active, and (after a sort) living
Essences: therefore in reason more perceptible, and causes of greater Wrath,
Fear, Stupor, Sorrow, or irregular Action in our Nature; unless we think every
thing is agitated by Necessity, as Sparks fly upward, and that there is no
living Understanding and Election in Us. But, if we bring these things to a
sensible Test, it cannot be denied, but that we feel the force of Anger, Fear,
etc. in our Bodies; which, if the Spirit in Us were not the Ruler, could never
be so.

Yet, to come nearer to our Selves: Do not trivial Errors, even of Meats and
Drinks, Heats and Colds, primarily affect the Spirit? Who is there, whom
fullness of Meats and Drinks does not affect with Dullness and Heaviness? Do not
Heats, when overmuch, cause Faintings and Languishments; and does not the
Supplement of Cordials (actual or potential) supply that defect? Likewise, is
it not apparent, that Cold (when offensive) stagnizeth the Blood, gives Cause
for dolor in the external Parts to Imposthumous Humors; or stirs up Disorders
internally, through the let of vital Separations; and is usually the Begetter
(if the Spirit be not helped to perform its natural Separations) of Vomitings,
Fluxes, Fevers, Coughs, and what not, through the obstructing of the vital
Spirit? Yet however, this can be no more than the Occasional Cause; the
Efficient must be the Spirit erring in its own Acts, that must constitute this
formal part of distemperature, and bring it to a Disease. And does any thing
sooner restore Nature to her wonted Action, than such things as fortify her,
and help forward Transpiration, which the Cold let? Also, it is very clear,
that if any one, upon the first Sense of a Distemper, does but use such
Universal Means, as can keep Nature to act without disturbance; he will
certainly find, that all these Distempers (so generally afflicting) are driven
away almost as soon as they came. For, by the first Assault, the Archeus is
only confused, and has not thoroughly impressed the obstructed Matter with a
diseasy Character. And this my Patients do generally find true, insomuch that
for many years, few of them know ought of a complete Disease, unless they
neglect their Remedies in the beginning.

For every Medicine of an Universal Tendency is gifted from above, to withstand
the Formation of Diseases (if the Internal Spirit has not given to them a
Seminal Being) inasmuch as it adds Power and Activity to Nature, through the
Light and Life that is in it, to Act regularly. Therefore, of how great Concern
is the knowledge of Medicines strengthening, exhilarating, and pacifying Nature;
since she is the only Actor, as well as Curer of her self? How chary then ought
a Physician to be of what he gives to his Patients, that he may not compel
Nature by the Crudeness, Contrariety, or Poisonous Property of Medicines (which
qualities all direct Purgers and Vomiters have) to exhaust her strength, by
opposing one Evil with another?

If Physicians have not Remedies more general, pure and friendly, than those
that are usually given (I mean such, as can excite Nature to Action, give her
strength, be employed by her to this or that Operation, without leaving
Relics Offensive, nay sometimes more troublesome, than the Disease it self)
the want of such can be no excuse to them: For GOD has not left Mortals
deprived of Remedies, of a more friendly and benign Nature and Condition, did
not Pride, Covetousness and an overweaning Conceit, accompanied with
Negligence, attend some Book-Doctors, keeping them from searching into the
Mystery of true Practice. These Men conclude, if they administer according to a
written Rule, set out by any they esteem able (let the success be what it will)
it is justifiable, because answearable to what was directed; they themselves
being Judges; tho it be contrary to Nature in all Respects. But, were Nature
more minded, and the Receipts of Doctors less, we should see an happier effect
on diseased Persons. And were the errors they commit, writ on their Foreheads;
or the means, by which they have attained their Grandeur among the People, duly
examined; they would be ashamed of the one, and abhor the other.

Nature is that we ought to observe, to strengthen her where she is weak, to
enlighten her where dark, to pacify her when enraged; that Fear may vanish,
Rage may cease, and Amazement be expelled. Whosoever can accomplish this, shall
find the most stubborn, and accounted uncurable Diseases, to fly before him.
But, Diligence, a sound and unbyassed Understanding, accompanied with Patience,
Love and Zeal, are Essential to open these Deeps, and to discover such
Medicines, as are fit to extirpate those Exorbitances. Alas! those that have
trod this Path, have been very few (or they have concealed themselves) and what
they have written rather stirs up desire, than satisfies. The Famous Medicines
of Paracelsus and Helmont, notwithstanding their Voluminous Writings, and
frequent Citations of them, contribute little to us, only, that they incite us
to follow Nature: but the Remedies themselves, either dyed with them, or are
very secret: No general Rule is extant, whereby such Medicines may be obtained.
What shall we do? Where shall we seek? unless we can find the Path of Nature is
general, we shall not be able by Art to answer her deficiency in particular.
The Pious and Learned Silurist, in his Silex Scintillans, has something fitted
to this purpose, where he says: When Nature on her Bosom saw
Her Children dye,
And all her Fruits withred to Straw,
Her Breasts grown dry;
She made the Earth (her Nurse and Tomb) Sigh to the Sky:
Till to those sighs, fetched from her Womb,
Rain did reply.
So, in the midst of all her Fears
And faint Requests,
Her earnest Sighs procured those Tears,
That filled her Breasts.


What is most natural is most fit to be exemplary, and will seldom fail those
that follow it. But, to rake the Volumes of the Dead (when their Sense is
buried with them) to find Understanding, is as irrational as for the Blind to
endeavor to discern Colors. Besides, it is a great undervaluing of Man's own
Capacity, Natures Bounty, and God's Blessing, to judge what has been once done
may not be done again. For, although their Medicines be dead with them, or
obscured; yet Nature is still in being, and her Lord (the Dispenser of every
Virtue) lives for evermore, loves his Creatures, created Medicines for them,
and never fails to impar^ Gifts to the Sons of Men, according as they stand
capacitated to receive them. But, if we think the old Metho^ of the Ancients
(set the natural Part thereof aside, which is the least Particle thereof) which
is already known, and found to be uncertain, to be sufficient for Diseases
which were not then in being, it is as much as to fit one Hat to every Head,
and one Shoo to every Foot.

Let it be inquired how Remedies came first to be known, seeing we know Man is
born into the World, with the least Capacity to help himself; and then Knowledge
must either arise by instinct, or by being acquired by Experience; or be
attained to by Education, or by Something beyond all. Assuredly, Education
cannot rightfully assume to it self the principal Place; for it is most
certain, that that Knowledge which is real, must either be taught from Natural
Instinct, or be acquired from Observation. And if from either of these,
whenever new Diseases happen, must not the Cures of the same naturally arise
from one of them two? because there is no Rule, nor can be any for what was not
in being before. If no Rule, then certainly natural Instinct, or Experience
acquired by Observation, must be the only available and truly prevalent Medium,
by which the most certain and proper Remedies of such new Evils can be known.
Education in these Cases cannot help; For, it is apparently manifest, that all
Education arises from certain received Principles, of supposed Convenience or
Inconveniency: and as the Principles are, true or false, particular or general,
so do they enlarge or diminish the Understanding. What takes being from
Experience is true (if they, who possess the same, have a true sentiment of the
experiment, and well understood the Causes) being sensible; yet, as it has
being from Effects, it is not always presidential for the future: But, what
arises naturally, and has the inborn Principles in Man for its Guide, is the
true Patron of all General and Particular Knowledge; I call to witness the
Testimony of all Ages, and ask:

Who instructed the first Authors of Physic, when there were neither Books,
nor Precedents? Who taught Hippocrates so many Ages since, to distinguish
something Divine in certain Diseases, and to have a Cure for a popular Plague,
never known or heard of before? Whence was it, that the same Man (in that Age
of the World, wherein Diseases and their Remedies were neither known nor
distinguished in any measure) did obtain a most clear Light, not only to
distinguish, but also to cure Diseases with proper Medicines? How was Basilius
a Monk instructed, who in his days became a most knowing Physician? Did not
Paracelsus and Helmont, neglecting the Traditions of their Predecessors, obtain
Medicines of greater Efficacy, than all that went before them? Paracelsus, tho
bred up in Schools, chosen Professor of Physic in Basil, raised not his
Knowledge from what he had read, but from the Light of Nature operating in him;
as sufficiently appears by his dissenting from every known Rule; and by his
effectual Cures; as also, by his own declaration, That he had not read any Book
of Philosophy or Physic in Ten Years time together. And Helmont acknowledged,
That he found out more certainty, when Discourse and Phansy, or Imagination was
subdued, than by all his Readings or Conceptions: To the Truth of which, some
now in being can bear their testimony. And is it not daily manifest, that the
Indians, which have no Books, by Natural Instinct only find out the Virtues of
Plants, so that they rarely want a Medicine for their Common Distempers? Do we
not our selves often see Sick Persons (given over by Physicians) to be cured by
their own natural Impulse? One Person is cured after one sort, Another after
another, altogetehr contrary to a known Method; which we ignorantly call
Chance, but it is so only to Us: For, without doubt, this is Nature, that
naturally excites Man to his Cure; as the Dog, to Quitchgrass; the Cat, to Nep;
the Swallow, to Celandine, etc.

If Nature be (as indeed she is) the Exciter of these Animals, to their proper
Remedies, without any Conception, Forethought, or Reasoning of their own; how
much more is she of Man, in whom is latent a Capacity of knowing things in
their Roots, so, that some Men, void of much discourse or Reasoning, when the
internal Man in them is touched or excited, utter wonderful things; yet, are
incapable of Reasoning how, or why they utter them? Even so, Arts appear more
polite, where Nature brings them forth in Man, without the Consult of his
Reason. For as the Strength of the Lion, and Fierceness of the Tiger, the
Courage of an Horse in time of Battle, and the Fearfulness of the Hare, are not
the Consults of their Strengths or Weaknesses, or the Effect of Education, but
ingenited Properties; so we see some apted to Music, to Poetry, to Limning, to
Arithmetic, the Mathematick Science, and Mechanic Arts, in so high a measure,
that they evidently outstrip all others that have been educated therein. Who
did ever exceed Appelles? When did ever Art make a Poet come near Homer, for
exactness of Phansy? Nay, it is generally taken for granted, that Poets are
born, not made. Our own days produced a Child, capable of solving most solvable
Questions in Arithmetic, without a Teacher, or known Rule. The Merchants, that
Trade to the Gold-Coasts, have told me, that the Negroes, upon their Fingers,
sooner account the value of Commodities, tho in broken Numbers, than our
acutest Merchants can with their Pen. How many have we seen excellent Artists
in Mechanic Works, that never learned them of Masters by Education skilled
therein? But to conclude all, of whom did Archimedes learn his admirable (and
as yet unparalleled) Inventions of Mechanic Engines, by which he so long
withstood the Roman Army, both by Sea and Land; using his single Artifice only,
without the help of other Weapons? insomuch, that Marcellus, General of that
Army, speaking in Mockery to the Engineers of his own Camp (as Plutarch
writes) said: What? shall we never cease to make War with this Briarean
Engineer, and Geometrician here? who, sitting still at his Ease, in sporting
manner, has with shame overthrown our Navy, and exceeded all the fabulous
hundred Hands of the Giants, discharging at one instant so many Shot amongst
us? Whence, I say, had these Men their Instruction, while we, who have had
their Books and Experiments (or at least an indubitate Relation of them) yet
attain not to their Perfection, tho so many hundred Years be past, and so many
Hands and Heads have been employed since their time? Surely Nothing has been a
greater Cause of this deficiency in Us, than our supposing Things declared to
be a better Rule to be gone by, than the Principles they began upon, who
declared them. And were it not for that, I cannot but, think, that we had been
long ago so enlarged in our Understandings, as these Lines need not have been
written at this time. But then, I would also be understood to suppose, that the
Foundation, in and by which these famous Men attained to the Perfection of
their Arts, be not neglected by Us: For they, not regarding (perhaps not
having, or not using) the frail and uncertain help of Books, not trusting to
the written Experiments of others, suffered themselves in great Simplicity (as
the Child above mentioned) to be taught by Nature. This way they obtained a
more certain knowledge, than wa^ possible to be attained by any other way.

Wherefore, to be unlearned in the Art of Physic, is not to want the benefit
of Languages; for a due Observation of, and living up to the Rules of Nature in
that Case provided, are the chief Things necessary to that Science, which is
more easily attained by a sound Judgment, than by reading the most Book-Learned
Wits. For, since Nature is the Guide of the Universe, and of each thing
therein, it is not to be doubted, but that as she brings forth Medicine, so she
does the Physician also to administer the same, whether it be considered
generally or particularly, as to those Remedies, the Gifts of which (in all
Ages, Times and Seasons, to all Persons and all Diseases) are always the same:
or to such Remedies as are more specific, or particular, which are produced by
her in one place only, at one time, and for some Persons; as Medicines fit for
foam certain personal, or local Diseases; and in another Place and Time, for
other Persons and Diseases.

And it is clearly manifest, that the knowledge of the Virtues of Roots, Herbs
or Plants, has been nothing advanced since the Days of Theophra^tus (a Man
naturally experienced ^herein, and the Divulger thereof) ^xcept what has been
discovered by Observation from Beasts, Birds, Old Women, Clowns, Indians, or
some such way unexpectedly. Not, that Nature has been all this time ignorant,
or incapable of succouring her own Offspring, especially since Diseases have
multiplied; but those that pretend themselves Physicians, have not been gifted
by her, but have opposed and hindered her proper Endeavors; they, being bent
and resolved to be wiser than she, and to compel her by Remedies: a Practice
their Forefathers never knew: thinking that Man, who was made in the Image of
GOD, has no Light or Guide in himself, sufficient to direct Him to his own
help, or the help of his Neighbor.

O great Blindness! What Man? the Summary of all created things, that has an
immortal Soul, shall not that in him, which descended from above, be capable to
distinguish what is fit for his help? Shall Birds and Beasts have the
privilege to know the fitness of Remedies, and Man be judged incapable
thereof? Shall barbarous Indians, and rude Shepherds Husbandmen or Old Women do
greater Cures, than the Learned Doctors of our Age? O Shame! For, to be
ignorant of what illiterate Persons know, is a great reproach to the Learned;
if they, pretending great knowledge perform little, (even in the Faculty, of
which they call themselves Masters) and the other, pretending little, are able
to do much more than they. But, this is, because the One is excited by natural
Instinct, and the Other only by credulous reading.

Although, at present, these things may sound harsh to the Ears of some, yet being
true, and having Nature for their Foundation, they will, perhaps, outlive the
Enemies of the same; and (in this latter Age) be as generally received as
heretofore (in times of Apostasy) they have been denied.

Our Ancestors in Art (though vulgarly reverenced under the notion of
Antiquity) were really but the Infancy of the World; it is our Age which, by
following long after theirs, is indeed the true Antiquity: Why then should we
dote wholly upon their Childhood-inventions; and not rather, having the
advantage of Example (which the Beginners must needs have wanted) proceed and
grow old in Understanding, as well as in Time? a Pigmey set upon a Giant's
shoulders, may be able to see farther than Him.

The Second Part.
OF THE General Nature of Diseases.
A Person is then properly said to be Sick, when some Part, at least, cannot
perform its due Action; and whatever produces that Infirmity, is styled the
Cause; and that Disability of the Part to do its proper Office or Function, is
called a Disease: of which some are Simple, some are Complicated.

Simple Diseases are either Natural, Preternatural, or Contranatural: Pardon
the Coinage of the last Word, because it seems as analogical, as the Terms,
Supernatural, Unnatural, Connatural, and the like.

Of the first Sort are all Hereditary Diseases transferred from Parents to
Children, and may be considered under the deficiency of Parts, transmitted
Idea's, or corporeal Venoms; sometimes singly, as when any weakness of Parts in
Parents (not laboring under any other Disease) is conveyed to their
Offspring, who have those deficiencies during Life, in one measure or other;
yet are not at all thereby the more liable to greater Diseases, but to the
trouble of Nature's exercise, where that deficiency is; except, Nature failing
in her own endeavor, admit Retents of things to her further Disturbance; which
yet may easily be prevented, by the help of Remedies specific to the Parts.
But, if to the weakness of a Part, a material Evil be added, then indeed the
Persons (if not quickly cleared of that Disease) through the weakness of their
inward Parts, do either soon die, or live a miserable Life. Nevertheless, even
in the conveyance of such Morbifick Idea's, if the Parts be sound, and no
accidental thing happen to give vigor thereunto, they perceive nothing thereof
for a long time, as is observable in the Derivative Gout, which a Child (tho
begotten by Parents strongly possessed therewith) feels many times nothing*
thereof, till 40, or 50 years of Age: For, it is absolutely necessary and
essential to every Ideal Disease, (except Mental Evils) to have material filths
for the Idea to work upon. For instance I have observed, that those, who have
contracted the poison of the Lues mummially, and have otherwise been of sound
Parts, have had no tokens, nor appearance thereof in several Years themselves,
(and perhaps never may) yet some of the Children proceeding from the same
Bodies, have been naturally infected therewith. And likewise I have known other
Parents Ideally defiled, to have had Issues that appeared sound and free
(because Seeds admit not of ought but Idea's) for 7, 10, or 12 Years; and
afterward that Ideal Disease, by occasional Matter, has manifested it self
apparently as an hereditary Communication. Besides, it is observed generally,
that those who are contaminated with that Disease, by a seminal Contact, have
never any Sense thereof for several Months; and Others, on whom the Disease (so
acquired) breaks out at any time, are conscious of some disorderly Acts, that
have introduced Superfluities, for captivating the Spirits; without which that
Malady, when seminally induced, is not made manifest. But, if the Lues be
materially contracted, then the soundest Body, and the clearest Spirit, escape
not free from the sense thereof for many hours, or at the most not for above 3
days: because it materially affects the Parts, discovers its proper Signs, and
manifests it self to be material; and the Archeus, striving against it,
produces Sores and Fluxes in the Parts infected, thereby to center the Evil in
the Part, to prevent its further progress in the Body: by which means,
Gororrhea's newly gotten are quickly healed, all the internal Parts being
sound; nor do they ever arise to the Lues, except Means be wanting to keep them
from further spreading. For, Material Diseases, (tho very venomous, by reason
of their corporeity) are easier overcome, than the spiritual or Ideal; because
they aseend not to so great an height, as to captivate Nature, so as to make
her nourish the Evil without resistance, except great Errors are committed:
whereas the Ideal do at first darken the Spirits, and then make them
subservient (through insensibleness of the unmateriated Venom) to prepare
Matter for the existence and nourishment of that spiritual Evil, and then is
the Disease formed.

Now, for corporeal Evils that are derived from Parents, having their original
from maternal Nourishments, they manifest their cruelty so soon as the Child is
born, by one Sign or other evident to the Sense, as by Vomitings, Looseness,
Restlessness, Thrush, or Convulsions; sometimes by Acrimonies external or
otherwise, by which their Lives are quickly cut off, if they be not helped with
Remedies that can fortify the natural powers to resist those Evils. And that
general Opinion (grounded upon the defectiveness of common Remedies) that
Physic is not fit for Children, has in all probability cast away many, that
might have been preserved: for material Evils, how great soever they seem, are
seldom mortal, if the internal Powers are strengthened by natural Medicines;
because the Spirit in them is not so vitiated, as to nourish the Evil: tho
indeed a diseasy. Idea, imprinted upon the Archeus of a Child, striveth to
bring the Disease into act, upon the advantage of every occasional disorder.

Preternatural Diseases (so called, because they have no Root naturally from
Parents, or from diseasy Seeds; but are accidentally begot by variety of
Distempers, as the Spirit or Part is more or less vitiated) are such as arise
through the Errors of Digestion; by Fullness, Emptiness, Colds, Heats, Sorrow,
Anger, Fear, Hatred, etc. things transmuted, transmitted or retained; or when
one Disease is changed into another through misapplication of Physic, or the
irregularity of the Patient. Under Fullness, is comprehended Gluttony,
Drunkenness, or any Excess beyond the ability of Nature to digest: for the
disagreements likewise of Foods (which, tho taken in small Quantities, may
notwithstanding offend) are to be numbered among Excesses; because, by reason of
their Properties disagreeing with Constitutions, through want of use; their
difficulty to be digested in their being over solid, their tendency to
corruption, their fermental Dispositions, or their hostile Venomes to
particular Natures (by their Antipathy thereunto) may prove equally
burdensome, as the over-charging of the Stomach with agreeable Meats and
Drinks: Either of these are the Foundations of Surfets, which beget
Languishings in the Body, Vomitings, Headaches, and Loosnesses, through
disability of the Pylorus; and if not conquered or healed in their primitive
Root and Seat, then the Jaundies (black or yellow) Iliac or Cholic Passion,
Diarrhoea; Quotidian and Tertian Fevers, Dysentery, Lientery, Imposthumes, and
Obstructions in the Spleen, Mesentery, and Reins, have their existences: whence
Dropsies, Consumptions, Hysterical Passions, Cachexies, Falsies, Vertigoes,
Apoplexies, and Epilepsies, have their original. For, when Evils are not
subdued in the Stomach, but vitiously slide into other Bowels, to defile and
beget strange Ferments in them; then the Spleen and Stomach conspire to the
maintenance thereof; their own Government being characterically blemished with
the foregoing disorders. Emptiness, if too much, makes a depression of the
Spirits, languishing of the Vital Powers, and an indisposition of the Parts of
assimilate Nourishment. The only Remedies of this, are Foods of a nourishing
and more spiritual Operation. Colds and Heats, in too great a Degree, congeal
or resolve the natural Spirits to an extreme, and obstruct, or expend the same.

Contranatural Diseases are all Epidemics, Endemics; and every Poison, yea, all
such Maladies as derive not their original from the Parent's Seed; nor take
beginning from preternatural Excesses in Meats and Drinks, Errors in Digestion,
or the like; but immediately from without assault the life. Of this kind are
the Pestilence, and all annual (commonly Autumnal) Distempers, by us called New
Diseases, which arise from the putridness of the external Air, by which our
internal Air or Ether, being primarily defiled, suddenly contaminates the
Spirit of Life, so as to beget Diseases correspondent to the Calamity the
Spirit is oppressed with, under the predominating Powers of Stupor, Rage, or
Fear.

In Stupor, the Disease having enervated the Efficacy of the Spirits
discrimination, finisheth the Tragedy without resistance: and when it is
finished, Nature her self gives testimony of her own Vanquishment, by that
small refuscitation of her proper Powers, which plainly shows her Incapacity to
strive against the prevailing Evil; because, while sensible of the Assault, she
willingly yields to Death, without Strife: as was sufficiently manifest to me
in those, that (in the Year 1665,) had the Plague; in whom, Nature, so soon as
she was sensible of her own Inability of overcoming, voluntarily submitted to
the prevailing Evil. And, tho Sense was perfect, yet, when the Tokens appeared,
each Person so concerned, tho seemingly well (Weakness excepted) as at any
other usual time, seldom failed of dying in 12, or 24 hours* Under this
manifestation of the prevailing Disease, the Pulses are equal* tho slow, the
Urine thin, and nothing visibly different from an healthful State: nevertheless
in these, there are Twitchings of the Nerves, Tendencies to Convulsions, which
(except Remedies be applied of so benign a Nature, as to be capable and able
to enliven the Spirit to act against the Disease, and resist its Venom) always
end in Death.

In Rage, Nature being sensible of the Evil, acts violently against it, moves
in and by the Fire of Nature, stirs up Vomitings, Headaches, Phrensies, and
Vehement Burnings, Blanes, Buboes, Carbuncles, Pustles, etc. ferments the Blood
sometimes to evacuation by the Nostrils, Bowels and Urine. But, if Remedies be
used, that can resist the Venom and appease the Rage, Sweats following, all
those inordinate Acts cease; Blanes, Carbuncles, and Pustles ripen; Buboes
dissolve, and the Disease is by little and little overcome.

Fear betrays the Succors of Nature, and renders all endeavors useless;
because (through that) she readily receives the Venom, sinks under it, and
rather endeavors to nourish, than strives against the Enemy. The Signs of
which are Faintings, Languishings of the Spirits, Palpitations of the Heart,
Tremblings of the Pulse, and rarely ever any other Testimony of the Disease,
than the Tokens: and if such Persons have (as sometimes happens) Blanes,
Pustles, Carbuncles, or Buboes, they neither ripen, nor dissolve. In this Case
(tho so desperate) if high Cordials be at first administered and continued, with
those Medicines, that resist malignity, then sometimes the Sick are happily
cured, otherwise they certainly perish.

The Distinctions of Diseases, Natural, Preternatural, and Contranatural, being
premised; it is now to be understood, That the Change of one of them into
another, or the Mixtion of them each with other, beget a Complication; as the
two General Evils, the Lues and Scurvy (in their progress, from their first
beginnings in Us, to the Exit of our Lives) do clearly demonstrate. Touching
the Lues, a Distemper too well known, I forbear to speak; but generally in the
Scurvy, a Disease by me long observed, I find the power of Contraction (or
Congelation) and Resolution. For Scurvys present themselves to our
consideration, as arising either from too great Constringency, whereby the
Effervency of the Blood is stayed; or from an overgreat Tartness, or
Resolution of the Chyle into an abounding Fermentation. In the one Case, the
Bodies of People afflicted are always (or for the most part) chilly, sleepy,
numned, stiff, and indisposed to Motion; in ^he other, they labor under
Faintings, ^alpitations of the Heart, involuntary ^weats* and Heats, and as
soon troubled with Cold again. For, in the Assault ^^om without, are inferred
Numnesses, ^ontractions of the Nerves, extreme ^oldnesses and Lamenesses. And
when nature (by the Assault perverted) er^neously strives against them, hor^ble
Pains ensue, and produce Rheu^atisms, and Scorbutic Gouts, (the Effects of
Tartness) known by Dolors in the Nerves, as well as in the Joints and, when the
Assault is more inward, then arise Palsies, Convulsions, Vertigoes, and all
other capital Diseases, that have their Original from Congelations in the
Nerves. On the other hand, when Resolution is present (for Congelations and
Resolution^ are too frequent in every part of the Body; and, as Paracelsus well
observed, are the Sources or Originals o^ all Diseases) there sometimes happen^
a Resolution of the Members, by Fermentations in the Blood, Erysipela's all
open Sores, Cancers, and the like also inordinate Bleedings, preternatural
Fluxes of Blood, Bloody Vomitings, vehement Burnings, Loosnesse of all kinds,
and the like. For, the Diarrhea, Lientery, Dysentery, Catarrhs, Hectic
Fevers, Solution o^ the Joints, etc. are properly calle^ Diseases of
Resolution.

I should now subjoyn a discour^ touching the Forms and Operation of ^^enomes,
forementioned in this Theory, but because they rarely come in play, I had
rather supersede that Treatise, until the Doctors vouchsafe to allow them an
Existence; Wherefore I shall here put a short end to the General Nature of
Diseases, whose universal Work it is to put such an end to Ours.

The Third Part.
A Proof of the former Positions by Practice.
NOw, I proceed to a direct Explanation of my Practice in Cure of Diseases,
consonant to the Theory above given. But, because I have elsewhere spoken of
Cures, by me performed in the same Method, from the Year, 1657, to the Year
1665; I will discourse only of those Distempers, that since that Time (tho of
the Progress and Determination of the Plague alone then raging, I could write a
large Volume) have fallen under my Care, and been Cured without the help of any
of the Compositions of the Shops, or commonly known Chemical Remedies; both
which kinds of Medicines, I do, in a manner, tacitly disclaim, as unfit to
serve the extreme Necessities of Nature; yet, have I so far allowed of them, as
they may in some sort or degree be of use in Cases less difficult: well
knowing, that it is only the Prudence of Physicians, in a due application of
Remedies specific to Parts or Juyces, which renders them serviceable to the
End, for which they were made. Nevertheless, for brevity sake, and because in
my Theory to this present Practice of Physic, I have at large discoursed about
this matter, I shall say no more of them; but go on, by the Practice it self,
to prove the Use of General Medicines to be rational, and true, certain in
Nature, and confirmed by Experience.

In order to which, I begin with the Plague in the Year 1665, and the Diseases
of the following Years; wherein popular Distempers (the Relicts of the
preceding Plague) did sufficiently manifest themselves in their Vigor, and
reigned long, to the Astonishment of those Doctors, who (the Year before)
conscious to themselves of the Deficiency of their own Medicines, fit to resist
that Malignity, forsook their Patients in a time, when their Skill (had it been
worth Esteem) would have been of greatest Service.

Having affirmed, Diseases to be either Simple, or Complicated, Resolved or
Congealed, as I must (with Paracelsus) acknowledge all Diseases are, it is now
time to speak of their Cures; first particularly, and afterward, generally.

In order to which, for order sake, I intend to give a short hint of Cures,
both particular and general (in discoursing of which, I shall be exceeding
brief) afterward, by many Examples produced from my own Experience, of more
than Eighteen Years since the last Plague, confirm the Truth of this my Theory,
by my proper Practice in a larger manner.

Therefore first, I thus say: In Congealed Distempers, Remedies furthering
Transpiration, by resolving those acrid Powers, that hinder the same, are most
conducent to the Cure of them. But, in Resolution of the Powers, where
Faintings, and Palpitations are predominant; there Constringents are most
serviceable.

Yet open Tinctures, by which Nature may (as in a Glass) see her own
Deficiency, perform both the one and the other, more strongly or more remissly,
according to the Excellency of them.

Of the Plague.
IN the beginning of the said Plague, I used all the known Anti-pestilential
Medicines (both of Ancient and Modern Physicians) which I found would indeed
provoke Sweats; yet not naturally, but by help of Clothes, where a great
Burning generally was, before the Sweats appeared. By reason whereof, Nature,
(being wearied) through such a forcible way of acting, could not be supported
sufficiently to the extirpation of that Venom, so as to dissolve Buboes,
without maturation; nor ripen Blanes, or Carbuncles, but by a long Series of
Time, and great Conflicts of the Sick, which too frequently ended in Death;
tho, the Plague (at that time) was not come to the height of its Malignity.
Perceiving this, I had recourse to my own Medicines, which I had formerly found
successful in most Fevers: For, by these Remedies, such as came to me upon the
first Assault, if the Chyle was infected, and any Fullness remained in the
Stomach, they usually Vomited at first, and presently after fell into Sweats,
without preceding Burnings, or the help of Clothes. And the Sweats, for the
first 12, or 24 Hours, were like drops of Water from a Bucket, for largeness;
yet was there not any Depression of Spirit, but more ease, and greater vitality
or liveliness, and the Continuation of the same Sweats was pleasant and
refreshing: by which Means, Buboes dissolved, and in the third Day (at
farthest) the Malignity was separated: And, tho the same Remedies were
continued, yet after that time no Sweats appeared, otherwise, than was usual in
an healthful Person, the Time and Season being considered. But where Blanes and
Carbuncles appeared, there Sweats were not so great, nor so continual; but
usually on the third Day, the Blanes and Carbuncles opened, and their Eschars
were divided from the Living Flesh, and digestion so followed into Matter, that
in a short time (comparatively to that, where other Medicines were used)
perfect Health followed.

The different manner of Assaults at that time.
In the first Assaults of that Pestilence, some were taken with great shivering
Pains in the Back and Head: others were afflicted with Lightness of the Head,
without pain; but had Tremblings and Palpitations of the Heart, and sometimes
Swoonings. Some were assailed, as with a Stroke, Stab, or Prick; Others with
Blanes, Buboes, or Carbuncles, without any manifest Sickness at their first
appearance.

My Method of Cure.
Under all these various manifestations (except where great fear was) I always
used one and the same Method. When they were first taken ill, I ordered them to
go to Bed presently, and lay no more Clothes on, than they usually did in time
of health; then I gave them my Powder, in a spoonful of Wine, Ale, or Beer: and
I gave my Aqua Pestilentialis, if taken with shiverings, two or three
Spoonfuls; but if hot, then but one Spoonful, or one Spoonful and half,
persuading them to lie still; which if they did, Sweats presently followed, and
for their supports therein, they were allowed Mace-Ale, Posset Drink, Sack or
White Wind; thin Caudle with a little Wine in it, and either of these somewhat
often repeated, but in small Quantities. My Aqua Pestilentialis was taken as
often, as need required; sometimes once in an hour, sometimes more, and
sometimes less, as Occasion was. My Powder was repeated once in two, four, or
six hours, according to the Capacity of Nature: where Diminution of Sweats and
of Strength happened, it was often taken; but if the Patients continued sweating,
and strong and brisk, only once in six hours. But, if there seemed a Tendency
to a Looseness, which (in that Disease) was usually fatal, my Coralline Cordial
was often used, a spoonful at a time every half hour, until the Signs of Laxity
disappeared. Where great Thirst was concomitant with the Disease, I used my
Simplex, mixed into the form of a small Cordial Drink, ordering one spoonful at
a time to be taken into the Patient's Mouth, and swallowed down leisurely, as
it were by Drops. And if great Restlesness happened, through want of Sleep, I
administered ten grains of Salt of Hartshorn purified, and dissolved in
Cytron-Water, or White Wind Posset Drink, and repeated the Dose once in two
hours, not neglecting the foresaid Powder. This Remedy thus seasonably given,
seemed to me far more successful in relieving Nature in that Exigency, than any
common Dormative Medicine, of what kind soever. But, if presently after the
Assault there appeared a Stupor, Drowziness, and a slow Pulse; then did I make
a strong Cordial of the Simplex, and gave of it a Spoonful at a time, once in
an hour (not neglecting either the said Powder, or the said Aqua
Pestilentialis) till the Pulse was raised, and the Sweats flowed free; and then
I proceeded in all things, as before specified.

In great Fear, tho I gave the Powder at first, yet I always used large
Quantities of the Coralline Cordial, to refresh the declining Spirits, and to
procure free Sweats; which if attained, then the Method before spoken of was
continued to the end of the Cure.

In the Anguish of Carbuncles and Blanes, I applied outwardly (besides the
internal Medicines) my Resolving Cerot, and changed the same once in 6, or 12
hours, according as the Dolours were more intense, or more remiss. For I had,
by sad Experience, seen the fruitlesness of all Magnetical Attractives, whether
Mineral, Vegetable or Animal: nay, the prepared Toads, so famous in the Year,
1603, (testified of by Helmont, and before him highly extolled by Paracelsus)
proved here of no use, either to extract the Venom, or prevent the Malignity
of that Disease.

I here write nothing of Buboes, because (where my Medicines were used) they
never ripened, but dissolved; except, where Patients were disobedient, and
unwilling to continue in their Sweats, and so gave Occasion to the maturation
thereof: which (tho but seldom) happening, I then applied only my Resolving
Cerot, as before; and found the same, as well in ripening as in resolving, to
exceed all Poultisses and Plasters, I ever used before, or since.

Remarks upon the Carelessness of Patients afflicted with the Plague, or their
Attendants, etc.
WHen some Persons, using my Medicines, had layn in Sweats, for 24 hours, more
or less, and found themselves seemingly well, and free from all Disturbances,
or Sense of the Pestilential Venom, they (notwithstanding their Sweats
continued large and free) would needs rise out of Bed, and so checked those
Sweats, inferring on themselves sudden Death. For, I always observed, that no
One, having that Disease, who did rise out of Bed before the third Day; or at
least before Sweats (excited by the use of my Medicines) had wholly ceased, did
ever recover; except by that long and tedious way of Maturation of Buboes,
which then admitted not of Dissolution; because after that time, Sweats could
never more be naturally excited.

Also, no less fatal Errors were committed by Nurses, and such as attended the
Sick, in laying on too many Clothes, during the time of their Sweats: for, so
doing, Violence was offered to Nature, and the Spirits, oppressed thereby,
languished under their own Burden, and were no longer capable of help, by any
Means whatsoever.

Moreover, where People (in time of the Pestilence) to please their Appetites,
eat large Meals, or over-cooling Foods, as Fresh-Fish, all sorts of Fruits,
Melons, Cowcumbers, etc. tho in a remiss degree; yet, if the same Persons were
taken with that Disease, great Vomitings and Loosnesses followed, which did
generally end in Death. Because such Persons could not (by any Remedies) be
brought to Sweat, after the manner of those, that lived Temperately, and
avoided like Excesses. Also, these Patients were wont, for the most part, to
impute their extreme Loosnesses and Vomitings, rather to their own inordinate
Eating, than to the Power of the Plague, then Raging; and so, sought not
Remedies against the invading Venom, but used particular Medicines, according
as the present and (by them thought) only Occasion required. Whereas, on the
Contrary, Those that lived Temperately, and were watchful over themselves, so
as to take Remedies presently after the first Sense of any Assault of that
Venom, and followed the Order before prescribed, very rarely miscarried. For,
whole Families, that have been large and infected, have all escaped, through
their proper Care, and Prudence, in duly observing the Directions above given.

Yet, which is to be lamented, I have observed, that when Spots appeared, of
what kind soever they were, the Nurses and Tenders of the Sick, seeing them,
were seized with so great amazement, that they forsook all their former Care,
insomuch as they gave up their Patients for dead; tho those Spots were not the
direct Signs of Mortality. For all I have seen, having such Spots, (except One)
did recover. But that Spot, which whosoever was seized with dyed under it, had
a round Circle, dark blew, and green, (after the manner of Mixtions of Colors
in the Rainbow) and in the Center thereof a Crimson Spot, that felt hard under
the Finger, in comparison of the Softness of the other Flesh. This, in that
Plague, was the infallible token of sudden Death: Therefore such Spots were
rightly called Tokens.

Of the Griping of the Guts.
THis Disease, for some Years (especially the first) after the Plague, did
sufficiently manifest it self to be a Relict of that Popular Distemper: For
this Malady Exceeded all other acute Distempers; the Patients, afflicted
therewith usually dying at the third or fifth day. The reason of this, was
because the Veins opening, the Blood flowed out, like a Torrent, and passing
through the Guts, no laudable Excrement could be seen in the Stools, but Blood,
and a Gelly-like Matter, that smelt like boiled Horns. The Pains were
excessive, Stools almost continual, tho in small Quantities; and until such
time as by the power of Nature alone, or through the help of proper Medicines,
the Blood was restrained, the Gelly-like-Matter lessened, and Excrements
laudable (both in Odor and Existence) began to appear, this Disease was never
cured.

My Method of Cure.
Upon the first Assault, or great Gripings, and appearance of Blood, or
Gelly-like-Matter in the Excrements, I gave my Powder (above specifyed in the
Plague) once every two hours, my Coralline Cordial once every hour, and applied
to the Belly Tripe parboyled, which was laid on warm; and when that waxed Cool
or Smelt, other warm parboyled Tripe was applied. By this Method, the first Day
the Blood was restrained, and the Pain somewhat mitigated: The second Day, the
Gelly-like-Matter lessened, and some appearance of Excrement showed it self:
And on the third Day, laudable Excrements were seen, and the Gelly-like-Matter
disappeared. Then, by continuing the same Medicines, in the former Method,
large Sweats were produced, which (being continued in but one Day or two)
perfect Health succeeded. Nor did I ever know any One, from that time unto this
very Day, perish by ahe Malignity of this Disease; if they took my Medicines
(and begun with them at first) according to this Order.

The Order of Diet, by me prescribed in this Disease.
I ordered Gelly of Hartshorn to be given to the Sick, and thin Broth made of
Tripe or Sheeps-feet, with Bread (not Oatmeal) boiled in it: Beer and Wine I
forbid, till the Disease slackned. I permitted Milk and Water, with Mallows in
it, to be frequently drunk, in small Quantities at a time. But, where great
Thirst was, I allowed Posset Drink, made white, (not green) with a little
Canary, or Malago Wine in it.

Remarks upon the Errors of Physicians at that time, in administering common
Binders, Opiates, or other Restringents.
In the Cure of this Disease, I deservedly rejected all Common Binders, or
Restringents, too much at that time used by other Physicians, how specifical
soever they were, or might be supposed to be; because I discerned, that Nature,
being enraged by the presence of that Corroding Venom, wanted only suitable
helps, to restrain her own Exorbitances. I likewise rejected Opiats, because
they were uncertain; and tho they eased Pains, they cured not. For, I had well
observed, in this Disease, That whenever a forcible Stop was made, either by
Opiats or Restringents, (if Nature were not, at the same time very strong) then
Light-headedness and sudden Death followed. For, such Remedies, having no Power
to expel the present Venom, did only Stop the Passages, by which Nature her
Self intended to separate that Evil; so that, instead of being natural Helps,
they proved no other, than unnatural Introducers of Death.

Of the Scurvy.
THis being the general Disease of our Country, seems both Nurse and Tomb to
all other Distempers. The last Plague was buried in it. For, when that
Pestilence waxed more mild, it plainly exhibited Scorbutic Symptoms. The Lues
is, by it, so masked, that its Original cannot be discerned. Autumnal
Distempers are hid therein; and every preternatural Disease, of what kind
soever, if not radically expelled by suitable Remedies, discovers it self under
a Scorbutic Form. Yea, Paternal Diseases, tho very various, do never appear
without some Signs of the Scurvy commixed with them. Hence it comes to pass,
that when Particular Remedies are applied to Particular Parts, or the Vices of
them, (no General Medicine being in the mean time used) tho they may cure or
remove the particular offenses of these or those Parts, yet it is but as the
Cutting off the Hydra's Head, in stead of which many more appear.

Now, as it is apparent, that all these Diseases are covered by the Scurvy; so
it is no less manifest, that the same Distemper does both nurse and nourish
them. For the Lues becomes more mild, through the dark cold and stupifying
Nature thereof; so that it does not so often occasion great pains in the Bones
between the Joints, as were usual (when the Lues was simple, and not
complicated with the Scurvy) but wandereth in the Nerves, disaffecteth the
Brain, produces Gouts of a new strain, Rheumatisms, Convulsions, Palsies,
Vertigo's, Lethargies, Atrophea's, Lamenesses, etc. In every of these Diseases,
tho particular, which by the Ancients (according to what we read of former
Ages) were well known, and often cured; yet, at this time, if they be remedied,
it is rather casual, than real: because the greatest part of those Patients,
that in our time have been thus afflicted, were never cured by any Medicines of
the Ancients, unless in a long Series of time, where Nature her Self was the
Sole and Principal Actor: but, by General Remedies, they usually obtained a
safe and speedy Cure. For, it is clear, that when the Lues is new shaped, by
the modifying power of the Scurvy, that the Remedies, usually successful in
expelling and annihilating the Rage of that Disease, proved notoriously
inimical to Nature; by reason of the cruel Qualities of Mercury, by the power
of the Venom of the Lues, made corporeal. Which Corporeity, where the Lues is
simple, is found to be of great Use and Service in abating the Rigor of that
Disease; but when Scorbutical it rather increases, than lessens the same: as I
my Self can (by sad Experience) testify; and Hartmannus did many Years ago, in
his own Practica Chymiatrica, and in his Annotations upon Crollius his Basilica
Chymica, sufficiently manifest the Inimiciousness of Mercury to Persons in any
measure afflicted with the Scurvy; yet he highly praises the Virtue of
Antimony in Scorbutic Distempers; which plainly shows he had a true Sense of
the different Nature of such Diseases and their Remedies.

The Gouts of our time very rarely appear Simple. For in all my Practice, for
30 Years past, I never could discern above three Persons, afflicted with that
Disease (which in them was Hereditary) that did exactly answer to the
Descriptions of the Ancients: all the Other have appeared rather Scorbutical,
than otherwise, and been by me cured after the same General Method above
specifyed. But in every true Gout, simple and not complicated (as in this our
Day all such Distempers generally are) the tormenting Pain thereof is only in
the Joynt-Water, or Synovy between the Joints; not elsewhere: whereas these
Complicated or Scorbutic Gouts are attended with Pains in the Muscles, Nerves,
between the Joints, and in the Vertebra of the Back, in the Os Sacrum, and
Head; Places never mentioned by the Ancients (in all their Descriptions of that
Disease) as liable to Arthritick Dolours, or more or less to be affected
therewith. Therefore,

Having thus far given a brief, but true, Definition of the Nature of the
Scurvy, showing how it intermixeth it self with other Distempers, disguising,
changing and nourishing them; I now proceed to Examples of Cures of the same
Disease, as it has manifested it self to Us, in these our Days, under several
Forms.

Example 1.
A Man of good repute, having for some Years labored under great debility of
Faculties, with dejection of Spirit, and Leanness of Body, insomuch, that the
Physicians he then used, concluded an Atrophea or Consumption to be present;
therefore, as the best Remedy for One in his Condition, they ordered him to
suck his Wife's Breasts: This Means he used, and other Remedies by them
prescribed, notwithstanding which, a general Lameness followed, with a Palsy,
and great Convulsions, which wrought so great Confusion in his Physicians, that
(not knowing what to do further) they gave him over for dead or uncurable.
After which, Application being made to Me, when I had well weighed his
deplorable State, heard what had been done, and saw the lamentable Effects
thereof, I discerned that the Source of all was the Scurvy, and that nothing
could alleviate that Evil, but Medicines of another Strain. Therefore, I first
of all gave him my Scorbutic Cordial (the Brain being deeply affected) with my
Powder, repeating that once in six hours, and the Cordial as often as he pleased.
At Night going to Bed, I gave my Arcanum Metallorum, and my Scorbutic Tincture,
30 Drops at a time, in all his Drink, Day or Night. This Method being continued
for some few Days, his Convulsions ceased, the Weakness of his Limbs began to
abate; and, instead of great Chilness and Coldness, that formerly attended,
Warmth and Itchings began to discover themselves, and (at last) gentle
breathing Sweats: by which Means, his Palsy was taken off, his lost Speech
restored, by little and little he recovered the Use of his Limbs, and was at
length wholly freed from his Disease, and lived (tho always a weakly Man)
Thirteen or Fourteen Years after.

Example 2.
An Aged Gentlewoman, afflicted with Rheumatism-like Pains, (after an Autumnal
Fever) which Physicians laboring to remove, by applying cooling and altering
Things, did indeed take off the external Dolours; but (by their Remedies)
retracted the Matter causing those Pains inwards to the Bowels and Mouth of the
Stomach; which great Evil deprived her totally of the use of her Limbs. Whilst
in this sad and deplorable State, being utterly given over, as a dying Person,
or at least uncurable, by her Physicians, I was sent unto. When I came, and had
well considered her Condition, and found her Stomach to be so very weak, as not
able to retain a Glass of Sack, without rejecting the same suddenly by Vomit; I
did not in this Case (as in Others) give her my Powder at first, but my
Scorbutic Cordial and Scorbutic Tincture, as I saw Cause, and the Exigency of
her present State required. When, by these Means, I discerned her Spirits to be
somewhat enlivened, and her Stomach fortified in some competent measure, I then
gave my Powder once a Day, and my Arcanum Metallorum at Night. Having continued
this Method for six or seven Days, I found her Water began to Change, and some
Signs of Separation therein, whereby I judged her Digestion to be in some
measure recovered. This Course I continued Day by Day for a long time together;
in which, I discerned that those Pains, which were before (by their Medicines)
brought into her Belly and Mouth of her Stomach, were again retired outward:
after which many Pustles came forth, and her Limbs by little and little
gathered Strength; and, about three quarters of a Year after, she recovered her
pristine State of Health, and is now alive at this Day, tho several Years since.

Example 3.
Another Woman, tho Young* yet through Convulsions was so drawn together, as to
go almost double; and when no Remedy could be had for her from other
Physicians, she came to me. After I understood from her how it had been with
her, I proceeded to the Cure as follows. I gave her my Powder every Morning, my
Arcanum Metallorum, and Arcanum Veneris at Night; sometimes one, sometimes the
other, as occasion was, and the Exigency of the Disease required; not omitting
to give my Scorbutic Tincture to be taken in all her Drink, during the whole
time of the Cure. Continuing this Method, she was recovered in a short time,
and is yet living, tho several Years since.

Example 4.
A Young Gentlewoman, afflicted with a great Congelation in the Sternon, always
inclining her Head downwards to the Stomach, as if it had been contracted and
forced thitherwards, never having the benefit of Sneezing, but long suffering
great Palpitations of the Heart; little or no Sleep, and such as was, much
confused, continually under Terror, and at the same time with Child;
sustaining this Misery until the time of her Delivery, and after that finding
no Abatement of the Evil, notwithstanding the Advice of several Physicians, and
the frequent Use of their Remedies, did at last send to me. I, finding her in
that sad Condition, and understanding all the Remedies she had used to be
fruitless and unsuccessful, discerned her Disease to arise from Congelation,
under the Scorbutic Power. Therefore, the Fourteenth Day after her Delivery
being come, I first gave her my Powder, which quickly brought her to more
sedateness, than she had found in some Months before, and the small Sleep, she
then had, proved more refreshing than formerly, as she her self acknowledged.
This Encouraged me to proceed, and She (according to the Result of her own
Reason and Judgment) rationally submitted to the following Course.

My Powder was given once in 4, or 6 hours; my Scorbutic Tincture in all the
Drink she took; my Arcanum Veneris, and Arcannm Metallorum every Night
alternately; my Hysteric Cordial, and Hysteric Drops, upon every Occasion, or
Exigency of Nature; not neglecting other Cordials (by intervals) for support.
This Method, being daily continued, till Strength came, and she was able to
move, did at last (with a few other Auxiliaries) accomplish the Cure so
apparently, that the external Cutis all peeled off, her whole Mass of Blood
renewed, and she seemed unto All (that knew her) to have assumed a new
Complexion, and Nature.

Note: That this Woman had not Sneezed in 6, or eight Months; but upon the
first Motion thereunto, the Congelation seemed to be much more easy, and
afterward she sneezed usually twice a Day, and by that Means the Contraction
daily lessened, until it was totally dissolved.

Also, among the various Scenes, that happened in this Disease, there never was
any Purgation by Stools and Vomits; but the Distemper gradually vanished, by
Transpiration, small Sweats, and Urine, without any other sensible Evacuation
thereof. And now she has attained her full Strength, and perfect use of her
Limbs, with as great Activity of Spirit, as did ever attend her before, and
has since conceived with Child.

It cannot rationally be expected I should here set down every Accident, that
happened, and the particular Auxiliaries I used, in this and the other Scorbutic
Diseases before spoken of: because, so doing, I should extend this Treatise to
too great a Bulk, and render it less serviceable (by augmenting the Price) than
otherwise, as by me intended, it is like to prove. I could also here subjoyn
many more Examples of Scorbutic Distempers by me Cured, after the former
Method; but for the same Reason I omit them, and proceed to Examples of Cures
performed in other Diseases no less deplorable.

Of Palseys.
PAlsies are fourfold, and therefore have rightly obtained four distinct
Denominations, as follows: Palseys of Contraction, Palsys of Resolution,
Numn-Palsyes, and Shaking Palsyes; which two last are partly resolved, and
partly congealed, therefore cannot be ranged under either of the former.

Of the Cure of these, by four Examples only, I intend to speak, with as much
brevity, as the Subject Matter it self can admit.

Example 1. Of a Contracted Palsy.
A Maiden Child, about Ten years old, having her Arms and Legs drawn together,
and her Neck drawn of one Side, (this being certainly known to every Physician,
to be a Paralytic Contraction) I began at first, as I had done in other Cases,
with my Powder, giving it twice the first Day, and at Night my Arcanum
Metallorum. This Method I continued Day by Day, using frequently my Mixtura
Simplex, given five or six times every Day. Sometimes I gave her my Volatile
Spirit (not the fetid acid Phlegm) of Tartar, in all her Drink. By which
Method, in three Weeks time, there seemed to be some Amendment, the Nerves were
more relaxed, the Head began to ache backward, and a Warmth more than usual in
that Part; and this descended down by the Backbone. Soon after this appeared a
Drivling in the Mouth. After the Powder had been taken for a Month, it began to
work every Day, and wrought a whole Month after by Vomit and Stool alternately:
yet still, with Increase of Strength, and Restoration of Faculties. And, in
about ten or twelve Weeks time, she was perfectly restored to her pristine
State of Health, and is since married, has had Children, and is alive at this
time.

Note. In this whole Cure, no other Medicines (than what are above specified)
were used, except a Resolving Oil, and that only for the first three or four
Weeks, until the Powder began to work; then I ceased the use thereof.

Example 2. Of a Resolved Palsy.
IN Resolution of the Members of a Male Child, where all the Nerves were
relaxed, so that Arms; Legs, and Neck, hung like Parts, that never had Capacity
of Motion; I used only my Powder, and my Arcanum Metallorum for three or four
Weeks together, and the Child by little and little gathered strength, and was
at length perfectly recovered; is since become a strong man, and alive at this
day.

Example 3. Of a Numn Palsy.
A Man of Seventy years of Age, was numned all over one side, his Speech for
the present quite taken away; but coming to me, and taking my Medicines
presently (having long before been my Patient) he was cured in three Weeks
time, in manner thus: I gave him my Powder twice a day, and my Arcanum
Metallorum every night, with my Scorbutic Tincture in all his Drink. This
Method being followed, in the first three days he could move some of his
Fingers; and so, Strength and Heat coming gradually into every Part, about the
tenth day he began to drivel, and the Powder to operate so, that he had loose
Stools every Day; and soon after recovered his Speech, and the perfect Use of
his Limbs, and is yet alive, though about Ten years since.

Example 4. Of a Shaking Palsy.
A Lad, about 14 years of Age, laboring under an Autumnal Fever, fell into a
Palsy, having a continual Shaking, with strong Convulsions also attending. To
him I gave (as to Others I had don) my Powder, my Arcanum Metallorum, my
Mixtura Simplex, and the Arcanum of Antimony prescribed by Basilius. By which
Medicines, used after my former Method, he was perfectly restored in a short
time.

Of Convulsions.
COnvulsions take beginning, either from an unnatural Fermentation of the
Juyces of the Body, whereby every Vessel or Organ is overmuch disturbed; or by
particular Compunction or Compression of the Nerves contracted; or else from
Nature's true Sense of what is fit to be separated from the Parts offended, and
her Endeavor to separate the same; as is apparent in the Beginnings of the
Small Pox, where the nutritive Juyces are condensed, by reason of the Morbific
Ferment, and so made unfit for the Nutrition of the Spirits, and the necessary
Separation appertaining thereunto; being wholly incapable to be distributed to
the Parts. Here Nature, regularly acting, makes Convulsions, which open the
Nerves, and render that Diseasy Ferment fit to become the Matter of the Small
Pox, or Fevers: for, so soon as the Convulsions cease, the Small Pox appears;
as is sufficiently evident by the Events: and it is apparently manifest, that
such Convulsions are sooner Perioded, than the Ideal. And although the Small Pox
or Fevers be very Malignant; yet it is rare to see any One fail under those
Distempers where Convulsions have preceeded: tho a Convulsion happening after
those Diseases, is most frequently Mortal. For, the first is the result of
Nature's strife against the Disease; but the other (the Disease being
annihilated, and Nature overcome) arises from the Terror of Death, of which it
is a general Prodrome.

Also, the Superfluities, that Children bring with them into the World, are the
occasional Causes of those many Convulsions, that attend them in their Infancy.
For, they being Retents of the Maternal Nourishment, which (coming then first
under the Dominion of the Stomach of the Infant) cannot not be received as a
Guest, but are rejected, and opposed as an Enemy to Nutrition; and if not
subdued in the Act of the first Digestion, by Vomiting, or Stools, Red or
White-Gum, etc. they become the Matter of long continuing Convulsions.

Likewise, in Breeding Teeth, Convulsions often happen; For, by the Compression
or Punction of the Nervous Fibers in the Gums, made by the ingrowing Teeth,
Nature is enforced to make Convulsions, that the Teeth may break through those
Fibers, impeding their forthcoming.

But most lamentable are the Ideal Convulsions, which have their Original from
Terror, Frights, or Fears: For the Spirit, by the amazement they infer,
produces a dark Image, or Impression, by which it is overwhelmed, and so
driven to irregular Actions, which occasion uncertain Events; because being
surprised with Stupor, and not knowing what to do, it does nothing to right
purpose, by reason of the variety of Imaginations which (in these Cases) are as
various as the Conceptions of the mind can be.

Of the Cure of Convulsions, that happen before the Small Pox, etc.
In the Cure of these Convulsions, I generally use my Powder once in six hours,
by which the rigor of them is usually abated; but, if in a short time the
Convulsions be not lessened by the use thereof; then I give my Arcanum
Metallorum, or my Arcanum of Camphire (administering either of them, as I see
Cause) and repeat the Dose once an Hour, till the Convulsions cease.

Note: Here it is to be observed, that even in these Convulsions (where my
Medicines are used) the Fits are more frequent, but shorter, until wholly
annihilated, and the Small Pox appears.

Of the Cure of Convulsions from Relicts of Maternal Nourishment.
These Convulsions rarely happen, where my Powder is given to Children, so soon
as they are born, and often repeated; and if they do afterward arise, such
Convulsions are soon and easily taken off, by the Use of other Medicines
prenominated. But, where Convulsions happen in Children, that have not had the
Benefit of such Remedies; there I must confess the Work to be long, and
irksome, requiring Soundness of Judgment in the Physician, because of the great
Variation, that happens therein; but more especially, by reason of the
Dissatisfaction of Parents and Nurses, seeing the Fits more frequent, tho much
shorter, when under my Cure: For, I once knew a Child, so afflicted that had an
hundred Fits in one Day; and this continued ten Days together, the number not
lessening; yet, with this Advantage, (notwithstanding the Fits were so
numerous) that the Child became daily more lively, and each Fit shorter and
shorter. After the Tenth Day, this Child had no more Fits; but was constantly
attended with Breathing Sweats unto perfect Recovery.

Note: In Cure of this Child, I used the same Medicines as before; but not
without other peculiar Auxiliaries, too long to be here recited: nevertheless I
purpose to speak of them, when I write (as I intend hereafter) of Particular
Diseases, and the Remedies I used in Cure of the same.

Of the Cure of Convulsions in Breeding Teeth.
In the Cure of these Convulsions, I have by Experience discerned, that tho the
former Medicines were effectually helpful in this Case; yet, if Incision also
were not used, the Cure was not so easily completed.

Of the Cure of Ideal Convulsions.
In Ideal Convulsions, I have experimentally found my Powder, and my Arcanum
Veneris, to be of general Use and Service; but could not (so speedily as I
desired) complete the Cure by them, without the help of particular Auxiliaries.
For, in these Convulsions, the Variety of Idea's is so great, that it requires
a Judicious Application of various Specificks.

Of Lethargies, Coma's, and Apoplexies.
These Diseases have all their Original from one dark and stupefactive Source,
where the Gates of Sleep continually stand open: for such as are afflicted with
them, are either troubled with overmuch Drowsiness, or oppressed with Sleeps
too profound. These Distempers differ only in the Degrees of their Power: In
the two first, there are only subtle Vapors, (by the Schools called smoaky)
which having their Assent from the Diseasy Power of Darkness in Us, do after an
obtuse manner stifle the Natural Faculties; but in the Latter, viz. Apoplexies,
they more intensly act, and materially by Blood, or otherwise suppress the
Faculties of Life, and so absolutely overwhelm all the Powers of Nature, that
the Body (or the Spirit thereof) becomes wholly Insensible.

I have great Reason to speak of these Diseases in this manner, having been
much exercised therein. If called in the beginnings of them, I have found them
to be sooner removed, than several other Distempers of less danger: for if the
Spirit can be timely excited, to strive against the Evil, they quickly vanish.
What Medicines are helpful to One, are really helpful to All, the Dose only
considered: but I never found, in any of these Cases any other than general
Remedies to be profitable, or available in exciting Nature to free her self
from the imimpending Danger; therefore Generally,

In Order to Curation,
I here begin with my Cephalic Drops, which I give once, and a little while
after they have been taken, my Arcanum Metallorum; and 6 hours after that my
Powder, and so interchangeably using my Powder and Arcanum, except that
sometimes (as I see cause) instead of my Arcanum Metallorum, I give my Arcanum
Veneris. I proceed always giving my Cephalic Drops once every hour, during the
whole Cure, which is usually completed in three Days time; during which,
Sweats rarely happen, until the Drowsiness be wholly over; but now and then
loose Stools. And in real Apoplexies, Nature stirs up Vomitings, Sneezings,
Bleedings at Nose, or else expels by Urine great Quantities of insipid Water
void of Odor.

Note: Where Vomitings are, which usually precede an Apoplexy, if any Physician
endeavor to restrain such Vomitings, or the Patients themselves be unwilling
to bear them, then they inevitably fall under the Burden of that Disease.

A particular Example of the Method I used in the Cure of a Lady of Sixty nine
years of Age.
THis Lady always dreading an Apoplexy, by reason her Relations had often dyed
of the same; desired I would give Order, in Case of a sudden Assault, what
should be used Whereupon I left with her Woman some of my Arcanum Metallorum,
giving charge, That if the Lady were suddenly taken with Vomiting, o^
Lightheadedness, she should give that to her first, and not the Powder, tho she
was formerly used to take it; and to send immediately away for me, because she
then lived four Miles ou^ of London. This Assault happening my Arcanum given,
and I sent for, ^ hastening thither, found her drowsy, tho the Cold and
Stupidity were somewhat less, than before the taking what I had left for her. I
then gave her the Arcanum Antimonii Basilii; which is not used or known by any
one else that I can tell: After the taking of which, Warmth increased, a little
Sneezing happened, Urine came away abundantly; insomuch, that in six hours time,
there was above 3 Pints of Water received, void of all Urinous Odor, or Saline
Taste. The Head grew hot, Blood issued by Drops at the Nosethrils; these Actions
happened in the first six hours after the Assault. After this, the Spirit
became more lively, and the Blood more frequently issued out at Nose and Mouth,
which continued more or less for three days together: In the mean time her
Sleeps were short, but refreshing. Then my Powder was given every 4 hours, my
Arcanum Metallorum once in 12 hours, and my Cephalic Cordial once an hour. And
in four days time, all Symptoms of the Disease vanished, Weakness only
remained.

Note: This Cure being taken in hand before the Brain was fully stupefied, the
Remedies had the greater Effect; for I have (to my Grief) too often seen the
same Medicines prove useless, tho the Dose was given in a threefold Quantity;
and where they were serviceable to prevent the Evil, they did not bring away so
much Blood, but caused Sneesings, and Urine in like Quantity, and Frequency.
Also I have observed, that Direct Vomitories, given in this Disease, (as they
too often are) are as dangerous, as things repressing Vomits, before the
Patient is thoroughly seized with the Disease; but after the Stupor is at its
height, a forcible Vomit, if it operate strongly enough, may do good, otherwise
the Patient certainly dies. The same may be said of Sacrification, Phlebetomy,
(tho that carry a seeming Convenience in Sanguineous Apoplexies) Blistering,
Clysters, and other forcible things, which cannot separate the Sanguineous
Matter, except accidentally only; therefore are uncertain helps; whereas
Medicines of an Universal Tendency, and truly gifted, act just as Nature
requires, and so frequently act with greater force and certainty, than any of a
Specific operation can do. But there is too often a great failing in
Physicians, that they discern not Apoplexies before they seize, and so cannot
contribute help for preventing them; which is much to be bewailed.

Of Imposthumes.
IMposthumes are as various as the Juyces of the Body, yet all of them have but
one Original, which is the Retents of Superfluities, not capable to be
separated without Apertion of the Skin; except such Remedies be used that can
further the Resolution of what is Congealed or Stagnized; which Resolution, so
procured, yields more ease to Nature, and is performed with less Anxiety, than
when turned into Quitter. For it is clear, if Nature can separate things,
without Corrupting them, her Government is not then much blemished; in the
performance of which, General Medicines are only capable to assist her. Here
Books must be laid aside, all Recipes dis-esteemed, conclusive Judgment, and
all Indications neglected, but Nature wholly tended, and referred to; We in the
mean while (by a due application of suitable Remedies) adding Light to her to
act by, and Power to overcome the present Stagnization. For in so doing, the
Scene is altered, and Nature rendered capable with ease to remove That, which
before could not be removed, without too great Molestation. For the Wisest of
Men, upon the first Appearance of a Tumor, cannot by any known Rule judge of
Nature's Capacity or Propensity to determinate the Evil; or whether it be more
profitable to resolve, or suppurate the same. As is apparent in some Tumors,
where by attempting Resolution, the subtillest or thinnest Parts being
separated, the Remainder is so indurated, as not to be resolved or suppurated;
and so it becomes the same, that Chyrurgeons call a Schirrus.

But, in suppurating Tumors, great Pains, Anguish, and different Symptoms, in
differing forms of Heats, Colds, etc. often happen; through the Distress Nature
falls under, by reason of the Largeness of the Tumor, and the difficulty to
bring such Evils to perfect Suppuration: and at last, unless they open
themselves and be judiciously handled, they are often changed from one thing
into another. For, it is evident, that the Opening of some Tumors by Incision,
and keeping them open by cramming in of Tents (a Practice too often used) does
either change the nature of the Tumor, or at least prolong the Cure. Whereas,
in either Case (viz. in Resolution, or Suppuration) if Nature be well minded,
no such Symptoms or Accidents happen.

Now, if such Errors be committed, as is daily obvious they are, in External
Imposthumes, how much more in the Internal (I mean not those, that are
internally caused by Contusion, or other Acts of Violence; because of them I
have elsewhere spoken) which are never seen, or known, but by their Effects?
tho, in truth, every Internal Imposthumation has the same occasional Cause, as
the External have: For they, being also caused by the Relicts of Nourishment
not separated, fall under the Laws of a disturbed, or sensible Spirit; which
makes so great Variety in them, not sensibly to be discerned by the Physician,
that he must of necessity, either refer himself to the help of such virtual
Remedies, as are capable to take off the Disturbance, and fortify the sensible
Power of right Distinction in Nature; or he can never arrive to so much
Satisfaction in himself, as (Scientifically) to declare how, or which way, the
Disease is, or may be cured. This is, by reason of the great Uncertainty of the
Inclination of Nature in these Cases: for sometimes she seeks to resolve, or
maturate the Relict, in the Place, where it is, which is a true natural Way; at
another time invirons the same with a Cistis, in order to Suppuration; and at
another Season, and in another Place, sends forth Blood out of the Veins,
intending thereby to separate that Retent (without Digestion) by the common
Passages; which, if stopped or let by the way, quickly tends to Pus: and
then (if in that form it be separated) the Irruption is so violent, that it
sometimes proves mortal; as is too frequently apparent by those Cataracts of
Blood and Matter, that (in such Cases) issue out by the Nosethrils, by the
Vreters, by Vomiting, by Stools, and by the Womb. Here Nature her self
erroneously acts, like those Physicians, who inconsiderately attempt to purge
out Retents before they are digested, contrary to the Mind of Hippocrat^s, and
the known Rule of Paracelsus, who says, Every Disease (to which I add, every
Diseasy-Inclination) ought to be cured in its own place. For it is evident, that
some Imposthumes are not wholly Sanguineous; and the Retents, being rarely
such, (because the Veins as they have their own Valves, so they have their
peculiar Passages to evacuate Superfluities by) the Blood that attends them, is
rather in order to Resolution, than Putrefaction, provided Nature be in her own
Path; but if diverted therefrom, either through the want of Light in her self
to act by, or the Physician's Error (in mis-application of Remedies) those sad
Effects, above spoken of, do inevitably follow. For every Retent, which Nature
can neither resolve nor digest, (being forsaken) naturally corrupts, by the
Heat and Moisture of the Place, and so makes a real Imposthume: but Experience
proves, that those Actions of Corrupting, may be prevented by a timely
application of suitable Remedies; as is apparent by the following Example.
Where Relicts of preceding Fevers are, there Nature sends Blood to be
materiated, to maturate by putrefaction the offending Evil, in order to its
Expulsion; but if prevented by due Medicines, and Transpiration happens, then
no Putrefaction follows. For where proper Means are used, Blood (extra Vasa) is
not corrupted, but kept from putrefying, or otherwise resolved without Pus; I
my self having often seen Blood after long extravasation coughed up dry and
hard, without the least Sign of Putrefaction.

Likewise every Vessel (of what kind soever) being over-filled, and Nature not
capable to separate the same by the Common Passages; that Fullness (by her
forsaken) becomes the Matter of Imposthumes. Or if any Matter be stagnized,
that also is liable to the same Transchangement, and produces Effects as bad,
or worse than the former; as is sufficiently witnessed by the Dry Belly-Ache in
the West Indies; and by some of our Countrymen afflicted with the Scurvey, in
whom the Knots in their Nerves give a palpable Testimony, not only of
Siagnization, but also of preternatural Congelation; not much unlike to our
knotty Gouis, or Tophuses in the Lues, which happen upon the Bones; where, for
want of Internal Attraction of the Parts, or External Separation from them, the
nutritive Juice of the Parts is indurated, and thereby becomes the Matter it
afterward shows it self to be. For, when a floating Evil, or Diseasy Spirit
undetermined, assaults the Life; then Nature sends forth Blood out of the
Veins, to encompass that Spiritual Evil, to materiate the same, and so makes
Fiery Phlegmones, and Diseases of like kind, which are true, real, and natural
Imposthumes, proper Issues of her own Intentions.

Of Fiery Phlegmones in general, and their Cure.
I forbear to write particular Examples of these Diseases, because they are so
numerous, so frequently cured by my Method, and so certainly known to the
Patients themselves; But in general the Tumors are large, the Blood (at first
appearance) uncorrupted; yet it is not long before great Pains, the Forerunners
of Putrefaction, discover themselves. And tho at the first manifestation of
these Tumors, when only a weight and burden upon the life is perceived,
letting Blood does somewhat diminish the Tumor, and prevent Pain; yet, if it
have a diseasy Character, that does not hinder the foregoing determination of
Nature toward separation; but allaying part of her fury, does I acknowledge
render the Suppurative Power less burdensome. But if Quitter be begun to be
made, then Nature by Phlebotomy is hindered of her own Determination; and being
thereby weakened, languisheth, and labors to little purpose, making those
Distempers tedious in suppurating; whereas, had not that supposed Expedient
been used, Suppuration would much more speedily have followed.

The Cure.
In the beginning of these Diseases (whether inward, or outward) if there be a
tendancy to Pain, or no Pain, if a burden be, I give my Powder once every 4
hours; if Sweats happen after taking it, and the Pain be not great, the Tumor
is soon resolved. But if there be real Matter made in these Tumors, then tho
the Tumor seemingly decrease, yet the Impostumation cannot be hindered; but does
quickly and suddenly come to maturity; and being thoroughly ripened, is as
suddenly cured, yet if Pains increase after taking the Powder, I give my
Arcanum Veneris once in 24 hours, and my Powder (as before is said) once every
4 hours; continuing this Course unto the end of the Cure.

Note also, in External Cases, I apply my Resolving Cerot once in 12 hours.

Of an Imposthume in the Liver, and its Cure.
Being called to a Child 7 years of Age, having Hardness, Weight and Pain in
his right Side, and a short Cough, with an unsavory Odor; which I strictly
observed, and thence presently distinguished (especially after I had compressed
the Side of his Belly under the Ribs) what the Disease was, and that the Seat
of it was in the Liver; yet, not willing to be happy in my own Distinction, I
desired an intimate Friend of mine (One of the honored Society of the College
of Physicians) to accompany me, to see the progress of this Distemper; which
he observing, fully concurred with me as to the Seat of the Disease.

The Cure hereof was thus performed; The first day I gave my Powder once in 4
hours, my Arcanum Veneris at Night, and my Aperitive Spirit in Drink, as often
as the Child drank; and outwardly I applied my Resolving Oil. After the first
or second Day (continuing the same Method) I found the Tumor did not increase
in Magnitude, but the Dolor was much augmented, till two Nights were past. The
third Night, the Pain lessened, and within a Day or two after, the Child being
taken with great Sickness, and Vomiting, a large quantity of suppurated Matter
was cast forth; and no sooner was a cessation of that Vomiting, but great
Coughing happened, whereby more of the same putrid Matter was plentifully spit
up. After which, the Child falling to sleep, and resting, no more Vomiting
followed; but the Coughing and Spitting continued (by Intervals) for 3 days
together. This time expired, the Coughing began to abate, and the Urine
thenceforth was filled with purulent Matter, which continued to come forth in
great quantity (with the Urine) for 7 days together, not seeming to be
diminished in all that Time. About the eighth day happened a loose Stool (the
Child having been costive all the time before) in which appeared the same
purulent Matter, as was before separated by Vomiting, Coughing, and Urine. From
that time, the Urine began to clear, and so continued clearing each Day unto
perfect Recovery. In this Cure no other Medicines were used, than those above
specified.

Note: Notwithstanding this Child had Stools each day after his first loose
Stool, yet (except that once) no Pus appeared in the Excrements. Also, it is
worthy of Note, That during the whole Cure, no Blood came forth with the
purulent Matter; a sufficient Testimony of the perfect Suppuration thereof.

Of an Imposthume of the Stomach, and its Cure.
A Young Woman coming to me, having great Dolor in her Stomach, and that
largely extended to hardness on the outside, yet compressive; notwithstanding
the many Remedies she had taken (according to the Judgment of her Physicians)
pro dolor Ventriculi, the Anguish of her Stomach increased, her Spirits
languished, she was subject to great Heats and Colds, Hysteric Passions,
Fumings in her Head, uncertain Sleeps, etc. indubitate Signs of an Imposthume
present. In this Condition I took her into my Care, and proceeded in her Cure,
as follows.

I gave her my Powder once in six hours for the first day, and my Arcanum
Metallorum at Night; and daily continued the same Method, with my Scorbutic
Tincture in all her Drink. In 7 or 8 days time, the Imposthume opening, she
voided by Vomit a large quantity of Pus; and for 4 or 5 days after (taking the
Powder) vomited every day, and brought up part of the Cistis. At 5 days end
the Powder wrought downwards, and the purulent Matter came away by Stools, with
the remaining part of the Cistis.

Note: Here was no Separation by Urine, for that was clear (as the Urine of a
sound Body) during the whole time of the Cure.

Of an Imposthume separated by Urine.
A Woman complaining of great Pains in the Sides of her Belly and Loins,
without any sign of Tumefaction (sensibly perceived by her Self) tho full of
Pain and Torture; when all Means failed, used by other Physicians, (they
judging her to be afflicted with Cholic-Passions; because of the Heats, Colds,
Tying up, and great Anguish she endured) applied her self to me. This
deplorable Case of hers, not being at all obvious to my Distinction, and
finding no place for any peculiar Remedy, I gave my Powder first, as in other
Cases I had usually done; and (because the Pain was in the descending Parts) my
Aperitive Drops in all her Drink, and my Arcanum Metallorum. The Powder I gave
but once in a day, and the Arcanum every Night. This Method I continued for 10
days; in which time the Pains daily lessened, and all bad Symptoms vanished.
Yet, being careful, that no Relict might be left, I appointed the same
Medicines to be taken, in the same Order, for 4 days longer; in which space of
time came away by Urine a little long Bag (some Drops of Blood preceding the
exit thereof) in which was contained Matter perfectly suppurated.
Notwithstanding this, she continued the Use of the Powder, for some Weeks
after, unto perfect Recovery.

Note: Here, in this Cure, was no Separation made, but by Urine only.

Of an Imposthume in the Head, and its Cure.
A Man of middle Age, having weight, puncturing and a Swimming in his Head,
being persuaded to take my Medicines, used them for a small time according to
my Order; but, finding his Pain to increase, refused to be longer governed by
my Directions. After this, taking Advice of Others, he used Sternutories,
whereby issued by the Nostrils a very small quantity of Blood and Matter. These
Remedies not producing that Ease he expected, his Physicians advised him to
Purge; in the doing of which, appeared both Matter and Blood in his Excrements:
and, tho the Purge was very gentle, yet this Looseness continued upon him for
several days, infering so great Weakness of Body, that he was not able to walk
the length of a Room. Blood and Matter issued at every Stool, and the Torment
then was greater in his Belly, than in his Head. He languishing thus, and
himself and his Friends discerning their own Inadvertency, to follow a specious
(but groundless) Hope of the Advantage of Separation by Stools; and finding his
Weakness greater than before, referred themselves a second time to me. Then I
gave my Powder every 2 hours, my Coralline Cordial once an hour; which
Medicines, tho they did somewhat ease the Pain in the Belly, and lessen the
Quitter which was exonerated with the Excrements; Yet was it full 10 days
time, before a stop was put to this unnatural way of Separation.

Note: As the Dolor of the Patient's Belly decreased, the Pain of his Head
increased; and then, to his own Sense, his Head was seemingly extended.

Perceiving this, I every Night gave my Arcanum Veneris, and the Powder every 4
hours: Then in 4, or 5 Days the Imposthume in the Head opened afresh, yielding
through the Nostrils and Mouth an indifferently large quantity of Matter, but
imperfectly concocted; together with small pieces of Skin, and at last so much
skin, as extended upon a Trencher, was as large in length, as the Trencher it
self. Afterward more small pieces of skin came away; but in Conclusion,
nothing except Blood and Matter was vented, till the extirpation thereof.

Of an Opened Imposthume in the Head, and its Cure.
A Woman middle-aged, having for some Months labored under the great trouble
of an Imposthume opened, as was manifest by the fetid Matter, that flowed from
her Nostrils and Mouth, having so great a Swimming in her Head, that she could
not go half a Flight-shot, without resting; and so great a Sense of Fullness in
her Head, that (putting her Finger into her Ear) she could feel the floating
Matter moveable; after all endeavors had been used, by Errins, Purgations,
Drying-Drinks, and whatsoever other Means her Physicians thought most fit to be
practiced; the Putrefaction being not changed, nor the Fluctuation stopped, she
applied her self to me.

In this Case, I used nothing but my Powder twice a day, for several days
together, and my Aperitive Drops in all her Drink during that time. By the
continued Use of these Means, her Head seemed (to her) more lightsome; that ill
Savor of the descending Matter was almost totally extinct. Then, I gave my
Arcanum Metallorum, after which a Gleety-Water flowed a great while, but void
of savor. This Method I continued for almost 9 Months after; in which Time all
that Distemper seemed to be subdued, and Nothing remained, except an ill Habit,
under a Scorbutic Form; against which I administered what was formerly specified
to be proper in Scorbutic Distempers. By which Remedies, her Head was reduced
to its pristine state, Weakness only continuing in that Part. This Cure was
performed many Years since.

Note: It is impossible to write of all particular Cases of Imposthumes, (tho
very briefly, they being so numerous, and daily presented) without enlarging
the present Work to too great a Volume; therefore I refer the Reader to the
Reasons urged by me in the foregoing Prologue to these Examples: because the
Medicines (by me used) are one and the same in every kind of Imposthume;
without other Variation, than what occasional Accidents may cause me to use.

Of Fevers, Putrid, Malignant, Epidemical, or Accidental.
All these Fevers are so well known, and so frequently happen, that they need
no Description: for, whether the Patients be taken with Chilness, Headache,
Vomiting, Pain in the Back, or other Symptoms; they are all (by me) cured
after one and the same Method, with small, or very little Variation.

I always give my Powder, in the beginning of these Distempers, and order the
same to be repeated every four hours. And then, if a tendency to Putrefaction
be in the Chyle, the Powder either makes Vomits, or stops them: Yet, in these
Cases, Sweats do not suddenly follow the taking the Powder, till all the
putrefactive Disposition is removed; however, on the fourth day a laudable
Hypostasis will appear in the Urine: after which time, constant Sweats follow
unto the end of the Cure, which (if my Simplex be daily used with the Powder)
is usually completed on the 7th Day. But, in Epidemics, that are continual, if
the Patients take the Powder so soon as they are seized with Shiverings, then
Sweats quickly follow (unless the Chyle be infected) without Vomiting, or
Looseness: and if the Powder be repeated once in four hours, it rarely happens,
that the Cure is not finished, on the third, fourth, or fifth Day at farthest,
if the Sweats (coming forth in the mean time) have not been checked.

Note: That in Cure of these Fevers (viz. Putrid and Epidemic) I administer
all things, as in the former Plague; except my Aqua-Pestilentialis, and some
other things only fitted for that present Necessity.

Of Fevers continual, and intermitting, complicated, and of Fevers simply
Intermitting.
In these Continual Fevers, tho stronger Paroxysmes daily be, or every other
day; yet, in the Intermissions the Fever is not wholly off. Nevertheless, in
these Cases, I follow the same Method, as in the other Fevers, with this
Variation only, viz. That I give my Simplex (or Febrifugal Drops) once in an
hour or two; both in the Paroxysme, and Intermission. This Order being
observed, these Fevers are generally terminated, at the third or fourth Fit:
at which time usually 3, or 4 loose Stools happen, just upon the Separation of
the Febrile Power.

In Intermitting Fevers, where no constant Continuance is, between the
Paroxysmes, I also give the same Medicines, tho not in the same Quantity, and
have always found them to answer the Ends of Nature; unless, by Irregularity
of Patients, their proper Effects have been impeded. Therefore, in these Cases,
I could never see any just necessity for the use of the Peruvian Bark, called
the Jesuits Powder: for what Repute soever that Bark has got in the World, the
Merit thereof is as yet undiscerned by me. By my Medicines, both Spirit and
Matter are separated, and not locked up together, as by the Peruvian Bark they
always are. For, I have by Experience discerned more grievous and long
adhering Calamities to follow the use thereof, (especially in Quartanes, or
Malignant Fevers) than those Diseases themselves would ever have left. Yet, I
deny not, but that sound People (of hail Constitutions) where no Malignity is,
having Intermitting Fevers, may receive benefit, by the taking off the Fits by
that way; provided Nature her Self be strong enough to subdue the Relicts
afterward; otherwise not.

Of Quartanes.
These Fevers, according to my Opinion, are far better and much more safely
Cured without; than with the Jesuits-Pouder; because I never found their long
Continuance prejudicial to Nature; except where Nature her self, or Physicians,
have inferred Damage, by not resolving Matter, and Spirit, at the same time;
therefore, I here speak no further of them.

Likewise of Small Pox and Meazles, Diseases very well known, I forbear to
write any thing; except this observation, That their Malignity is somewhat
abated, their Matter diminished, and the Patients continue in Sweats most of
the time, by the use of my Medicines: And of Convulsions, preceding the said
Small Pox, I speak not here, because they are sufficiently treated of in the
Chapter of Convulsions.

Of Diseases of the Womb.
Having hitherto said nothing of those grievous Infirmities, incident to Women
only, that arise from the Inordinacies, Defects, and Distemperatures of the
Matrix, (which has a peculiar Government in their Bodies) and generally prove
to be more frequent, lamentable, and dangerous, than most or all of the other
Diseases above treated of; I thought it highly necessary here to subjoyn a
peculiar, plain, and succinct Discourse of them, showing what Remedies I used,
and the Method I always observed in Cure of the same

Of Imbecility of the Womb.
I call that an Imbecility, when the Matrix is not capable of Conception; or
after Conception, has not strength sufficient to retain the Embryon. Both
these do naturally arise, either from some superfluity adhering to the Part, or
through Indisposition of the Archeus thereof: The One of these is Spiritual,
the Other Material. The Spiritual is evident by the Proneness of the Archeus
(or Spirit of Life) to form a too great Contraction, or overmuch Laxation in
the Part: the Material is sensibly obvious, by overmuch Moisture, or extreme
Dryness. That, which is material, consisting of those Excesses of Dryness and
Moisture, is remedied by my Powder taken twice a day, three Days before the,
Monthly Flux, and during that flowing, and for three days after. This Method
being observed for two or three Months, those Weaknesses are for the most part
removed, and the Womb rendered apt to perform those natural Offices, it could
not do before. But, in Contractions and Laxations of the Womb (most true
Effects of the Error of the Spirit, or Archeus, of the Part) there is no
Observation of time required: only, when such Patients come to me, I order them
to take my Powder twice a Day, for three Days together (all the said three
days* and during the whole time of their Cure, taking my Scorbutic Tincture,
20 Drops at a time, in all the Drink they drink) and when the three first days
are expired, I give one Dose of my Arcanum Veneris, every Night going into Bed,
and my Powder every morning following; always keeping this Method, till the
Evil be sensibly removed. Other Accidents, that may inter^een, during such
Cures, cannot well be described here; but must be referred to the Judgment of
Physicians, to apply their helping-hand whenever they do occur.

Of Miscarriages.
But, because (in the former Paragraph) I but tacitly hinted at Abortion,
where I spoke of the Imbecility of the Womb, to retain the Conceived Embryon,
I think it needful here to express my self further, touching such like
Accidents attending Women with Child; of which, some are false Conceptions,
with the true; others only Tendency to Abortion* without any false Conception;
in both which, I intend to declare, what has been my Judgment and Practice,
heartily and freely, and how* I have cured, or helped the same* Where false
Conceptions have been (in Women with Child) which were usually followed with
great Floudings rendering the Parties doubtful, whether they had conceived or
not; gave my Powder often, till the Flou^ding) ceased. Then (if the Embryon wa^
not too much injured by that Flouding) the false Conception was explled and the
true preserved. And, because in this Case, there is often great Faintings, I
ordered my Scorbutic^ Tincture to be given, 20 Drops at a time (in Drink) once
in 2, or 3 hours* where no false Conception was, and yet a Tendency to
Abortion, perceivable by the falling of the Womb and Pains attending, I gave my
Powder once in four hours; And if i^ twelve hours the Pains ceased, the
continued use of my Powder perfectly cured, without other helps: but if (as
sometimes happened) those Symptoms vanished not, I gave one Dose of my Arcanum
Veneris, at night, and six hours after my Powder, then I applied my Histerick
Plaster to the Navel, and by these means completed the Cure. Yet, where
Abortion unavoidable happened; I (by Experience) found the continued observation
of my Method above prescribed; with the Addition of my Hysterical Spirit, did
certainly take off all Relicts of the said Abortions without prejudice to the
Party.

Of Childbearing.
If Childbearing Women, before the Birth, have Floudings, and no Pain, and yet
the Child be right; the taking the Powder stops Floudings, brings on Pains (if
the time of the Birth be fully come) and causes an happy Delivery. But, if the
Child be not right, (for which there is no help but the hand) then if the due
time of the Birth be not fully come, the same Medicine, stops Floudings, and
represseth Pains till the natural time of Delivery approaches. When that
comes, and the Child is Born, I give the same Powder (according to the
Childbed Woman's strength, or the Exigency of Nature) either every two, four,
or six hours to overcome the After-pains; which it certainly in a short time
takes off. Also if false Conceptions remained in the Womb after the Birth, or
(through Ignorance, or Carelessness of the Midwife) any part of the
After-burthen were left; none of these did ever putrify (but were naturally
expelled) where my Medicines were used: For I certainly know, that all such
Relicts were safely expelled (without putrefaction) if my Powder, Hysteric
Cordial, and Hysteric Drops were taken according to my order. Yea, I have by
long Experience known, that where my Powder was continually used (twice a Day)
by Women lying in, during the whole Month, they always found greater strength
and liveliness, than could be discerned in others, not taking the same
Medicine; tho the green Water continued longer in such, than in those, unto
whom none of my Powder had been given. Therefore (to prove the certainty of
these Medicines) I can most truly assert, that never any Woman using them in
the manner above prescribed, died in Childbed (of the Diseases of
Childbearing) from the beginning of my Practice unto this very Day under my
Hands.

Of Floudings in General.
Floudings, so well known, and too often lamented, are frequently stopped, but
never cured, by Particular Remedies: Therefore, in such Cases, I give my Powder
once in two or four hours, and continue the use thereof, in the same Method,
till the Floudings cease, which usually is in a day or two after the first
administration of the Medicine; also all Acrimonies (occasioned by those
Floudings) are taken off, and the Cure happily effected by the use of that
Remedy only; which performs not this by a forcible stopping or binding, (as
particular Medicines usually do,) but by inciting Nature to free her self from
that Inordinancy; which being done every natural Evil, usually attending such
Floudings, is certainly removed: For Nature, assisted thereby, permits not the
Blood to corrupt in the Womb; through the Acrimony of which foul Ulcers are
often formed, nay, sometimes Sphacela's are induced, and other Evils, to the
ruin of the Patient.

But, because what is hitherto written, will unto most men seem only an
Historical Relation of Womb-Diseases in general; no particular Cure being
hereunto annexed; I therefore now descend to a more plain Demonstration,
particularly proving, by several Examples, the Power and extraordinary Service
of my Remedies, when used as is fit, in those sad and deplorable Cases above
mentioned.

Example. 1. Of an Imposthume in the Womb of a Woman with Child.
A Woman, about seven Months gone with Child, was afflicted with great Pain and
Torture in her Womb; which manifested the proper Signs of a contra-natural
Cause existent, by Issue of Blood (not Flouding-like, but by Driblings) at last
of Quitter. Upon these apparent Signs of a suppurated Imposthume, I was sought
for and hearing what had happened, could not but give Judgment of an Imposthume
present. Yet, having read Hipocrates (of whose Sincerity and deep Skill, in
curing Diseases of his time, no Prudent Man, unto this day, doubts) and finding
him to proclaim Imposthumes, and Ulcers of the Womb, not curable in Women with
Child, I was very loath to be concerned in this Case: but, Importunity and
Necessity overweighing, I adventured to apply my self to the Cure. In order to
which I first gave my Powder, once in 8 hours, and my Arcanum Veneris, at Night
going into Bed. This Method was continued every Day, without other Medicines
(except some small Cordials for Support) unto the time of her Delivery. During
which space of Time, after the taking these Medicines, Matter flowed each Day
more than other, for a great part of that time; in which time her Pains
nevertheless vanished, and she grew more lively, than before; but when the time
of her Delivery drew near, the Matter, that came forth, was less and less each
day. After Delivery, I viewing the Bag, in which the Child had been contained,
did plainly discern the Compass of the Imposthume, and some part of the Matter
unresolved, upon the Outside of the Bag. But afterward to this same Woman, so
well delivered of a Sound and well proportioned Child, I gave my Medicines (all
the time of her lying in) in the same Method, as is above prescribed; and she
recovered Strength, and after this had several other Children, and is now
alive, tho this happened fourteen years since.

Example 2. Of a Dropsy in the Womb of a Woman with Child.
A Woman with Child, before quickening, being swelled (to outward appearance)
like one ready to be delivered, sent for me: I seeing the Woman, and hearing
how it was with her, could not but be amazed, and doubt of the reality of her
Conception. Nevertheless because. I well knew the certainty, and effecacious
Power of my Medicines (above specified) in Cases no less deplorable, I rejected
all thoughts of particular Remedies, and applied my self to that general Method
I had formerly used. Accordingly, I gave my Powder, Night and Morning, for
three days; yet no separation happened during that time; but the Woman found her
self somewhat more lively than before. The fourth Day, I gave my Arcanum
Metallorum, and the following Morning my Powder: That Day came forth a
Dribbling of Water, and the next Day more. This Method I continued, and, in
three Days time after, more than too Gallons of Water, was voided, and the
Dropsy separated. Then I ordered the Powder to be taken Night and Morning,
until Quickening; and all the time after of her being with Child, I prescribed
to her the same Powder, to be taken a Day or two at a time, whenever any
Appearance of a Return of the Dropsy was; and, by this means, she went out her
full time, had a sound Child, and several Children after, and has continued
Well and in Health for about these seven Years since.

Example 3. Of an Ulcer in the Womb.
In this sad Case, the Neck of the Womb was tumified, uneven, hard in one
place, tender in another, and raw in a third; as was clearly testified by
diverse Midwifes then present: The Sanies, that flowed from thence, was Red,
Yellow, and greenish White. In Cure of this Woman, I gave my Powder every Day
once, and at Night my Arcanum of Metals, and (perhaps) the next Night my
Arcanum Veneris, changing them as I saw occasion; but my Powder I always gave
once a Day. During this Cure, many Changes and Accidents happened, to which I
applied particular Remedies, too long to be here incerted. After some Series of
time, all these Accidents vanished, and the suppurated Matter by little and
little abated, and at length perfect Health followed. This Woman after her
Recovery Conceived, and has had several Children since, and is alive at this
day. This Cure was performed about seven Years ago.

Example. 4. Of a Tumified Womb.
A young Woman, laboring under a natural Deficiency propagated to her,
striving to extrude it self by Hemeroids and Piles, being also at the same time
afflicted with a Tumified Womb, hard and sore, so that she could not possibly
bear the Congress of her Husband; and having long sustained this Calamity, and
finding the Remedies of other Physicians useless, applied her self to me. I
straight, in order to her Cure, gave her my Powder every Morning, and my
Arcanum Veneris, every Night, appointing my Scerbutick Tincture to be taken in
Drink, by twenty Drops at a time, as often as she drank. And this Method was
continued for full four Months; after which time she quickly Conceived with
Child, and has ever since remained well, though she were cured of this Malady
diverse Years ago.

Example. 5. Of a Mola.
Being called to a Woman, laboring under great Floudings, who conceited her
self to be with Child; when I had observed the great quantity of Blood, that
came from her, the Midwife (then present) gave me an account of the closure of
the Womb; and so, an Impossibility of distinguishing the Concern. I finding her
Case such, caused the Powder to be given twice in one hour; in which time, the
Flux of Blood began to stop, and the Womb to open a little, yet no more than
sufficed to admit the Midwifes finger to distinguish somewhat unusual.
Whereupon I desired her to give me some more plain Testimony of what she felt;
and by her words I judged it to be no Child. And as I judged, so it proved:
for, when the Midwife could somewhat better reach, what she had before touched,
she brought forth a Gleuy Matter, white and clear: I, seeing this, ordered her
to bring it away as fast as she could; but, she (having no more place open,
than for one Finger to enter) brought it away by piecemeal, I giving some
Cordial for support to the afflicted Woman, in the mean time. This Matter I
caused (when as much was brought away, as possibly could be by the Midwifes
Finger) to be put into a Basin of Water, where it joined all together, and
seemed in quantity to be no less than a Quart would contain. Now because
(without force) the Womb could be no further opened, the Remainder was left to
the power of Medicine. Therefore I gave my Powder every hour for twenty four
hours; at the end of which, this sadly distressed Woman began to be pretty
sedate and quiet, and no Blood appeared: for I think she had before evacuated
all, or the greatest part of all she had. Then I gave my Powder twice or thrice
a Day, for several Days after, and sometimes my Arcanum Veneris. During this
Cure the Cleansings were not Sanguineous, but Aqueous, and continued for
Seventy two Days. In all which time no Blood appeared, but a Cleansing Water,
sometimes of one Color, sometimes of another, as is Common to other Women
After this, she each Day increased in Strength, and at length became perfectly
well, and has since had several Children.

Now, forasmuch, as I have (in all the Diseases abovenamed) made frequent
mention of my Powder, showing the particular use thereof in those Cases; but
have never yet Published the General use of the same, though it seems to me to
be of greater concern to the Public, than any other Medicine before specified;
I am therefore willing here to subjoyn a succinct and plain Description of the
General use of this Powder, and also of my Scorbutic Tincture (the first being
more Material, the latter more Spiritual) for the necessary help of particular
Persons or Families, where Physicians are not easily to be had: experimentally
knowing the Powder to manifest its Operation chiefly in the first Digestion,
and the Effects thereof; and the Tincture to be singularly useful, for
Purification of the Blood, opening the Obstruction of the Nerves, Spleen,
Liver, and Gall, separating the superfluous moisture of the Glandules, and
acrimonious Humors in the Reins.

Of the Use of the Powder.
In the beginning of every Disease, known or unknown, where the Stomach is
concerned, there I give the Powder first; which, tho it may not cure (as in
Apoplexies) yet it is more safe than any other commonly known Remedy, either of
the Shops, or of any Modern Physicians of Public Note at this Day: because it
is not only subservient to Nature in preventing the formation of Diseases; but
is also (if timely taken) sufficient to enervate, or nullify their existence
when formed. For in the Primary Assault of any Disease (that is, upon the first
perceivance of Illness) being once or twice taken, it either wholly prevents
the growth and increase of that Disease, or renders it fit to be more easily
cured with other Medicines.

In Diseases arrived to some height, as of two or three Days, or longer
continuance, especially if undeterminate, this Powder sometimes solely and
alone works (being taken at first ^wice or thrice a Day, and afterward Morning
and Evening) unto perfect Recovery; but, in Intermitting Fea^ers I always give
it an hour before ^he Fit. In every Epidemic, Putrid, or Acute Fever, it
answers the regular Intention of Nature; because it sometimes Vomiteth,
Purges, and provokes Sweats (without the help of Clothes more than usual) and
otherwhile stays Vomiting and Looseness arising from Nature's Error, or
debility of Parts, or Organs; rectifying her Error, and strengthening the
Parts. Also it stops those Morbific Sweats, that arise from Languishment; or
alters such Sweats, as are produced by forcible Diaphoreticks, unseasonably
used, contrary to the intent of Nature.

In Vertigoes, and all Dolours of the Head; Stomach, Back, or Sides, it is a
Medicine of general Use and Service.

In the Iliac and Cholic Passions, in Numnesses, and all Pains in the Muscles,
that happen from the Scurvey; or in any other Congealed Distemper, or what may
be comprehended under the Name of Congelation, this Powder proves it self a
powerful Remedy; because, if taken in hot Posset Drink, Sweats usually follow
the taking thereof.

Also, in every Scorbutic Distemper it is very available, and acts as variously
as the Scorbutic Form is various; for in all Fluctuations, or Diseases of
Resolution, it is no less serviceable, than in Congealed Distempers; because
being a Medicine truly Natural, Nature can use it either way, to her own
benefit.

In Pleurisies, Bruises, and all Imposthumes inward or outward, it will
completely answer the Desire of a good Physician: for it powerfully resists
Putrefaction; and tho it cannot always prevent Imposthumation, or hinder
Putrefaction when begun; yet it ripens the Matter begun to be Putrified, and
afterward expels it when perfectly digested.

In the Bloudy-Flux it is a certain and speedy Cure, even to admiration; also
in the Griping of the Guts, attended with vehement Vomitings, and a continued
Looseness, it effects so much, beyond the Power of other Medicines, as is
scarcely credible; yet the same Powder, in extreme Costiveness, accomplisheth
the Work, by loosening the Belly.

In the Smallpox, taken in the beginning of the Disease, it causes Vomiting,
Purging, or Sweats, and then binds the Body (as is fit) and brings out the
Smallpox; fortifying the Life as far as it is gifted for that work.

In the Jaundies, no Medicine, that ever I used, exceeds this: for it
extirpates that Disease, Root and Branch.

This Powder, frequently taken, prevents the Formation of Worms in the Body;
where Matter of Worms is made, it expels that; and if Worms be really formed,
enableth Nature to cast them out alive or dead.

In Surfeits, contracted from Excesses of Meats, Drinks, or overgreat Labor
it is singularly useful; because it either causes Vomitings, or Stools, or
provokes Sweats powerfully, thereby to clear the first Digestion, or resolve
the Congelation, caused by those Excesses.

In Convulsions, it is highly serviceable, as (in the Chapter of Convulsions I
have largely showed;) and if given to Children newly Born, and for some time
used, it prevents such Fits, by carrying off those Crudities Children bring
with them into the World.

In all highly Malignant, and Pestilential Diseases, it proves it self a true
Succor to Nature, if taken every four hours. For in such Cases it acts
vigorously toward expelling all Venomes.

In Feminine Diseases, all Intemperancies, Inordinancies, and Distemperatures
of the Womb, it is a certain and speedy Remedy.

If Women with Child take the Powder upon any Sense of Illness, or where a
Tendency to Abortion is; it prevents the Danger thereof by strengthening the
Womb. In the Birth it brings on Pains, and hastens the Labor with Safety; but
if the natural time of Delivery be not near, it restreins Pains until that time
comes. It stops Floudings, facilitates the Birth, and cleanses as is fit,
curing the After-Pains; and in Women Lying in, answers the Necessities of the
Patient, either in Cleansing or Strengthening.

Likewise, the Monthly Flux is by this Remedy brought into due Order; if
inordinate, it checks that inordinancy; if too little or not at all, it brings
down the same in due time and Order; being taken at certain times of the Moon,
with respect had to the Age of Women or Young Maids. Therefore, in the Latter
(with other small helps) it sometimes cures the Green Sickness, altering the
Inordinacy of the Appetite, and brings them to a due State of Health, and right
Color of Complexion.

In the Piles and Hemorrhoids it is a Medicine of singular use: for it opens
the Piles, or dissolves them; it opens also the Hemorrhoids, and cures them
when opened, preventing Ulcers in the Parts.

Also in the Sore or Ulcerated Breasts of Women, this Powder is of great
Service.

It strengthens a weak Stomach, enabling it to retain the Food, and digest it;
especially if taken so soon as the Parties have eaten. And in all Weaknesses of
old Age, so far as the first Digestion is concerned, it is of use.

The Dose to a Man or Woman, full grown, is j. to a Child newly-born, 7 or 10
gr. and so proportionably to all Ages, between the Birth and full Growth. It is
to be repeated once in 4, 6, 8, or 12 hours, according to the manner of its
Operation, and the Necessity of the Sick. The Vehicle may be either Breast
Milk, Beer, Ale, Wine, or Mace-Ale, as the Patients best like, or the Necessity
of the Disease shall require.

Note: In the Use of this Powder, let the following General Rule be always
observed. Whether it works by Vomiting, Purging, Sweating, or Urine, so long
as any such Operation lasts, it ought to be continued; so likewise, in
restreining diseasy Sweats, contra-natural Vomiting, or Purging, continue the
use of the same, until it be clearly seen, that Nature has no further need
thereof in that Exigency.

Of the Use and Dose of the Tincture.
In Apoplexies, Palsys, Vertigoes, and Epilepsies, Rheumatisms, Gouts, Stone,
Stranguries (too frequent Issues of the Scurvey) and other Distempers, that
have their Propagation from things congealing, or too much acrimonious,
inferring Pains or Numnesses, etc. I have by Experience found this Tincture to
be of general Use and Service, if taken in the following Order.

Considering most of the Diseases abovenamed, are either Hereditary, or of
long Continuance, or Both, it is expedient in all the aforesaid Cases, that
this Tincture be taken daily four times a Day (in Beer, Ale, or Wine.) twenty
Drops at a time, when the Stomach is most empty; but more especially; let it be
taken in the Morning fasting, and at Night going into Bed, without mixing the
same with any Specific, or direct-working Medicine: though (it must be
understood) that this Tincture must never be taken, but in some Liquor, or
other.

In Scorbutic Affects, appearing in other forms than above described, use the
Tincture in the same manner, until the Diseases be abated, never using any
other Medicine with it, except my Powder, or other Medicines above specified in
the Chapter of the Scurvy; only the Dose must sometimes be increased; as it
must also in all Tendencies to Stagnization, whereof chilness, and coldness are
forerunners.

In all Impurities of the Blood, of what kind soever, whether Pox, Surfets,
Scabs, Tetters, Scales, Ring-worms, Spots, Freckles, Morphews, Sores in the
Mouth, or other Parts, if constantly taken (in manner aforesaid) for a Month
together, viz. Four times a Day, or as often as the afflicted Party drinks, and
the external Parts washed, with his (or her) Urine every Morning and Evening,
it will prove it self a very effectual Remedy.

In the Green Sickness, and Feminine Obstructions, this Tincture is of singular
use, if taken three, or four times a Day in Drink: For, it restores their lost
Complexion, and opens all Obstructions of Spleen and Liver. Also it cleanses
the Spleen and Reins, eases the Dolours of the same; and is of admirable
Service, in Hypochondriac Melancholy. But in these Distempers it must be taken
in all Drinks, or Liquid Meats the Patients use, viz. 15 Drops at a time, and
constantly every Day, until their Afflictions are altered

In the Distempers of Old, or declining Age, as Asthma's, Coughs, etc. that
arise from the debility of the Transpirative Faculties; by reason of which,
they labor under shortness of Breath, and troublesome Phlegm, it is beneficial.
For, although this Tincture cannot wholly take off these Distempers from aged
Persons, yet it does much alleviate them; provided it be frequently taken, and
that in a large Quantity, viz. 40 Drops at Night going into Bed, and also every
Morning fasting.

In Suppression, Difficulty, or Sharpness of Urine, it is an Effectual Remedy,
if 20 Drops be taken Morning and Evening in Mace-Ale, or in a Decoction of
Mallows if they design Ease; or Parsley-Roots, if they intend Expulsion.

In Convulsions, Lethargies, great Pains, Weights, or Numnesses of the Head, it
is profitable, if taken 4 times a Day, 20 Drops at a time.

Against Pains in the Stomach, and the Weaknesses thereof, it is very
efficacious, if 30, or 40 Drops be taken at a time, twice or four times a Day
in Drink when the Pains begin to invade, and the use thereof continued, till
the Dolor ceases. Only in this Case, let the Parties grieved be sure to take
Care, never to eat or drink, until they are assured, that what they eat and
drank before be well digested.

In Imbecility of the Generative Faculty, or in Weakness, Coldness, and
Vnaptness to conceive, this Tincture is very profitable, if twenty Drops at a
time be taken in Sack, three times a Day, viz. In the Morning Fasting, one hour
before Dinner, and at four a Clock after Noon; and the fourth time at Night
going into Bed, in Mace-Ale, especially if the Powder be used with it. This
Method must be continued for a Month together.

For Recovery of Strength in Consumptions, where the Lungs are not Ulcerated,
this Medicine ought to be given, by 10 Drops at a time, as often as the
languishing Party takes any thing Liquid (whether Broth, Milk, Iellies, or
Emulsions of any kind) as also in all his or her Drink.

The same Tincture is no less effectual in the Jaundies, if 30, or 40 Drops be
taken at a time, in what Drink the afflicted Party best likes, in the same
manner as before; and the Use thereof continued, till the Urine be clear, as it
was before the Disease invaded.

Against After-Pains in Childbed, and to open Obstructions, this Medicine
effectually yields Relief; if 10 Drops be given to Women in that Condition, in
their usual Caudle, every time they drink it.

A Child of a year Old may take 2 Drops, in two Spoonfuls of Breast-Milk, and
so proportionably.

Note: In taking, or administering this Tincture it is very convenient to be
careful, not to suffer your Selves, Friends, or Patients, to be over-perswaded,
by any Arguments whatsoever, to take Purging or Solutive Medicines, although your
own, Friends, or Patients Bodies seem to be somewhat Costive: for so doing you
will much retard the benefit, which would naturally accrue from this Tincture,
by its Transpirative Virtue. And let this also be a Caution to All, in every
kind of Distemper, where this Medicine is used, not to take or intermix any
other things, (except as is above in this Treatise described) with the same.

Now, because I very well know the Generality of People to be so far from
believing these contrary Operations, that they will exclaim against them, as
Impossibilities in Nature, I thought it requisite here to subjoyn (as is well
known to Practitioners in Chirurgy) that the Herb St. John's Wort, does as
certainly dissolve congealed Blood in Bruises, as by Congelation an incised
Wound, Stab, or Prick: which being Actions so different, may somewhat plead for
the Verity of what I have written. But, if this single Example be not
sufficient, let any One make Experiment of the Power of the Ash-Tree, cut down
(when Sol is in Gemini, with the Girdle of Orion, and just ascending) and
divided into small flat Sticks; for any one of them applied to a Cut, Stab, or
Prick, and held there for some small time, quickly and evidently heal the Wound
without Suppuration.

Also in Bruises, tho large and great, if a broad piece of that Wood be rubbed
gently upon them, he shall find a sudden Resolution, in the space of a Quarter
of an hour (if this be done at first) and no Blackness appearing: and if it be
applied speedily, In Burns, and Scalds, no Blisters will arise: In Stingings of
Wasps and Bees, and Pricks of Thorns, this Wood is a speedy Remedy, if
presently applied: In Bleeding at the Nostrils, tho very great and large, if a
piece of the Wood be held to the Nostrils, and rubbed just above the Gristle of
the Nose; you shall quickly see the Blood stopped. Likewise, in Bitings of
Dogs, tho their Teeth have entered deep, if suddenly applied, all the Anguish,
and Danger of those Bitings are as suddenly removed.

If a single Plant can perform such various and contrary Actions, what then
shall Minerals and Metals effect, wherein all the Seven great Properties of
Nature are concentred.

I could enlarge this Section with many other signal Examples and Proofs, but I
shall conclude all with this Corollary: that, since Nature is the true
Preserver and Curer in all Distempers; and is more active and subtle for her
own Preservation and Recovery, than any adventitious Agent can be. That
Preparation must needs be fitter, and more useful (in those her Methods) which
attends and assisteth her Inclinations and Actions; than That, which disturbs
her Intentions, and imposes Operations upon her, contrary to her own Designs:
to which Errors and Mistakes all particular Medicines, and the Applyers of
them, are very obnoxious. Wherefore, if I have had the Blessing to find out
Medicaments (universal as to Parts and Persons) which will be perfectly
complyant, and subservient to Nature^s Tendencies, as my long and successful
Experience of them persuades me I have done; and whereof Others may be likewise
convinced, if they will make studious Trial of my Receipts; I would not have
any prejudicate Person wonder at this my Assertion, that one and the same
individual Medicine can congeal and resolve, open and shut, work upwards and
downwards, or (in a word) produce quite contrary Effects, tho Some Doctors have
averred to my Face, this thing to be impossible: For, if Nature in contrary
Exigencies, cannot but act contrary ways to her own Relief; then consequently
the Physic that does not forcibly drive Nature out of her Course, but
officiously follow her in her own Motions, must like an Handmaid necessarily
trace the Footsteps of her Mistress. And what Man, that does but understand, or
possess a Nature, is ignorant, that the Means and Passages which she takes in
Difficulties for her Succor and Safety, are strangely different, contrary and
mysterious; and yet most ingenious to a Miracle?

Here are no Angry flames, only some bright
Beams of plain Truth flowing from Nature's light.
FINIS*
THE TABLE.
A.
ANcestors in Art, the Infancy of the World, 53 Ancient Artists how they
attained the Perfection of their Arts, 50 Apelles and Homer commended, 48
Archimedes his unparalled Inventions of Mechanic Works, Ibid. Arts appear
more polite, where Nature brings them forth, 47 Author, why he at first
followed Chemistry, 2 His good Success therein, 4 How non-plus'd in following
the same, 5 His Satisfaction afterward, 7 His Patients how they preserve
themselves, 38 First Authors of Physic who instructed, 45
B.
BAsilius a Monk, a most knowing Physician, 45 Book-Doctors reprehended, 39,
40, 52, 53, 72 The Reason why they are ignorant, 53 Buboes, why the Author
writes nothing of them, 80
C.
CAuse of Deficiency in Us, 49 Change direct a diminishing of the natural Gift,
16 A Child capable of solving most solvable Questions in Arithmetic, 48
Childbearing, 149 Choler makes not Men angry, 33 No sense of it unless the
Spirit be defiled with a wrathful Image, ibid. Cold stagnizeth the Blood, 37
The Begetter of various Diseases, ibid. Convulsions, 107 The Cure of those that
happen before the Small Pox, 110 The Cure of those that happen from Maternal
Nourishment, 111 The Cure of them in breeding Teeth, 112 The Cure of Ideal
Convulsions, 113 Compositions of the Shops, and commonly known Chemical
Remedies, rejected by the Author, why, and how far he allows them, 71 Corporeal
Evils, hereditary, take beginning from Maternal Nourishment, 59 Chemists differ
from Galenists, 2
D.
DIsease defined, 55 Diseases Simple, Natural, Preter-natural, and
Contra-natural; how complicated, 66 Hereditary, what, 56 Ideal, must have
material filths, 57 By occasional matter manifest themselves, 58 Darken the
Spirits, 59 Preternatural, what, and how caused, 60 Contranatural, and Autumnal
how caused, 63 Diseases of the Womb, 145 Chronical, their Original, 26 How they
take Root in Us, and are changed one into another, 28 Of the first Digestion
changed into Distempers of the second, or third, how, 27 Degenerated, how made
worse, 28 Have no Existance in the Body, till the Stomach submits to them,
30 Hereditary, kept from increasing, ibid. Disposition, seminal incorporeal, 29
Distempers, accounted uncurable, how cured, 31, 40 Suddenly cured, why, 37
Disturbance of the Spirit the Generator of Defects in the Body, 35 Dropsy in
the Womb. 55 Its Cure, 56
E.
EDucation, its Insufficiency, 43, 44 Emptiness, its Effects, and the Remedies
thereof, 62, 63 Envy, and Malice, their Effects not much different, 33, 34
Experience commended, what takes being from it, is true, how, 44
F.
FEar, Its Effects, etc. 34. 65, 66 Fevers, Putrid, Malignant, Epidemical, or
Accidental, 140 Continual, Intermitting, and simply Intermitting, 142 Ferments,
diseasy, strange, how begotten, 26. 29 Floudings in General, 151 Fullness,
defined, 61
G.
GAlen's Method, why neglected by the Author, 1, 2 Gonorrhea's, hurt not in the
Lues, except Means be wanting, 59 Gout, true, its Symptoms, 30 Derivative, may
lie concealed until 40, or 50 years of Age, 57 Griping in the Guts, how cured,
84, 85 Order of Diet in that Disease, 87 Remarks upon the Errors of Physicians
in Cure of that Disease, ib.
H.
HElmont, commended by the Author, found out certainty by Stilness, 45, 46 His
Theory how proved true to the Author, 17
I.
IMbecility of the Womb, 145 Imposthumes, 120 In the Head, cured, 135 In the
Head opened, cured, 137 In the Liver, cured, 129 In the Stomach, cured, 132 In
the Womb, cured, 153, 154 Indians, without Books, by Natural Instinct find out
the Virtues of Plants, 46 Inquiry, how Remedies came first to be known, 43
Instinct, natural commended, 44
K.
KNowledge, of Medicines, of how great concern, 38 Real, taught from Natural
Instinct, or acquired by Observation, 43 General, and Particular, its true
Patron, 44 Of the Virtues of Roots, Herbs, or Plants, not advanced since the
Days of Theophrastus, 51
L.
LAnguages, not absolutely necessary in the Art of Physic. 50 Lethargies,
Coma's, and Apoplexies, 113 Their Cure. 115 A particular Example of an aged
Lady cured of the Apoplexy. 116 Lues, and Scurvey, the two general Evils, 66
Lues, materially contracted swiftly infects, why, 58
M.
MAgnetic Attractives fruitless, when, 79 Medicines, Natural, work not by their
own Power, but by Nature's dispose. 17 The Means to obtain such, 40 Particular,
act rather against, than with Nature in complicated Diseases; why, 27 General,
how they act in the humane Body; their Safety and Properties, 12, 13, 14. 18,
19 Of Paracelsus, and Helmont, why of little Service to Us, 41 Marcellus, his
Speech to the Engineers of his Camp, 49 Man has capacity of knowing Things in
their Roots, 47 Men, void of much Discourse, etc. utter wonderful Things, ibid.
Method of the Ancients uncertain, 43 Metals and Minerals, their outward Life
Poison, 11. 16 Their Virtues more concentrate, than those of Vegetables, 9 Not
specificate to Person or Disease, ibid. Their Gifts from GOD, the Light or Ray
of them true Medicine; not changed in the Body; but bring less Trouble, than a
spoonful of Wine; their Virtues condemned, why, 10 Their Air, and its
Properties, 11 Their Operation against acute Diseases, 12, 13 Their middle Life
Medicine, Antidote against Poison, etc. 16, 17 Miscarriages, 147 Mola, and its
Cure, 159, 160
N.
NAture, Guide of the Universe, 51 Physicianess, and Curer of Diseases, 2. 18.
The only Actor, and Curer of her Self, 38 To be observed by Physicians, 40
Naturally excites Man to his Cure, 46 Brings forth both Medicine and the
Physician, 51 How restored to her wonted Actions, 37 Her Incapacity to strive,
when, 64 Negroes, in Accounting excel, 48
O.
OCcasions of Errors committed in the Medicinal Faculty. 32 Opinion, that
Physic is not fit for Children, refuted. 60
P.
PAlsies, fourfold, their Cure by four Examples. 102, 103, 104 Patients
afflicted with the Plague, and Remarks upon their Carelessness, 81 In whom the
Tokens appeared, their State described, 64 Paracelsus his Endowments, 45, 46
Pestilence, how caused, 63 Plague, the last described, different manner of
Assaults therein, and the Author's Method of Cure thereof, 76, 77, etc.
Antipestilentials of Ancient, and Modern Physicians ineffectual, 73 34 Persons,
Sick, cured by their own natural Impulse, 46 Phlegmones, firey, in general, and
their Cure, 127, 128 Physicians, ought to be chary what they administer, 38
Practice of Physic various, 1, 2 Things necessary to that Science, 50
Practicioners, their grand Mistake, proved by Example, 32, 33
Q.
QUartanes, 144 Rage, its Effects, 65 Remedies, general, how serviceable. Their
difficulty to be obtained, 14, 15 Their dark part, what; their Properties,
Essential to true Healing, 18, 19. 22 Their general Dispositions keep
Physicians from Error, 31 Remedies, Particular, when useful, 21. 31
S.
SCurveys, whence they arise, and their Effects, 67 Of them in general, 89
Their Cure by Ensamples, 93 Seeds, admit not of ought but Ideas, 57 Spirit of
Life, or Archeus, the Ruler, why 36 How primarily affected, ibid. Erring,
becomes the Efficient Cause of Diseases, 37 Specificks, not altogether useless,
22 How made more general, 23 Sorrow, its Effects, 35 Stupor, its Effects, 63
Surfeits, their Foundation and Effects, 61, 62
T.
TInctures, open, their singular use, 73 Transpiration insensible, how excited,
and the benefit thereof, 20 The Medium thereof unknown, 21
V.
VEgetables, not so serviceable, as Minerals, why, 8, 9 Venomes, 68 Virtues, of
St. John's-wort, and the Ash-Tree, 176 Of Natural Subjects, not conferred, but
only discovered by Art, 10 Ulcer, in the Womb, and its Cure, 157 Urine, vented
through the Fleshy Parts about the Kidneys, 20 Use and Dose of the Author's
Powder, 162. 169 Use and Dose of the Author's Scorbutic-Tincture, 170
W.
Womb, tumifyed, and its Cure, 158 World, waxes old, 8
FINIS.

