workers constructing fortifications HR e f


THE STRENGTHENING of STRONGHOLDS: INVENTED On several Occasions, and
practiced during the late WARS, as well in the United Provinces, as in France,
Germany, Italy, Dalmatia, Albania, and the Neighboring Countries.

By HENRY RUSE, Engineer, and Captain of a Foot-Company belonging to the City
of AMSTERDAM.

Translated out of the Low-Dutch-Copy, by His Majesty's Command.

In the Savoy, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1668.

To the Honorable, etc.
Dr FRANCIS BANNING KOCK, Knight of the Order of S. Michel, Lord of
Purmerlandt, and Ilpendam, etc. CORNELIUS BICKER, Lord of SWIETEN, etc. JOHN
HUYDEKOOPER, Knight, Lord of Maerseveen, etc. Dr NICHOLAS TULP:
RULING BURGAMASTERS Of the City of AMSTERDAM.

AS ALSO To the Honorable LORDS,
CORNELIUS DE GRAFF, LORD of Zuydt-Polsbroeck, etc. NICHOLAS CORVER,
Treasurers and old Burgamasters of the said City.

AND
ANTHONY OETGENS VAN WAVEREN Knight, Lord of Waveren, etc. Dr GERARD SCHAEP,
Lord of Koerte-hoef, etc. Dr CORNELIUS WITSEN, JOHN VAN DE POLL,
Old Burgamasters.

MY LORDS,
IF this little Treatise which I humbly present to your Lordships, may be
favorably accepted as a pledge of my grateful Acknowledgements, and may beget
in your Lordships a firm belief that my real intentions are to employ my best
endeavors in the discharge of that Trust your Lordships have reposed in me, I
have obtained the utmost of my desires; beseeching your Lordships to consider
more the matter therein contained (which the greatest and wisest of men in all
ages have esteemed as one of the most noble Sciences, and the most necessary
for the settlement and preservation of a flourishing Commonwealth) then the
rough and unpolished style of the Writer, remembering that Soldiers and persons
of my profession (as your Lordships very well know) ought much rather to ponder
their Actions, then to study the needless ornament of Words; as likewise to
rest assured, that the continuation of your Lordships affection toward me,
will not only encourage me to a steadfast and unwearied perseverance in my zeal
for your Service, but likewise to proceed to some other undertakings of the
like nature, for the good and benefit of your City, and of the whole
Commonwealth. And so I remain,

My Honorable, etc. Your Lordships most devoted Servant, H. RUSE.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
IN the year of our Lord 1639. (being the Fifteenth of my age) having a great
inclination to the Wars, and my Genius leading me principally to the studies of
Fortification, Artillery, Fireworks, Mines, and the like; I was first of all
entertained in the service of the States, where I continued about four years;
during which time I observed with great diligence the Manners and Customs used
in these Countries, as well in the business of Encamping and Retrenching, as in
Erecting their Fortifications. But hearing very much of the French and other
Nations, for their mavelous Address and Dexterity in all Warlike Affairs, I
was extremely desirous to be better acquainted with their ways, as promising my
self to see wonders done by them: Wherefore I went with a Regiment of Walloons
from Mastricht to France, in quality of a Lieutenant; which Regiment was joined
to the Army of the Duke d' Enguin (who was then General of the French) and so
they kept together till the Battle of Frybourg in Brisgow, 1644. where the said
Regiment was wholly routed, and I with many other miserable Wretches shared
together in our Misfortune; however with that Army we reduced the Palatinat by
the Rhyne, Frankendal only excepted. Being since returned into France, I had
the advantage of seeing there many places well Fortified, as also in Burgundy,
Lorraine, and Germany, and did examine very curiously their Principles of War,
together with the various Methods of Fortifying, attacquing, defending, and
embattailing their Armies, which often happened between the French and Germane,
against the Imperialists and Bavarians, to which we were not altogether
strangers. Thus having seen whatever I thought necessary in those Countries, I
assisted at the Battle of Nortlingen, in and near the Village of Alderheym
1645. where the Duke d' Enguin was General of the French, V. C. Tureyn of the
Waymarians, and Merci of the Bavarians, which last was slain in the Fight.
After this, having assisted in the Battle of Herbrausen near Mariedal, I
resolved to seek my fortune in some other Country, to see what was there to be
done, the French and German Customs and Warlike practices being sufficiently
known to me already. Consequently in the year 1646. hearing that the Turks had
invaded Candia, and declared War against the Venetians, I had great
inclinations to follow that War, (besides the curiosity I had to see those
Countries) as being against the most inveterate and irreconcilable enemy of
Christendom. Whereupon I left the German Camp (for I was then come from the
French to the Waymarians) where I had served for the space of three years, in
diverse employments, and endured many hard and tedious Marches, hazarded my self
often in bloody Battles and famous Rencounters, with the loss of most of my
Comrades and Fellow Soldiers, who were either slain in fight, or otherwise
lost their lives in the Service. From thence I first steered my course to
Helvetia, and being arrived at Zurich, I met with the Venetian Ambassador, and
other German Officers, with whom I made an agreement to levy German Soldiers,
and to lead them over the Alps into Italy ( Bergamo in Lombardy being the place
appointed for our Rendezvous) where having been a while, and observed the most
eminent Fortifications on the Continent, we got Letters to go to Venice, from
whence some of us were sent for Candia, others for Corfu, and I with some
German Forces for Dalmatia, which was already invaded and taken by the Turks of
Bosna, Macedonia, and the Grecians, who made great preparations to assault the
Strongholds in those parts. Here, by the entreaty of Foscolo the Venetian
Ambassador, I took upon me the employment of Engineer, and had many strange
Adventures, too numerous to be here recited. About five years after, Lunardo
Foscolo, then General in Dalmatia, was chosen Generalissimo in Candia, who
desired me to accompany him thither. But when we came to Venice, his journey
was retarded, and I employed my time in curing some Distempers I had gotten in
the Wars, in the Paduan Baths; and afterward returned to Venice, where I found
the General, having got leave from the Senate, resolved to continue that summer
at Venice. Whereupon being desirous to visit my friends and relations in my
native Country, I took my leave, and went for Germany, and by the way had an
opportunity of seeing some Fortifications of the Duke of Bavaria, and some
others, which before I might not, because I served their enemies. Being in the
Low Countries, I had an opportunity of offering my service to my Lords the
Burgamasters of Amsterdam, in whose service I am at present employed, and hope,
as occasion shall offer, I shall be able so to improve my talent, as to bring
to light that which may be for the advantage of this great City, and the whole
Country. In the mean time I shall begin with this small Treatise, the Subject
whereof is the doctrine of Fortifications; not that I intend to discourse of
the first Rudiments, but only to manifest unto those who understand this
Science, the weakness of Modern Fortifications, and how the defects may be
supplied, and the Works made incomparably stronger, as well the Royal
Fortresses, as the Outworks, and all this with as small cost as ordinarily
other Works are erected. Which expedients are no Chimeras or idle Fancies, but
such as have been sufficiently disputed of and thoroughly examined. For I have
made it my business to observe very strictly the proper function of each
distinct part of a Fortification, and that not in a Closet, but abroad, and in
the Field, together with the manifold ways of improving them; and have
discoursed and debated the same with the most excellent Engineers of this our
age. I do not mean with such who attacque Cities by a fireside or in a
chimney-corner, but with such who have been trained up among the Canons and
Muskets: nor do I mean with our ordinary Mathematicians, who think that Wars,
and all affairs of this world ought to be regulated unchangeably after their
rules. Neither do I hereby in any wise despise or undervalue Mathematical
Learning; for on the contrary, I lay that for my foundation and groundwork,
having for my own particular studied it with great affection and delight. But
because I have found by experience, that the Principles of War are not always
limited to Mathematical Rules, therefore I do not begin this Treatise with
Demonstrations, but declare my opinion to the lovers of this kind of learning
as plainly and as briefly as I can; not thinking it necessary to show how to
erect a Fortification, but only to point at some general Amendments, which
will, I doubt not, be very grateful to all ingenious Students. And in case
there be any thing found which they cannot approve of, they will highly oblige
me whenever they please to declare the same, and to propound expedients for the
reforming of whatever is amiss. But for as much as I do not doubt but that this
little Treatise will find acceptance, I shall God willing communicate unto the
world my particular reflections and observations, for Attacquing, Defending,
Artillery, Mines, Counter-Mines, with all other things relating thereto, as
likewise for the ordering and forming of Battles; all which have been found to
be practicable, and of great use in the late Wars.

THE STRENGTHENING OF STRONGHOLDS: INVENTED On several Occasions, and
practiced in the late Wars, as well in Holland, as in France, Germany, Italy,
Dalmatia, Albania, And the Neighboring Countries; BY HENRY RVSE.
AFter I had thoroughly considered the best Methods of Fortification practiced
in the Countries before mentioned, I found that none of them had made better
use of Situations (as to the Artificial part) then the United Provinces.
Forasmuch as they have not only very well designed and contrived their
Fortresses, but have also placed them so advantagiously, that by the
overflowing of Waters (which they can by the opening of Sluices let in or out as
they please) they have rendered the greatest part of the Works impregnable. I do
not say but that in other Countries are also found very sufficient Fortresses,
and well contrived; but there has been a necessity in these Provinces (where
they have had to deal with so potent an Enemy) to use greater caution and
circumspection then elsewhere, and to make choice of the best Fortifications,
and yet with no great charge, being made of Earth only, which of all Materials
I hold to be the best for this purpose; whereas in other Countries, especially
in Italy, they are of opinion, that the outsides of their Works ought to be
altogether of Stone, and afterward cut or pared, which cannot be done without
excessive charge. And yet notwithstanding all their endeavors, they have not
been able so to contrive their Strongholds, but that the best of them, if
accessible, are taken in a short time, being hardly tenable for three Months,
to the astonishment of the World, as examples do abundantly testify. This has
been the cause why many Military Architects have tried all ways and means to
supply those Defects, of which I have seen many Conceits, but in my judgment
altogether impracticable; which has encouraged me to improve my own
Observations in all Occurrences, and earnestly to mind each part of the
Fortification, of what use it might be, and whether it were able to perform
that, for which it was ordained and intended. And having discovered very many
Errors, especially in the Modern Flanques and Outworks, I did debate my
Observations very particulary with many Engineers of the greatest Practice and
Renown; but never met with any whose judgment I so well approved, as that of a
certain noble Italian, who having had several Employments, as well in Germany
and the Low Countries, as likewise in the French Wars, had carefully improved
all opportunities and advantages of gaining Knowledge and Experience. With this
Gentleman I therefore made a particular Acquaintance and Friendship, and we did
mutually communicate and compare together our Observations, till such time as
we had found out, and agreed upon such a Method, as seemed to us to be of all
other the safest, and yet practicable with the least expense; according to
which Method, almost all considerable Fortifications might without difficulty
be redressed. The truth is, this Method is something near that which shall
hereafter be discoursed of: For having looked yet more narrowly into this
matter, and examined it with greater diligence and curiosity, I did only (as I
found cause) alter something of that our first design. I do not here undertake
to make Accessible places impregnable, since all that is made by man, may by
man be again destroyed; for the Attacques being carried on upon a sure foot,
and the Approaches being managed with skill and judgment, if in the mean time
no relief come, even the strongest places must at length yield up to the
Besiegers. My intention is only so to contrive Works, that they may resist
much longer then ordinarily they do, that so the Besiegers may be wasted and
consumed, either by ill weather or some other accidents. (For by lengthening of
time, opportunity is given to the Besieged to get relief; or in the mean while
to Attaque some other places in the Enemies custody, and so to make him quit
his design;) which will be a sufficient recompense for the pains and charge,
which I conceive to be but little more then ordinary, in case the Work be
managed by an experienced Artist, as will sufficiently appear by what hereafter
follows. In the mean time I shall propound some general Rules or Principles of
Fortifications, approved and owned by many skilful Captains and Engineers.

The Maxims or general Rules which are observed in the Modern Fortifications.
1. There ought to be no point of the whole Fortification undiscovered or
unflanqued, and that from several places of Defense. 2. The Lines defending
ought to be longer then the Lines defended, or at least as long. 3. A Regular
Fortification is very much stronger then an Irregular. 4. The more Bastions a
Regular place has, the greater is its Strength and Defense. 5. A Fortress
ought to command all places whatsoever round about. 6. Those parts of a
Fortress which are nearest to the Center, ought to command those that are more
remote. 7. Those parts of a Fortification which are at greatest distance from
the Center, ought always to be Commanded by those e that are nearest the Center.
8. The Line of Defense Fichante, ought not to be much longer then 60 Rods, that
being the distance ordinarily allowed for the Port of a Musket. 9. The larger
the Flanques and Gorges are, the better and stronger they are, provided the
other parts are not prejudiced thereby. 10. Of second Flanques, and
Courtine-Flanques, the larger is the better, in case it cause no disproportion
in the other parts of the Fortification. 11. As for the Linea Stringens, (or
Line of Defense Secant, which is continued from the Face to the Courtine) the
shorter it is, the better, if the Flanques be not too much lessened by it. 12.
That opening of the Angle of a Bastion is the best, which gives a right length
to the Flanque, second Flanque, and Gorge. 13. The Angle of a Bastion ought not
to be less then 60 degrees, nor greater then a Right Angle, or 90 degrees. 14.
The Angle of the Poligone ought not to be less then 90 degrees. 15. The Angle
of the Face and Flanque ought to be at least 150 degrees. 16. The Angle of the
Courtine and Flanque ought to be evermore 90 degrees, or a Right Angle. 17. The
outward Angle of Defense (or Angle Flanquant) cannot well be too Acute. 18. The
inward Angle of Defense ought not to be less then 25 degrees. 19. The
proportion between the Courtine and the Face ought to be as 3 to 2, or as 36 to
24. 20. The Faces should never be longer then the Courtine, nor shorter then
one half of the Courtine.
These are the Maxims and Rules for the structure of most of the Modern
Fortifications, which I hold to be exceeding good and necessary, all but the
16th, which says, That the Angle of the Flanque and Courtine must always be a
Right Angle. As for the reason of that Position, we shall see more hereafter.
For I do assert the contrary, and say, That it ought always to exceed 90
degrees: which Angle is the only thing that makes the difference in the form
of my Ground-Lines from those now in use; besides that, I take greater Parts,
and other Profiles. The truth is, the Flanques are the most considerable parts
of a Fortification, and those wherein lies its chiefest Strength, and therefore
the Structure of those is of so much the greater consequence. But now the
reasons of those who would have the Flanque evermore perpendicular to the
Courtine, are these that follow, viz.

Because all Shots coming from thence fly parallel to the Courtine; and that
by night all parts of the Courtine may be better defended; and that when it is
very dark, the Soldiers holding their Muskets in a right Angle to their
Breasts, must needs hinder the Enemy from approaching the Courtine, as may be
seen in Fig. 1.

These reasons being well scanned and examined, appear so weak, that they are
scarce worth the answering; nevertheless I shall briefly refute them. The first
reason is, because the Shots fly all parallel with the Courtine: whereupon I
say, whether the Flanque be perpendicular to the Courtine or no, the Shots may
for all that fly parallel with the Courtine; for the Soldiers know not how to
make a Right Angle in setting their Muskets. I do also affirm, That only one
Musqueteer can with one Shot clear the whole Courtine at once, and all the rest
must incline to it; for if they do fly parallel, then those who give the
Assaults must have Wings likewise, that so they may be shot in the Air, in case
those within are to defend the upper part of the Wall, or else the Shots must
fly only the height of four or five foot above the Horizon (as out of the
Faussebray) that so they may keep parallel to the Horizon; whereas
contrariwise, the Flanques in these Fortifications are eighteen or twenty foot
high, and all Shots go downwards, and therefore hit the Horizon in one place
only. The principal duty of a Musqueteer is, that by nightime he turn
himself with his Musket toward the place where he hears a noise, or sees
fire, or something else; to which neither the Perpendicularity nor the
Obliquity of Flanques can give any advantage, or become the least hindrance.
And these parallel-shots are only Imaginary, found out upon the Ground-Lines,
which in the Profile come far otherwise, as Fig. 1. Number. 1. shows. The
Musquetteer A standing upon the Flanque, which is Perpendicular to the
Courtine, clears the upper part of it: in case the Musquetteer B do the same,
and Shoots parallel with A; but then his Bullet flies so far from the Wall,
as he himself stands off from his fellow; and so likewise all the rest that
stand along in the same Line. Whence it follows, That those who assault, must
be upon the Wing, or in the Air, or else are not to be hit by these
parallel-shots: but let the others without the Point A, as C, D, etc. not Shoot
parallel with A, then their Shots cannot hit either the Courtine or Moat, or
Bridge, but in one place only; which in an Oblique Flanque of an equal height,
will be the same. Now as for my flanques, I order them after another Method,
and therefore they are of far greater Advantage then the former, or any other
that were ever yet in use, which any Artist may easily conceive, when he
vieweth only the Figure, although no Explanation or Animadversion were made
upon it, in case he will but declare his judgment without partiality,
according to right reason, and the practice of War.

The Flanques or Defending-Lines are the chiefest part of the Fortification,
and ought therefore to be considered in the first place. They have been altered
several times already, but never with any advantage comparable to what is
obtained by these; which advantage is distributed and has an influence upon all
the parts of the Fortification. The Flanques with Casematts are odious in the
United Provinces, because their Orillons could not stand, unless they were
Walled up with Stone, which is too chargeable; as likewise by their Cutting and
Retiring of the Flanques mounted with Canon, the entrance of the Bulworks came
to be too little, which in my Work is otherwise. Those who view my Bulworks,
and do not understand the Profiles. may also imagine, that they are made with
Casematts; but it is very far from that, and there is something else in it,
which hereafter shall be sufficiently declared and explained: only let no man
flatter himself with an opinion, that forasmuch as so many brave Captains and
Engineers have employed the best of their understandings and endeavors to
arrive at the utmost perfection of this Art of Fortification, it cannot be, but
that they have attained unto it: Whereas in the late Wars it has been
observed, and is daily seen, that the best Fortresses, made after the manner
aforesaid, can scarce resist so much as two Months; and it is altogether
needless to produce Examples of that which so many Histories do attest.

Besides all this, we are to know, that the bravest Captains and Engineers of
this Age knew very well the imperfection of the Modern Flanques, and therefore
they have made it their business to think of it, and the truth is, many have
conferred with me about it; but I did not find the Inventions propounded by
them, practicable in all places: and in this Country it has not been minded,
because the Spanish did seldom or never Attacque any place of consequence with
an industrious force; but being Besieged in any of their own places, did easily
Surrender it, without troubling themselves much with the knowledge of
Engineership. But I shall leave this Subject, and come to my purpose, which is
not to teach the Grounds or first Rudiments of Fortification, but only to
Instruct the Ingenious Lovers of that Art, how to reform those errors which in
these late furious and industrious Wars have been rightly discovered in the
Modern Fortifications. I style them furious and industrious, because no History
gives a relation of any War that was carried on with greater fury, or of any
Cities that were taken with greater industry.

In the sequel of this Discourse, I shall manifest the Errors of Modern
Fortification, and in order thereunto, I shall begin first from the
Ground-Lines, and propound a part of a Regular Fortress of Eleven Bulworks,
according to the practice of Friday and other Modern Mathematicians, whose
Method I esteem to be much better then those of former Ages. But before I
proceed, the Enemies of Strongholds ought in the first place to be known,
which are Sappes, Spades, Pikes, Canon, Mines, and Muskets, managed by
Soldiers, and Commanded by skillful Captains and Engineers: And forasmuch as
the very same things are to be made use of for Defense, it is necessary that
the Fortresses, to the end they may be convenient for use, should be prepared
for it long before. Now this cannot be practiced in small Works, where after
the springing of one Mine, all is lost. It is also necessary, that the Works
should outwardly be defended, as well with Canon as with Muskets, by a greater
number of men, and from more places of Defense, then can be done by the Enemy
conveniently in his Attacques; And herein consists the virtue of a
Fortification: For if the Enemy do find place to make a Battery of six or eight
Pieces, to break the Flanques; we ought to have a commodious place to plant
Twenty eight or Thirty pieces in Contra-Battery, which will soon ruin the
Enemies Battery, being greater in number, and standing already in advantageous
places; whereas the Enemy must first raise his Battery under the danger of
those Canon-shots. All which being premised and well considered, let us now
inquire whether our Modern Fortresses have this convenience; and if not, where
the difference lies. For example, see Fig. 2. Number. 2. which is part of a Work
of eleven Bastions, and Fortified after the best Modern Method and Practice,
(being Fryday's second Way) and according to the measure of these following
Lines.

A B Polygone exterior 78.13 Long. F G Polygone interior 64.93 Long. F E
Demy-Gorge 14.19 Long. A G Capital-Line 24.40 Long. A C Face 24.00 Long. C D
Flanque 11.91 Long. D E Courtine 36.00 Long. A E Line of Defense Fichante 61.68
Long. A H Line of Defense Secant 48.85 Long.

These Lines have indeed a mutual proportion; but let us now see, what is the
office of each of them respectively. It is evident, that in case this Place
were to be Attacqued, it must be done either by the Faces, or by A C. or B I.
or by some other place at pleasure; for the Courtine D E. cannot be assaulted,
but by breaking in between the two Bulworks, which are as two strong Castles,
which would be too difficult an Enterprise. Therefore it is taken for granted,
that the Face is the weakest part of the Fortification, being most exposed to
the Enemy; and therefore the more Defense it has, the stronger it is. In this
Work the Face is Twenty four Rods, and the Lines that must defend this Face,
being the Flanque and Second-flanque, are the Flanque 11.91. and the
Second-flanque 14.19. to be understood upon the Ground-Lines, which are yet
something diminished, when the Wall is raised, by reason of its slooping.
Suppose now, that the bringing over of a Gallery should be hindered by the
Canon where the Moat is full of water, (for where it is dry, they go to work
after another manner) seeing it cannot be done by Muskets only. If therefore
I plant Canon along the whole Flanque D C. because every Piece ought to be
distant from the other Twenty foot (for every Merlon ought to be at least so
thick) there may be placed Six Pieces, it being in all One hundred and nineteen
footlong. It is my opinion, That upon the second Flanque the Canon cannot be
lodged conveniently, by reason of the obliquity of the Muzzel-gates, and the
little Earth, which the Merlons (this is the Mass of earth that is left between
two Gun-holes) have about their ends: For if a Canon-bullet should come against
them, it stops the Holes, and ruins the Parapetts, so that in a short time the
Canon upon this Line are left naked and useless: but if they were there placed,
let schematics of fortification Number. II
Maete van. 110 Rynlanse Roden voor beyde dese Figuren

us suppose there might stand four; however this place is better for the
Musketeers. And thus upon these Defending Lines of the great Wall, I find
place for Ten Pieces of Canon, which are all of an equal height, and are
discovered from the whole Field that lies over against them; and the Enemy may
Plant against them as many Pieces as he pleases, to Dismount them, which has
been always done in these late Attaques, before ever they came to the Moat; and
after they were past the Counter-scarp, they met with no more stops, but now
and then a Shot by stealth coming either out of the Faussebray, or from some
part of the Wall: And therefore the Galleries were brought over with surety,
because it was not possible to make any further resistance; and it is now come
to this, that a place is looked upon in a manner lost, after the Counterscarp
is once gained. What signify then all the charges and expenses of so feeble
and so weak a Work? since it hinders not, but that the Enemy with small pains
may pass the Moats, and undermine the Bulworks; which Mines the Enemy, by
reason of the ill contrivance of the Modern Fausse-brays, can make where he
pleases, after he has got over the Moat; and by reason of the thickness of
the Wall, the Mines can hardly be prevented before they do Execution; (as I
shall make good hereafter.) After which, the Bulwork inwardly is unfit to cut
out sufficient Retrenchments, because it is too little, and closes too
narrowly behind, or else it must be performed with great labor and charges,
and more slowly then can be permitted; for all things ought then to be done
with great expedition: And if the Cut be made about the Gorge, the Front grows
too little, besides that no just form can be given unto it; with many other
inconveniences, too long to be here rehearsed, etc.

The Modern Engineers refer themselves much to the strength of their Outworks,
whereof some nevertheless are very Murthering-Holes, more troublesome then
useful; as I shall prove in due time: but for the present shall only show, how
the faults of Modern Fortifications may be Rectified according to my Method.

It is notorious to every one, who understands Fortifications, according to the
Maxims abovementioned, that the longer the Defending Lines are, the better
they are; and that according to Axiom 9. the longer Flanques and Gorges, are
much the stronger; always provided, they may be made without prejudice to other
parts, or that they be weakened thereby: As also, that the great Bulworks are
better then the little ones, because Retrenchments and Counter-mines may be
made within them; and because more Pieces of Canon and Musketeers may be
placed there, for the defense of the next Bulwork; and because it is fitter for
all other Warlike actions. It is also notorious, that the longest Polygones and
Regular Fortresses contain most room, and therefore ought to be preferred
before the shorter, in case the Lines of Defense in the Fortification do not
exceed the reach of a Musket, that is, 60 or 70 Rods; for after this manner
more space is included with fewer Bulworks, and therefore with less charges.
The other Maxims are also very strictly observed in my Fortifications.

Now to obtain all these Advantages, I describe in Fig. 2. Number. 2. the
Ground-Lines of part of an Eleven-angled Work, according to Friday, as also
part of an Eleven-angled Work, according to my own practice, both of them
Fortified after our second Methods of Fortifying. Which is the most commodious,
and the fittest for Cities of an ordinary extent: but to Fortify very great
Towns, it will be better to make use of the third Method. I shall therefore
show first the difference of Lines in our two Methods, and afterward the
manner of applying the whole Work unto practice. See Number. 2. Fig. 2.

The Length of Lines in an Eleven-angled work Fortified after Fryday's second
Method. The Length of Lines, according to my second Method, in a Figure of
Eleven Angles. A B Exterior Polygone 78.13 A B 90.00 F G Interior Polygone
64.38 F G 74.03 -- The little Semi-diameter 114.26 -- 131.36 F E The Gorge
14.19 F E 24.00 A G The Capital-Line 24.40 A G 28.32 A C The Face 24.00 A C
27.69 C D The Flanque or Shoulder 11.91 C D 16.00 D E The Courtine 36.00 D E
27.00 A E Line of Defense Fichante 61.68 A E 64.50 A H Line of Defense Secant
48.85 A H 54.00 E H Second Flanque 14.19 E H 12.00

Here the difference of Lines is clearly seen; and that my Figure of eleven
Angles contains in the Circuit of its exterior Polygones, 130.57 more than
that of Fryday's; for his eleven Polygones are 859.43 in length, and my eleven
990, and my Line of Defense is no more than 2.72 longer than his, which is
little or no difference; my Flanques, Gorges, and consequently whole Bulworks
are much larger, and more convenient. My Bulworks-Angle, (or Angle Flanqued) is
equal to his; as also the Angle of the Polygone, and the Angle of the Tenaille,
and the Faces are as long as the Courtines. My Flanques defend the next
Bulworks, Faces and Moats, at righ Angles: So that all parts do mutually defend
themselves with great conveniencie. Here it is to be observed, That I do
include very near as much space with nine of my Bulworks, as Friday does with
eleven of his, keeping very near the same Line of Defense; which eases the
Charges very considerably, besides the great Symetry of the Work. And this is
all that concerns the Ground-Lines; the virtue of this Work will be seen by
that which follows. I shall proceed now to the Structure of these
Fortifications, and how the proportions of Lines are to be found. I doubt not,
but there be many Theorici, which understand the use of Fortifications no
otherwise than upon the Paper, who will imagine, that this Work cannot be good,
seeing the Flanques do not (according to the profound Error before mentioned)
stand Perpendicular to the Courtines; not considering what strength the
Bulworks have by this Obliquity, not only those that are next, but also those
that are situated on the other side. For hereby the Bulworks gain at the
entrance upon each Gorge, the length D I, being 8 twice, which is 16 Rods
gained upon both the Gorges, so that the entrance of the Bulwork comes to be
48 Rods. This affords place enough to Lodge upon the Flanques the supposed
Artillery and Soldiers, which I esteem necessary. It affords also room for
the making of Retrenchments, and the Flanques come to be much longer after this
manner, as is proved by the 47 of the first of Euclid. It makes also the great
Line of Defense to keep its due measure, not surpassing the length of 64, which
is the true reach of a Musket. Although my Polygones be considerably longer,
yet the Lines of Defense are not sensibly longer than those of Fryday's, and
others. I am also of opinion, That the Modern Flanques are more for an
imaginary beauty, than to make good the Defense, which notwithstanding is the
main end for which they are made, and wherein consists the strength of
Fortresses.

The Calculation of my great Fortifications, consisting in the little, mean,
and great Royal.
TO do this, I state first my exterior Polygones, after which I regulate the
proportions of the whole Work. For the exterior Polygone of the little Royal, I
take 80, for that of mean Royal 90, and for the exterior Polygone of the great
Royal 100; and I follow the same proportions in the Calculating of my Lines,
which Friday has, that is, making the Courtine to the Face, as 36 to 24, or as
3 to 2; but the difference is, that I take my parts greater, and redress them,
after the first Position is done. This Calculation is done only by the Rule of
Three, thus: Admit there is a place to be Fortified with a Regular
Fortification of four, five, six, or more Angles, and that after the first,
second, or third of my Methods; I take then the Lines of such a Polygone, as
the Fortress should be, that I intend to make, out of Fryday's Tables. For
example, I would make a Square after my first Method; I take then out of the
Tables the length of the Lines; as 24 for the Faces; 36 the Courtines; for the
Gorges 9.23; for the Capital 19.73; for the Flanque 7.74; and so for all the
Lines: these Lines I lay before me, and say, by the Rule of Three, If the
exterior Polygone of a Square of Fryday's, being 82.36, gives me the Courtine
36, what does my exterior Polygone of 80 after the first Method in the great
Royal, give me for my Courtine? and the answer is, 34.97.

Item, the exterior Polygone gives for the Face, according to Friday, 82.36 --
24. What gives the Polygone of 80? -- Answer. It gives 23.31

various depictions of fortifications Number. I.
detail from schematics of fortification Fig. II
Gra^

Esplanade

Bedock^e wegh

Grafte

Parapet vande Fausebraye

Bedeckte Wegh

parapet van den grooten wall

Kr^ des walls

side-view of fortification Fig. I.
schematics of fortification Maete van. 80. Rynlandtse Roeden



And so observing the same Rule for a Square, whose exterior Polygone is 80
Rods (as in the Figure of Numb. 1.) there will arise the following proportions
of the Lines, viz.

H G The Courtine 34.97 A I The Face 23.31 C H The Gorge 8.96 C A The
Capital-Line 19.16 H I The Flanque 7.52 H L The second Flanque 6.77 C D The
interior Polygone 52.88 H B The great Line of Defense 59.05 D M The little
Semi-diameter 39.37

N. B.
He who is disposed to Calculate, or who has not these Tables at hand, he may
find out himself, by Calculation, the chief Angles of every Figure, and
afterward by the Tables of Sines, or Trigonometry, the length of the Lines,
etc.

These Lines and others that may be required, being found by the foregoing
Rules, I delineated the Figure (whether it be a Fortress of five, ten, eleven
or more Angles) according to Art, as here in the Figure Numb. 1. the Square,
which I hold to be the first Figure capable of being Fortified. This being
drawn according to the Modern Practice, I redress the Ground-Lines according to
my Method, very easily thus: I lengthen the Faces at pleasure, as here A I, N
C, of which I N, is the Line of Defense Secant. Upon this C A, I let fall a
Perpendicular-line, touching the extremity of the Face B K, in K, and I take
the Line F K, for the Flanque; and thus I do round about the whole
Fortification; and this from a Square, to a Figure of twelve sides inclusive.
In such Fortresses, as have more than twelve Polygones, I keep always the same
Courtines. And so the form of a Square with its Ground-Lines is sufficiently
seen in Numb. 1. and the Structure of it showed before. From this alteration
arise these Advantages; First, That the Gorges are lengthened by F G, and H E,
and therefore the Bulworks at their entrance become wider and fitter for
Retrenchments, and the use of necessary Artillery; as may be seen in the
Profile of the Flanques. But the Gorges remaining at the length of D G, the
said Artillery cannot be duly Lodged. This lengthening of the Gorges makes
also the Flanques E I, F K, longer than the former Flanques K G, and I H, were:
This Obliquity of Flanques causes also the Faces A I, and K B, together with
the Moats lying before them, to be Defended at Right-angles, and that the Lines
of Defense F A, and E B, become shorter. And lastly, This manner of Structure
gives sufficient room for the Cutting or Retiring of the Flanques. And
concerning the Angle-flanqued, or Angle of the Bulwork, which in a Square is 60
degrees; he who desires to have it greater, let him draw a Line from the Point,
where the Flanque and Courtine meet together, by the extremity of the opposite
Flanque; as by 5 to Q, which is the Line D 5 Q, and so at the other side. Thus
the Faces become something shorter, and the Angle something greater, according
to the 21 of the first of Euclid. But the Second Flanque is lost, which in a
Square signifies but little. And this in my opinion, is sufficient as to the
alteration of the Ground-Lines, and the finding of them; and the more Bulworks
in any Figure keep their just distance, the more considerable will be the
advantage gained by their Alteration.

Of the Fausse-bray.
THe Modern Engineers draw the Fausse-bray parallel, round about the foot of
the Wall, at such a distance, that between the Parapet of the Fausse-bray and
the Wall is left a hidden way of between 15 and 25 Foot. This Parapet is made
to defend the Moat, when the Enemy is passed the Counter-scarp, and intends
to carry over the Gallery. I make also Fausse-brays, but after another manner
than the Modern, viz. thus: I draw a Parallel-Line with the Flanques, as in
Numb. 1. X W, parallel with the Flanque 6 V, at the distance of five Rods; so
that the place may be capable to hold Canon; afterward I lengthen the Faces of
the Bulwork, as B V, till they cut the parallel X, W; this done, I draw a
parallel with the Courtine, at the distance of 3 or 4, as X Y; so that the
Lines V, W, X, Y, 2, 3, make the Fausse-bray; and this I do round about the
Fortress, only before the Flanque and Courtine, and not before the Faces. The
reasons hereof are these: First, It is found by experience, that the
Fausse-brays are more hurtful than advantageous before the Faces; because they
are not of service, before the Enemy comes to Lodge upon the Esplanade or
Parapet of the hidden way, and then they are to oppose him, which they cannot
possibly do: And this so much the less, because the Enemy may plant his Canon
there for the Destroying and Dismounting of them. Which is easily done, seeing
it is but a bare Parapet, which is soon thrown down; so that in this part
before the Faces, which are Attacqued, no body can remain for Defense, by
reason of the playing of the great Guns from the Batteries, which may be made
as need requires; as here Fig. 11. Numb. 1. is intimated by the Letters A, B,
and C; where from the Battery A, the Face of the Bulwork D, and its Fausse-bray
is pierced Perpendicularly, and from the Battery B Obliquely; but the Battery C
cutteth and clears the Earth away, which is shaken by the two others; so that
by these Batteries and Musquet-shots, coming from the Lines and Cors de Guards,
the Faces, as well of the Fausse-bray, as of the great Wall, are soon ruined
and left without Defense, so that no body may be seen upon these Lines without
being hit; whence it follows, That they cannot hinder the coming over of the
Gallery, but it must of necessity be done from the opposite Flanque. Item, That
so soon as this part of the Fausse-bray, lying before the Face, is discovered,
it is presently made useless to the Defenders; and not only so, but it does
them this hurt and disadvantage, that so soon as the Gallery comes over, the
Miners are able to Undermine the Faces of the Bulwork, where they please, and
at several places together. The Mines being blown up, the Enemy may set Footing
upon the space where the Fausse-bray lies, not only to Assault the Breach, but
he may run along the Foot of the Wall through the Fausse-bray, to fall on at
more places at the same time. To this it might be replied, That the Fausse-bray
ought to be Cut with Trenches, to hinder this running about. But every one who
has experience in these Actions, knows very well, what slender Opposition these
Trenches are able to make, especially, when the Earth, which is raised by the
Mine, falls down, and sometimes buries the Defenders alive. This place is also
of Advantage for the Enemy, when the Breach is Retrenched, and he will make new
Attacques upon it, and by that means will lodge himself conveniently in the
Fausse-bray, and further in the Breach; whereas otherwise, where there is no
Fausse-bray before the Faces, he finds very inconvenient Lodging against the
slooping of the Wall, seeing no other place is found to fix upon. The Miners
are forced to make their Mines about the place, where the Gallery comes on;
besides that the Faces, which are surrounded with these Fausse-brays, being
Attacqued by Canon and Mines, all the Ruins of them remain lying in the same,
and afford an easier Ascent unto the Enemy; whereas otherwise, where they are
not, the Ruins roll down into the Moat, and the Breach remains clear, and
the Enemy finds little Earth to Retrench himself. By all which it is easy to
understand, That this part brings more advantage than hurt unto the Enemy. To
what end is it then, to be at such Charges to our Prejudice, and to cumber the
Moat before the Bulworks with this needless Parapet? Therefore to conclude, I
say, That the Faces of a Bulwork being Attacqued, can make little Opposition of
their own; but ought to be Defended from the Flanques and parts of the
Courtine; and the more eaven and neatly the Faces lie, the better may they be
Flanqued. That part of the Flanque of the Fausse-bray D, hinders also, that the
Face a G from being defended at the bottom from the opposite Flanque. Some
Engineers are of opinion, That the Fausse-brays ought to run out after the
shape of Ravelins in the middle, before the Courtine. I think this needless,
where the Lines of Defense are of a just length, not much exceeding 60 Rods;
but where they be longer, this must be practiced. At Breda, it is done before
some long Courtines. And this is enough as to what concerns the Ground-Lines of
the Fausse-bray, in the Profiles: I shall show hereafter, how the Work is to be
raised. It remains now, that I speak of the Ground-Lines of the Counter-scarp
and hidden way, and how it may be made, that it may defend it self with great
Advantage, without the great Wall; and that these Counter-scarps are as strong,
yea stronger, than the Modern Fortresses themselves.

N. B.
In those Fortresses, where the exterior Flanquing-angle (or, as the French
call it, Angle de Tenaille) comes to be less than 120 degrees, (but it is never
made less than 90 degrees) the Faces may be lengthened upon the Ground-Lines,
till they meet together; and in such Figures the Fausse-bray may be made upon
these Lines, that is, upon the Line of Defense Secant, without running parallel
with the Flanque, as may be seen in Numb. II. by the three Figures 5, 6, 7. But
when it happens, that the Lines of Defense Secant meet one another within the
Courtine, or just before it; then a Parallel-Line is to be drawn before the
Courtine at the distance of three Rods, to have a Communication; as the
understanding Reader will easily perceive, and is seen in the Figure of Numb.
II, etc.

Of the Counter-scarp, or hidden Way.
THe Modern Engineers do strengthen the outward Brink of the Moat (or
Counter-scarp in Italian,) with Ravelins and Half-moons, leaving a hidden way
with a Ditch about it, and without this hidden way they make sometimes another,
without a Ditch; as may be seen at Breda: Which latter I hold to be very good,
because not only great Defense may be made from thence, but they are also very
convenient for Sallying out, both on Foot and on Horseback; for the Moat does
not hinder it, and the Enemy does not know from what side he must expect the
Sally: Those who thus Sally out, being driven back, may always retire hither,
and presently be in a posture of Defense again behind this Parapet; whereas
otherwise they are many times driven into the Ditch of the hidden way, with
great loss and disorder. This hidden Way (or Esplanade) costeth little, for in
places where the ground is something dry, it is cut in above half its height
under the Horizon, that is, three or four Foot, that it may be the better
flanqued from the first Esplanade which is behind it; as also, that the Shots
may fly more Horizontally, etc. I do Fortify my Moat with another kind of
Work, and I shall show first the manner how I do it, and afterward give
reasons why it is so much better than the Modern Works. And at the same time I
shall discover the Defects, which the Modern Works are subject unto.

See Fig. 4. Numb. 3. which is part of a Regular Seven-angled Figure after my
little Royal, where the exterior Polygone is 80 long: Now to draw my
Counter-Guards (for so I call them instead of Counter-Scarps, this name being
improper) about it, and to give them such a form, as may fit them for that
service I expect from them; I lengthen the Half-diameter K, O to A, or further
at pleasure; then I measure upon the lengthened Half-diameter from the brink of
the Moat O to I, thirty Rod or more, according as I would have the Flanques N 5
and 4 R short or long. Then I draw from of the Face, as from K the Line K, G 5,
as also on the other side the Line L, R, M, from the Point where these two Lines
meet, which should be before the middle of the Courtine; as here from G, I draw
the Perpendicular G H, which is the Capital-Line of the Ravelin W, G, P, H;
then I measure from N to L, as also from G to P, upon the Lines K, G, on
the other side L, G, such a distance as I need for my retired Flanques: from
these Points, viz. from N and 4, I draw N 5 Perpendicular to L, M, and 4 R,
Perpendicular to K 5, as is clearly seen in the Figure, and wants no further
explanation as to the Delineation of it. I make further upon the Line 5 R an
equilateral Triangle, as 5 R, R, which gives a Ravelin, whose Angle at the
Point R is 60 degrees: He who desires the Angle to be greater, may make it so,
without prejudice to the other Work. About this Work I draw a Parallel-Line at
the distance of five Rods, viz. M R G 5 2; which is the Ditch about the
Counter-Guard, so that the Ravelins lying before, become little Islands. At the
brink of this Ditch I make a hidden way or Esplanade, whose sloping is
regulated according to the Wall of the Counter-Guard, without Ditches, with
small cost, which becomes a great benefit. This I continue about the whole
Fortress; and all is clearly seen in the Figure, how the Work must lie
according to the scale and measures. These are all the Outworks, which I look
upon as necessary for a good Defense; and I make no Hornworks, etc. unless
extreme necessity do require it, when perhaps there is some height; and then I
make them after another manner than the Modern, as the nature of the place does
require.

Of the Virtues and Defects of the Modern Outworks.
THe Modern Outworks are Ravelins, Half-moons, hidden Ways, Crownworks,
Hornworks, Tongues, Kettles, etc. and are made about the Fortresses, as Fig. 5.
Number. 3. shows; where the Figures marked with G are called Half-moons, those
with B Ravelins, D is a Crownwork, such as are laid before the Courtines,
before which there lies a single Tongue; E is a Crownwork lying before a
Bulwork, being strengthened with a double Tongue, and at the side of it there is
represented the form of a Hornwork. This Figure is part of a Regular
Seven-angled Work, according to the most Modern practice, as well the Outworks
as the Royal Work. The Virtues and Defects of the Royal Work are in part
manifested already. But now I shall show those of the Outworks; and first

Of Ravelins.
THe Ravelins, marked with B, I count very necessary, seeing they multiply very
much the Defense, especially of the Outworks: But because they do in a manner
stand instead of a Royal Work in Modern Fortresses, they have this Defect, that
their Flanqued Angles are too small, and the Points may be easily broken, as
also the Faces, as may be seen in Fig. 5. where the Ravelin B being Attacqued
from the Batteries A, A, is easily made useless. There may be more Batteries
placed to Attacque these Ravelins, as it is required, because it is seen from
the whole Field I A L. These Works being Attacqued, it is very difficult to
succor them, and no less difficult for the Defenders to retire when it is
taken; and being once taken, it becomes, as it were, a Knife to cut the Throat
of the whole Fortress.

Of the Modern Half-Moons.
THese Half-Moons marked Fig. 5. Numb. 3. with C, I look upon as Works of
little use, because they can make but poor Defense, and are Defended but
weakly; since they have no other Flanque, than from the Faces of the next
situated Ravelins; which Defense being broken (which is easily done, as I have
showed by the Ravelins, and appears by the Figure) they remain to the use of
the Enemy, to make in it the Battery H, whereby the opposite Flanques of the
Bulworks are ruined, and the Galleries are brought over with surety; all which
is clearly showed.

N. B.
The Faces of the Half-Moons cannot be seen from the Flanque of the great Wall,
the Ravelins being in the way; ergo, they cannot be Flanqued from thence, etc.

Of the Modern hidden Way, or Counter-scarp, as they call it.
THese hidden Ways are very advantageous before Fortresses; for lying low by
the Horizon, they make all the Shots that come from thence, to Mow and Clear
the Horizon: neither can they well be broken by the Canon, but must for the
most part be taken by storm, and they are commanded from the great Wall: This
is a work which covers much the defects of the Modern Fortifications. They
favor also the Sallying out, when they have no Ditches; but here in these
United Provinces they have almost all of them their Ditches; which fault being
discovered, it has been remedied by another hidden Way, running about the
Ditch of the first, and being cut in, part of it, according to the nature of
the ground, under the Horizon, and the surface of the Parapet of this hidden
Way, loses it self, sloping into the Field, without a Ditch.

Of Crown-works, and Horn-works.
IT is many times necessary to make these or the like Works to take in any
heights or suburbs, according as the place requires it. They are made after
the manner and practice of the great Fortresses, and according to the same
proportion, excepting only, that their parts are smaller, and they have but
half-Bulworks on either side, which are very weak; and yet their strength may
be much increased by an understanding Engineer. They ought, in my judgment, to
be made so, that they need not to rely upon the Defense of the great Wall; but
that they be sufficient to defend themselves, especially those that lie before
the Courtines, as in Fig. 5. may be seen by the Crownwork D, whose Wings have a
very weak and oblique defense from the Faces of the Bulworks, and being
Attacqued by night, the Lines E E cannot be well defended from the Faces of the
Bulworks. Yea, in such occasions the Defense of the great Wall is but
troublesome to these or the like Works; for the Musketeers of the great Wall,
shooting by night only upon the Alarm of the Assaulters of the Outworks, do
hit as well within as without, and wound as well the Defenders as the
Adversaries. They ought nevertheless to lie open toward the City; and to be
made so, that being taken, they may be little able to hurt it.

Of single and double Tongues.
THese are very slight Works, and never ought to have other Profiles, then
those of ordinary Trenches; for else, if the Wall should be high, they were not
able to defend their own Front. Neither are they but seldom made otherwise than
Trenches, or to hinder the Approaches; as also the Kettels marked with H. Hence
it may be seen, wherein the strength of the Outworks now in use does consist,
which the Modern Engineers make such boast of. Let us now examine the Outworks
according to my Practice.

OF OUTWORKS, ACCORDING To the latest METHOD and PRACTICE.
First of the Counter-Guard.
OF these Outworks it might be said, That they take in much place, which is a
truth; but when we shall have showed what benefit comes by them, I doubt not
but that will outweigh any inconvenience that shall be occasioned be the great
space and place which these Works take in more than other Works usually do.
Neither is the difference so very great: For admit, that about the Modern
Seven-angled Work Fig. 5. Numb. III. there should be made another hidden Way
about that which is there already, or that it should be strengthened with two
hidden ways; the Semidiameter of my Heptagone Fig. 4. is but five Rod longer
then that of the other. In recompense whereof it is to be considered, That my
exterior Polygones of the Heptagone are 80 Rods; whereas those of the other (or
Modern) Heptagone are but 70 Rod long, which in the whole makes 70 Rod
difference, which is an entire Polygone. Wherefore to include the place of my
Heptagone after the Modern manner, there would be required eight Bulworks; so
that I do include and Fortify more place with fewer Bulworks than now is
usual, which understanding men will easily conceive, by comparing the one with
the other. To show then, what good this Counter-guard does, let us suppose, That
the Fortress Fig. 4. is also Attacqued by the Approaches O O. Now skilful
Artists know, That it is best for the Enemy to Attacque the Point D, and after
he has gained the Counter-scarp, to pass the Ditch of the Counter-guards of 5
Rods. To do this, it is needful for him to render first the Flanque of this
Work D, and the Face of the Ravelin F incapable of Defense: but if he would
break the Flanque of the Counter-guard D, he finds no other place for his
Battery than by the letter C, where but five Pieces can be placed, schematics
of two fortifications with a sketch of battle between Number. III.
Fig 4

Schale voor dese beyde Fortificatien van. 140 roed.

Fig. 5

to Dismount the lowest Flanque; and surther in the Field about G there might
be planted 3 or 4, to throw down the uppermost Parapets of the Retired
Flanques, so that nine Pieces of Canon may be used; whereas those of the
Retired Flanques may bring 17 or 18 Pieces in Counter-battery, and from the
part H, 4 or 5 Pieces, for the Defense of the Face of the Counter-guard;
therefore the Defenders are able with more ease to break the Battery of the
Assaulters, than they to break the Flanques of the Defenders. That which
hinders, that no greater place is found for the Battery of the Assaulters, is
the Ravelin F, and the Angle of the Flanque of the Counter-guard I. Let us see,
whether there be no where else a place to make a Battery, to break the Retired
Flanques withal, and to Dismount the Canon standing upon the same. Suppose
there be a Battery by B, from thence with the Line B one might boar in between
the Ravelin F, and the Angle I, but not so, as to touch the lowest and first
Flanque; yet this shot (which cannot be done by more than one Piece of Canon)
would come obliquely against the last Shooting-hole of the second Retired
Flanque, and cannot Disinount the Canon that stands there, because the shot
hitteth the Parapet obliquely in the forepart. No more can it be done from the
Battery A, against which Batteries upon the Line D E, every where
Counter-batteries may be made. Put the case, That the Enemy not regarding all
these difficulties, do with great loss pass the Ditch by D, and undermine the
Point of the Counter-guard, (which would also be very hard to do, seeing the
Walls are made so, that one cannot well put a Spade into the Ground without
being discovered) and make a Breach. In this case, I can first with small
labor cut off this Point by the Retrenchments 1 and 2, till the great
Retrenchments by 3 and 4 be finished, which are duly defended from the Flanques
6 and 7, as also from the Bulworkspoint 8; besides that they succor and defend
one another. And in case the Besiegers mean to pass between the Retrenchments
toward the Bulworks-point, without gaining before the two Lines marked with 3
and 4, they will find hot work. But suppose they force one of these Lines, then
there is within, two or three Rods after them, another ready, and those that
lie before are Undermined, which Mines are blown up, when the Enemy once thinks
to lodge there; and this is a thing that may be done with great advantage.
There needs not one Rod of ground be lost, but what is gained with abundance of
blood, and also with great toil and labor. Being forced, we have always a free
retirement into the Ravelins marked with K. and L. And in case there be but men
within a Fortification made after my Method, who understand the Work, it seems
impossible to gain it any other way, than by length of time, and with the loss
of many men. This Work helps it self, nothing being in the way that
hinders; and all parts are so contrived, that they are provided against all
inconveniences. Hence the understanding Reader may easily conceive, what
advantage these Outworks have before the Modern. They are Flanqued within and
without with Canon and Muskets from the great Wall; there may be made in
haste, and with small pains, as many Retrenchments as is desired, which are all
enfiled within and without from the great Wall; and the more obstacles are cast
in the way, the more the strength of these Works is discovered. This is enough
as to the form and advantage of my Outworks, which each according to his
judgment and place may apply: In my opinion, it would be needless to propound
these things in a plainer manner, seeing all particularities may be observed by
the Figures. It might be said, That these Outworks would cost more, than those
that are now in use: the contrary of which is true; for the Parapet of the
Modern hidden Way having a Base of 60 or 70 Foot, costeth as much as my
Counter-guards-wall, whose Profile I do make so, that it is just Canon-proof. I
shall not add here the charges of the Modern Crownworks, Hornworks, etc. but I
put my two Ravelins against the Modern Half Moon and Ravelin; the Counter-guard
against the Counter-scarp now in use, my outward hidden Way without Ditches
(which is made with small charges) against the Modern second hidden Way, being
also without Ditches. And although this Work should cost much more, yet the
charge is sufficiently balanced by the benefit that is had thereby: For the
Fortresses made after this manner, have quite another Defense, and are, besides
their Out and Inworks, provided against all Occurrences, with 2, 3, a 4, double
Flanques, made as well for Canon, as for Muskets. If any body thinks, that I
propound new and strange things, as doubtless those will do, who are possessed
with the Modern practice of Fortifying, and never did search after more
convenient means, or examine the strength of every part of it distinctly; or
what may be the cause, why Strongholds are lost so soon, neither understand
the force of the Maxims of War now in use: To those I reply, That if they will
consider these new things judiciously, they will find, that the practices of
War now in use, ought to be preferred before those old things; and that the
Work is very proper and capable of making a good Defense; and that these things
were not practiced conjecturally in a Closet, but in occasions of Besieging, or
being Besieged; and that in several countries and grounds, and in such places
where indeed flew swift Bullets, not Sugar-plums, or roasted Capons. Many
things may be projected upon Paper; but we ought to look, whether they be
practicable in the open Fields. The Latin proverb, Facile est inventis addere,
might be applied here, I do confess, but it has not been done as yet by
others. I have been about this a long time; but always observing more and more,
whether any thing might hinder it, which perhaps I had not considered of; and
possibly there may be some such thing, but whatever it be, it may with ease be
rectified by time and practice. All things devised by men, do not immediately
come to perfection. Let them who please to use this way, first consider the
Work well; and if there be any thing that they do not like, let them practice
the Latin proverb abovesaid. There are yet many Particularities in this Work,
which I do not describe here, but keep them for my use, and propound only the
Generals. It is true, That the Art of Fortifying is highly improved in these
United Provinces, by reason of the continual exercise in it: But here have been
but few alterations or diversities of Attacques, seeing they are almost all of
them made after the same manner; as also the Defenses of the Spaniards, who
were furnished most commonly with ignorant Engineers, and their places ill
Fortified; so that being Besieged, and much pressed, they wanted many things
that were most necessary. Here in these parts they have been a while at a
stand, without practicing any thing at all, which might serve to rectify their
Errors; although understanding men saw well enough, that there was something
wanting, and that the Work did want another Form; and this proceeds chiefly
from the impression which many had, and still have, that the Fortifications
were at perfection, contrary to experience and matter of Fact in the late Wars.
In this opinion they were confirmed by the curious searches, experiences and
amendments, made by His Excellency Prince Maurice, and His Highness Friderick
Henrick, Princes of Orange, of glorious Memory: These indeed did in those days
reform many things exceeding well; but the manner of Attacquing being much
altered since, the Fortifications ought also to be strengthened against them.
The Practitioners have only joined to the first Inventions, those things which
serve to establish Fortifications upon sure Rules, according to the
Mathematics, to which we ought not to be tied too close; however it is
necessary to take their assistance in this Science. The question is not,
Whether the Fortifications do lie exactly according to the Rules of
Mathematics; but whether the Lines be well Flanqued, and all things ordered
for most convenience. I confine my self indeed to these Rules and Calculations,
for so much as the first Ground-Lines do require; but upon these I make my
Observations afterward: so that my Work receives no small benefit from thence,
by reason of the firm and well-contrived Flanques, and the giving of little
advantage and place to the Enemy to erect his Batteries against them.

Many places (though well Fortified) are also lost in a short time, for want of
skillful Officers and Governors. For although a man had the best Sword he
could wish for, and yet did not know how to use it for his advantage, the worst
would be as good for him as the best. Let the best Fortress be defended by a
Governor, who knows it not, that Fortress shall be gained sooner than a mean
place Commanded by an experienced Officer. This has been sufficiently made
good in these late Wars, which also Histories do testify abundantly. For,
Retrenchments, Cuts, Counter-approaches, Counter-mines, besides the ordering of
Sallies at due times; as also the managing of Fireworks, contrived by an
expert person and skillful Architect, are all very advantageous for Places, and
detain the Enemy long. And yet they cannot well be known, before there is
Attacque made; and then they may easily be so ordered, as to be made more
advantageous for the Enemy, then for the Place it self: Hereof there are
examples enough, and these Works cannot have a good success, unless they be
directed by a skillful Architect, who has not only a perfect knowledge in
Fortification, but understands also the power of Artillery and Fireworks, as
also the manner of managing them, and how Mines ought to be made upon all
occasions. And this I think sufficient for the designing of Ground-lines, and
have described only three Figures more of three Regular Hexagones Fortified;
see Number. IIII. one of them, after the great Royal, whose exterior Polygone is
100; another after the mean Royal, whose exterior Polygone is 90; and a third
after the little Royal, the exterior Polygone being 80.

NOTE.
No body is confined to these lengths of Polygones, but they may be taken
shorter or longer; only care must be had, that the Lines of Defense be not too
long.

The lengths of the Lines of these three Demy-Hexagones are of several
Quantities; viz. the first, whose outward Polygone is 80.35, and is equal to
the Modern Polygones of an Hexagone, according to Friday: the second is of 90:
the exterior Polygones of the third are of 100 Rods, and the proportion of the
Courtines to the Faces (which is to be understood in the first design, which
afterward is altered) Sesquialter, or as 3 to 2.

Lengths of the Lines according to the first Calculation.
Lengths of the Lines after the first manner, where the outward Polygone C D is
always 80.35 Rod in length, in a Regular Hexagone. Lengths of Lines after the
second manner, where the out ward Polygone is always 90 Rods long, in a Regular
Hexagone. The outward Polygone being 100 Rod, in a Hexagone. Lengths of the
Lines, after my alteration, in an Hexagone, as follows: The I. manner The II.
manner The III. manner The Courtine F I 36.00 40.44 44.82 29 30 33 Face C M
24.00 26.88 29.86 the same. Gorge G F 11.36 12.72 14.43 14 17 19 Capital G C
21.26 24.20 26.89 the same. Fanque F M 9.54 10.68 11.87 11 12 13.5 Second
Flanque F N 12.98 14.53 16.16 8.5 10 10 Line of Defense Fichante C I 61.11
68.44 76.05 58 63.5 69 Interior Polygone G L 58.73 65.89 73.09 the same.
Distance of Polygones F E 18.72 20.96 23.29 the same.

The Intelligent Reader will see all things better in the three Figures, Numb.
IIII. and may measure it by the Scale that is joined to them, by which all
three of them are made; and it is to be observed, that these Lines serve only
for an Hexagone. But if any one would Fortify another Figure, he must first
calculate the Lines, and afterward alter the work according to the directions
heretofore mentioned. By the first Figure are showed three several manners of
Counter-guards, being all three very good and commodious, and may be very fitly
applied to places, that are already Fortified; as also the Royal Work, and the
great Wall may be redressed in such places, with little charge, after this way.
The second and third manner of Counter-guards I count better, when the place
and occasion permits it, to make them so large, for they are extraordinary
Advantageous; but for brevity sake, I shall not rehearse here all their
Advantages and Conveniences. Some will say perhaps, That the Ground which
these Outworks take in, being so large, the same would cost very much to buy it
from the owners, in such places where it is required. To these I answer, That
in this case there is not three fortifications rendered from above and in
profile Number. 4.
Profil voor die Flanc 35 ^oet h^ogh die vierde flanc Linea Horizontalis CD.
die B^ytenste Poligone 80.35 ^ nae die I Maniere CD. 90 ^ nae due II manier CD
100 ^ nae die III manie^ Maete van 100 Roedon voor dese dry Figuren end is
e^n maete voort profil der flancquen de roede voor even voet genoomen Maete van
25 Roede vort Profyl der Linie AB

any part, which after the Fortification is finished, cannot as well as before,
either be sown, or used for other conveniences, except the Wall and the Moat;
and these parts may also be used in time of Peace, and the Walls may be planted
with fruitful Trees, which may so soon as a War shall break out, be cut down
if need be: But they may be planted so, that they may as well be left standing,
and the Moats may be used for Fish Ponds, etc. By the first Figure I do also
show, how I join my Hornworks, when there is need of them, viz. as follows:
The Capital of the Ravelin, (or properly the outstanding Point Q,) I lengthen
toward the Fields 60 Rod to R, and upon this I draw on both sides a
Perpendicular; as R M, and R N, each of 20 or 25 or more Rods, as need
requires; and this I take for the outward Polygone of the Hornwork: From M and
N, I draw the Lines M L, and N O, to the of the Faces of the Counterguards.
After this manner the Angles of the Half-bulworks come to be much greater, than
if the Wings L M, and N O, were drawn parallel to one another, etc. All may be
eonsidered better in the Figure. There might also instead of the Hornwork
another be made, as is marked with the Letters L P O, which is also good, and
well Flanqued. Here it is to be observed, That to these and the like Works no
great Profiles must be given.

Thus I finish my Discourse, as concerning the Ground-lines of my
Fortification, as well of the Inworks as of the Outworks. Now I come to the
Profiles, and shall first treat of those that must be made in wet places, where
the Ditches are full of water: And first of all,

Of the Walls of the great Strongholds.
THe Walls ought not to be too high, nor too low: For when they are very high,
the Moat can hardly be defended from them; and the nearer the Enemy gets
under them, the more he is sheltered. They have also this fault, that they are
very chargeable; for they ought also to have a thickness proportionable to
their height; and the thicker the Walls be, the better they may be Undermined,
and the Mines that are made in them, do better Execution than in lesser Walls;
for the more the Powder is enclosed, and the more it sindeth resistance, the
greater force it has, which is evident. Some are of opinion, That the Walls
ought to be of such a height, as to cover the Houses from those Canon-shots
that come from without: which is ridiculous: For although Walls were made so
high, that no houses might be seen; yet by all this we cannot hinder the shots
from flying through the Houses; neither are the Mortar-pieces hindered by it,
which do the most hurt to houses; besides that, I being Besieged, could rather
wish, that the Enemy would busy himself with shooting through the houses, than
against the Wall, in case it were a Frontier-town, where more Soldiers lodge,
than Citizens; for this shooting through the houses is only to frighten the
Inhabitants or Citizens, to compel them the sooner to composition. But
Soldiers count this their pastime: they had rather that the tyles and laths
should fly from the houses, than that the earth should be torn as rags from
the Parapet. To show that the high Walls cannot hinder this nevertheless, See
Fig. 6. Numb. V. Let there be a Battery by A, from whence out of the Canon A is
made the shot A B F, so that it goes just over the Parapet of the Wall; this
shot offends the roof of the houses more or less according as the Wall is low
or high; as is seen by the shot A C. Suppose the Wall to be as high again as B
C, and that the shot be A C G, this goes indeed far over the houses; but let
the Canon D be elevated some degrees, and it will make the shot D E H, against
which the height of the Wall avails nothing, although it were five times
higher; for the Bullet comes down with a Circular-line. It might be said, That
the Canon would carry the Bullet over and beyond the City: which is true, in
case the Piece stands near by it; but it can be placed further off, at a
convenient distance, which is easily found by a good Canoneer: which I intend
to show clearly in my Treatise of Artillery, which, God permitting, I shall
communicate to the Lovers of this Art. Such Pieces may be placed here and there
in the Fields, or even in the Quarters, where they please, without making any
Beds for them, and so be used; for they ought to stand without the true Line or
ordinary Canon-shot. Besides that the houses may be troubled after this manner
by the Canon; the same may be done more conveniently by Fire-Mortars, out of
which Grenades, several images of fortifications Number. V.
Fig. 8.
portion of fortification rendered in profile Profil van de geretireerde
Flancken

Flanck vande Conter guarde

Face

Fla^

Rau^llyn synde vast aen de contra guarde

Laeste geretireerde Flanc

t^eede Flanc

Horizont

Eerste ver laegerde Flanc van den Grooten wall

Fousebraies Flanck

Maete van. go. voeten voor die Flanck

Fig. 7
angles of defensive cannon fire Fig. 6
angles of attackers' cannon fire Fig. 9.
portion of fortification rendered in profile Fig 10
schematics of portion of fortification wall Fig. 11.
portion of fortification rendered in profile Fig. 12.
portion of fortification rendered in profile and Fireballs are cast; as may
be seen by the F I. In case the Walls be too low, the Enemy can heighten the
outward Batteries, from whence he may enfile the Wall of the Fortress. It is
true indeed, That the Canon or Musquet-shots, the nearer they are shot the
Horizon, the more they sweep and clear the same, and the greater Execution they
do over the Fields against the Assaulters: For a shot coming from alost, can
hit the Horizon but in one place; whereas contrariwise a shot being made about
the height of a man parallel with the Horizon, does sweep the same off
continually; as is seen in the Fig. 7. Numb. V. where the shot made by the
Musqueteer 4, standing at the top of the high Wall, hitteth and sinketh into
the Horizon but in one place, as in 1: but the Musqueteer standing in the
Fausse-bray A, shoots the Line 3 2 6, parallel with his height; whence it is
manifest, that in such manner it has a greater effect. To help these
deficiencies, I betake my self to mediocrity, that is, to a mean height, and
make the Wall in my great Fortification with Parapet, and all from 18 to 24
foot high, and the upper breadth of it, not reckoning the Parapet, as much as a
Demy-Canon, having discharged an ordinary load, will run back. I take it from
20 to 30 foot broad, the Base is regulated according to the sloping of the
Wall: but I do not make my Walls alike every where, but make the Profiles
lighter or stronger according as the part is; for I make the Profiles of the
Faces of Bulworks much lighter, than those of the Courtines or Flanques, and
that with great reason, as I shall show in its due place.

Of the Faces of Bulworks.
THe Faces are the weakest parts of the Fortification, seeing they lie nearest
to the Enemy, and cannot defend themselves; but their Defense must come from
the next situated Flanques, which are made for that purpose. The Faces are
always first Attacqued by the Enemy, unless the Courtines be too long. When the
Enemy is past the Moat, he Undermineth this part, to make a Breach fit for an
Assault. To prevent this, as far as it is possible, there is no better remedy,
than to hinder the coming over of the Gallery by well ordered Flanques: But
being weakened by time, and the Enemy bringing, as it were with leaden shoes,
his Work as far as to the Wall of the Faces; then it is time to know the way of
making Counter-mines in wet places: for where the Moats are dry, there is made
another kind of Attacque. To make these Counter-mines very hastily ready, as it
ought to be done, the Wall of the Faces must be no thicker than only to be
Canon-proof, and that there be only place for some Canon, to be used there,
when occasion requires. For in case it be very thick, the Miners can the more
securely accomplish their work, and the Mines do greater execution than
otherwise. The Canon which is placed upon the Faces, is commonly set upon the
point of the Bulwork, where the Lines meet; and where this is done, there is
after this manner place enough at the top of the Wall near the Point of the
Bulwork, though the Wall be very thin. I make it in my great Fortifications
from 16 to 24 foot broad, to be reckoned from the Parapet, whose top or surface
I extend to the breadth of from 12, to 18 foot.

Of the Flanques.
I Make the Wall of this part of several heights, see Number. II. I divide first
the Flanque 5, 4 into two equally, as in 8; then I draw from of the opposite
Face the right Line A 6, 8, 7, by the Point 8, so long, till it touch the
Perpendicular upon A, 9 as 9, 7. This done, the Lines of the retired Flanque
are made. The Profile of the Flanque I defigne thus, following the Fig. 8.
Numb. V. Let here the Line K, H, G, D, A be taken for Horizontal, beginning
from A, which is the inner brink of the Moat; I mark from A to B, 5 or 6 foot
for the berme; from B to B, 24 foot, or so thick as I desire to have the Base
of the Parapet of the Fausse-bray; from B I dig under the Horizon 2, 3 or 4
foot, according as the water stands high or low in the Ditches. At this depth
I make an even place from B to D, 30 or 35 foot broad, fit for the Canon or
Musketeers. Before this place I ordain the Parapet of the Fausse-bray, 7 or 9
foot high, as from B to L: in case one would lodge Musketeers there, Benches
are made behind, and besides a convenient form is given to the Parapet; then
the Flanque of the Fausse-bray is made, which I make as low, as the place will
permit, yea so deep, that the Canon-shots are even with the Horizontal Line,
and lower when the Moats be dry. After this I measure from D to E 27 foot, from
E, I draw a Perpendicular E, 8 foot high from the Horizon. At this height I
make the first Flanque of the great Wall, with its Parapet of 8 foot high, the
breadth, as need requires; as is seen clearly in the Figure: this place or
Bedding for the Canon is 10 foot higher than the lowermost. After the same
manner I proceed with the last, second and third Flanques: But observe always,
that one place with its Parapet may come so much lower than the other, as that
the shots coming from the one or other, be not interrupted; and the smoke and
blow of the upper Canon do not much trouble those, that are in the lower
Flanques. But for these inconveniences, I shall prescribe sufficient remedies
hereafter.

There are many more Considerations, required by the places and situations,
which I leave to the understanding Architect. The Figure 8 shows the
particularities something near. Against these raised fourfold Flanques, one
might object and say, That the Canon standing upon the two hindermost places,
being Discharged, would let fall its stops, and Fire into the two foremost, and
kindle the Powder, which is used for the Artillery standing below, and so make
dumb the Canoneers that are ordered to be below. Concerning the stops, I have
seen many a time, and observed, that they fly 20 or 30 Rod from the mouth of
the Pieces, especially being wrapped close together, and sometimes much
further; so I did not see where they fell. Here it is to be observed, That
those Pieces that stand upon the last and highest Flanque, are distant but 13
Rod from the first or Fausse-brays Parapet, from whence it appears, that such
stops can do no harm: Put the case it were so, yet this obstacle cannot hinder
the advantage, which I reap by these places; for in time of Attacques, I make
in the Courtines little houses supported with Wood, like Mines, wherein the
Powder being in Casks, and other things necessary for the great Guns are put.
Those Pieces that are Charged and Primed, I cover with a small Leaden Plate,
till they are to be Discharged. It is also to be remembered, That all the Pieces
of these Flanques must not be discharged at once; but first from the uppermost
or lowermost, and then from the others; and those in the lower Flanques may be
advertised to retire themselves into the said little Houses, or in the entry of
the raised Flanque, in case this precious Music do too much offend their ears.

Of the Moats.
THere are two kinds of Moats, viz. Wet and Dry. Of the Dry I shall speak
afterward, because they require another kind of Prosile; but now only of the
Wet Moats. What they serve, and are made for, every one knows: Concerning
their fashion and making, I give them a convenient wideness, yet according to
the nature of places, broader or narrower: where there is good Ground, I make
them ordinary as broad, as the length of the Flanque, which falls
Perpendicular upon the Courtine, or 10 Rods; and as deep, as I have need of
earth for the Wall. He who desires to calculate, may cast up their depth
according to the Profiles; I esteem the deepest for the best, as well in dry as
wet places. To design then the Ground-lines of the Moats, I draw Parallel-lines
with the Faces, at such a distance, as their breadth should be; and where the
Parallel-lines intersect one another (which in Regular places is before the
midst of the Courtines, and Bulwork-points) there are the extremities of the
Ground-lines; as is seen in the Figures Numb. III. and 4. Just before the
Bulworks-point I make the circular Ark, 1, 2, 3, at the distance of the breadth
of the Moat; see the Figure, Number. II. by Y. And this is sufficient as
concerning the wet Moats.

The Construction of the Profile of the Walls for Ravelins, Counter-guards,
Hidden Ways, and what depends on it.
TThe Walls of the Ravelins joining to the Counterguards, I make something
higher and stronger; and those of the Counter-guards, lower and weaker.
Likewise those of the Ravelin before the Counter-guard, still something several
portions of fortification in profile Number VI
Fig 8

Maete vppr dese vier profylen van. 110 voeten

Profile van die linie KW in die plaete Number. 4 nae die 111. maniere
Groote wall van de Courtine

groote graste

Binnenste Rauelli^^ wall

Profil van die linie AB. indie plate Number: 4 nae die 111 maniere
esplanaede

Buytenste rauellyns wall

Profil met even drooge graste
Groote wall

Horizont Linie

Fousebrey

Wech der ronden

Binnenste Rauellins profil

Horizont

Even ander profil met drooge graften
Horizont linie

Cunette

Profil van die Contra guarde

Perspectif
weaker and lower, and I order the Profiles as follows: The great Wall with its
Parapet being 20 foot high, I make the joining Ravelin with its Parapet 13 foot
high; the top of the Wall, to be measured from the Parapet 20 foot broad; the
Surface of the Parapet 12 or 15 foot, and the rest proportionally; the Wall of
the Counter-guard with its Parapet is made 11 foot high; the top of it 16 or 18
foot broad, to be reckoned from the Parapet; the top of the Parapet from 10 to
15 foot; the rest accordingly. The Wall of the uttermost Ravelin with the
Parapet I make 9 foot high; the upper breadth of the Parapet also from 10 to 15
foot; the top of the Wall from 12 to 16 foot; the Ditches from 50 to 60 foot
wide, and the deeper the better; the Hidden Way from 15 to 25 foot; its Parapet
6 foot high; the sloping (or Esplanade) is regulated after the Wall of the
Counter-guard. To have a clearer declaration of this, see the Profiles Fig. 8.
which are both made after the Scale adjoined; and the uppermost shows the
Profile of the Wall of the Courtines, with the Moat before it; besides the
whole Capital-line with the Profile of the innermost Ravelin, or
Counter-Guards-Ravelin and its Ditches, which continues by the letter A, A;
the remaining space is the Capital of the outmost Ravelin with its Profile and
Ditches, as also its Hidden Way and Esplanade, which in the Print Numb. IIII.
by the III. manner is showed. The lowermost Profile shows the thickness of
the Wall upon the Faces, the wideness of the Moat, the distance of the
Counter-guards Wall, with the Profile of it; and the wideness of the same
Ditch, which continues by the letters B, B, on which the Hidden Way and
Esplanade is also described. This is enough as touching the Profiles of the wet
Moats, for such as are skilled in this Art. Where dry Moats are, I make quite
other Profiles, for they are to be designed according to the nature of places.
In the Print Numb. VI. there are described Profiles for two several dry Moats.
In the Moat of the first by the letter A is the Cunette, or false Moat,
strengthened with a thin Parapet and Palisadoes, which serves for Enterprises,
and is also very good in Sieges; whose use I shall describe in the second part
of Defenses and Attacques. The Ditches of the Counter-guards and Ravelins, may
also be sunk to the half, or above one third part, to be measured from the
Wall, and strengthened with Palisadoes against Invasions, as may be observed
by the letters C and D: the inward sloping of the great dry Moat must be raised
of a Brick-wall; as is seen by E E. These Brick-walls must be made thick and
high, according to the nature of places, and the Princes or Lords purse. At the
top of these Walls, there is planted a Thorn-hedge, which is either bound, as
by F and D; or else planted wild, and left to grow close through one another,
as by C and G. These are also very good, for they make the Earth stand sirm
with their roots. The Profile A continues with the letters H, H, where the
cutting in of the two hidden Ways without Ditches are described. In the
Architecture or Building of dry Profiles, there is required great experience in
the practice of War; for they must be made with great skill; and being so made,
I prefer them before those that are filled with water, of which I shall give
reason in my Discourse of the business of Defense.

The Profile of the Retired Flanques is seen Numb. V. Fig. 8. according to its
Scale. In the same Print is also seen a Bulwork with part of the Courtines on
both sides; as it appears from within Fig. 12. Numb. V. Fig. 11. is a
Bulwork, looking against the Flanques, which Ground of two Bulworks is
designed, Fig. 10. Fig. 9. is a perspective of the Counter-guard, with its two
Ravelins, viz. that which joins to it, and the other, which after the manner of
an Island lies before it. In the Print Numb. VII. is seen the Perspective of
this whole Work. First the Ground-lines of two Bulworks of an Hendecagone
according to the middle Royal, whose outward Polygone is 90 Rods, wherein the
disposition of the whole Work is perfectly seen, with that of the
Counter-guard, besides their Ravelins and Counter-scarp. In the second is seen,
how the whole Work lies in Profile; yet this forelying Counter-guard has
another disposition, and is without Flanques of its own; but it is Flanqued
from the joining Ravelin, and from that, which lies in the Island. This manner
of Counter-guards is also very good, and does not take in much space. In the
Figures all this is clearly seen, and therefore it requires no further
explanation for the understanding thereof. I have yet many other speculations
and particularities, concerning these manners of Fortifying; which I shall keep
to my self, till I find a fit opportunity to put them in practice. If God give
overhead schematics of fortification Number. VIII
Mate van 90 Ry^lantse Roeden

me health, till I bring to light the other parts ( viz. of Attacques and
Defense, of Undermining, Counter-mining, Fireworks and Artillery, when it may
be done most conveniently) then the advantages of this manner of Fortifying
will be better conceived and understood; for the quality of every part of a
Fortification shall there be declared one by one separately and distinctly.

Of Irregular Fortresses.
I Shall say only this, That it would be too long to show here particularly
the manner of working, which I esteem as needless, seeing that Irregular
Fortresses are made up out of parts of Regular ones: The calculation thereof
may be done after the Modern practice, and the parts afterward reformed
according to my way; as has been showed in the Regular. There are many
Engineers, who think it an Art to Fortify any places altogether Irregular,
although they might well enough alter them. I do not glory in this; but am very
well content, when I meet with such an unfit Figure, to reform it after the
Regular, as near as the place will permit. A Regular place, besides that it
has its Defense more equal, is also the fitter, and takes in with the same
Lines more space, which I prove thus: Let there be a Rightangled Square, each
of whose sides is 12 Rod, and the four together 48 Rod, whose content is 144
square Rod: Let there be another Irregular Square or Rhomboides, having also
four straight Lines each of 12 Rod, that is, the four of 48 Rod; let this
Rhomboides be made of two Equilateral Triangles, then the shortest Diameter is
12 Rod, and the longest 20 Rod, and 8 foot, whose content is therefore 124
square Rods, and 8 square Feet; From whence it appears, That the Rhomboides
contains 19 Rod, and 2 square Feet less than the Quadrat; and the more the
Rhomboide recedeth from Regularity, the less is the content of it, etc. But
this is true of Irregular Fortifications, That the Rules and Maxims of the
Regular being known, the good or bad Form, as also the strength or weakness
depends wholly on the knowledge and experience of the Engineers, etc.

SOME QUESTIONS That might be moved concerning this manner of Fortifying;
together with the Answers to the same: by which the use of this Work may be the
better understood.
I.
Question.
FOr what are the Flanques not drawn Perpendicular or Right-angled upon the
Courtine or inward Polygone, in this Way of Fortifying; but Right-angled upon
the Line of Defense Secant: For it is esteemed more graceful after this manner,
and the Ground-lines may be found more easily by Calculation; it being also
believed, that being thus made, they defend the Outworks the better?

Answer.
I Give this Obliquity to the Flanques for the Reasons following. See Numb. II.
the Figure being Calculated and stated after the foregoing manner and
proportion, or being measured in the Fields, the longest Defence-line would
exceed a Musket Shot; whereas now the said Line by this Obliquity is brought
to its due length; whereby I reap this advantage, that with fewer Bulworks than
the Modern do use, I can include a far greater space. Examples have been before
alleged. And with an Octogone of my great Fortification I do include as much
place, wanting only about half a Polygone, as the Modern do with an
Hendecagone, or Fortress of Modern Bulworks; whereby so much charge is saved,
and the Lines of Defense remain within Musket Shot. Item, By this Delineation,
the Gorges gain on each side in length 8 Rods in an Hendecagone, whereby the
Bulworks get the desired opening at their entrance, which makes place for the
Retired Flanques, and affords convenience for the making Retrenchments
speedily and easily. By this Obliquity the Flanques do likewise become also
longer, and therefore fitter to lodge a competent number of Canon and
Musketeers upon them. This Obliquity causes also the Gunholes not to stand
Obliquely, and that the Moats are Rightangled and defended from the Flanques.
And whereas they say, that the Perpendicular Flanques defend the Outworks the
better, this does not stand to reason; but it is known, that the Oblique ones
do it better, seeing they come more flat against them, and the Outworks are
better seen from the Oblique Flanques, when they are made after this manner,
etc.

II.
Question.
FOr what are there three Flanques and the great Wall, set at the top of one
another, and yet below a Faussebray's Flanque; whereas nevertheless the Canon
being placed thus above one another, the uppermost cannot be discharged
conveniently, without prejudice to those that are in the lower Batteries.
Besides that, the flame coming out of the upper Canon, and falling upon the
lower, might give Fire to them also sooner than would be desired?

Answer.
THese three or four Flanques, I make at the top of one another, not to plant
them all full of Canon; but to fit the uppermost with Musketeers and
Falconets, as occasion requires. But if need should require, that I must have
a strong Counter-Battery upon the Flanques, or that much Canon must be there,
to hinder the coming over of the Galleries: then put the case, that all four
Flanques are sill'd with Canon; what should hinder me from using them at
pleasure, without endamaging the lower, or giving fire to the lower Canon
before the due time, if I go to work after the manner following? At one side of
these Retired Flanques, I place a skilful person, either an Officer of the
Artillery, or some other. This Officer, when they are upon Discharging,
commands the men in the lower Flanques, to retire themselves at the side of
the Battery into the Way, by which the Canon is let into the Flanques, till
such time as the uppermost have Discharged; which Shooting begins from the
last Retired Flanque, where the longest and heaviest Canon may most
conveniently be used. When these have Discharged, they Charge presently again,
and then those of the second Retired Flanque give Fire; which being done, they
also Charge again with all possible expedition: For those that have Discharged
(beginning from the hindermost) cannot be prejudiced by the following
Canonadoes; and this continues, till the Flanque of the Fausse-brays (being
the last to give Fire) has also done. In this time the hindermost can have
almost Charged and Levelled; so that after this manner one may orderly Charge
and Discharge the Canon, as if it were a Band of Musketeers, without hindering
or prejudicing another. These Canon-shots are alternatively favored by
Musquet-shots, coming from the second Flanques; (where I would Lodge no Canon,
except there were great need, for the reasons before mentioned) as also from
the second Flanque of the Fausse-bray, and also from the half of the great
Walls Flanque and Faces, etc. Concerning what is objected, That the lower Canon
might be kindled by the upper before its time; for this, no other remedy needs
to be used, but to cover the Holes with a Plate of Lead, as they do in Ships.
Now it may be considered, Whether it be easy or no, to bring a Gallery over a
Moat, that is seconded by such a Hail of Canon and Musket Shot.

III.
Question.
SInce here is mention of so many Canons, there must be great number of them,
to furnish one of these Fortresses with Artillery: For besides that the great
Wall (or Royal Work) requires much Canon, the Outwork ought to have part of it
too, seeing it defends it self, as well as the great Work, with Artillery and
Muskets; and according to the number of Gun-holes, there must upon the four
heightened Flanques on each side of every Bulwork be at least 20 ^^eces, which
is 40 Pieces for each Bulwork; which in a Fortress of seven Bulworks amounts to
208 Pieces, for the entire Fortress only. Now in the Outworks there is by the
joining Half-moons of the Counter-guard, on each side place for 12, 13, or 14
Pieces: If it be 14, it is for every Courtine 28, which for the Counter-guard
of an Heptagone comes to 196 Pieces of Artillery, and so the whole Work to 476;
to which Ammunition being added proportionally, all other things necessary, the
charge would be extraordinary.

Answer.
IN this my Fortification I want no more, or at least very few more Canon, than
in the Modern; which I prove thus: In a Modern Heptagone there must be at least
eight Pieces for every Bulwork, when a Siege is expected; namely 3 upon every
Flanque, and two upon the Bulworks Point, that is 4 Demy-Canons, two Pelicans
shooting a Bullet from 3 to 8 pound, and two half or whole Dragons as occasion
requires. Whereunto are commonly joined 4 or 6 whole Canon, to be used upon
Counter-Batteries; these being reckoned together make up 56. It is an old
custom, to keep in Fortresses that are considerable, twice as many Pieces in
the Arsenal, as are upon the Wall, to fill up the places of those that shall
happen to be Dismounted or to crack, or to become useless by any other
accident; as also to be used upon the Crown, and Hornworks: This number is in
all 188; which the Modern Engineers appoint in their Works. These I distribute
in my Fortification, when there is no Siege, after this manner: Upon every
middle Flanque of the great Wall two, and upon every Bulworks-point two, which
is 6 for every Bulwork, and so for the Royal Work 42: In the Counterguard none
are required, but however, in case one would Plant them there, there might be
set near every joining Half Moon, two, which makes 4 for every Courtine, that
is 28 for seven Courtines, in all 70 Pieces; and then the place is furnished
round about with Artillery, as well for the Inworks as Outworks. But instead of
lodging these 28 Pieces upon the Flanques of the Counter-guards, I think it
more convenient to use them upon the next Ravelin, because I keep there the
outward Centries, or Cors de Guards, which do Flanque the Counter-guards from
within, and hit the Enemy from behind, in case he should undertake to pass the
great Moat. But in time of Siege, I distribute my Canon quite otherwise, and do
as follows. At the first coming on or surrounding, I take my lightest Canon and
place them upon the points of the Counter-guards, to keep off the Enemies
Quarters, as far as it is possible; yet, the Quarters being closed, and I
perceiving whereabout they open their Approaches, whether they bring on 2 or 3,
although they make seldom more than two, and have sometimes a third, only for
diversions sake: Admit, they carry on two Approaches, by which they intend to
Attacque two Bulworks; to promote these Approaches, it is needful for the
Besiegers to raise Batteries, under whose favor they may make their Laborers
work with more surety. Against these Batteries I raise Counter-batteries (that
is, when they come near, within 150 or 200 Rod,) these Counter-batteries I can
raise every where, as well in the outmost Ravelin before the Counter-guard, as
upon the Faces of the Counter-guards themselves, whereto I use some heavy
Pieces: upon the other Bulworks or Outworks there is then little need of any
Pieces, but only of Falconets, or other small Guns. Now the Besiegers being
after all difficulties, come so far with their Approaches, that they are ready
to pass the Ditch of the Counter-guards, then I use no where any Pieces more to
defend the Outworks, but only upon the Flanques of the Counter-guards, where
in Fortresses according to the great Royal, might be used 14. Yet in case two
Bulworks be Attacqued at once, the Ditches and Faces may also be defended by
two opposite Flanques, upon which two there must then be 28 Pieces. If three
Bulworks be Attacqued, there must be 42. These Pieces I can always retire again
from the Flanques into the joining Ravelin, and from thence into the
Fausse-bray of the great Wall, and further upon the Flanques of the great Wall,
which are opposite to the Faces Attacqued; and upon all occasions there need be
no more upon these Flanques than 14, seeing the Enemy cannot place any more
against them with advantage, but 10, unless they come to stand one in another
way. Suppose one would have 18 upon every Shoulder or Flanque, this would make
54 Canons for three Flanques, which being also trebled, the whole number
amounts to 162. Whence it appears, That in my Fortification no more Canon is
required than in the Modern; and one might in time of need very well make shift
with a third part, that is with 54, in a Fortress of seven Bulworks, if a
skilful Governor had the management of it: But for want of such men, the best
Strongholds are soon lost; For let a place be Fortified with as much
providence as it will, in case he who Commands it, has no skill, it signifies
nothing.

IV.
Question.
WHat may this way of Fortifying cost more than the Modern, seeing they are far
larger in their parts; and much more is spent for the retired Flanques, than
for the simple ones, as well to make the Shooting-holes, as also the paved
Batteries: The Wall of the great Work, or of the Fortress must also needs be
something higher, than that of the Modern, so it may command the better over
the Wall of the Counter-guard; and with these Counter-guards much Field is also
taken in, which is chargeable, in places where it must be bought from the
Commonalty or Owners?

Answer.
THis Work being well considered, it will be found, that the charges differ
little from the Modern: For I with my Pentagone take in as much or more place
than the Modern with an Hexagone; my Line of Defense Fichante remaining still
within Musket Shot, whereby the charges of one whole Courtine and a Bulwork in
a Pentagone are saved. Concerning the charges of the retired Flanques, against
them I put the two Faces of the Modern Fausse-brays, which I do not make; as
also the charges that are required for the digging of the Moat before the
Courtine, where in my Fortification out of that part of the Moat nothing near
so much Earth is taken.

N. B.
It is not necessary, that these Flanques should be brought presently into this
order round about the Fortress, when they are made. One may make up the first
paved Flanque of the great Wall, which falls upon the Ground-line, something
higher then usually, and lay 2 or 3 Benches behind the Parapet, and putting
Palisadoes at the top of the Parapet, which come to be so high as the great
Wall; and being Besieged, whilst the Outworks are disputed, there is time
enough to bring all things into order.

Concerning the great compass of the Counter-guards, the charges bestowed that
way are little, seeing in time of Peace, (as is said before,) the enclosed Land
and Wall, and all may serve for civil uses as well, as if these Walls were not
there at all: Besides, that these being compared with the Modern Outworks, as
Half-moons, Horn and Crown-works, etc. as are about many Strongholds, it will
be found, that these my Counter-guards do not enclose so much place, nor do not
cost so much. It might be further said, that these my Fortresses would require
more men for Defense than the Modern: In order whereunto, it is to be
considered, How the Garrisons ought to be ordered in time of an Attacque? I
shall only answer this, That the Outworks ought first to be Defended well; and
to do that well in my Fortifications, no more men are required, than in one of
the Modern, having but one Bulwork more than one of mine; for by my Method, I
include more place with fewer Bulworks. I shall only tender this, That the
Flanques being well furnished, the Fronts are easily defended; for herein
consists the strength of Fortresses: which may be compared with a man that
has strong and long arms; it is evident, that such a one can better defend
himself, than another who has short and stiff arms. Thus I conclude this
little Work, hoping that it will be acceptable to the Lovers; and stir them up,
in case it do not please them, to bring to light something better.

TO please those who desire to study Engineership, I have added an Abridgment,
which shows how all Calculations necessary for this Science may be made with
little pains, only by Decimals, without being subject to the intricacies of
Fractions; as also the most usual manners of Working with ease, by Compasses,
etc.

Arithmetique in Decimals.
THis Calculation does not differ from the ordinary Method, only in the
understanding of the Signs of the Fractions, and how to place them rightly,
which is as follows:

First take a Rod, (which is the usual measure of the Country where you are,)
or what measure you please, and call that an Integer; this divide into ten
equal parts, and take one part for a Foot; this Foot divide again into ten
parts, and one of them take for an Inch; the Inch divide again into ten parts,
and call one of them a Grain; the Grain divide again into ten, one of which
call a first Scruple; and that divide again into ten, and let one of those
parts be called a second Scruple; and so on to the tenth Scruple; which tenth
Scruple is 1/10000000000 part of a Rod, and is so small, that it cannot be
comprehended otherwise, than by understanding the following Signs: A Rod, or
Integer, Foot, Inch, Grain, First Scruple, Second Scruple, Third Scruple,
Fourth Scruple, Fifth Scruple, Sixth Scruple,
and so on to the Ninth Scruple.

Addition in Decimals.
OBserve here the same manner, as in the Addition of Integers; but have a care,
that the Signs of the Fractions of one sort, do stand under one another; as
Rods under Rods, Inches under Inches, etc.

Example.
THere are to be added 2 Rods, 3 Feet, 4 Inches, 7 Grains, 0 Scrup. 2 Scrup. 3
Scrup. to Rods 89 2 3 4; I place then Rods under Rods, as 2 under 89, and the
other Signs also under one anoother; as may be seen ^ and where the Signs want,
fill up the places with 0, and put the last Signs of the Fractions behind them
in a crooked or round stroke; which shows, how many places or kinds of
Decimals there be, as is seen in the Example, and the Sum is 91. 581023, that
is, 91 Rods, 5 Foot, 8 Inches, 1 Grain, 0 First Scruple, 2 Second Scruple, etc.
and the Sign of the Fractions being ^, therefore six Figures are to be counted
from the last toward the left hand; and so many kinds of Decimals there be.

Substraction in Decimals.
PUt here also the Signs of one sort under one another; and where they fail,
fill up the place with 0.

Example.
There are 56. 32 to be subtracted from 982. 345, therefore put 982. 345, and
56. 32 underneath, so that Rods come to stand under Rods; so the remainder is
926. 025, and so forth in all cases, fill the places of the Signs with 0, where
they are not.

Multiplication in Decimals.
HEre follows also the common rule; but you must add the Signs of the Fractions
together.

Example.
^

Division in Decimals.
THis is also done the ordinary way; but here the Sign of the Divisor must be
subtracted from the Signs of the Dividend, or the Number to be divided: and in
case the Number to be divided, be less than that by which it must be divided,
join so many 0 to it, till it come to be equal to it.

Example.
THere are 5. 76 to be divided by 3482; here the Divisor is greater than the
Dividend; therefore add so many 0 to it, till it come to be as great or
greater; as here 0000 Ciphers, and there will be 5. 670000, this divide by
3482, as is usual in common Divisions; and put the Signs as ^ here is seen, and
the Quotient is 165; Now to know what kind of parts they be, substract the
Signs of the Fractions, as 4 from 6, and there remains 2, and this 2 is the
Sign of the Quotient, as may be seen; and this is a general way: There remain
yet 772, of which if you desire to have yet smaller parts; then put so many
Ciphers behind it as you desire.

NOTA.
If you put one 0 behind it, or Multiply it by 10, that is all one; and by so
doing it is brought to 10 lesser parts, etc.

The Rule of Three in Decimals.
THis is performed after the same manner, as in the Integers: and forasmuch as
it consists of Multiplying and Dividing, observe the foregoing Rules.

Example.
^ quotient.

The proof make thus: Say 7 gives 116, what then dos 3 give? There arises by
Multiplication 348, to which adding 2 which remained, the whole is 350; these
divided by 7, the Quotient 50, and putting away the 0, as signifying nothing,
there remains the sign, and then the Quotient is as above 5, and the Work is
right.

To extract the Square Root in Decimals.
TO sind the Root of a Number given, even in its smaller parts, put after the
Number given toward the right hand, as often two Ciphers, or 00, as you desire
parts, and half the Number of the Ciphers is the Sign of the Fractions that
belongs to the Root; as may be seen in the Example.

Example.
20345, Out of this Number I desire to have the Square Root, to the second
Scruple, or nearer; therefore I put as often two Ciphers to it, as I desire to
have parts, as here 4; wherefore I join eight Ciphers to it, and work, as is
usual in Integers; as may be seen here beneath.

^

The Root is 142 Rod, 6 Foot, 3 Inches, 5 Grains, and 9 First Scruples or tenth
parts of Grains; the Signs of the joined Ciphers, or their Number is 8, the
half of 8 is 4, which is the sign of the Fractions, and is written thus 142.
6359, here remain yet 3119 parts: if you desire to have the Root still nearer,
add again two Ciphers, as often as you desire to have smaller parts, etc.
various geometric shapes Number. VIII


To extract the Cube-root in Decimals, or Fractions.
OPerate in the same manner, as in Integers, and look how many Fractions you
desire, so often put 3 Ciphers behind it; and this wants no further
declaration, etc. Having thus showed the Arithmetic in Decimals, I proceed to
show some Draughts and Operations with the Compasses, which any one may use at
pleasure.

How a given Circle is to be divided into equal parts, and the Polygones of all
Regular Figures, necessary for Fortification, are to be inscribed within it.
LEt the given Circle be A, B, F, E, Numb. VIII. Fig. 1. through which draw the
Diameter A B; and where it touches the Circumference, as in A and B, put one
foot of the Compasses, and make the two Intersections, C and D; and from the
Points, where they cut, draw a straight Line C D, falling Perpendicular upon
the Diameter A, B: these two Lines A, B and C, D divide the Circle into four
equally, and A, E is a side of a Square.

Taking F for the Center, and drawing at the distance F, G an Ark H, G, I, and
then a right Line from H to I; where this Ark cutteth the Circumferencc, as H,
I, this is a side of an Equilateral Triangle, which may be inscribed within
this Circle. The half of this Line, as H, K, is a Polygone of an Heptagone, and
the distance I B is the side of a Dodecagone; Take K for the Center, and at the
distance A, K describe the Ark A, L, the Line drawn from the Section L to A is
a side of a Pentagone, the Line G, L is the side of a Decagone; G, N of an
Hexagone; E and B are the Centers of the Arks G, M, which Line divides the
fourth part of the Circumference into two, and N, B is the side of an Octogone;
divide the Ark H, F, I into three equal parts, and one third, as H, O is the
side of an Enneagone; from L to P is the side of an Hendecagone; E, L is the
Polygone of a Figure of 16 sides.

Another way to find the Sides of every Regular Figure, that may be inscribed
within a Circle.
THis is done thus; Divide the Circumference into four equal parts, and then
one fourth part of the Circle into so many equal parts, as the Figure should
have sides; and take four of those parts, and that will be the length of the
Polygone of such a Figure as you seek.

Example.
THe Circle Q, P, V, R, in the Plate Numb. VIII. Fig. 2. is first divided into
four equal parts by the two Diameters Q, V, and P, R; part Q, P is divided into
ten equal parts, four of those parts is the side of a Decagone, viz. the length
K, P, which being set off ten times about the Circumference, describes a
Regular Decagone; after the same manner do with all other Figures, dividing
always of the Circle into so many parts, as you desire sides; and four of these
parts being taken with the Compasses, make up the side. This manner may be also
proved by Arithmetic.

N. B.
In the making of Geometrical Figures, the Compasses ought always to be set
perfectly upon the Lines, and marks made softly with the feet, to do the work
with more perfection.

There are many other ways, which we pass over for brevity sake.

To divide a Line with the first opening of the Compasses, into as many parts
as you desire.
LEt the given Line be D, E, which you desire to divide into ten equal parts;
therefore draw an undetermined Line B, H, and open the Compasses at pleasure,
and with that opening set off as many parts upon the Line as you desire, (as
here ten from B, to H;) so the tenth part reaches to H; upon this Line B, H
make an equilateral Triangle B, A, H, and from A draw the Lines AI, AK, AL, AM,
etc. Thus you have by the parts of the Line B, H, a Triangle, which is divided
proportionally: then take with the Compasses the given Line D, E, and set it
off from A to G, and also from A to P, and draw the Line P, G, equal to D, E,
which by the intersecting Lines is divided into 10 equal parts; as also the
Line F, G, if it be required, and so with all other Lines whatsoever.

To let fall a Perpendicular upon a given Line.
THe given Line is G, F, and upon the point G we let fall the Perpendicular G,
H; therefore set one foot of the Compasses in G, and open the other at pleasure,
as here to I; from thence make the Circumference H, G, F; and where this
cutteth the Line G, F, (as in F) from thence draw a Line just by the Center,
till it touch the Circumference in H, and from the Point H draw the Line H, G,
which stands right-angled or Perpendicular to G, F. There are many other
ways, which I here omit for brevity sake.

From a given Point in a Line, to raise a Perpendicular.
THe given point is A, and the Line B, C, in Fig. 5. Set one foot of the
Compasses in the point A, making with the other the Ark B, C; upon these Points
set one foot of the Compasses, opening the other at pleasure, as to D, and make
from these Points the intersection of the Arks in D, at the distance D, C, and
draw a Line from the intersection by the given point A, to the Line B, C, which
is Perpendicular to B, G.

To make an Equilateral Triangle.
UPon the Line B, H, in Fig. 6. set one foot of the Compasses in B, and with
the other take the distance B, H, and with that make an Ark about A; as also out
of H: where these Arks intersect one another, there is the third Point of the
Triangle; and draw from thence the Lines A B, and A H, and so the Triangle is
made.

To make a Triangle of three right Lines given, whatever they be, provided that
two of them be longer than the third.
THe Lines are AB, CD, OF; take with the Compasses the length of one of the
three, which you would have to be the Base, (which is here A, B) and mark two
Points, one in H, and the other in L; from the Point L describe the length of
the Line C, D with an Ark in K, and from H the length of the Line E, F, and cut
the former Ark in K, and there is the third Point: from K draw the Line K, H,
equal to E, F; K, L, equal to C, D; and L, H, equal to A, B, etc.

Three Points being given, and not standing in a right Line, to draw a
Circumference, which shall pass through all three.
THe Points are O, P, Q; make the equal sections on both sides of the Center,
as from P and also from Q, which is done in V; as likewise from O, which
falls in 5, Perpendicular upon Q, P, and P, O. Where these touch one another,
there is the Center (as is seen in Fig. 7. Numb. VIII.) of the Circular Ark O,
P, Q, which being drawn, etc.

The same manner observe in the finding of the Center of a Circular Ark, or a
whole Circle.

To divide a given Circle into 360 degrees, and to make an instrument from it
which Geomemetricians call a Theodolit, or Astrolab.
THis Instrument is of great use in the Mathematics; for by the same all
inaccessible distances, heights and depths are measured, the use of which I
shall declare in its own place in the following parts, and it is divided thus:

The Circle A, B, C, D being first divided into four equal parts by the two
Diameters A, B and C, D, take with your Compasses the exact length of the half
Diameter; as A, E or E D, by which the Circle is divided into six equal parts,
and after the manner following into 12; with this opening of the Compasses, set
one foot in C, and with the other make upon the Circumference marks on both
sides in F and G, likewise from D in H and L, etc. Thus the Circumference is
divided exactly into 12 equal parts. The part D, A, or a quarter of a Circle,
contains 90 degrees, as a quarter of 360 degrees; F, C being a sixth part, 60
degrees; and D H as a twelfth part, 30 degrees; then divide a twelfth part, as
D, H or D L into two, as in O and P, and such a part holds 15 degrees; then
divide one of these parts into 3, and one of them will hold 5 degrees, of which
one being exactly divided into 5, one of these is a degree, of which 360 make
up the whole Circumference of every Circle, whether it be great or small, and
are always proportional, viz. the least Circle that can be made, to the
greatest Circle of the Sun, or any other Astronomical Circle: For if you draw
several Circles out of one Center, and from the same Center several
Semidiameters to the utmost Circle, the Arks intercepted in the innermost
Circles contain as many degrees, as those in the outmost, etc.

Each degree contains 60 Minutes, a Minute 60 Seconds, a Second 60 Thirds, a
Third 60 Fourths, and so on; and they are written thus, 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. which is
as much, as 4 Degrees, 5 Min. 6 Seconds, 7 Thirds, 8 Fourths.

How all kind of Ovals may be drawn by the Compasses, is to be seen by the
marks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and needs in my opinion no further declaration, seeing
the manner of working appears enough by the Figures. By 6 is an Oval, which
can be made by a Cord and 2 or 3 Nails: This manner is of much use in
Architectura civili, to make oblique Vaults. By 7 and 8 are seen two sorts of
spiral Lines, whose structure may also be perceived by the Figures.

And thus I have showed the principal Draughts with Compasses, serving for
Geometrical use.

END.
For the Bookbinder, To place the Prints of the Copper Plates.
Numb. after Fol. II. 8 I. 12 III. 22 IV. 28 V. 30 VI. 34 VII. 36 VIII. 48


