HEAVEN's GLORY, AND Hell's Terror: Containing the Glory of the Saints in
HEAVEN with Jesus Christ, and the Eternal Torments of the Damned in HELL.



London: Printed by W. O. for the Author, and Sold by J. Blare, at the
Looking-glass on London Bridge.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
SInce the time my little Book for Children firstcome abroad, I was persuaded
by some of my Friends, to set out another Book for those of riper Years, which
I was not very free to do at first; but now at last, I have yielded to it,
hoping it will be for the good of their Souls. And I could think no Subject
more suitable for Young and Old, than to make a Book of Directions, by what
means they may escape Everlasting Torments, and get safe to Heaven.

I had thought at first, to have made this a double Book, but I have yielded to
make it only a small Penny-Book, because all Poor, as well as Rich, might be
able to purchase One; for I earnestly wished that this little Book may come
into the hands of them all; and that all into whose hands this little Book
should come, would follow these Directions, and lead such Lives, as that they
may be Saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. Which is the earnest Prayer of your
dear Friend,

Robert Russel.

THE Plain Way TO HEAVEN.
THE Reasons why I write these Directions, is, Because so many thousands flock
to Hell, when they verily think they are in the Way to Heaven. And others go on
securely in their Sins, running on in all kind of Wickedness, not considering
what will become of them, until they drop into Hell. I shall therefore proceed
after that Order, as I did in my Little Book for Children:

First, I will give you a short Hint of the dreadful Estate of the Wicked; and
then of the joyful Estate of the Godly; with some Directions in order to your
Salvation. Consider first, all you that continue in your sins, and will not be
persuaded to repent and lead a new life, how dreadful your Estate will be at
last; for as long as you remain in your unconverted Estate, God and you are
Enemies, you are under his Wrath and Curses: You are Slaves to the Devil. And
besides all this, you are in danger every hour of dropping into Hell; you know
not how suddenly Death may seize upon you. And if then you are unprepated, you
shall be haled by the Devils down to Hell, where you shall be kept under Chains
of Darkness unto the dreadful judgment of the Great Day; and then your Bodies
shall be raised to Life again, and be summoned before the Judgment-geat of
Christ, where you shall give a strict Account for all things that you have
thought, done, or spoken in your lifetime; there you shall stand trembling
before your offended Judge, expecting that doleful Sentance to be pronounced
upon you, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which was prepared
for the devil and his angels.

No sooner is this dreadful Sentance past, but away you must be gone, away you
shall be haled by the Devils, with the rest of your damned Crew, down into that
Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone: where you shall be continually
tormented with thegnawings of your guilty Conscience; where you shall be
continually scorched with the burning Wrath of Almighty God: there your Blood
shall boil, your flesh shall fry; there you shall lie howling and screeching
continually in that Lake of Fire, and never have ease nor end.

But on the other fide consider how happy your Conditions will be, if you in
time repent and forsake your Sins, and become new Creatures; that then God will
be your Father, Christ will be your Brother, and the Spirit will be your
Comforter: you shall be filled with Peace of Conscience, which is better then
the carnal Peace of the Wicked. You shall be filled with the Joys of the Holy
Ghost, which a thousands times surpasses all Worldly Joys: You shall have the
free and full Pardon of all your Sins; so that they shall be remembered no more
And besides all this, whenever Death comes, whether sooner or later, you
shall be sure of Heaven; and at your last gasp, the Angels shall carry your
Soul, as they did the Soul of Lazarus, into the Kingdom of Heaven. And as for
your Body, that shall be laid in the Grave, as in the Bed of Christ, there to
rest until the glorious Morning of the Resurrection; and then your Bodies shall
be raised again, and fashioned ^ike unto the glorious Body of Christ; and Soul
and Body being then reunited, you shall be openly acknowledged and acquitted,
and be placed at the right hand of Christ, and hear that comfortable Sentance
pronounced unto you, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom which
was prepared for you from the foundation of the worla. Then you shall be
received with rejoicing and triumphing into the Heaven of Heavens, the place of
Joy and Bliss. Therefore you shall be stripped of all your Robes of Mortality,
and be clothed with immortality: then you shall sit down to rest with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. There you shall possess such Divine
Freasures, such rare Joys, yea, variety of Joys, and such sweet Delights, as no
Mortal Eyes has ever seen, no Mortal Ear has ever heard, nor can it ever
enter into the Heart of Man to conceive, what Joys and Delights God has
prepared for you in Heaven; then you shall be for ever free from all kind of
Sin and Sorrow: There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying;
neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away:
and God shall wipe away all tear's from your eyes, Revel. 21.4. There shall be
Life without Death, Health without Sickness, and Pleasure without Pain; as you
shall be freed from all Evil, so you shall enjoy all the Good that can be
enjoyed. You shall there meet all your dear Friends and Relations, that
departed in the Fear of God, there you shall rejoice one with another; and with
one heart and voice sing Praises and Hallelujahs to God, to the Lamb that sits
upon the Throne for ever and ever.

And now I hope you are ready to ask, What shall we do, that we may escape
everlasting Torments, and get safe to Heaven? And begin to be priest at the
Heart, and are ready to say, What shall we do to be saved?

Ans. If it be so, that you earnestly desire to know the Way to Heaven, and are
willing to walk in that Way, then as I in my little Book for young Ones, Nine
Directions, what they should do to escape Hell, and attain Heaven: So here I
will give you some Directions, What you should do ^o be Saved^^ And instead of
many, I will only give you these two: That is, (Repent and B^^^ue the Gospel,)
follow but there two D^^^ctions and you are in the right way to Heaven * The
Law indeed, requires Perfect, ^^^^ence; but no mere Man, since the Fall, (...)
perfectly to keep the Commandments of God, and so by the Works of the Law, can
never be saved.

God has by Christ, our Redeemer, required Faith and Repentance, as the
Conditions of the Gospel, by which Eternal Life is to be had. Faith and
Repentance is all that God requires in order to our Salvation: Repent and
believe the Gospel, and you shall certainly be saved. I will give you as plain
Directions as possible I can, how you shall attain these two Graces:

First for Repentance. You must know that there are two kinds of Repentance;
there is a false Repentance, and a true Repentance:

A false Repentance, is that which a Man is driven to, through fear of Hell and
Damnation. When a wicked Man lies upon his Deathbed, then he seems to be sorry
for his Sins past; and makes many fair Promises of a new Life, if it should
please God to restore him again: though in the mean time, he likes and loves
those Sins he seems to repent of; and if it please God to restore him to his
former Health, he follows his old course again. Now this kind of Repentance can
never be effectual to Salvation.

2. Now you must mind what true Repentance is: True Repentatce is a saving
Grace, whereby a Sinner out of a true sense of his Sin, and apprehension of the
mercy of God in Christ, does with grief and hatred of his Sin, turn from it
unto God, with full purpose of, and endeavor after new Obedience.

But now seeing without this Repentance, there is no getting to Heaven, and
that we cannot repent of ourselver, it is of God's free Gift. I will therefore
give you some plain Directions how Repentance may be had, and how to go through
with it; for though we cannot repent of ourselves, yet if we do not repent the
fault lies upon us.

1. The first step to true Repentance, is the Examination of your selves; try
your Hearts, and search into your former Life, how, and after what manner you
have spent your time since you have been a Child; and to this end, I counsel
you to make a Catalogue of all your Sins you can possible call to mind; for
which purpose you must take the Ten Commandments for your Pattern.

Had I time and room, I would for your Memory write you a Catalogue of Sins
which is against each of the Ten Commandments; but they being so many, that I
cannot do it in so small a Book as this. But I counsel you to get you a Book
wherein is the Exposition on the Ten Commandments, which shows what are those
Sins of Omission and Commission which is against every Command, and try
yourself by these, and labor to find out as many of those Sins as you know
yourself to be guilty of, for you will find many Sins there, that you in your
place cannot commit. You may only take but one Commandment or two at a time,
according as your Memory will hold, and if your Memory cannot contain all the
Sins that you find yourself guilty of, you may write them down according as you
find them out, which way I think to be the best: and then every Evening you may
make use of this Catalogue, for the finding out the Sins that you committed in
the Day; likewise every Sabbath, the Sins you committed in the Week; likewise
before you receive the Sacrament, that thereby you may repent and be humbled
for them.

2. The second step to true Repentance, is the Confession of those Sins you
have thus found out; you must spread them all before the Lord, and confess them
all in particular, with all circumstances: as the time when, place where, and
manner how, such and such things are committed. Now many confess in general,
that they are Sinners, but few confess their Sins; and if your Sins are so
innumerable that you cannot find out every particular Sin, so as to confess
them all in particular, then confess the rest in the general. And there is no
doubt but God will take this for a true and sincere Confession, in that there
is no known sin that you would willingly hide from God.

3. Another step to true Repentance, is godly Sorrow for those Sins thus
confessed. And it is godly Sorrow that works Repentance to Salvation, never to
be repented of. Now for the obtaining of this godly Sorrow, you must use these
means:

1. Lay to heart how good, and how merciful God has been to you: How many
Tokens of his Love and Kindness he has bestowed upon you; and yet how ill you
have required him. Seriously consider, how he has delivered you from such and
such a Sickness, when you were near Death: How he has preserved you from such
and such a Danger: How he has delivered you from such and such Enemies: That
not withstanding your many Provocations, yet he has born with you all this
while: he has patience with you, and waifs for your Repentance, who might in
Justice have snatched you away whilst you were sinning, and sent you quick to
Everlasting Burnings. Yet still he spares you; yet, he gives you every day
fresh Supplies of his Mercy: and as before you were to make a Catalogue of your
Sins, so here make a Catalogue of God's Mercies; those several kinds of Mercies
and Favors you have received from him, and then lay to heart what a base
unthankful Wretch you have been, thus to provoke and grieve so good and
merciful a God. Think thus with yourself: O that I should be such a base, vile
wretch, for to provoke and grieve so loving a Father, that has been so good and
gracious unto me; so merciful a Savior that died for me.

Such Considerations deeply laid to heart, will prick your heart into godly
sorrow for your Sius; as Peter, when he considered how he denied Christ, He
went out and wept bitterly, Matthew. 26.75.

2. Keep in mind the most of those Sins whereby you have most dishonored God,
and grieved his Spirit; this also will be a means to work in you godly Sorrow.

3. Ply the Throne of Grace by earnest and constant Prayer, that God might take
away that stony heart of your flesh, and give you a heart of flesh, as he has
promised, Ezeck. 36.26. But it may be, God will seem not to hear your Prayers
presently, if therefore you cannot find your heart to relent the first time, go
and pray again and again; and give God no rest until he hear you; and then of a
certain, one time or other, God will mele your hearts into godly Sorrow and
Remorse for your former Sins; and then this excellent Grace of Repentance is
begun and wrought in you.

4. The next thing to be done, is this, Beg heartily to God for the Pardon of
your former Sins, that they may be cast all behind his back, that they may be
washed away in the Blood of Christ.

And then lastly, make a firm, strong, and settled Resolution, (hence forth to
lead a new Life) this must not be a weak Resolution, but it must be a settled
and deliberate Resolution. Now, when a Man seriously considers, that except he
becomes a new Creature, he cannot be saved; and thereupon takes up a strong and
sixth Resolution, hence forth to lead a new Life, the Work is more than half
done; that Man is not far from the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus for the Act of
Repentance. Now I will give you some Helps for the daily renewing of your
Repentance:

1. Every Morning as soon as you rise, prostrate yourselves before the Throne
of Grace, and earnestly beg for God's assisting Grace, to keep you from falling
into any kind of Sin that day; for after a Man is regenerated, he is yet daily
liable to fall foul into Sin, without the assistance of God's special Grace.
Therefore earnestly desire of God in Prayer, that he might strengthen you
against all Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and keep you
that day from falling into any kind of Sin.

2. When you have thus done, then go about the works of your Calling. But set a
strict and continual Watch over your Heart and all your Senses; watch your
Eyes, that they do not wander after Vanity; watch your Tongue, that no Lies nor
vain Jesting, nor unprositable, filty, and corrupt Speeches don't come from
that. But above all, watch your Heart, that no evil Thoughts do enter in there;
for the Heart is the Spring and Fountain of all sin and wickedness; and be very
jealous over yourselves in every thing you do, lest at any time you should sin
in it, and keep yourselves from all the occasions of Sin; meddle with none of
the Devil's Baits, least you tempt God to leave you to be overcome. And as
often as the Devil does tempt you to any kind of sin, or do offer you any Bait,
then immediately lift up your Hearts to God by Ejaculatory Prayers, as thus,
Lord, vanquish Satan at this time, that he don't overcome me; Lord preserve me
this once from falling into sin: Lord have mercy on my soul and keep and streng
then me against this temptation of the Devil, that I be not overcome. And if
wicked Men should at any time seek to draw you into Sin with them, then make a
firm Resolution with yourself, never to consent, and as much as possible you
can, keep yourself from the Company of wicked Men: But when at any time you,
through Iufirmity, fall into Sin, then lie not in it, but immediately go by
yourself into some corner, and there present yourself, and humbly confess it to
God, and earnestly beg that God would cast it behind his back, and wash it away
in his Son's blood, that it may never rise up against you, to shame or condemn
you; and give yourself no rest until God has given you some assurance of
Pardon; and withal, renew your Resolution to be more watchful for the time to
come. Thus renew your Repentance as often as you fall into Sin; or if you cannot
do it presently as soon as you sin, to be sure to do it before you lie down to
sleep at night, every night before you lie down in your Bed, look back into the
day past. what Sins you have fallen into, and repent and beg pardon for them,
and look also and see what Temptations you have overcome, and what Graces God
has strengthened in you and rejoice and praise God for it. Thus by continual
watching and praying, and striving, you will find Sin to die in you more and
more, and Grace more and more to grow and increase in you: And whilst others
grow near Hell, you will grow nearer and nearer to Heaven. This is the first
step in the Way to Heaven, Repentance.

The Second is Faith As first I directed you to Repent, so secondly, Believe
the Gospel. Now Faith is a saving Grace, whereby receive and rest upon Christ
alone for Salvation, as he is freely offered to us in the Gospel. Now seeing a
true saving Faith is not your Power, but it is the Gift of God, and God always
bestows it upon those that use the Means which he has prescribed in his Word
for the obtaining it. I shall therefore give you some Directions, what you
shall do to have this Grace of Faith wrought in you:

1. Be deligent in reading the Scriptures, First, you must every Morning and
Evening. read a Chapter in your Bible, or else some part of a godly Sermon; and
when you read, you must not run it over and then leave it, you were as good do
nothing as do so. But when you read, you must take especial heed what you be a
reading of, and when you have done, look back a little upon what you have read,
and see what Sins are condemned there, that you know your self guilty of, and
be humbled for them, what Duties are required there, and resolve to practice
them; what Judgments God has threatened against such and such Sins, and stand
in awe of them; what Promises God has there made, and what are the Conditions
of those Promises, and resolve through the Grace of God inabling you, to
perform those Conditions, that those Promises may belong to you; and i^ so
doing, then you read with Profit indeed.

2. Be fervent and diligent in hearing the Word preached, For faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.17. But then you must not do
as most do, who either sleep all the Sermon-time, or else lend their Ears for a
while, and then when Sermon is ended, they let the Devil steal it out of their
Hearts, and so never mind it afterward, but you were better never go to Church
at all, than to go and hear after that rate. But when you be at Church you must
hearken with all the Attention you can hearken earnestly, as if you were to die
presently and go to Judgment. And for your help herein, you must mark what is
the Doctrine; what are the Reasons and Uses, and how many they are.

2. Hear with Affection, and for your help, you must hear as if God himself
were a speaking to you, and as if he spoke directly to you; you must hear as if
it were indeed the Word of God, and not of Man.

3. Whilst you are a hearing, set a Resolution to practice what you hear, and
when you come home, call over the Heads of the Sermon in your Mind, and turn
every Use and Direction that has been delivered into Prayer, pray for God's
Blessing on it, and ma^e, it matter of your Meditation all the Week: and then
lastly, set to the practice of it.

3. Another means for the getting of a saving Faith, is earnest Prayer unto God
for it, Matthew. 7.7. Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, kneck and
it shall be opened unto you. But you will say, it may be God will not accept my
Prayers, for God hears not Sinners, and the Prayers of the Wicked are
Abomination unto him. I answer, it is wilful Sinners that God will not hear,
they that pray for Mercy, and other good things, and yet hate to be reformed,
the Prayers of such God will not regard: But they that come to God in a
returning way, with a full purpose to leave their Sins, and pray, and earnestly
desire Grace, especially this Grace of Faith, they shall certainly be accepted
and have their Prayers granted. But if you desire indeed to have this Grace of
Faith bestowed on you, then you must look to the manner of your Prayers; you
must not pray as most do, but you must pour out your very Souls in Prayer to
God, your Hear and Tongue must go together, earnestly des^ing that which you
pray for; you must pray with zeal and fervency; you must strive and wrestle
with God in Prayer, and never give him rest until he has granted your desire,
these are the Prayers that God takes delight in; and if God answer not your
Prayers the first nor second time, then try again and again as the Woman of
Canaan did, and then you need not doubt but God will hear you at last.

Now concerning the Act of Faith, take but this Direction: Make a Catologue of
all the Promises, as you did before of your Sins, and God's Mercies; and then
heartily believe, and assure yourselves, that every one of those Promises
belong to all those that perform the Conditions of those Promises; and if you
perform the Conpition, then those Promises belong to you. As for instance, I
will name this one particular Promise, Matt. 19.29. Every one that has
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands for my name's sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life. Now to make use of this Promise, when you thus
embrace Christ as is he offered, when you make your greatest care to obey the
Commands of Christ, all his commands out of love to him, as our Savior. When
you are heartily willing to forsake all your beloved pleasures, your darling
Lust; your secret Sin, for Christ's sake; and if at last you should be called
to it, can willingly forsake Houses and Lands, yea, and your own Life too for
him, resting fully and wholly upon him for Salvation, then you are true
Believers; and such a Faith as this will certainly bring you to Heaven. Thus,
if you walk according to this Rule, that I have here set you, if you do thus
Repent, and believe the Gospel, then at last, when Unbelievers and all
impenitent Sinnersshall be turned into Hell, you shall be received into the
Joys of our Lord and Master, there to reign with him for ever and ever.

Which God of his Mercy grant unto us all. Amen.

FINIS.

