Quakerism is Paganism, BY W. L's Confession;

In a BOOK Directed to Mr. N. L. Citizen of London: OR, Twelve of the Quakers
Opinions, called by W. L. The Twelve Pagan Principles, or Opinions; for which
the Quakers are opposed to Christians;

Examined and Presented to WILLIAM PENN.

By W. R. a Lover of CHRISTIANITY.

Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? desiring to be a Teacher of the Law,
understanding neither what thou say, nor whereof thou affirmest, 2 Samuel 16.
17. 1 Timothy 1. 7. Tuum Testimonium, quod in aliena releve est; id, in tua,
quoniam contra te est, gravissimum esse debet. Cicero Orat. Pro. L. Q. p. 12.
Thy Testimony, which is but light and frivolous in another Cause, yet is
weighty in thine own, when it is against thy self. LONDON, Printed for Francis
Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange. 1674.

QUAKERISM is PAGANISM, By W. L's Confession, etc. OR, Twelve of the Quakers
Opinions; Examined and presented TO WILLIAM PENN.
SIR,
AS I design not to traduce the Person of any Man, nor wrong him in his
Sentiments about Religion; much less your self in this Undertaking; having a
high (...) of those natural and acquired Parts, which manifest themselves more
conspicuously in you, than in many others of your Friends: But these being
alon^ (...) but Meteors adding Blaze, little of true Brightness, They have an
umbrage of Grandeur, not a Spark of Saving Grace, or Dram of Heavenly Glory.
The Enamel of those seize are apt to fully and expire; and the Possessor
in endeavoring to stand accerseth his fall. It is an Interest in (...)
Conformity to his Will, as it is Revealed (...) Scriptures, and a Constant
Perseverance therein; that would make you truly happy to Eternity.

But Sir, I would employ my Pen at this time, humbly to entreat you, to examine
what Ground you stand on; whether you have good Principles to support you? for
I fear you stand in a slippery place; and that great will be your fall, without
a timely Prevention.

It is my design to be Instrumental (among others) to persuade you to own the
Man Christ Jesus, whom to me you seem to deny: And to submit your self to his
Laws, recorded in Holy Scripture; which you now Slight and Trample upon. That
those Parts which God has been pleased to Honor you withal, might be employed
to his Glory and the Salvation of your Soul, which are Matters most sublime and
weighty.

It is certain Christ will come in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on those that
obey not the Gospel as it was at first delivered to the Saints; and much
greater Vengeance may they expect, who Deny him and Oppose themselves against
it: For God will Judge Men by the Gospel as a Rule, and by the Man Christ Jesus
as their Judge, Romans 2. 16. For he has appointed a Day in the which he will
Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has Ordained, and whom
you Reject, Acts 17. 31. I pray God you have not cause one day to remember that
you have been told so, but refused to be Admonished.

Sir, If upon second thoughts you find you have gone too far, and have espoused
a Cause not to be Justified by the Principles of right Reason and Christianity,
count it not a dishonor to Retract. It 's no wrong to you or any man (but a
kindness) to be delivered from an Error, it will be your advantage and honor
to embrace Truth, whenever you are convinced and enlightened.

But Sir, If you are confidently persuaded of the Truth of the Quakers
Principles, as you profess; pray tell the World the Reason why you are so shy
in discovering, so unwilling to confess, them, (for Truth seeks no Corners to
hide her self) stand forth and declare you own those Doctrines; or let us know
you are of another Mind, by rejecting the Men and their Books in which those
Opinions (as charged upon you) are Asserted: Think not to hide yourselves under
a Mask of Evasive pretenses, and Clouds of Impertinences and Railery; for that
is seen through, and will be daily more and more by those that are judicious,
to your great Reproach, notwithstanding all your Stratagems to prevent it.

Among which I do find, That as you have taken New-ways, so there are
New-Advocates risen up to plead your Cause; and propagate your Principles; one
of which I have now taken upon me to Examine: I do promise you to do him
Justice, though he has been Unjust to himself and others; and do present my
Sentiments of him to be Considered by you, for these Reasons.

1. Because I understand he is an Intimate Friend and Associate of yours, and
it may be you are more privy to what he has done in this Matter than another
Man, and so more capable to Judge of what I shall say.

2. Because he has Espoused your Quarrel, and Gratitude obliges you to assist
him.

3. Because he has opposed your Sentiments concerning Mr. HICKS: You call him
a Liar, a Forger, and what not? W. L. lays no such thing to his Charge, but
calls him his Friend, etc.

4. Because I would have you return an Answer in Print, that we may know
whether your mind be yet altered or not, touching Mr. HICKS, and these Twelve
Pagan Principles.

5. Because, if you shall insist upon the Confutation of Mr. HICKS, in all or
any of these Particulars, that you would be pleased, not barely to call him a
Liar, Forger, Slanderer, etc. but show wherein he has belyed you in any of
them.

I will first speak to the Title of William Luddington 's Book, which is The
Twelve Pagan Principles: And my Opinion is, he has rightly named them,
(although I think he may have the honor of the Invention) and if W. L. say
true, then a Quaker is a Pagan and no true Christian; for he Confesses they
hold those Opinions he calls by that Name, and as He and I are agreed herein,
so is T. H. also, by his own Confession: for he says, it is for those
Opinions, he has Published the Quaker to be no Christian.

He says, he has seriously considered them: but he gives me ground to think
otherwise, in passing-over some things slightly, extenuating others, and
avoiding simply what he could not subtly evade, or soundly confute.

But whereas he says, Presented to Mr. N. L. Citizen of London: I do make bold
to tell him, That he is much displeased with that causeless and impertinent
Present: and were not he known to be a worthy Citizen, a Man of Integrity, and
sound in the Principles of the Christian Religion; This had been Indication,
sufficient to bring him into some Suspicion with others, as if he were
tottering in the Fundamentals of Christianity: W. L. being known to be a Man
fast of Whimsies, and Enthusiastical Notions, about the most sacred and weighty
Points of the Christian Religion, of which this Book is no small Testimony: But
by this we may see what ways are invented to impose upon the World when they
are in a strait.

Touching these Pagan Principles as W. L. calls them, I am more confirmed in my
Opinion, that these are the very Principles of the Quakers from what he has
written: being persuaded, That if he continue writing for the Quakers, and
against the Baptists, as he has begun, not only in this Book, but also in that
Impertinent Letter of his to Mr. Ives; he will do the like kindness for the
Baptists, as that Man did for his Enemy, of whom it is Storied, That he thrust
his Sword into his Body with an intent to kill him, but instead thereof, let
out an Imposthume which was a means of his preservation: And my Reasons for it
are these.

1. Because he does not deny any one of those Charges laid upon them by Mr.
Hicks, but under each Head, he acts the part of an Advocate; I wish he had
better Clients, and a better Cause. The Principles (he says) are Pagan, and
the Men are no Christians. Neither indeed do they impose upon us to believe
them so, nor have they that Appollation given them; bur instead thereof, they
call themselves, and are called by others, Quakers. He endeavors to Excuse
them, from what they cannot Excuse themselves, without a manifest injury to
their own Opinions: And where this will not do, he labors to Extenuate the
Fault by substracting from, and adding to the Quakers Sayings; and then tells
us, it is but a little word; as putting in (OF) and taking away (IRRELIGIOVS.)
But sure less than either of these may totally destroy the sense; as will
appear by these following instances.

1. The first is, That a Compositor (that was a Papist) being employed at the
King's Printing House in the Days of King James, took out of the 7th
Commandment the Particle (NOT) and then it was thus read, Thou shall Commit
Adultery, and that was less than the word (Irreligious:) and it was then
esteemed so great a crime, that (it is said) the Printer was fined a 1000 Pounds.

In the 1 Cor. 15. 51. where it is said, We shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be Changed; leave out but (C) and then it must be read, we shall all be
Hanged: and yet this is less than (OF.)

Such liberty as this being allowed, I will make my Antagonist speak what I
list; but this is the practice of this Author; I hope I may be allowed the
liberty of thinking that the man is in a strait.

2. Because where he cannot deny but those words were spoken by the Quakers,
which T. H. charges upon them; and that they do also bear the same sense which
he puts upon them: there he endeavors to persuade us that they may also bear
another sense; and says, It Is a sign of hatred to catch at the worst.

Now from thence I perceive (if W. L. say true) That the Quakers Words are
delivered as Ambiguously, as the Heathen gods used to deliver their Oracles;
that so the falsity thereof may be the less capable of detection. A Man of
great credit among the Graecians, named Oenomaus, who for that he had been much
delighted with Oracles, and more deceived; wrote a Book, in the end, of their
Falsehoods and Lies; and yet shows, That in many things wherein they deceived,
it was not easy to convince them of open Falsehood; for that they would involve
their answer (on purpose) with such Obscurities, Generalities, Equivocations,
and Doubtfulness, that they would always leave themselves a Corner wherein to
save their Credits, when the event should prove false. As for Example, When
Craesus that famous and rich Monarch of Lydia, consulted with the Oracle of
Apollo, whether he should make War against the Persians, and thereby obtain
their Empire or no? Apollo desirous of Bloodshed (as the wicked spirits are)
gave his Oracle in these words, for deceiving of Craesus. If Craesus without
fear, shall pass over Halys, (this was a River that lay between him and Persia)
he shall bring to confusion a great Rich Kingdom. Upon which words, Craesus
passed over his Army, in hopes to get Persia; but soon after he lost Lydia, by
an evil understanding of this doubtful Prophecy. Eusebius, Lib. de Praep. Evan.
Cap. 10.

Surely, all such dark unintelligible language (in my understanding) ought to
be exploded by all the Ministers of the Gospel, and all true Christians; for it
has no better tendency, than to deceive and beguile ignorant and unstable
Souls. This was not the Practice of the Holy Apostles, of our dear Redeemer the
Man Christ Jesus, who delivered their Doctrines in the most plain and
intelligible words that might be, for the instruction and information of their
Auditors; especially about the great and most important Truths of the Gospel:
as the blessed Apostle Paul does testify, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4. For our exhortation
was not of Deceit, nor of Uncleanness, nor in Guile; but as we were allowed of
God to be put in Trust with the Gospel, so we speak: for if the Trumpet give an
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? So likewise you,
except ye utter by the Tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken, for ye shall speak into the Air, 1 Cor. 14. 8, 9. The
direct contrary is found in the Quakers, as appears, not only by this Man's
Confession, but also by their Writings and Expressions, as is obvious to all
that have experience of them. Surely they are not guided by the Spirit of the
Lord, their Practice being so contrary to the first Ministers of the Gospel,
and so agreeable to the Method used by the False gods among the Heathen; whose
Words and Writings are like their Oracles, i. e. full of Deceit and Ambiguity.
And if W. L. thinks this to be the way to make Men in Love with Quakerism, it
must be such that are men of corrupt Minds, Reprobate concerning the Faith: As
for me, I will say of all such vile and deceitful Practices, as Jacob said of
Simeon and Levi, touching that wicked Act of theirs. Genesis 49. 6. O my Soul,
come not thou into their Secret, unto their Assembly, mine honor be not thou
united.

3. Because in these 12. Pagan Principles, he has cleared T. H. of those Black
Charges the Quakers have laid upon him; in calling him Liar, Forger, Slanderer,
etc. For if these words were spoken by the Quakers, or written in their Books,
then he cannot be a Liar, Forger, etc. And that they are so, take W. L.'s
Confession under each Head, (as they stand in his Book) in the method following.

1. Pagan Principle.
THe first Opinion Charged upon the Quakers is, That the Light in every man, or
the Light with which every Man is enlightened, is God.

W. L. His Answer is, How small a Word would stop this Breach? put in but (OF)
and all is well.

Rep. By the same Rule, where the Apostle John says, He that does good is of
God; John 3. Epistle v. 11. Take out but (OF) and then it is thus; He that does
good is God; which as it refers to men, as by the scope of the place is
evident; it is not only an Untruth, but Blasphemy: Neither will that relieve
him to bring in W. P. saying, That every such Illumination is not very God, for
if it were, then W. P. must believe there were as many Gods as there are Men in
the World; because he faith that every man has that Illumination: For W. P. in
his Reason against Railing, Page 56. says, Geo. Whitehead owns it in its own
being to be no other than God himself; where he approves of that saying, and
adds this to it himself; We assert the true Light with which every man is
enlightened, to be in it self the Christ of God, and the Savior of the World.
Now if W. P. will contradict himself, who can help that? it is not T. H. his
fault, but his own. Reader, here he confesses the charge, so that Mr. Hicks is
no Forger.

2. Pagan Principle.
HIS Second Charge is, That the Soul is a Part of God, and of God's Being,
without beginning and Infinite.

W. L. His Answer is, What hurt is there in this? if they do say so: I never
heard the Heathen were of this Opinion* I see no cause to be offended, much
less to account them Heathen, if the Quakers do count it a part of God.

Rep. Surely this Man is little Read in Heathen Authors, that he can say he
never heard the Heathen were of this Opinion that the Soul is a Part of God
etc. Let him but read Seneca (I presume he has learning enough to do it
because he is a Schoolmaster) and he will find him to be of this very Opinion;
These are his Words, Quid aliud voces animum, quam Deum in Corpore humano
hospitantem: What can we call the Soul (says he) but God abiding in an humane
Body? And of the Reason wherewith the Soul of Man is endowed he affirms, that
it is Part of the Divine Spirit in Man's Body: For these are his Words, Ratio
nihil aliud est, quam in corpus humanum pars Divini Spiritus, etc. Seneca
Epist. 67. So that if I would trouble my self and you, I could show you that
herein there is a great union between a Quaker and a Pagan in their Opinion
about the Soul of Man; the which may be most elegantly detected in the Words of
a Learned Author of our times, (...): It is a little Deity guesting in a body
of Flesh.

Thus Reader thou may see that T. H. is no Forger, and also that W. L.
(though ignorantly) has rightly called this A Pagan Principle.

But W. L. says, The great Heat of disputes of that nature, has caused a
scoffing Poet to Rhyme thus of OUR Disputes;

These Disputants like Rams and Bulls,
Do fight with Arms that spring from Skulls;
And when they argue the greatest Part,
O'th Contest falls on Terms of Art.
Who would but think these Verses had been made upon the late Disputes between
us and the Quakers as W. L. words it? and yet I find that Hudibras is the Poet,
and the Title of the Book tells me: it was written in the time of the late War,
and Licensed November 11. 1662. Hudibras Part 1. page 267. Canto 3.

But I perceive he can allow himself a liberty to say any thing, yea rather
than T. H. shall go free, he will jeer his Friend W. P. also; for if the Author
of the Quakers Quibbles be not much mistaken, the great fault (which made that
Dispute so fruitless) lay in W. P. and his Friends; for in page 10. he asks W.
P. this question: When thou came to the Reasoning and Disputative part, how
many shuffles and put-offs? How many pitiful Evasions and poor shifts did
thou make? how many delays? how much loss of time? I was not only ashamed to
see it, but admired thy self and Friends did not blush at it, to see you make
yourselves and party so ridiculous in the Eyes of others: What Railing instead
of Reasoning! What Clamor! What Noise! What Tautologies! What Disorder! What
Discord and Confusion! No Argument to me more fully proved you to be no
Christians, than your Unchristian carriage in that Meeting. And he that speaks
this is an Indifferent Person, neither Quaker nor Baptist.

As for the abuse he has done to the Poet in repeating the two first lines
otherwise than they are in Hudibras, I question not but Hudibras knows how to
right himself better than I can direct him; in the mean time I would advise W.
L. to take that good advice nosec tripsum, to study the knowledge of himself
more, and then he will not be at so much leisure to pry into the lives, and
espouse the Quarrel of other Men: had he been so employed when he wrote this
Book, he had saved me this pains; for I can assure him that I don't use to
employ my Time after this sort; nor would I have done it now, only I hope God
may have some Honor by detecting his folly, and it may be I may be made
Instrumental to bring him to a sight of it.

I had thought to have passed over this Head, but the man makes such a stir
about an impertinent Question, that I am minded to say something to it, lest my
silence should prove his prejudice.

Quest. But, Why (says W. L.) may not we as well say, God has given us a Part
of himself; as a Part or Measure of his spirit which has no beginning nor
ending.

Ans. I answer, as it is in the Question, and relates to the Soul of Man; I
will tell you why we may not so speak, because there is a great Disparity
betwixt the Soul of Man, and the Spirit of God: As,

1. The Soul of Man is a Creature made by God. Isaiah 57. 16. For I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for the Spirit should fail
before me, and the Souls which I have made.

2. But the Holy Spirit is increated and of the same Essence with the Father,
as the Quaker himself confesses, and from thence takes occasion to confound
the Personal Existence of all the Three.

Now, though I may say God has given us a measure of his Spirit, because we
are made to partake of the Gifts and Graces thereof; yet I may not affirm that
therefore the Soul in which they do reside, is a part of God and of God's
Being, without Beginning and Infinite.

But says W. L. That Man has an Immortal Soul we all grant; and yet before he
is got ten lines forward he says, if the Soul be a Created part of Man coming
by Generation, then (as I have heard it argued) it must be Mortal: and a little
after. This is a great Mystery, and we must wait till another Seal of the Book
of Life be opened, before we shall know what the Breath of Life was which God
Breathed into Adam, Genesis 2. He says, Philosophers and Divines have made a
great Bustle about the Soul, but to define what it is, will be as hard a Task,
as it was to one Simonides, to tell what God was; but still we are as wise as
before.

Ans. Truly I don't expect to be made wiser by this discourse of thine about
the Soul; but give me leave to ask thee a few questions about it,
notwithstanding thy considence in saying It Is strange we should differ about we
know not what.

1. Do thou believe the Soul of Man was Created?

2. Do thou not believe God to be Increated, to subsist of, and from himself,
and from no other?

3. Do thou believe it possible for the Blessed Creator of all things to
become a Creature; or for a Creature to be made God Blessed for evermore, and
to be without beginning and infinite? He that can believe this, may easily
believe Transubstantiation.

I would have W. P. and W. L. consult together once more, and see if they can
invent some Answer that may Reconcile these 2 Propositions:

1. That the Soul of Man was Created.

2. That the Soul is God himself, without beginning and infinite.

The first is asserted by God himself, Esaias 57. 16. The Souls which I have made.

The latter is asserted by themselves, for they say the Soul is a part of God's
Being, etc. and in this case that known Maxim will stand good, Quidquid est in
Deo, est Deus: Whatsoever is in God, is God. Now if they cannot Reconcile them,
if I come to be put to my choice whether I will Believe God's Word or Their's,
I shall not only believe what God has spoken, but also that his Word will
certainly stand against them for Evil. Jer. 44. ult. For they have rejected the
Word of the Lord, and what Wisdom is in them? Now I hope W. L. may see,
notwithstanding all that he has said, That though the Soul of Man be made
Immortal and can never Die, yet it had not always a Being, it is not without
beginning; there being a time when it was not, and that it is not infinite and
God himself.

But I wonder W. L. should say that it is so hard to know what the Soul is; he
forgets sure that the Quakers have a light in them that (they say) can teach
them all things: if they cannot know what it is, now the Scripture has so
plainly told them that Man has a Soul, surely they would have been hard put to
it to have told us that, and all other things Recorded in Scripture concerning
God, the Man Christ Jesus, the Holy Spirit, and the Souls of Men; if they had
not been written there. Notwithstanding they have often told us, That they
could have known all those things contained in the Bible if they had never been
written: But I am glad we are not forced to be beholding to them for the
knowledge thereof; for if we were, I have ground to conclude we must go without
it; for I have often asked, What some of those things were that our Savior did
when he was upon the Earth that are not written? But they could never tell me
one of them.

Pagan Principle the 3d.
THe Third Opinion charged on the Quakers is, That Jesus Christ is not a
distinct Person without us.

W. L. His Answer is, These Expressions being not in Scripture are not owned by
them, and why we should impose them I know not.

Reader, here is a plain confession that the Quakers do not own Jesus Christ to
be a Distinct Person without us, therefore T. H. is no Forger.

But I will examine his Reason why they do not own it; It is (says he) Because
it is not expressed in the Scripture: Now in case that supposition were true,
that cannot be the Reason why the Quakers do deny it.

1. For first, They deny the Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith and Practice unto
Christians, and therefore though they may sometimes make use of them against
those that own them Argumentum ad hominem, as I may make use of the saying of a
Heathen Poet against a Heathen; yet it is shameful for a Quaker having exploded
them in print from being a Rule of Faith, to bring this as a Reason why they do
not own it, because (as they say) it is not written in Scripture; and as W. P.
does, in calling this Doctrine of T. H. Unscriptural: seeing all the real
ground a Quaker can have to own any Doctrine is, Because he is Taught it by the
Light within: and the pretense of any other proof to himself is but vain; for
that is the Question, Whether the Quakers themselves do believe Christ to be a
Distinct Person without them.

2. But Secondly, These Expressions of T. H. are no more in effect than if I
should say in other words, That Christ is a Man without us: and is he not
called in Scripture the MAN Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. For surely to say he is
a MAN, is to suppose him both to be distinct, and a Person without us.

Obj. But Christ is said to be in his People, and to dwell in them

Ans. I grant it, but the Scripture says it is by the Spirit, 1 John 4. 13.
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us; because he has given us of
his Spirit. Chap. 3. 24. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the
Spirit which he has given us; neither is this to be understood of the Essence,
but of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, therefore it is said so, Ephesians. 3.
16, 17. where the Apostle prays, that they might be strengthened with Might,
by his Spirit in the inner Man; That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by FAITH.

3. But thirdly, I will prove that Christ is called a PERSON in Scripture.
Matt. 27. 24. Pilate says, I am innocent of the Blood of this JUST PERSON: If
they say he was a wicked man that said so, then it seems a wicked Man did own
more concerning Christ than a Quaker is willing to do: But I can prove that the
Apostle Paul uses that very Expression, 2 Cor. 2. 10. For your sakes forgave I
it in the PERSON of CHRIST: and this does not only prove Christ to be a PERSON,
but also that he is a DISTINCT PERSON without us; Because Paul does here tell
the Church, that in that Act he did Represent the PERSON of Christ, he being
(in respect of his HUMANE NATURE) absent, and in Heaven; and that he acted in
his stead. But surely the Opposition the Quakers make against the PERSON of
Christ is wholly Unscriptural; Never any true Minister or Christian mentioned
in Scripture did ever oppose this Doctrine of Christ's being a Distinct PERSON
without us, if they did, let them show it us in their Next.

4. But Fourthly, Seeing Syllogizing (which they formerly condemned) is now
grown into Fashion among them; I will give them one Argument to prove Christ
Jesus to be a REAL and True MAN.

If all the Properties of a Humane Person were found in Christ, then he was a
Real and True Man.

But all the Properties of a Humane Person were found in Christ; Ergo, he was a
Real and True Man.

To deny the consequence of the Major, is to take away the very Rule of
Distinction between the Species of different Creatures; so that if that be
denied, then they may call a Man a Horse, and no body can contradict them.

The Minor I prove thus: The Scripture tells us that Christ was made Flesh, and
made of the Seed of DAVID according to the Flesh; made of a Woman, did partake
of the same Flesh and Blood that Children do, that he was Born of the Virgin
Mary, he did hunger and thirst, eat and drink, speak and sleep, was liable to
all our Temptations; yea, was Tempted in all points as we are, did Travel from
one place to another, was exposed to so many Sufferings, that he was called A
MAN of Sorrows; and lastly, as the greatest Demonstration thereof, He who had a
Reasonable Soul, and a True Body did lay down his Life as a Ransom for us,
being himself Subject to Death, even the Death of the Cross; from all which I
draw this Conclusion, Christ was a Real and true Man.

But says W. L. God manifest in the Flesh is yet so great a Mystery, that I
know no Catechisms free from some seeming incongruities, attending the
questions about it.

(...). Sure he should have excepted Smith's Catechism, and the Catechism of
the Quakers great Prophet George Fox; for they say they speak and write by an
Infalliable Spirit, unless he does not believe they have Immediate Revelation
for the Rule of their Faith and Practice, notwithstanding they so confidently
Assert it. But perhaps we are to understand him thus, That though there be some
seeming Incongruities in them, yet they are not Really Incongruous; if so, then
the dispute about that point may soon be ended? But to take him, as I conceive
he would be understood, and as indeed his words do signify, then it is to make
this Doctrine so doubtful, that (in his sense) it is lost labor to enquire
about the Truth of the Proposition, viz. Whether Christ be Really a distinct
Person without us, or no? and a thing not to be Resolved.

To that I would give this Answer; It does not follow that because there may be
some Questions asked about the Manner, how that great Work was Accomplished, of
God's being Manifest in the Flesh, (which is the wonder of Men and Angels) that
cannot be resolved by any Man; That therefore we should disown it (as the
Quakers do,) and conclude that no man can know de facto that such a thing was:
For though I do not know what moved W. L. to write, nor what reward he expects
for writing; yet I know he did write: W. L. cannot tell me how the Bones do
grow in the Womb of her that is with Child: and yet he knows they did grow
there, or else they had not been. He cannot tell me how the Corn that is cast
into the Earth does grow to be what it is at Harvest; and yet he knows it is
so: A Stalk, an Ear, etc.

By the same Argument that W. L. makes it doubtful whether Christ be a distinct
Person without us, and the Quakers deny him so to be; a man may make it
doubtful, yea deny that ever the Heavens and Earth were made, and so not only
be no Christian, but an Atheist: for it is evident, when the most learned Men
come to examine every point concerning the Creation of the Heavens and Earth,
and the things therein; as, how, and what, and where, and in what manner, and
when things were done? it does astonish them all, to consider the difficulties
which they find, and the depth of such infinite and inscrutable Mysteries. We
may as well by William Luddington's way of reasoning conclude that these things
had no beginning; nay, that they are not, notwithstanding the Scripture says
so plainly, Genesis 1. 1. In the Beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth,
and we see them with our Eyes. And by the same parity of Reason, because our
Savior says John 3. 8. That the Wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it
goes; A Man may conclude that the Wind has not its Origination and
Termination: but how absurd such a conclusion would be, I leave to the
Judicious to determine.

I hope W. L. will acknowledge, That it is the Indispensable duty of all Men, to
know God, and to believe that he is; and yet there may be some Questions asked
about it, that no man living can resolve. I believe the Quakers themselves,
though they say their Soul is a part of God, and the light they have in them is
God himself, yet they would be as much puzzled, and find as hard a Task on it,
as W. L. says one Simonides did, when he took upon him to define what God was.
But must we therefore turn Fools and Atheists like him that Holy David speaks
of, Psalm 14. 1. And say in our Hearts there is no God. Reader, I am greatly
offended when I find men trifle (as this Man does) about the most Sacred and
Divine Truths of the Gospel, and strain their Wits, to root up Religion out of
the minds of Men, for I know (through grace) that nothing can make a man so
happy as to be truly Religious; that inriches the Soul with Divine Truths and
Heavenly Graces: but these Men take away him, whom the Father has anointed and
filled with Grace and Truth, and appointed to reveal unto us the most glorious
Truths of the Gospel, and to give us Grace to enable us to obey his Will, from
whom the Apostles and first Christians did receive BOTH. John. 1. 16, 17. And
of his fullness have all we received, and Grace for Grace: For the Law was given
by Moses, but GRACE and TRUTH came by Jesus Christ. It Is not sufficient for
them to say, they do own there is a Christ, when they intend not the MAN Christ
Jesus, but a Christ of their own setting up, and adoring as such, to wit, the
Light within them; For our Savior says, If ye believe not that I am HE, ye
shall dye in your Sins, John 8. 24. The JEWS could have said as much for
themselves as that, and more too; for they did not deny a Messiah, but,
believed he should come: yea, and be a MAN also, when he did come; yet they and
the Quakers are both agreed, that the Man Christ Jesus that is come in the
Flesh is not HE: and that the True Christ can never dye and be made a Sacrifice
for Sin. That the Jews were of this Opinion, see John 12. 32, 33, 34. And I, if
I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me. (This he said,
signifying what death he should dye) The People answered him, We have heard out
of the Law, That CHRIST abides for EVER: And how say thou the SON of MAN
must be lift up? Who is this SON of MAN? That made them to say when he was upon
the Cross; If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross; Matt. 27. 40.
and in verse. 42. The Chief Priests, Elders, and Scribes mocked him, saying, HE
saved others Himself he cannot save: If he be the King of Israel, let him now
come down from the Cross, and we will believe him. That the Quakers do also
deny Christ's Death, and say, That he never did Dye; I and many others have
been Ear-Witnesses, to the great grief and trouble of our Souls. But though
these Men can so easily part with their Savior; I hope when they or others
tempt me so to do, I shall say, (and so I hope will many thousands that fear
God) as the Apostle Peter did, LORD, to whom shall we go? thou have the Words
of Eternal Life: And we believe, and are sure, that thou art THAT Christ the
Son of the Living God, John 6. 68, 69.

Reader, I would not have detained thee so long upon this subject, but to let
thee see, That the design of such insinuations is to make void plain and most
necessary Truths, that they may the better introduce their own corrupt
Principles: For it is not only in this, but about many other the most Important
Truths of Christianity, which they endeavor to evade by raising Difficulties
about the MODE of things, when we enquire not into the Manner how it shall be,
but TRUTH of the Matter whether it is or shall ever be? and I will give thee
one instance, in the room of many more; which I could give upon my own knowledge
if there were occasion.

I have asked many of the Quakers, Whether they did believe, that the same Body
which does now consist of Flesh, Blood and Bones, and is buried, shall be
raised again out of the Grave, and made Spiritual and Glorious?

The Answer they used to give me was, Thou art one of them Fools that Paul
speaks of, that art inquiring about the manner how, what Body it shall have?
etc. thinking thereby to have evaded and dropped the Question: But at length,
when I have pressed them for a plain and full Answer, and desired them to tell me
not how it should be raised, or with what a Body in respect of Form; But
whether the same Body that dies shall Rise again, respecting the Matter of
which it does Consist? And they have often told me, That that Body which Dies
shall not Rise again. But to return from whence I have digressed.

W. L. says; Nevertheless we and they agree, That he is unworthy to be called
a Christian that denies the Divinity of Christ, and brings diverse Scriptures to
prove it: But, (says he) When from other Texts more dark, we are taught to
understand our Lord Jesus to be that very Jehovah, Creator or Father; of whom
and to whom he himself speaks when he says, My Father is greater than I. And
Father I will, that whom thou have given me, etc. with many more of that kind:
then I say, Are not our Apprehensions so darkened and bewildered, that we are
apt to read Psalm 110. 1. thus, The Lord said unto himself, sit thou at my
Right Hand. And John 3. 16. God so loved the World that he sent himself: and
many others would come under the like Absurdities.

Rep. This is such a confused heap of Words, that I know not well where to
begin. First, If by Divinity of Christ he mean as I do; i. e. That though he
were a Man, yet he was also Truly God by Nature, then I am of his Mind: But
then he does not truly represent the Quakers Notion, for they say he is only
God, and not Man at all.

2. If he means as they do, That he is only God; then I wonder at his
confidence, to throw that absurdity upon others, which lies only at the door of
the Quakers, Ranters, Muggletonians, etc. and how he, and they, conjoined, can
remove it, I do not understand; but am of Opinion, That if W. L. and W. P. had
one of them the Strength of Sampson, and the other the Wisdom of Solomon, they
might employ themselves all their lifetime, and yet find it a difficulty too
hard for them to resolve. But however, I know they are Men of confidence, and
will venture upon hard things; I will therefore try their strength and skill in
this Matter.

1. W. L. tells us, We being taught that Christ is the very Jehovah, Creator or
Father, etc. it does so bewilder our Apprehensions, that we are apt to read
Psalm 110. 1. The Lord said unto himself, etc. and John 3. 16. God so loved the
World that he sent himself; which he says is an Absurdity; And I think a great
one too: But that it lies not at our doors, but at the Quakers; I think it no
hard thing to prove: and in order thereunto, I would ask these few Questions.

1. Whether W. L. ever heard any Man of T. H's Opinion about Christ, i. e. That
he is both God and Man, and a Distinct Person without us, affirm, That in
respect of his Person he was only Jehovah, Creator or Father (as he is pleased
to word it) and whether it be sayable from their own Principles? when at the
same time they also affirm, That he is truly Man.

2. Whether the Quakers do not deny that the same Body which Christ had when he
was upon the Earth, and is now ascended with into Heaven, is a Part of that
Christ, and affirm it to be only a Body in which he was, and acted in for a
time here upon Earth?

3. Whether the Quakers do not believe That it is only the Light or Spirit
which was in that Man which is the Christ, which Spirit (they say) is now in
them and all Men?

4. Whether it will not thence follow that the Quakers believe Christ to be
only God? if they deny it, I am able to prove it against them.

5. Whether the Quakers do not deny all Personal Distinction between the Father
and the Son, and say, that the Son is the Father, and the Father is a Son to
himself?

If the Quakers should deny this and say, There is a Distinction of Persons in
the Divine Essence; Will. Penn may remember what himself has written in
opposition to such a Distinction in his Book, Entitled, The Sandy Foundation
shaken; where among many other sayings of that import, he lays down this
Argument to prove that Doctrine Absurd and Ridiculous.

If each Person be God, and God subsists in three Persons, then in each Person
there are three Persons or Gods, and so from three they would increase to nine,
and so in infinitum: from whence it is plain the Quakers deny all Distinction
of Persons in the Divine Essence.

6. Having gained thus far upon them, I therefore query, Whether according to
their own Opinion this absurdity will not necessarily fall upon them, to read
those Scriptures as W. L. has done; That the Lord said to himself, sit thou on
my Right Hand; and that he so loved the World, that he sent himself: and all
other Scriptures of the like import, as that where he says; If I bear witness
of my self, my witness is not true. There is another which bears witness of
me. The Father himself which has sent me, has born witness of me, John 5. 31,
32, 37. which they must read, If I bedr witness of my self, my witness is not
true, But I bear witness of my self: and then how bravely will they make the
Lip of Truth to contradict himself: and indeed make void the Fathers Testimony
concerning his Son, and make it doubtful whether he be the True Messiah?

If they assert it, it is horrid Blasphemy, and the very Opinion of Muggleton
and his Company, who they say are Impostors; for they agree with the Quakers in
this, That there is no distinction of Persons in the Divine Essence: and
therefore they say, That the Son was the Father, and the Father the Son; and
that when Christ died, God himself died. But the Quakers, though they agree
with them in the former, yet they differ in the latter; For the Quakers say.
That Christ in respect of himself never died, neither could he, because he was
only God,

I do therefore beg of these two Gentlemen W. L. and W. P. to show us how it
is possible for them to extricate themselves out of this difficulty, and that
they would either remove this absurdity from the Quakers door, or else
acknowledge they have been mistaken in charging their own Guilt upon other Men.

In the next place, W. L. tells us, And so I pass to the Humanity, and makes a
full stop, only in the Margin, or rather a Break that is made for that purpose;
he puts in these words, I know no better Text to teach us the Divinity and
Humanity of Christ, than 1 Cor. 15. 27, 28.

Reader, If this be a passing to the Humanity, no Man ever past from it (as I
think) with that brevity before; if this be an account of the Humanity, I must
confess I don't understand it: but let us consider those two Verses he has
quoted for our information, ver. 27. For he has put all things under his Feet:
but when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is
excepted that did put all things under him. ver. 28. And when all things shall
be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all. Which words I have
seriously considered, and I find nothing in them to the purpose pretended, i.
e. to prove the Divinity and Humanity of Christ with that Cleerness W. L.
speaks of: But I think I have found out his intent; namely, to lead us from the
Matter we are upon. But I will examine his next words, which are these:

W. L. Only with this Caution that because we oppose not our Teachers in these
Mysteries which are above our Reason, we suffer not Mystical Babylon to impose
others upon us contrary to Reason; for then we shall soon be able to give as
little Reason of the hope that is in us, as the poor Irish-Men.

Rep. An excellent definition of the Humanity of Christ: sure this Man has
lost his Wits, or honesty, or both; but to proceed.

W. L. Now (says he) As to the Quakers denying the Distinct Person without
them, if it were so (is it still but an If? W. L. confessed at the beginning of
this Head, that they did not own it, sure he has a bad Memory) then certainly
there is no probability they should be of the Popish Pedigree, or easily
reduced to that Religion, as many conceit: And he gives us a jeer for his
Reason; i. e. For that is busied most of all about the Person of Christ and his
Mother too: and adds, If the Jesuits were their Fathers, (as a late printed
sheet would persuade us) truly they went as wisely about their business, as
General Venables to take Hispaniola: (and why not Admiral Penn too, for I think
he was there) by landing his Army so far from it, that before they could get
through the Woods, they met so many difficulties as forced them to retreat, and
assault Jamaica.

Ans. To which I answer, That the Quakers might be set on work by the Jesuits,
notwithstanding they deny Christ to be a Distinct Person without them, and the
Jesuits do not: For there is nothing more suiting Jesuitical Policy, than to
pretend one thing, and intend another; Their Art and Order is almost as well
filled with Subtilties and Equivocations, as the Order of Quakers; and had but
this Man studied Machiavil, as well as W. P. is supposed to have done, he might
get over this Objection with ease: For it is possible the Jesuits may design
the introducing of Popery in England, by promoting Quakerism: And in my Opinion
it is the likelyest way to do it, and that for these Reasons.

1. Because the Quakers deny the Holy Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith and
Practice to Christians; and it all England were of this mind, what Argument
could be urged against the Church of Rome, but what a Jesuit could easily
enervate. I have met with diverse Popish Priests in my time, and I always found
Scripture-Argumens the best Weapons against Popery. I would not have the
Quakers take away from us the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God,
till they have found a better Sword to put into our hands.

2. Because the Quakers agree with the Church of Rome, That there is some other
infallible Rule of Faith and Practice: The Quakers use to tell us, It was the
Light in every individual man that comes into the World: But since some
difference has happened among themselves, which they could not reconcile, now it
is the Spirit in the Body (as they call it) that is the Judge in Religious
Controversies. And can it be thought when the Contest shall lie here between
them and you, that a Jesuit cannot show better Antiquity and Authority for his
Church, than you can for yours? I should be very sorry if Englands remaining
Protestants, or returning to Popery, depended upon that single issue. But to
proceed:

3. But suppose the Jesuits should miss of their end, which is to suppose all
that W. L. supposes; this is no Argument to prove, that they may not therefore
attempt the doing it; for many men have undertaken things which they could not
effect, by reason of some unhappy and unseen Accident intervening, and yet
their design no whit the more impolitickly laid. And why should not W. L. think
this possible, seeing at the same time he opposes it, he brings in the instance
of General Venables to prove de facto that such a thing was done: We must
conclude by this man's Argument, That the Devil will never attempt the doing of
an Impossibility, in respect of the event; and yet if he read but Chap. 4. of
Matthew's Gospel, he will find he did so in the Assault he made upon our
Savior. And I believe, a Quaker that says he has attained such perfection,
that he does not commit one sin, cannot say but the Devil tempts him to many.
Now if the Devil be such a fool to attempt that which is never effected, why
may not the Jesuits do the same? For I always thought the Devil was too
cunning for a Jesuit, and I doubt they will find it so too at the last.

4. But why does W. L. make such a stir about this Book, called, The Quakers
Pedigree? I am of opinion there is some wit, if not much truth contained
therein: But why does he insinuate, as if the Baptists made it, and as if they
promoted it? This must needs be to render them ridiculous, which is a very
unworthy design. But to prevent him from persevering therein for the future, I
will tell him what the man is not which made that Book, HE is not one of the
People called Baptists: I could let him know who did write it, but I will not
humor him so far at this time, because he has so pleased himself to throw
dirt upon us in Print about it; for which he deserves a sharper Reproof, than I
will permit my pen to give him at this time: Will. Pen, who seems to have dipped
his quill in Gall and Wormwood, may do that piece of Justice for me, if he
please.

But said W. L. Why should we think they deny the Person of Christ? it is not
long since they were railed on as the Spawn of SOCINUS, for denying the
Divinity, and now they are faced about to oppose his Humanity? either they are
very unsettled, or T. H. misunderstands them.

Answ. Will. Luddington is no sooner got out of General Venables Wood, but he
is got into one himself: But I Will do that kindness for him as the Law required
(when a man saw his neighbors Ox, or Ass going astray) to bring him home if I
can.

There is a man has written a Book very lately, entitled, The Christian, a
Quaker; The Quaker a Christian: Which they seem to glory in very much, and do
him the kindness to sell his Books. And one Reason he gives to prove, that the
name of a Christian does most properly belong to a Quaker is this, Because a
Quaker is an Ass: His words are these,

He being before speaking of Antioch, says, The Disciples were there first
called (...), that is to say, Christ's Asses: And in a break made for that
purpose, he inserts these words, (...), Asses; (...), Christ's Asses, page 23,
24. And continuing his Discourse upon this subject, in the latter end of p. 25.
and beginning of p. 26. he has these words:

But these (...), whom this Author calls Quakers (meaning T. H.) walk by a
better Rule; for if they receive a Blow on the one Cheek, they turn to them
that give it the other also (so they profess) patiently undergoing all manner
of Affronts, Persecutions, Reproaches, and Revilings, returning not evil for
evil, according to the Commandment of the Everlasting God: So that they may
truly enough be termed (...), Christ's Asses. To which I answer:

Answ. 1. This Author does abuse his unlearned Reader; for that word in the
11th of Acts verse. 26. is not (...), but (...): Which the Learned Leigh in his
Critica Sacra, p. 288. renders thus, Qui Christi discipulum se profitetur, and
a Christo se denominat; Who professes themselves Disciples of Christ, and
derive their name from Christ. And it is so used also in Acts 26. 28. and in 1
Pet. 4. 16. both quoted by the said Learned Author.

But suppose we should interpret the word as the Quakers Advocate does, then we
must read Acts 26. 28. thus, Almost thou perswadest me to be one of Christ's
Asses; and 1 Pet. 4. 16. But if any man suffer as one of Christ's Asses, let
him not be ashamed. But how ridiculous this would be, I leave to all that hold
the name of Christian as Venerable to determine: If this will not make a Quaker
to blush, what will?

2. But secondly, Besides those he mentions, I am persuaded he consulted as his
Oracle in this point, that famous Conjurer Cornelius Agrippa, who at the end of
his Book, called, The vanity of Sciences, gives the like ridiculous account of
a Christian, by comparing him to an Ass. But what have the Quakers gained by
this man's Book? He has proved them to be Asses, and he that took them to be
otherwise, was mistaken in them: And I am much afraid I shall find one property
of an Ass in W. L. which is given by a very Learned Author now living; his
words are these, (...) An Ass; some way or other (says he) it seems to be a
troublesome Beast by its name; for the root is (...) he was troublesome, and so
any Ass (tanquam Davus aliquis, perturbat omnia) troubles all where he comes.
But let the trouble be as great as it will, I will go on to prosecute my
purpose, and perform my promise, to bring him out of this Labyrinth, if I can.

1. W. L. says, They railed on them as the Spawn of SOCINUS, for denying the
Divinity.

2. But now (he says) they are faced about to oppose his Humanity: From whence
he draws this Conclusion, Either they are very unsettled, or T. H.
misunderstands them. And till this Dilemma be removed, it seems W. L. cannot go
forward: If this be the difficulty, I Will do him that kindness to remove it.

1. I do affirm, That in this point T. H. does not misunderstand them; for the
Quakers do say, That Christ is not a distinct Person without us. Geo. Whitehead
in Dip. pl. p. 13. says, Jesus Christ a Person without us is not Scripture
Language; but the Anthropomorphites, and Muggletonians. The Socinians tell us
of a personal Christ, and that the Man Christ Jesus our Lord, has in Heaven a
place remote from Earth, a Humane body. But does he believe him to be the
Eternal God, whilst he imagines him to be a personal Christ? a Humane body so
limited and confined to a remoteness. Geo. Whitehead, Append. to Reas. against
Railing, p. 21. Therefore you see the difficulty lies not here.

2. If any persons did rail on them as the Spawn of Socinus, for denying the
Divinity, I suppose they were mistaken. But suppose they should have said, they
held that part of Socinus Doctrine, that says, Christ gave no plenary
Satisfaction to the Justice of God for the sins of men, herein they had not
wronged them: For while the Quakers believe Christ to be only God, he is not
capable to suffer death; it being absurd to imagine, that the Deity can become
Mortal: And because they deny the Body to be a part of the Christ, they are
forced to say, Christ never died, and so consequently, he did not satisfy
Justice thereby. So that W. L. may see, that the Quakers are not faced about to
oppose the Humanity, for they always opposed it; neither is T. H. mistaken
about their meaning.

Well, I perceive W. L. is got halfway out of this Labyrinth; for in his next
words he says, Let Us be charitable in these Mysterious points however, and
expound these Extremes as we do that betwixt Paul and James, Gal. 2. and Romans
4. with James 2. for as Faith and Works, so Divinity and Humanity must go
together. And what God has joined, let no man put asunder.

Answ. I wish the Quakers would but do so, and then this Controversy would
soon be ended. As to what he tells me of W. P. his words at the
Barbican-Meeting, as an instance, I say this to it, When W. P. has given us
some infallible Demonstration, that he did not speak equivocally in those
Expressions, then, and not till then, do they deserve my cognizance, any
further, than to answer him in the words of the Roman Orator, Quid attinet
gloriose loqui, nisi constanter loquare; Cic. l. 2. de Fin. p. 61. For what
avails it for a man to speak gloriously, if he be not constant, and sticks
not firmly unto that which he speaks. And I fear I may say of him, as it is
said of some others by Augustine, Hoc in labiis, non in cord dicere. Aug.
Epist. 20. Tom. 2. p. 588. They speak it but with their lips, they believe it
not with their hearts. But let us proceed to the next particular.

4. Pagan Principle.
THe fourth Charge is (says he,) That Christ Redeemed himself.

W. L. His Answer is, This our Friend T. H. confesses to be but his own
Consequence from their words, which he leaves to the judgment of others, (as
indeed all Consequences ought to be:) And I Will tell you what my weak
apprehension is of it, The sayings from whence he has drawn this Charge, I
confess are above my capacity: I do not understand, how Christ is both the
Election, and the Elect Seed: Nor how Abraham's old decayed Body, was a Type of
the Seed of Abraham. Now I begin to like my Author, and I should have done so
before, if he had spoke as honestly: I wish he may keep in this mind. A little
after he says, W. P. asserts the Redemption of the Seed, etc.

But then he endeavors to extenuate the fault, saying, It Is true, it looks
with a strange countenance to us, but yet there is some of even the very same
in Scripture; as that in Isa. 59. 16. He wondered there was no Intercessor;
therefore his own Arm brought Salvation to him: And in Chap. 63. 5. Mine own
Arm brought Salvation unto me, and my fury it upheld me. Whence faith W. P. in
Reas. against Railing, p. 63. It is no ways absurd that we affirm, That the end
of Gods manifesting himself in the flesh, was for the Redemption or Deliverance
of his holy life that was in man, as a small seed, even the smallest of seeds
that had been long vexed, grieved and pressed down by sin and iniquity: And in
page 64. This Seed was, and is pure for ever. Here, says W. L. He tells what
he means by Redemption of the Seed. In this he has fully cleared T. H. from
the guilt of Forgery: And I will also quit this point, when I have considered
the meaning of those two Texts urged to prove it, or rather to excuse W. P.

1. I take notice, That though W. P. and the Quakers deny the Scriptures to be
a Rule, yet they can make use of them in favor of themselves, when they think
they will serve for their purpose: But to pass that.

2. It is obvious to all that will take the pains to consider them, that these
Texts do not prove what they are brought for; i. e. That the end of Christ's
coming was to redeem himself: For as there is no such words spoken by the
Prophet, so it is contrary to the general scope and design of the Gospel, and
to the express words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the World to
save sinners, of whom I am chief: And that he came to seek and to save that
which was lost; not a lost God, and a lost Christ, as Geo. Keith says, but
lost and undone sinners.

3. If you will have my understanding of these two Scriptures, it is this; That
by Salvation is meant by a figure the person saved, and that it signifies no
more, but that he purchased them to himself, the Abstract being there put for
the Concrete, as is usual in Scripture; as in Phil. 3. 3. Circumcision is put
for the persons circumcised; and in 1 Cor. 12. 28. Helps, Governments, is put
for Helpers and Governors, with many more of the like kind that might be
mentioned: And therefore it is said in Isa. 49. 6. I also will give thee for a
Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the ends of the
earth; that is, My Salvation that I have appointed for them. For God, who is
always perfectly happy, and Blessedness it self, cannot stand in need of any
Salvation; yea, it is as great an absurdity as any the Quakers can be guilty
of, to affirm it. But from hence we may see, that the Light which is in them,
does teach them to have strange blasphemous thoughts of God; and sometimes out
of the abundance of their hearts their mouths do utter it.

5. Pagan Principle.
THe fifth Charge is, That the Quakers do deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of
Faith and Practice unto Christians. And T. H. brings in W. P. his words for
proof: Which are these,

We deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and Practice; In honor to that
Divine-Light that was the Author of them. W. P. in Reas. against Rail. page 48.

W. L. The Quakers sayings brought to prove this, I confess at a distance, or
to a hasty, or a prejudiced Reader seem to do it; but look seriously and
charitably on them, and there is as much truth in them as I desire. Ben. Furly
says, There is nothing in the Scripture that is a duty upon him, or which he is
obliged to obey, because there recorded; and so say I. He further
acknowledges, that Geo. Whitehead says, That it is Idolatry to call the Bible
the means of our knowing God, Dip. pl. p. 17.

Reply. Reader, W. L. has gone very far already toward the clearing T. H. But
hear what he says further, page 17. he there confesses, They seem to him and
others to speak slightly of the Scriptures, which (says he) I would not have
them do. But it seems they will not be ruled by him; for you have heard W. P.
his positive denial already. And for Ben. Furly, he says, It is the greatest
error in the World, that ever was invented, and the ground of all error, to
affirm, That the Scripture ought to be a Rule to Christians: Whatsoever is a
command to me, I must not receive from any man or thing without me; nay, not
the Scripture it self. And Edw. Buroughs in his Works, p. 62. says, He that
persuades people to let the Scriptures be the Rule of Faith and Practice, would
keep people in darkness. Now I hope T. H. is no Forger.

But whereas my Author does endeavor to cover their nakedness by some pitiful
Evasions that covering of his is too narrow, the Light in every man does see
their folly, and is above them; justly condemning them by the Light of the Holy
Scriptures, which they do wickedly reject: And their great pretenses to Light
and Knowledge, are seen to be the manifest effects of Darkness and Ignorance. To
the Law, and to the Testimony, because they speak against this Word, there can
be no Light in them.

Quest. W. L. asks this Question, What Scriptures do they disown for a Rule,
but such as relate to some external parts of Worship? and do not we our selves
do the same?

Answ. I answer, They deny the Scriptures, yea, as Geo. Whitehead phrases it
(as quoted by W. L. himself) the BIBLE, which contains all the Books of holy
Scripture both in the Old and New Testament, to be a Rule; and therefore it is
idle for him to talk as if it were some part of it only, that related to
external Worship.

Quest. But says W. L. Do not we our selves do the same?

Answ. There is one thing I would be satisfied in, what W. L. means by saying,
WE, US, and OUR in this Discourse? I suppose he does it on purpose to
insinuate, as if himself were a Baptist, because he has been so some years
ago: If that be his meaning, then I must tell him, it is unbecoming a man
professing Religion so to carry it; for I do declare, That he has not had
Communion with any Baptized Church in England, nor been owned by them, as
worthy their Communion, for several years, unless he has gone to any place
where he is unknown, and got it surreptitiously; which I think the method used
in such cases, among our Churches, will hardly admit him to do: And to my
knowledge, they have refused long ago to admit him to preach among them, because
of his corrupt and dangerous Principles. And yet the chief of the Quakers in a
scurrilous Book of theirs, in the Title Page, call him a Sober Baptist
Preacher; signifying to the World, that he is owned so now, which is a most
abominable untruth. But they seem to have no regard to Truth and Honesty,
neither with their Tongues nor Penns: For as Mr. Ives shows in his Questions
for the Quakers, That two of these Publishers, i. e. William Mead, and John
Osgood, have both of them (with others) took their Oaths in Chancery, one
before Sir William Beversham, and the other before Sir William Child; and yet
it is known to all, that this is the Quakers avowed Principle, That it is sinful
to swear at all, or in any case: For as Geo. Fox says in his Catechism, quoted
by Mr. Ives, p. 107. All that swear are out of the Power of Jesus Christ and
his Truth, and the Doctrine of the Apostles, etc. AND ARE FALSE CHRISTIANS,
etc. Now though they can rail against others at pleasure, yet if we do but tell
them of their faults, though it be with the greatest mildness that may be, they
presently fall a raging and raving, as if they were possessed with, and under the
power of some unclean Spirit. I will therefore leave them, and return to W. L.
whom I know to be a man that has adhered to, and contended for the Quakers
Principles for diverse years: And I would say thus much to W. L. by way of
advice, That he would either be what he pretends to be, or profess to be what
he is. Why do thou halt between two Opinions? Be in earnest, and don't trifle
thus about Religion. God is a jealous God, and he is very angry with Lukewarm
Professors, but more with Apostates. Take heed to thy self, and to the Holy
Scriptures; for thereby thou may be made wise to Salvation, through faith in
Christ: And if thou shall reject the same, know of a truth, that Gods Word will
certainly stand against thee for evil; for I perceive thou have drunk down too
large a draught of their poisonous Doctrines, as is manifest in this very
instance under consideration (besides many other;) for thou say, There is as
much truth in this Position, That the Scriptures are no Rule of Faith and
Practice unto Christians, as thou desire. Where is then the difference
between W. L. and a Quaker? But we shall find much more of this in his Book.

There is some other rambling nonsensical Discourse under this head, which I
shall pass with this Observation upon it:

1. That W. L. confesses T. H's. Charges, are matters of Opinions.

2. W. L. says, We read of no punishment denounced against men, nor rewards
given for their Opinions at the last day.

3. That if W. L. has no reward from the Quakers, for this service he has
done for them, in contending about Opinions, he is like to have none in the
last day.

4. That a man may hold and maintain the most wicked and abominable Opinions
that are in the World, though never so Atheistical and Antichristian, and not
be condemned for it at the last day.

But sure W. L. forgets, The corrupt Principles, lead to corrupt Practices; as
he will certainly find this corrupt Principle will do (if prosecuted) in
denying the Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith and Practice.

Do but debauch a man's Conscience with wicked Principles, and you will quickly
see him a man of a debauched Conversation. Why does God appoint the Gospel to
be preached? Surely, besides its Office in the revelation of himself and Son;
it is, that by it we might come to have an evil opinion of the ways of sin, and
so forsake them: And by presenting God therein as an Holy God, and the Beauty,
Glory, and Excellency of Holiness, we might come to have our minds influenced
thereby, fall into a love and liking of it, which begets holy Principles in us,
and so leads us to a holy Life. And herein lies much of that difference,
betwixt the obedience of a man that is merely Moral, and one that is
Evangelical: The one being taught by the Law of Nature, does that which is good
for the matter of it; the other, as he is farther enlightened, does not only
obey in doing more, but in all the parts of his obedience he acts from higher
Principles, and to a more noble end. But whilst others are slighting good
Principles, I desire to prize and improve them for the honor of God, and my
own Salvation; to believe and obey as God has commanded in the Holy Scriptures.

6. Pagan Principle.
THe sixth charge is, That the speaking of the Spirit in any, is of greater
Authority than the Scriptures. W. L. His Answer is, There is no reason in my
opinion for this Charge; for the saying brought to prove it is thus, That which
was spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the
Scriptures, (and Chapters are) and greater. Geo. Whitehead's Serious Apol. p.
49.

Reply. A man may see how dark the eyes of this man's understanding are become,
that he should acknowledge, that G. W. speaks the very words that T. H. charges
upon them, and yet can see no reason for this Charge: But I hope he can see
that this proves T. H to be no Forger.

W. L. Having confessed the Charge, he goes to excuse it by saying, That the
addition of these words, [and greater] will easily make any moderate man to
believe, G. W. means in some cases it may be greater.

Answ. The Question that was put will inform us of his meaning; i. e. Do you
esteem of your speakings to be of as great Authority as any Chapter in the
BIBLE? Now both these words are in the Quakers Answer, Of as great Authority as
the Scriptures (and Chapters) are, and greater; though W. L. has the civility
to leave out (and chapters are) I know not for what cause, unless it were to
introduce that instance he gives, on purpose to evade the force of T. H. his
evidence: But I will not let it slip.

W. L. says, And that we cannot deny! for if one of T. H. or I. G 's. Sermons,
should at any time make a greater impression upon you or I, than ever any
Scripture did; may we not lawfully say, That the Spirit of Truth speaking in
either of these men, was of greater Authority to us, that is, wrought more
powerfully upon us by them, than by the Scriptures.

Answ. To this I would make this answer:

1. That W. L. mistakes the Question exceedingly; for it is not about the
influence, but the Authority, which the Scripture has over us as a Rule.

2. That W. L. supposes by these expressions, that T. H. and I. G. do not
expound the Holy Scriptures in their Sermons: Which is a false Supposition.

3. And from thence he concludes, That the influences their Sermons have upon
the Consciences of their Auditors, is not from the Power and Authority of God's
Word, but of their own sayings.

4. Whereas he supposes, the Spirit of Truth speaks by these men: I readily
grant it, but not exclusive of, but in conjunction with the Doctrine they
preach, agreeable to the Holy Scriptures.

5. Therefore I conclude, That whatever good effect their Doctrine has upon
the Souls of men, for their Conversion and Salvation, it is wrought by those
words they deliver unto us; not as they are the words of men taken abstractedly
(for as such, they can have no such Efficacy) but as they are indeed the Word
of God, which effectually works in them that believe. Thus all men may see
this instance serves not to the purpose for which he intended it.

Quest. But says W. L. What need we fear any dangerous Consequences attending
this saying? so long as they agree with us in this, That every Spirit speaking
contrary to plain Scripture is false.

Answ. This man is very apt in drawing fale sSuppositions: Do the Quakers that
deny the Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith and Practice, make it the Standard to
try Spirits by? and conclude all to be false that speak contrary thereunto? No,
if they had done that, or would yet do it, they would see themselves to be
false Teachers, no Christians, but Impostors: Their Principles and Practices
being contrary to Holy Scripture, and the Rule of Christianity therein
contained.

7. Pagan Principle.
THe Seventh Charge is, That is no Command from God to me, which God has given
by way of Command to another: Neither did any of the Saints act by the Command
which was to another. Every one obeyed their own Command.

W. L. He says, There is no great difficulty nor danger in this; for it is very
true in one sense, and as false in another, and Charity will always take the
best.

Reply. There is so great danger in it, that it leaves all men without a Rule
for their Faith and Practice: For if I am to obey none of those Commands given
by God to others, and recorded in Scripture for our Instruction; and there be
no new Revelation for the Rule of my Faith and Practice, then are all men
wholly destitute of a Rule; and yet this is the very case. And whereas he would
salve it, by distinguishing between one Command and another, and allowing the
Quakers a liberty to pick and choose, obey what they list, and leave the rest
undone: This may not be allowed by the Quakers themselves; for they confess,
that the Scriptures were all given forth by the same Spirit, and therefore must
needs be of equal Authority in those Commands they enjoin upon us as our duty.

Object. I know no Objection lies against this, but the Quakers affirming, They
have immediate Revelation for the Rule of their Faith and Practice.

Answ. I answer, It Is easy to affirm any thing: But that they cannot prove it
is evident, not only from the want of sufficient Testimony at all times, when
they have been desired to prove it; but particularly, for that at the late
Dispute in their own Meeting House in Wheelers-street, they were not able to
give any other Demonstration of it, but what a Turk or Impostor might give, or
pretend too, equal with them. But if they think they can do it; when they have
further consulted one another about it, I will give them a longer time, that
they may fetch in what other Auxiliaries they have: for I perceive the Light
within them cannot supply them with sufficient Demonstration; for if it could,
they had that to have been Geo Keith's Dictator in Wheelers-street. In the mean
time I would ask W. L. a few Questions upon his Distinction.

1. Why he should say, That the Quakers, except against some particular
Commands, as not belonging to them; as that Command to the Jews, To anoint
their heads when they fasted; that to the young man, To sell all, and give to
the poor; and that to Paul, To go to Rome. Whereas it is manifest, the Quakers
say, That not any one of the Commands in Scripture concern them: That the
Scripture is no Rule to them.

2. Why he should say, That no Quaker will say these Commands, Swear not at
all, Love your Enemies, Quench not the Spirit, etc. concerns not them, because
they were spoken to others. Whereas he knows, they do so confidently affirm,
That those are no Commands to them, that were given by God to others, and
recorded in the Scriptures.

3. If the Scripture be no Rule, how comes the Quaker to know, that it is a sin
to Swear, and a virtue not to Swear at all? He must not say, Because it is
written in Matthew. 5. Swear not at all; for that Command was given to those that
lived 1600 years ago; and therefore that can be no Command to them: For Edw.
Buroughs says in his works, page 47. That is no Command from God to me, which
he commands to another: Neither did any of the Saints we read of in Scripture,
act by the Command which was to another, etc. They obeyed every one their own
Command.

4. If it be a sin as the Quaker says, To take any Oath, how comes it then to
pass, that the Quakers do frequently go to Law with their Neighbors, and
employ men, yea, give them money to come in and swear for them: And also, when
others cannot be accepted in their stead, Why do some of the chief Quakers in
London take Oaths themselves? Surely if your Principle be true, both these
Practices are Abomination to the Lord. Now with what face of Truth or Honesty
can these men censure others, and do the same things themselves?

5. How can the Quakers tell what Spirit it is they must receive, must not
quench the motions of, must be taught and instructed by, and that those things
it teaches them are true? What Rule is there to distinguish it from all false
Spirits? that so all men may know what Spirit they are to follow, and what to
reject: If these things be not discovered by the Light of the Holy Scriptures,
how can they be known? If they must be examined by the Light thereof? then the
Scriptures must be acknowledged to be our Rule, and the Commands therein
binding to us, notwithstanding all that the Quakers say to the contrary.

8. Pagan Principle.
THe Eighth Charge is, That Justification by that Righteousness which Christ
fulfilled for us, wholly without us, is a Doctrine of Devils.

W. P's. Answer is thus, And indeed this we deny, (viz. Justification by the
Righteousness which Christ fulfilled in his own Person for us, wholly without
us:) And boldly affirm it in the name of the Lord, to be a Doctrine of Devils,
and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which does now Deluge the World. Will.
Penn. Serious Apol. p. 148.

Will. Lud. says, This makes a great noise; surely somewhat more than ordinary
moved W. P. to write at this rate: Herein he confesses the Charge, so that T.
H. is no Forger.

But first (says W. L.) let us calmly consider the terms, whereupon he does
express himself in favor of W. P.

W. L. This one word (...), serves for Justification and Righteousness all
along the New Testament; so that when we are said to be justified, it is all
one in my understanding as to be made just or righteous.

Reply. I will speak something to this, before I proceed any further: And
first, whereas he says, (...) serves for Justification and Righteousness all
along the New Testament; I hope he does not intend, that there is no other
words used to express it by; for I think that word is but seldom used in the
New Testament upon that occasion, but most frequently other words to express
the Spirits meaning by, as in Romans 5. 1. (...), Therefore being justified by
faith, verse. 16. it is (...), But the free gift is of many offenses unto
Justification. v. 18. (...), unto Justification of life. And Mr. Leigh in his
Critica Sacra p. 69. says thus upon that very word (...), Justitia, i. e.
Justice; in which sense he says, the word is often used, and brings in
Cornelius a Lapide speaking thus, Justitia ea quae est in nobis; and a little
after, Est ipsa animi integritas, sanctitas, and innocentia, per quam sancti
vivimus and placemus Deo vel bonis viris. So that it must be understood, to
respect that Integrity, Holiness and Innocence of the souls of good men, by
which they live a holy life, and please God. But this cannot be done, without
their persons be first acquitted of their former sins, by the Justification
they receive from Christ through believing.

1. But here I do distinguish between a Legal Righteousness, so as to obey
perfectly all that God requires at all times, both in thought, word and deed.

2. An Evangelical Righteousness, which is a sincere endeavor of the Soul to
do all that God requires; although by reason of the pravity of his nature, he
cannot attain it; which is accepted with God for Christ's sake, as if he had
perfectly done it.

3. And that Righteousness which Christ fulfilled for us in his own Person,
wholly without us; which was his keeping the Law perfectly in our stead, and
his suffering death for our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3. Christ died for OUR sins
according to the Scriptures.

Now this is imputed to us, if we believe, Romans 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. and 22, 23, 24,
25. And Christ is made unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. And in this sense
he is called, The Lord OUR Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. And therefore it is said,
Christ was made sin for US, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He bare OUR sins in his own body on
the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. The truth is, if Legal Righteousness, and Justification
THROVGH Christ, according to the Gospel, be the same thing, then the Quaker is
right in denying Justification by that Righteousness Christ fulfilled for us,
both Actively and Passively, in his own Person, wholly without us: But then the
Apostle Paul was mistaken, who says, A man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: Even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works
of the Law* for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified -- for if
Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2. 16, 21. But
by this I perceive, That the Quakers rather than they will own Justification by
that Righteousness Christ fulfilled for us, wholly without us, they will avoid
that absurdity laid upon that Opinion by the Apostle, i. e. That then Christ
died in vain; by affirming, That Christ, in respect of himself, never died. But
why I may not from hence conclude, The Quakers professing Christianity to be
vain, I know not: If W. P. can demonstrate the contrary, I desire he would. But
let us hear what W. L. has to say further touching this thing.

W. L. Now that no man can make himself so, or that he can be so without
Christ's Righteousness; and also, that this act of justifying us, or making us
just, is of the free Grace of God, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, I believe it is granted by us and them.

Answ. If by Us, W. L. mean, according to his former false Insinuation, the
Baptists and himself, (though indeed he is not one of that number, neither can
he be so accounted:) Then I answer, That those words expressed by him, if as
honestly intended as plainly expressed, is that the Baptists and other
Protestants own. But as I know the Quakers do not own it, I have reason to
suspect W. L. also: For in a certain Discourse he had with R. S. a good Friend
of mine about two years ago, he pleaded for a sinless Perfection here in this
life (as it is opposite to that Imputed Righteousness of Christ, made Ours by
believing) as the way by which he expected to be justifified. Whereupon R. S.
asked him, Whether he had yet attained it? W. L. told him, he had not.
Whereupon R. S. replied, You do not know, but you may die before you have
attained it; how then can you think to stand justified before God? It cannot be
by your own personal Righteousness; for that you confess you have it not. I
should be amazed to hear him utter such expressions, so contrary thereunto as
these are in his Book, but that I consider he may have learned the Art of
Equivocation from W. P. by his often converse with him.

But now I am upon this Head, I would make so bold as to ask W. P. and the
Quakers one Question.

Quest. Suppose they do attain to a state of sinless Perfection here in this
life; yet seeing many of them have lived in a course of sinning twenty, thirty,
or forty years before they attain it; What must make Compensation for the sins
they have committed in the time past of their lives?

If they shall say, Their own Obedience which they perform to the Light within
them, after they are thus perfect: That is to suppose, the good deeds they
perform in the latter part of their lives, should make Compensation for their
former evil deeds: Which will proclaim to all intelligent men, not only that
they hold Justification by their own personal Righteousness, exclusive of
Christ's Righteousness, which is to be justified by Works in the strictest
Notion (being the next Principle we are to enquire into;) but also, that they
do hold that other Popish Principle, To believe that they can do Works of
Supererogation. And yet this Author is much displeased, that any should suppose
the Quakers do derive their Pedigree from Rome.

W. L. Goes on to excuse his beloved Friend W. P. by telling us, That forasmuch
as many Teachers so word this Doctrine of Justification, as the weak are
thereby misled into a vain hope, that God will justify them, or look upon them
as just and righteous THROUGH Christ at the last day, though they live and die
in sin: Hence (says he) so great a zeal might arise in W. P. against such
Expositions of Scripture-Justifications and chiefly against this phrase,
THROVGH CHRIST.

Answ. To which I answer, If W. P. has so great a zeal risen up in him,
CHIEFLY against this phrase, THROVGH CHRIST: Then it follows, That if we should
word the Doctrine of Justification, so as to please Will. Penn, we must say,
That men are justified WITHOUT CHRIST: But I hope I shall never make that one
of the Articles of my Creed.

But farther (W. L. says) These words, Wholly without us, may very well
satisfy us, That they level not at Scripture-Justification, but at our
conceits of it.

Reply. Then it seems W. L. concludes, That Justification by that Righteousness
Christ fulfilled for us, wholly without us, is not a Doctrine agreeable to
Scripture, but a conceit. I perceive now T. H. is no Forger; for W. L. does not
only own the words to be spoken by W. P. but owns the Doctrine of the Quakers
about it: And yet forsooth, we must be very tender of calling this man a
Quaker: Howbeit, I conclude, he avoids the name for no other Reason, but that
he might be the more serviceable in propagating their cause. An excellent
Stratagem!

As for what he says, about the Doctrine of Justification, springing from the
Doctrine of Predestination, misunderstood, and as held by Calvin, Beza,
Piscator, Synod of Dort, etc. As I do not believe it in the sense that I have
defined it, and as Protestants generally hold it: So for those men's Opinions
about the Decree of Absolute and Irrespective Reprobation, I shall leave it to
them whose concern it is to clear themselves of it; for it is none of mine at
this time.

9. Pagan Principle.
W. P. Says, His ninth Charge against the Quakers is, That Justification is by
Works. Here W. L. has followed his own advice; viz. To leave out words most
material in this Charge: For the words laid down by T. H. are;

That the Quakers hold Justification by Works in the strictest Notion: And
brings these proofs out of the Quakers own Books.

God accepts not any, where there is any failing; or who do not fulfill the Law,
and answer every Demand of Justice, Edw. Burrough's Works, p. 33. And in Answer
to Quest. 14. Was not Abraham justified by Works? We must not conceive that his
personal Offering, was not a justifying Righteousness; but that God was pleased
to count it so. Nor was there any Imputation of another Righteousness to
Abraham: But on the contrary, his personal Obedience was the ground of that
Imputation. Therefore that any should be justified by another Righteousness
imputed, and not inherent in him, is both ridiculous and dangerous. W. P. Reas.
against Rail. p. 80. Now I hope T. H. is no Forger. But let us hear what W. L.
has to say.

W. L. This is almost of the same nature as the former; and it is a greatdeal of
pity to Heathenize men for preaching up Good-works, especially in a day when
they are so scarce.

Reply. Rarely well guest. Is T. H. finding fault with men's preaching up good
Works? Surely that is none of the Question: Neither does he Heathenize any for
so doing, that is no part of the Charge; nay, he does not so much as mention the
words Heathen, Pagan, or Pagan Principle, in all his twelve Charges. I wonder
how W. L. did, to give them so right a name: The honor of that belongs to
himself, and not to me nor T. H. But seeing so great a Friend of theirs as W.
L. is, has so often called them so, I hope they will not find fault with me,
for writing after his Copy.

As for what he is pleased to say, of his own renouncing meriting by Works; and
that he thinks no rational Papist can be so weak to imagine, that forty or
fifty years spent all in Good-works, nay forty or fifty thousand years, can
deserve Eternal Recompense of Reward; is no Argument to the contrary, but that
an infatuated Quaker may be of that mind: And why we should not think so of
them, till they have cleared themselves of it, by renouncing Edw. Buroughs,
Will. Penn, and their Books, with all others, who have asserted such Doctrines
as these, I see no Reason.

10. Pagan Principle.
THe tenth Charge is, That Christ fulfilled the Law ONLY as our Pattern.

The proof cited by T. H. is W. P.'s own words, For not the hearers of the Law
are just before God: But the doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13.
From whence (says W. P.) how unanswerably may I observe, Unless we become
doers of that Law, which Christ came not to destroy, but as our example to
fulfill, we can never be justified before God. Nor let any fancy, that Christ
has so fulfilled it for them, as to exclude their obedience from being
requisite to their acceptance, but ONLY as their Pattern. W. P. Sandy Found. p.
26.

W. L.'s Reply is, How T. H. puts an ill face upon an honest Sentence, and
repeats W. P.'s words as cited by T. H. and endeavors, according to his
accustomed manner, to excuse his great Friend W. P. but so faintly, that it
expires with the breath that names it: And being soon spent, he concludes in
these words, But take it at the worst, as in the Charge, though I will not
justify it so worded, and understood as T. H. does, yet methinks its too harsh
to reckon it Heathen Doctrine; I would rather have compared him to Apollos, and
wishing him a little more fully instructed in the ends of Christ's Life and
Death, have passed it by. But before I pass it with you, give me leave to ask a
few Questions.

1. Why you say, This is an honest Sentence of W. P. and yet afterward say,
you will not justify it: Sure you are very inconsistent with your self.

2. Why you say, T. H. puts an ill face upon it, when he repeats W. P.'s words
as you your self do, and as they are in his Book.

3. Why you say, its too harsh to reckon it Heathen Doctrine, when the word
Heathen is not so much as mentioned by T. H. Sure W. L. has the word Heathen
by Inspiration, or else he would never hit of it so often as he does.

4. Why should you compare Will. Penn to Apollos? Do you think him so great a
man for Water Baptism, when he denies the Baptism both of John the Baptist,
Christ and his Apostles, who were all for Baptism in water.

5. Why do you suppose that W. P. wants to be more fully instructed in the ends
of Christ's Life and Death? Is it possible, that you should imagine the chief
Freacher of, and Disputer for the Quakers, to be ignorant of the ends of
Christ's Life and Death? If so, what Opinion must you needs have of the
ignorance of many hundreds among them, that are men of an Orb much inferior to
W. P. Surely they must be ignorant indeed.

6. But pray tell me, how it is possible for any Quaker (admitting their Notions
to be true) to be ignorant of any thing that is knowable, and necessary to be
known? seeing they say, They have immediate Revelation for the Rule of their
Faith and Practice; and could have known all that is in the Scripture, if it
had never been written there, ONLY by the Teachings of the Light within them.
But I wonder they should be so ignorant, as not to know the Author of the
Quakers Quibbles: Sure they need not have come so often to the Bookseller to
have known, if the Light within them could have taught them all things.

If they shall object and say, It is matter of Fact.

I answer, So are many things written in Scripture; as, the names of persons,
the places of their dwellings, things done by them, etc. and some of them five
thousand years ago: And shall I think they can know things done at so great a
distance, seeing they are so ignorant as not to know things that are done at
present?

11. Pagan Principle.
THe eleventh Charge against the Quakers is, That the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction, is Irreligious and Irrational.

T. H.'s Proof is out of W. P.'s Sandy Found. p. 22. where W. P. speaks thus,
Consequences (that is, from this Doctrine) Irreligious and Irrational; and
concludes one of his Consequences thus, O the Infamous Pourtaiture this
Doctrine draws of the Infinite Goodness! Is this your Retribution? O Injurious
Satisfactionists! Thus says W. P. But what says W. L.

W. L. Substract but the word Irreligious, and there have been others, neither
Quakers, nor Heathens, nor Illiterate men, that have thought the common
understanding of Christ's Satisfaction, as between Creditor and Debtor, to be
Irrational; and therefore have Queried, how Free-Forgiveness, and
Full-Satisfaction can stand together? I perceive T. H. is no Forger in this
neither. But to Reply to W. L.

1. As to what he says, Substract but the word IRRELIGIOUS, etc.

Answ. I answer, Take away but the word IRRATIONAL too, and then the Doctrine
of Christ's Satisfaction is: But who knows what? But W. L. may remember it is
put in by W. P. and therefore the word irreligious is not to be subtracted:
for he speaks by immediate Inspiration, as G. Keith has lately attempted to
prove in a Public Dispute: And though he could not make it out, yet they would
have People believe it without proof; for they say they witness it, and that
may go very far with such ignorant men, as W. L. represents the Quakers to be.

2. But if W. L. had come to me for advice, when he had been writing on this
subject, I could have taught him a nearer way to the Wood than he has gone:
For if he had but taken away [Ir] from both the words, then it had been thus,
That the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is Religious and Rational: And if he
could but have persuaded his intimate Friend W. P. and the rest of the Quakers
to have believed it, then I would have persuaded T. H. to have subtracted the
whole Charge, and so the Dispute between him and them, as to this particular,
should have been ended. But I have cause to fear W. L. will not undertake that,
because he is so indifferent about it himself, saying, That for the sake of
more necessary Truths, he never contends about this. So that (it seems) his
speaking to it, is to gratify W. P.

12. Pagan Principle.
THe twelfth and last Principle (says W. L.) T. H. charges on the Quakers is,
That this body which dies, shall not rise again.

The proofs T. H. brings to justify himself in the truth of this Charge. are
as follows:

Geo. Whitehead asserted, in the hearing of many witnesses, That this body
shall not rise again.

Such a Resurrection is inconsistent with Scripture, Reason, and the Belief of
all men right in there wits. W. Pen. Reas. ag. Rail. p. 133.

For shame let us never make so much stir against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; for the absurdity of that is rather outdone than equalled,
by this Carnal Resurrection. W. P. ib. p. 134.

The change which shall be is not of Accidents, but of Bodies. W. P. ib. p.
136. and in p. 138. He calls it a Barbarous Conceit.

From our denying the Resurrection of the Natural and Corruptible Body, etc. W.
P. Counterfeit Christian, p. 32.

Now I hope every one will be satisfied, That Mr. Hicks is no Forger, Liar,
Slanderer, etc. as the Lawless Quakers have allowed themselves a liberty
(untruly, and without just cause given) so to call him: And I am much
persuaded, the reason why they rail and rage thus furiously against him, is,
Because no one of them singly, nor the whole Body conjoined, know how to clear
themselves of those things he has charged upon them, without rejecting the
chief of their Ministry; whose Tongues and Pens have so often asserted these
pernicious Doctrines: But that I perceive they are not yet willing to do. But
let us hear how well W. L. can bring up the Rear, in excusing their denial of
that great Fundamental Principle of the Christian Religion, The Resurrection of
the Body.

W. L. says, Of all the Articles against the Quakers, none has made many
honest, serious People more afraid of them, nor the vulgar more rail at them,
than this.

1. As for the vulgars railing, it concerns not me, they should have forbore
divulging such dangerous Notions.

2. But whereas he says, This Principle of theirs (in denying the Resurrection
of this Body that dies) has made many honest, serious People more afraid of
them, than any other Article they hold: I think it has not been without just
cause, from the perniciousness thereof. And I have good Authority to justify
me therein; for the Apostle Paul says, If there be no Resurrection of the
dead, then is Christ not risen: And if Christ be not risen, then is our
Preaching vain, and your Faith is also vain, and ye are yet in your sins: Then
they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. And if in this life
only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. These are some
of those evil and dangerous Consequences, charged by the Apostle Paul upon this
very Doctrine (as maintained by the Quakers) in denying the Resurrection of
this Body from the dead; as you may see at large in 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, etc. But let us hear W. L. speak his thoughts about it.

W. L. says, But to tell you freely my thoughts about it, there is less cause
for it upon this account, than any of the former.

Reply. I hope those that read this will be fully satisfied, that there is no
more difference between the Quakers and W. L. in this Article, than there is
between Four-pence and a Groat, which (with us in England) is the same piece of
Money. But has W. L. no way left to excuse his Friends at the last gasp, now
their Cause is expiring? Yes, yes, don't think you shall find him without a
shift.

1. W. L. Flies to what he supposes the Charge suggests; viz. That there is no
Resurrection; insomuch (says he) that I have heard lewd men swear, and curse
them for denying the Resurrection.

Reply. But here W. L. evades the Question, which is so plain, that it needs
none of his Suggestions to darken it. Why don't he answer to that? For the
Quaker says, This Body that dies, shall not rise again. Speak out, and be not
afraid to answer, now it comes to the point.

2. But says W. L. Does not their exposing themselves to all the miseries of
this life, confute the charge?

Answ. I answer, No: For the Sadducees were men that professed Religion, in
opposition to the common received Opinion among the Jews, and so consequently
were exposed to sufferings; and yet they denied the Resurrection of this Body,
and the Being of Angels, which are Spirits, etc. Acts 23. 8. For it is evident,
a man may give all his goods to the poor, and his body to be burned, and have
no love to God, nor be truly Religious; 1 Cor. 13. 3. And what think you of the
Esseans, a Sect among the Jews, of whom Josephus reports, That nothwithstanding
they denied the Resurrection of the body, saying, that it is corruptible, and
that the matter thereof is not perpetual: Yet could they not be forced to
revile their Lawmakers, or to eat any forbidden meats, by breaking off the
members of their bodies, fiery Torments, and all kind of Tortures which were
laid upon them: Nay, in the very midst of their griefs and pains, they scoffed
at their Tormentors; and laughing, joyfully yielded up their Souls, as though
they hoped to receive them again. Joseph. Of the Wars of the Jews, Lib. 2. p.
616.

3. Whereas it may be objected. That they would be more Immoral in their lives,
if they expected no Resurrection of the body.

Answ. I answer, That the Sadducees were men of such strict lives, that it is
reported, they had their name Sadducees from (...) Tzidek, which signifies,
Just or Righteous; and yet they denied the Resurrection from the dead, Matthew.
22. 23. And for those Esseans beforementioned, if he will read Josephus, he
may find, that they were exceeding zealous for the Law, and stricter in their
lives, than the Quakers are by many degrees: It Is too long to be here inserted.
But if W. L. will take the pains to read that Book of Josephus I have
mentioned, Chap. 7. he will find what I say to be true. Besides, it is well
known, that there were men among the Heathen, full of Moral Virtues, and men of
great strictness in their lives, and yet agreed with the Quakers in this, That
this body shall not rise again.

Quest. If that be not the Resurrection intended, what then is it that shall
rise from the dead?

W. L. answers, The Apostle has given us as good an account of this Doctrine as
we may desire, and to that they refer us. But suppose (says he) they should
tell us, This very Body should not rise, what care I, etc.

Reply. 1. I am well satisfied with the account the Apostle Paul gives of the
Resurrection in 1 Cor. 15. but not at all informed of the Quakers meaning about
it, by their referring us thither; because I know they can Allegorize some of
the plainest Texts in the Bible, and why may they not be supposed to do so by
this?

2. I cannot possibly understand, that the Quakers intend the same Resurrection
the Apostle does in 1 Cor. 15. for he tells us, That the same body that is
buried (which he calls sown) in corruption, shall be raised in incorruption.
Which agrees with the saying of our Savior, The hour is coming, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: They
that have done good, to the Resurrection of life; and they that have done evil,
to the Resurrection of damnation, John 5. 28, 29. As also with the Prophet
Daniel, And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some
to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12. 2.
with many more that might be alleged; all which do plainly prove the
Resurrection we contend for. But the Quaker says, Such a Resurrection is
inconsistent with Scripture, Reason, and the Belief of all men right in their
wits. Will. Penn. Reas. ag. Rail. p. 133.

3. But what does W. L. mean when he says, He is willing to part with this
Body for a better? and that he will never be angry with him who promises and
assures him a pound of Gold, for a pound of Clay?

1. If the same body shall not be raised, as the Quakers say, then he cannot
mean the glorious form of this body, which shall be made incorruptible,
glorious, and full of majesty, like to the glorious Body of Christ, with which
they shall shine forth as the Brightness of the Sun, in the Kingdom of their
Father, Phil. 3. 21. Matthew. 13. 43.

2. If he means, That this body which goes into the grave shall rot there, and
not be raised and reunited to the same soul: But that instead thereof, some
other matter shall be formed into a body, and possessed with the soul: This is
not to be allowed; for it is highly rational, That if any body be raised and
reunited to the soul, it should be the same body (because the Scripture
declares, That the end of the Resurrection of Man is, that he might receive a
reward according to the deeds done in the body, 2 Cor. 5. 10. and, that the
Righteous shall go into life Eternal, Matthew. 25. ult.) Seeing it was the same
body in which these good deeds were done, why should not the same body receive
the Reward together with the same soul? why must there be a new, another body
to enjoy it, made of they know not what?

3. If this be so, Then whether it be not most absurd to imagine (seeing some
men shall be damned) that one body should commit the sin, and another body,
that never sinned, should suffer Eternal punishment in Hell, for those sins
another committed? This is to condemn the innocent, and acquit the guilty: Both
which are an Abomination to the Lord: And the Quakers can no ways avoid this
Absurdity, unless they will say, That no man shall be damned: Which I take to
be the necessary Consequence of their affirming, The Soul to be a part of God's
Being; and their denying, The Resurrection of the Body.

4. If so, then all that W. L. has done, is but Quibling; for all the
Resurrection he and they must be understood to intend, is only within men while
they are in this World. And in truth, their Opinion about the Resurrection (as
worded by some of their noted Teachers) is this:

1. The Resurrection of the unjust, is sins rising in man, and getting above
the Light.

2. The Eternal Judgment, is the Lights condemning and reproving for sin.

3. And as any one comes to hearken to the Teaching thereof, the Light comes to
rise up in him: Which (say they) is the Resurrection of the just.

Now from hence they infer, That they are in the Resurrection, and past the
Eternal Judgment, even in this life; and that it is not they themselves, that
shall rise, but the Light within them: Which Light (say they) is sufficient to
lead them into all Truth, cleanse them from all sin, and will Eternally save
them.

Thus you see that W. L. has discharged T. H. of Forgery in all these Twelve
Pagan Principles of the Quakers. But how the Quakers can clear themselves of
Lies and Forgery, would do well to be considered; seeing they tell T. H. that
he has belyed them, when he has not charged them with any thing in all these
particulars, but what is truly chargeable upon them: As appears by this brief
Account, and W. L.'s Confession under each Head.

But says Geo. Whitehead, I hope you have considered that moderate Account
which your Friend and Brother W. L. has given in his Book, entitled, The
Twelve Pagan Principles or Opinions, etc. and what a serious Check it
contains to Thomas Hicks, for his immoderation, and unfair dealing. G. W. in
The Quakers Plainness detecting Fallacy, p. 88. Now that there is no reason to
account him a Baptist, as G. W. does in these words, because they are the
persons to whom he writes, I will here insert a Testimony given under the hands
of two of the eminentest Baptists in those parts, where he has had his abode
for above seven years past; that in all that space of time, he has not been a
Member with them, nor any of the Churches to whom they belong, much less a
Sober Baptist-Preacher, as the Quakers had the confidence to call him in the
Title Page of their Book, touching the Barbican-Meeting, October. 9. 1674.

THis is to certify, That WILLIAM LUDDINGTON has never been in Communion with
the Congregations in the Country to whom we belong, either in Buckinghamshire,
or the County of Hertford (which are the places in which he has lived for
above seven years last past) so as to partake with us in that Holy Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper.

Witness our hands, Tho. Monck. Tho. Heyward.
December. 1. 1674.
I have two things to tell the World, and I have done.

1. An Account of some Slanders, and Abuses of the Quakers cast upon me, for my
opposing their Doctrine.

2. Open and manifest Confessions of some Eminent in the Quakers Ministry,
concerning the Man Christ Jesus; and, His dying for our sins.

1. As touching the first of these: I being at the Bull and Mouth, May 8. 1674.
and demanding of them to prove that Great Principle of theirs, which Geo.
Whitehead was so baffled about in his Dispute with Mr. Ives in the Marketplace
at Croyden in the County of Surrey, April 24. 1674. before hundreds of people.
The Question was this:

Quest. Whether every man that comes into the World, is enlightened with the
Light of Christ?

They did then affirm it: But when they saw they could not prove it, I was so
pulled, struck, and abused, that I was not able to keep my standing, and attend
the Discourse: They also made such a Bawling on purpose to prevent my being
heard, that it was impossible to hear what was said: And at last to prevent any
further Discourse, one of them concludes the Meeting in prayer.

A Gentleman that was a stranger being present, and observing the violence they
offered to my person, came up into the Gallery where I was, and said, Sir, I
perceive, that if a man comes to dispute with these men, he had need to take a
Guard with him to secure his person. And as we went out, one cries out, Children
of Babylon, Brats of Babylon; another, Thou art a Blasphemer, etc.

I being there again, May 15. 1674. to hear whether they had any thing further
to say to that Question beforementioned: And when their Friend in the Ministry
had done, and I began to speak to the Question, one that is called a Friend in
their Ministry, whose name is Samuel Thornton, thrust in between me and the
post where I stood, and another Quaker crushed me up on the other side; the
Rail of the Gallery was before me, and a crowd of Quakers at my back thronging
upon me, and my leg between the Banisters, which were turned with knobs; he
pitched his knee against mine, and his elbow against my breast, leaning upon me
with his weight; and I having no liberty to give way, my breath was in danger
of being forced out of my body, and my shirt wet with sweat, as if it had been
dipped in water: And not being able to endure it, upon giving notice to the
people, there came up some very lusty men, that were not Quakers, and relieved
me.

After this, when Sam. Thornton saw he was disappointed of his purpose he
railed upon me, saying, Thou art a Thief, a Liar, a Murderer, a Devil, Thy name
is Cain; and then cried out with a loud voice, Cain, Cain, Cain, Cain, Cain,
just like a man bereft of his Reason. One said, I was a Drunkard; another Thou
art drunk every day in the week. I not knowing what opinion some might have of
me, that did not know my Conversation, asked what they meant by saying, I was a
Drunkard? One of them answered, Thou art drunk with words, besotted with
ignorance, etc. Now if these men can allow themselves a liberty thus to rail
against one, at so desperate a rate, against whom they can prove none of those
things whereof they accuse him, and when they have done, excuse it by saying,
We meant Allegorically: Who then can have his Reputation secured from these
men's virulent and reproachful Tongues?

I being at the same Meeting place some time after, and hearing such
expressions about Christ, which had a tendency to beguile the ignorant: When he
that was speaking had done, I offered to discourse soberly with them about it;
which they refused. Whereupon I told the People, that the Quakers held these
Opinions; viz.

1. That Jesus Christ is not a distinct Person without us.

2. That Christ, in respect of himself, never died.

3. That the Blood of Christ, shed upon the Cross, without the gates of
Jerusalem, is of no more value in point of Justification, than the blood of
another man.

4. That the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, which he fulfilled for us in his
own Person, wholly without us, is a Doctrine of Devils.

The Quakers refusing to answer, notwithstanding I offered to make good each of
these particulars them; I told the People, that I hoped they would believe what
I had charged upon them; i. e. That they were afraid to bring their Doctrines
to be tried by the Light of the Holy Scriptures; like those spoken of by
Tertullian, whom he calls by the name of Lucifugae Scripturarum, Men that fly
from the Light of the Scripture, as the Bats do into their holes, when the Sun
appears.

Whereupon Francis Campfield stood up and said, Thou art my Neighbor, and I
know thee: And then made a speech to the people, telling them, He desired they
would take no notice of what I said, for I was somewhat distempered in my head.
Giving a strong Indication to the people, That I was a distracted man, and so
not fit to ue discoursed with.

I told him, I hoped the people would not believe what he had said; but in case
they should, if the Quakers would be pleased to appoint time and place, I would
procure a man that should make good all that I had charged upon them, whom they
should acknowledge to be in his right wits: But they refused to accept of that
offer also.

I being at the Barbican-Meeting, October. 9. 1674. fell into some Discourse with
a Quaker: Another that stood by, seeing his Friend at a loss, pulled him by the
arm, saying, That I was a distracted man, or to that effect. The Quaker I was
talking with, cried out, Alas for him, is this he! I told him he was mistaken,
for (I thank the Lord) I am not in that condition. He presently replied, I was
so, for Francis Campfield had declared me so to be in the Meeting at the Bull
and Mouth. By this the Reader may see, what subtle Artifices these men make use
of to evade the force of an Argument. What did all this signify to the matter
in debate? was it not a mere shift?

2. Open and manifest Confessions of some Eminent in the Quakers Ministry,
concerning the Man Christ Jesus, and, His dying for our sins.

1. I and many others, being present at Mr. Mekins, a Dyer in Oldstreet, we
heard Josiah Cole affirm, That that Man which was born of the Virgin Mary, and
suffered at Jerusalem without the gate, etc. is not the Christ, the Savior of
the World. And he would needs undertake the proof it: And having agreed
beforehand, that the Scripture should be the Rule to try that present
Controversy by (though he would not own it as the Rule of Faith) he attempted
to prove it as follows:

J. C. It is written Isa. 45. 21, 22. I am God, and there is none else, a just
God and a Savior, there is none besides me: From whence he drew this
inference; If God be the Savior, and there is none besides him, then that Man
is not the Savior.

It was replied, That Christ was God as well as man; and therefore his Argument
was insufficient.

Quest. It was asked J. C. Whether the Light or Spirit in that Man, was not the
Christ? And he answered, Yea, it is so.

Rep. His Respondent replied, A Spirit has no flesh to be broken, nor blood to
be shed; therefore if his Notion were true, Christ never died.

Josaih Cole did affirm, (with a great deal of seeming seriousness) That the
true Christ, in respect of himself, never died.

A Friend of mine being present, one Mr. J. D. brake forth into Admiration,
saying, He says Christ never suffered. There being about eight of the chief
Quakers in London present, one of them said, Thou lie, he did not say Christ
never suffered (for he suffers in thee and others) but he said, Christ never
dyed.

I met with Josiah Cole twice afterward, and both times discoursed with him
about that point; and he was very positive and peremptory in it, asserting with
the greatest confidence imaginable, That Christ never died.

At another time, being at Edw. Man's the Hosier, I and diverse others then
present, heard Patrick Livingstone (another owned in the Ministry) affirm, That
Christ, in respect of himself, never died, neither could he, because he was
only God: There was indeed a holy Body, which he (i. e. The Light in him) took
up, acted in for a time, and laid down again: But that Body was no part of the
Christ, but only a holy Body in which he was. I then brought that Scripture,
Luke 24. 39. to prove he had a Body, as well after, as before his Resurrection;
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me and see, for a
Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. But it seems this very
saying of our Savior was so distasteful to them, that about ten of the Quakers
cried out together, Blasphemy, Blasphemy, his Christ is a Christ of flesh and
bones; Blasphemy: And that without any Provocation thereunto; for I made no
Comment upon the words. And at the same time Charles Harris, another Eminent in
the Ministry, being asked, Whether that holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper was
now to be practiced? said, It Is written, If any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in and sup with him, etc. Rev. 3. 20. This is the Supper of
the Lord, we witness it: And about the Resurrection and Judgment to come he
said, I speak this from the Eternal God, That the Resurrection is come, the
Judgment is come, and I witness it. And this very well agrees with Isaac
Pennington's words, in his Book of Questions about Christ, p. 14. Now Friends,
if you would know or believe aright, you must believe in him who was with the
Father before the World was, who was the Savior, the Jesus, the Christ, from
Everlasting. This we firmly believe, etc. Yea, it is he to whom the name Jesus
and Christ did of right belong, before he took up the Body: For that which he
took upon him, was our garment, even the flesh and blood of our Nature, which
is of an earthly and perishing Nature: But he is of an Eternal Nature, and his
flesh, blood, and bones are of his Nature, viz. Eternal: For that which
redeems, that which is Jesus the Savior, came down from Heaven, page 20. que.
7. que. 8.

Reader, Not knowing how short my time may be, I thought good to leave this to
Posterity, lest I should not have such another opportunity: And will conclude
with that saying of the Apostle, Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these
things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own stedfastness: But grow in grace, and the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to him be glory, both now and for ever,
Amen, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.

AN APPENDIX.
SInce the finishing these Papers in answer to W. L. I have been earnestly
importuned to write a few lines touching that great Question about the Lord
Christ, as it relates to the Quakers Opinion: And to show who it is to whom the
name Christ does properly belong. And although I think my self a Child in the
knowledge of such Divine and Metaphysical Truths, compared with those Worthies
of our Age, whose parts and learned Acquirements may more amply fit them for
such a Work: Yet seeing they have hitherto omitted it, I shall speak something
to it; hoping it may be an occasion to set some abler Pen on work to discourse
more accurately upon this subject: And by polishing what I have more briefly
laid down, they may make the Truth appear more perspicuously in its own
Brightness and Splendour. And I will give you the Question, as it is laid down
by Mr. PENN in the Barbican-Meeting, and since printed, and published by some
of the chief Quakers in London, viz. W. Mead, J. Osgood, W. Shown, E. Man, S.
Newton, J. Claypool, W. Welsh.

W. P.'s Question is this, Was he the Christ of God before he was manifested in
the flesh?

Answ. I answer, He was never called the Christ of God before, but with respect
to what he was to be, when, and after he was manifested in the flesh.

To make this good, I shall use this method.

1. To explain what is meant by the word Christ.

2. To show that it is taken Relatively, is a name of Office, and as such
applied to him.

3. That this name cannot be properly and really applied to the Divine Nature,
taken Abstractively.

4. That it does properly and really belong to that Sacred Person, who was
Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, and called by the name of
Jesus of Nazareth.

1. To explain what is meant by the word Christ: It is a Derivative from the
Hebrew and Greek, the two Original Languages in which the Holy Scriptures were
written. The word in the Hebrew is (...) Mashiach; in the Greek (...),
Christos; in the Latin Christus: All which signify in English, Anointed: Being
derived from (...), ungo: All signifying to Anoint.

2. That it is taken Relatively, and is a name of Office, etc. appears from the
frequent use thereof in the Old Testament, and applied to Priests, Prophets,
and Kings, who were anointed with Oil when they entered upon their Offices; and
therefore were called, The Lord's Anointed.

1. To Priests, Exodus 40. 13, 14, 15. And thou shall put upon Aaron the holy
Garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him, that he may minister unto me in
the Priests Office. And thou shall bring his sons, and clothe them with coats;
and thou shall anoint them, as thou did anoint their Father, that they may
minister unto me in the Priests Office: And this was to be observed as a Rule
throughout all their Generations.

2. Touching the other two Offices of Prophet and King; we find the same method
used in both, and that by the Command of God himself to the Prophet Elijah, 1
Kin. 19. 15, 16. And the Lord said unto him, Go -- Anoint Hazael to be King
over Syria. And Jehu the son of Nimshi shall thou anoint to be King over
Israel. And Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-Meh-lah shall thou anoint to be
Prophet in thy room.

Now that the name Christ is so applied to him, viz. Relatively, and as a name
of Office, I shall prove, by showing you:

1. That he is called, a Priest, a Prophet, and a King.

2. That he was anointed by God the Father, when he entered upon his Offices.

First, That he is called a Priest: These Scriptures following do sufficiently
evince. But Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come, Heb. 9.
11. The High Priest of our Profession Christ Jesus, Heb. 3. 1. This man because
he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 7. 24. Seeing then
that we have a great High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the
Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession. For we have not an High Priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 4. 14, 15.

Secondly, That he is called a Prophet: Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet,
mighty in deed and word before God, and all the people, Luke 24. 19. And it
shall come to pass, that every Soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be
destroyed from among the people, Acts 3. 23.

Thirdly, That he is called a King: Pilate called Jesus, and said unto him, Art
thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this World.
Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, Thou
say that I am a King: To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into
the World, etc. John 18. 33. and 36, 37. Nathaneel answered and says unto him,
Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel, John 1. 49. Who is
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. And he has on his Vesture, and on his Thigh, a name written, KING
OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS, Revel. 19. 16.

Secondly, That Christ was Anointed by God the Father, when he entered upon his
Offices, with the holy Spirit: As the Priests, Prophets, and Kings under the
Law, were anointed with Oil, when they entered upon Theirs; see Matthew. 3. 16,
17. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: And
lo, the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
like a Dove, and lighting upon him: And lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Heb. 1. 9. Therefore God, even
thy God has Anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy fellows, Luke 4.
17, 18, 21. And there was delivered unto him the Book of Esaias* the Prophet;
and when he had opened the Book, he found the place where it is written, The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel, etc. And applied this to his own Person, as being then fulfilled, Then
he began to say unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.
The word which God sent unto the Children of Israel was this, That God had
Anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power, who went about
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil; for God was with
him, Acts 10. 38. Now by this we may see, that as his Name is, so is the Person
to whom it is given; for he being Anointed with the Holy Spirit above his
fellows, he is properly and truly the Lord's Christ.

Thirdly, That this Name cannot be properly and really applied to the Divine
Nature, taken Abstractively: And my Reason for it is this, Because some of
those things which were done by the Man Christ Jesus, could not have been
performed by the Divine Nature in the sense before defined.

1. Because if they could, there had then been no need for him to have been a
man, made of a woman, to be made flesh and dwell among men, to have been
exposed to all those sufferings and sorrows which befell him in the days of his
flesh, while he was upon the earth.

2. Because Christ died for our sins according to the Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 3.
But the Divine Nature taken Abstractively cannot die: For besides this
Consideration; viz. That the Nature of the Divine Essence cannot possibly admit
of it, and it is horrid Blasphemy to assert it: So on the contrary, it is
positively affirmed, That God lives for ever. If I lift up my hand to Heaven,
and say, I live for ever, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. yea, he swears by himself, As I live,
says the Lord, Isa. 49. 18. The name of the Lord, the Everlasting God, Genesis
21. 33. For thus says the High and Losty One that inhabiteth Eternity, Isa.
57. 15. whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, Micah. 5.
2. Lord thou have been our dewlling place in all Generations. Before the
Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth, and the
World, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God, Psalm. 90. 1, 2. And
God said unto Moses, I AM that I AM, Thus shall thou say unto the Children of
Israel, I AM has sent me unto you: This is my name for ever; And this is my
Memorial unto all Generations, Exodus 3. 14, 15. The Certainty, Perpetuity, and
Eternity of Gods Being, assures Believers of the Certainty and Accomplishment
of all his Promises; seeing they know he is faithful, and cannot lie, nor cease
to be: For if he could do either, it would take away all the Foundation of our
Faith and Hope in God, his Word and Promises.

But there are some Objections urged by the Quakers in print against this
Truth, in these words.

W. P. Asks this Question, Was he the Christ of God before he was manifested
in the flesh?

Mr. Ives answers, He was the Son of God.

Quest. W. P. But was he the Lords Christ? And turns this Answer to it himself.

Answ. W. P. says, I will prove him to have been the Lords Christ, as well
before as after.

1. From the Apostle Paul's words to the Corinthians, That Rock was Christ.

2. Next, from Jude, where some Greek Copies have it thus, That Jesus brought
the people of Israel out of Egypt. See The Quakers Account of the
Barbican-Meeting, p. 24.

Reply. I will answer to the last first, If W. P. have seen any such Greek
Copies, he should have cited them, and told us what they are: Till which time,
I shall account it as the effect of passion stirred up in the defense of a bad
cause. But surely W. P. forgot himself to bring this Allegation; for if this be
brought to prove any thing, it is, That he as Jesus was before he was
manifested in the flesh: Which name was never given to him till he came in the
flesh; And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. And
she brought forth her firstborn Son, and he called his name Jesus, Matthew. 1.
21, 25. Besides, our English Translation does very well agree with the Greek;
for in Jude, v. 5. which is the place he refers to, the word is (...), and in
our Translation, Lord; which is the express signification of the word, and so
rendered in multitudes of places in the New Testament. And this can be brought
by W. P. for no better purpose than to undervalue the Scripture, by quarrelling
with the Translation, though there be no cause.

Secondly, As for those words in 1 Cor. 10. 4. That Rock was Christ.

I answer, It Is meant, not really, but figuratively; as appears by the
precedent words, verse. 3, 4. And did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did
all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of the spiritual Rock that
followed them; and that Rock was Christ. For it is evident;

1. That there was a Real and True Rock, which Moses smote with his Rod, and
out of which the water gushed.

2. That the people of Israel drunk of this Water to quench their thirst.

3. That this was Real and True Water; because their Cattle also drank thereof,
Numb. 20. 11. He smote the Rock twice, and the Water came out abundantly, and
the Congregation drank, and their Beasts also.

4. That the Water which came out of that Rock became Rivers, and followed them
in the Wilderness: He brought streams also out of the Rock, and caused waters
to run down like Rivers, Psalm. 78. 16. Behold he smote the Rock, that the
waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed, ver. 20. And they thirsted not
when he led them through the Deserts: And in the next words you have an Account
how they were supplied in this their journey through the Deserts; He caused the
waters to flow out of the Rock for them: He clave the Rock also, and the water
gushed out, Isa. 48. 21. He opened the Rock, and the waters gushed out, they
ran in the dry places like a River, Psalm. 105. 41. And therefore it is said, The
Rock followed them; Which by a Metonymie is meant the water that came out of
the Rock.

5. It Is called, A spiritual Rock, because it was Typical of Christ; and that
the Believers among them did as truly partake of Christ by Faith spiritually,
as They, the rest of the Multitude, and their Cattle, did drink of the water of
the Rock literally. And in the same sense that the MANNA is called Spiritual
Meat, verse. 3. They did all eat the same spiritual Meat; so is the water of the
Rock, called spiritual Drink. They did all drink the same spiritual Drink.

Now we may not conclude from hence, That that Rock was really Christ; or that
he was called Christ, with respect to what he was before he was manifested in
the flesh: But on the contrary, it is to be understood of the Faith they had in
the promised Messiah that was to come, whereof that Rock was a Type. So that
this manner of speaking agrees with that saying of our Savior, Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad, John 8. 56. which was not
really by an Ocular view of his Person, as being then present, but by the Faith
he had in the Promise that he should be revealed in the fullness of Time: for it
is said of Abraham, and the rest of the Faithful, mentioned Heb. 11. 13. These
all died in Faith, not having received the Promises; but having seen them afar
off, and were persuaded of them: The principal of which was, The promise of the
Messiah that was to come.

Object. But it may be objected, That in Psalm. 2. 2. in the Latin Bible,
translated by Beza, it is said, Et contra Christum ejus; And against his
Christ. And the like in Dan. 9. Therefore he is called Christ, before he was
manifested in the flesh.

I answer, 1. It Is true, he is called Christ, Messiah, and the Anointed in
those places: And if we will believe a very Learned Author of our time, he
says, The name of Messiah is but twice or thrice at most, used in the
Old Testament, directly and immediately to denote the promised Seed; namely,
Dan. 9. 25, 26. whereunto Psalm. 2. 2. may be added. J. Owen D. D. Exercit. 9.
on the Epistle to the Hebrews, p. 95. So that these are all the places in the
Old Testament wherein he is so called.

2. That it is also true, That the word in the Hebrew is (...), Mashiach, both
in Psalm. 2. and Dan. 9. which signifies, Anointed, and is applied to our
Savior the Lord Jesus Christ. So that I grant all that is in the Objection.

But it does not thence follow, That because he is is called so before, that it
does not respect what he was to be, when, and after he was manifested in the
flesh; but the contrary is manifest by the scope of those Texts, to any
considering person: For in Psalm. 2. it is said, The Kings of the Earth have set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against
his Christ: Now in Acts 4. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. upon the Threatenings they had
from the Rulers, Chief Priests and Elders, etc. they apply these very words
upon that occasion; Who by the mouth of thy servant David have said, The Kings
of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together, against the Lord,
and against his Christ; for of a truth, against thy Holy Child Jesus whom thou
have Anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People
of Israel were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done. And, now Lord, behold their Threatenings, and
grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy Word: By
stretching forth thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders may be done by
the Name of thy Holy Child Jesus. So that you may see, that this opposition in
the Kings against Christ, was upon the account of his being manifest in the
flesh, and introducing a new Doctrine and Religion in the World; which set them
in a rage against him and his Disciples. And this is the plain meaning of this
Text.

And in Dan. 9. it is said, Know therefore and understand, That from the going
forth of the Commandment, to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah
the Prince, shall be seven weeks: And after threescore and two weeks, shall
Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: And the People of the Prince that
shall come, shall destroy the City, and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof
shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the War, desolations are determined.
All these things were yet to come when this was spoken, and not fulfilled till
the days of his flesh: For here is his own death expressly prophesied of, the
destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple, and the Desolation of that Nation.

Object. But it is objected by Geo. Keith: But I prove, that he was Jesus
Christ before he took flesh, Ephesians. 3. 9. Who created all things by Jesus Christ.

Reply. 1. I grant, That God did Create all things by Jesus Christ: But it was,
as he was God, and not as he is a man in the flesh: And yet as such, he was the
Christ of God, being Anointed with the Spirit, as is showed above.

2. If this be true that G. K. says, That he was both Anointed, and a Savior
before the World was:

3. I would then know:

1. How he came to be in a capacity to receive that Anointing, seeing then he
was only God?

2. Who Anointed him? seeing you say, There is no distinction of Persons in the
Divine Essence.

3. What sinners were there for him to save, before any thing was created? For
he is called Jesus, because he came to save his People from their sins, Matthew.
1. 21.

But I take this to be the genuine sense of that Text, Ephesians. 3. 9. That he
being then best known by the names of Jesus and Christ, and known to be a real
and true Man, the Apostle would let them know, that he was also truly God;
seeing he did Create all things: But was so far from being Jesus Christ then,
that he says, the knowledge of his Revelation according to the Gospel, was so
great a Mystery, and so little known, that from the beginning of the World it
has been hid in God, and was now revealed, according to the Eternal purpose of
God, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord: Which in other Ages was not
made known to the Sons of Men, as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles and
Prophets by the Spirit; as you may see at large in this Chapter.

So that he intends not by these words, that he was then the Savior Anointed,
any more than the Scripture does intend he was really slain from the Foundation
of the World; and yet it is said so, Rev. 13. 8. by him who calls things that
are not, as though they were, because he has decreed it, and his Decrees shall
be accomplished.

But by the same Rule G. K. might as well have said, that Christ was Born,
Dead, and Buried in the Prophet Isaiah's time; because it is said, Isa. 9 6.
Unto us a Child is Born; and Chap. 53. 11. he has poured out his Soul unto
Death; verse. 9. and he made his Grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death. All this being spoken in the present and preterperfect tense. But if the
Light within them can interpret Scripture no better, I will not consult it as
my Oracle.

By this time I hope, not only these Objections are removed, but all others of
the like import, may easily be answered by these Distinctions; which I should
have particularly spoken to, only the Paper allotted me will not permit of it.

Fourthly, That it does properly and really belong to that sacred Person, who
was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, and called by the
name of Jesus of Nazareth.

To make this good, I shall use this method:

1. Show you what this Sacred Person is.

2. That that very Person who is called Jesus of Nazareth, is also called
Christ.

3. That the Name Christ does properly and really belong to him.

1. To show you what this Sacred Person is: I do affirm, That he is both God
and Man, and that the Hypostatical Union of his Divine and Humane Nature, does
so constitute this Sacred Person, that both of them, as united, are the Christ
of God: And that when the Scripture speaks of acts done by him as Christ, they
are to be understood as performed by that Person so considered.

To make this good, I shall prove three things:

1. That this Sacred Person is God. And because the Quakers own him whom they
call Christ to be God, I shall only cite that known place, Romans 9. 5. Whose are
the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came; who is over
all, God blessed for ever. Amen.

2. That he is also truly Man. 1. Tim. 2. 5. For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and Men, the MAN Christ Jesus. Acts 2. 22, 23. Ye men of
Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a MAN approved among you, by
Miracles, Wonders, and Signs which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye
your selves also know: Him ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified
and slain. But if he had not been truly Man, he could not have been put to
death by the hands of men; for, as I have proved before, it is impossible for
the Deity to become Mortal. But I shall say no more to this here, having proved
Christ to be a real and true Man, p. 18, 19. to which I refer you.

3. That those acts done by him as Christ, are to be understood as performed by
that Person, considered as God and Man.

For the better understanding of this, consider;

1. That some acts done by him, cannot be performed as he is God, taken
Abstractively; for as such, he cannot be made flesh, he cannot die, and be made
a Sacrifice for sin.

2. That some acts also are done by him, which cannot be performed by his
Humane Nature, taken Abstractively; for as such, he cannot know all things, he
cannot be everywhere present, neither could he have given plenary Satisfaction
to the Justice of God for the sins of men, had not his Humanity been supported
by his Divine Nature, and united to it.

3. And yet that these things are ascribed to him, as he is a Person consisting
both of the Divine and Humane Nature: And that this is so, I will give you some
few instances;

1. That in Acts 20. 28. Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with
his own blood. Here the Person spoken of, is said to be God absolutely; the
Church of God. And this God is said to have blood of his own; the blood of
Jesus Christ, being the blood of him that was God, though not the blood of him
as God; for God is a Spirit, and a Spirit has no blood to shed: But it was
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom the Jews Crucified, Acts 4. 10. it is his Blood
that cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. And this being considered, it
undeniably testifies to the Unity of his Person as God and Man.

2. That in John 3. 13. And no man has ascended up into Heaven, but he that
came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven. And that in John
17. 5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the World was. Now these things cannot be applied
to the Humane Nature, taken Abstractively; for that had no Being, and so could
have no Glory with the Father before the World was; neither did he, as such,
come down from Heaven, nor could he be in Heaven and on Earth with his Humane
Nature at one and the same time: And yet as he was both God and Man in one
Person, by the Figure Synecdoche, all this is truly spoken of him. But why the
Quakers should pretend to relieve themselves by this Figure, and say, That the
Body is sometimes called Christ, unless they did own the Humane Nature to be a
part of Christ, I cannot understand; because it always signifies a part of that
whole of which it is predicated.

2. I shall prove, That that very Person who is called Jesus of Nazareth, is
also called Christ. Joh. 1. 41. We have found the Messiah, which is being
interpreted, the Christ. John 4. 25, 26. The woman says unto him, I know that
Messiah comes, which is called Christ, when he is come, he will tell us all
things. Jesus says unto her, I that speak unto thee am HE. And many more
believed, because of his own word; and said unto the woman, Now we believe, not
because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves: And know, that this is
indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World, verse. 41, 42. And this does not
only prove him to be the Christ, but such a Person that the People saw with
their eyes, and heard with their ears; notwithstanding the Quakers have the
confidence to say, Christ was never seen with Carnal eyes, nor heard with
Carnal ears.

3. That the name Christ does properly and really belong to him, is evident.

1. Because he has that Name given him in the holy Scriptures: And the Quakers
say, They are a true Declaration of the mind of God; and therefore he must be
what the Scripture calls him.

2. Because he was Anointed with the Holy Spirit, so as never any was but he;
for God gave not the Spirit by measure unto him, John 3. 34. and therefore he
is properly and really the only Christ and Savior of the World: Neither is
there Salvation in any other; for there is none other Name under Heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved, but by the Name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, whom the Jews crucified, Acts 4. 10, 11, 12.

I shall conclude this point in the words of the Learned Leigh, as it is by him
applied to that Sacred Person before defined: His words are these, Messiah does
solely and singularly betoken Christ, as it is interpreted, John 1. 41. and 4.
25. For though the word Mashiach in Hebrew, in the Scripture, signifies any
Anointed one whatsoever; yet in this Greek form, Messiah, it never signifies
but only Christ: Nor is the Hebrew word used in Hebrew Authors, but in the same
sense; and so it is used infinitely among them: Sometimes set single, without
any other addition, and very often with this addition, Melech Hamashiach, the
King Messiah. In this propriety the word is used, Dan. 9. 25, 26. Psalm. 2. 2.
and so it was confessed by the ancient Jews. Mr. Lightfoots 2 d Part of his
Harmony, Critica Sacra, p. 136.

Now seeing Christ is thus exalted at the Fathers Right Hand, to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give us Grace here to enable us to do his will, and Glory
hereafter far surpassing all our Obedience: let us therefore believe in him for
the pardon of our sins, as he is a Priest; receive his Doctrine, as he is a
Prophet; and submit to his Laws, as he is a King: For whosoever shall be found
so doing, and continue therein faithful unto death, they shall certainly
receive that Crown of Life and Glory, which God has promised to them that love
him. I shall conclude in the words of the Apostle, Grace be with all them that
love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

Quakerism is Popery Revived: OR, Some of their Old Opinions put into a New
Dress, and Asserted by the Quakers to be New Discoveries of the Light within
them.
THere are two General Principles must be received by every one that will be
either a Quaker or Papist.

1. That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are not the Rule of Faith
and Practice.

2. That there is some other Rule of Faith which is Infallible.

To prove this I shall quote their own sayings, that you may know I do not
wrong them.

The Quaker says thus,

Will. Penn, in Reas. ag. Rail. p. 48. We deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of
Faith and Practice, in honor to that Divine Light that was the Author of them.

Edw. Burrough's Works, p. 62. He that persuades people to let the Scripture be
the Rule of Faith and Practice, would keep people in darkness.

Geo. Whitehead, Dip. pl. p. 13. It Is Idolatry to call the Bible the means of
our knowing God. And in his Book, entitled, Christ Ascended, p. 11. You are
walking by your fancies and imaginations, who set the Scriptures in the place
of Christ, as your only absolute Rule and Ground of your Faith and Knowledge.

G. W. in Enthusiasm above Atheism, p. 20. says, As for W. Penn's saying, That
our Belief concerning the Scriptures, is that inward Testimony that we have
received from the Holy Light within us, to the truth of those sayings: He
concludes thus, Wherefore the Scriptures are so far from being the great Rule
of Faith and Practice, that the Light of Christ within, is both our Warrant and
Rule for Faith in, and Obedience to them: And in p. 27. he blames his
Antagonist for saying, The Doctrine contained in the Scriptures, is the Rule of
Faith and Practice; telling him, He should rather have said, A Rule subordinate
to the great Rule of Faith and Practice; to wit, That Divine Light. And yet
says, p. 49. But if he pretend the Spirit to be his Rule, then the Scriptures
are not.

Having heard what the Chief Men in the Quakers Ministry have said, be pleased
to hear what some eminent Popish Priests have said, and you will see that this
is no new Doctrine.

The Papist says thus,

Eckius, Luthers Antagonist, in his Book of Faith and Justification: The end
that moved the Evangelists to write, was not because they would have their
Writings to rule over Religion and Faith, but rather that they should be
subject unto it.

Coster says the same in his Enchiridion of Controversies. And in Chap. 71.
The Scriptures are as a Nose of Wax, that suffers it self to be turned this
way, and that way.

Turrianus, p. 250. If Christ had left no other Rule of our Faith than the
Scriptures, we should have had nothing else but a Delphian Sword.

Bellarm. de verbo Dei non Scripto, Lib. 2. says, The way to keep men sound
and undeceived about Religion, is to forbid to the Laity, or worldly men, the
reading of the holy Scripture, as being the occasion of many Heresies. Lib. 4.
For although the Scriptures is God's Word, nevertheless it can have no
Authority without the Churches Approbation, being an imperfect, broken, and
lame Rule; for there is not comprehended in it all things that are necessary
for God's Honor and our Salvation, but what is wanting, must be supplied by
unwritten Tradition. Lib. 4. cap. 12. The proper and principal end of the
Scripture was not, that it should be a Rule of Faith, but a profitable
Admonition to make men entertain the Doctrine of Preaching.

Secondly, There is some other Rule of Faith which (they both say) is
Infallible.

1. The Quaker says, It Is the Light in the Body (immediate Inspiration, or
Enthusiasm by the Light within them) which is the Infallible Rule.

George Keith says, That Will. Penn has immediate Inspiration, as the primary
Rule of his Faith and Practice. See the Quakers own Account of the
Wheeler-street-Meeting, p. 56, 57. And in answer to Mr. Ives 's Demand, To give
one evidence that they had Divine Inspiration for the Rule of their Faith and
Practice, he says, p. 62. It is sufficient that we have the witness in our
selves. Page 65. We profess and experience Immediate and Divine Revelation, as
the Ground of our Faith and Testimony. And in his Looking-Glass for
Protestants, p. 29. he says, And this is our Faith in all these particulars,
who witness unto the Immediate Teachings of God by his Spirit in our hearts.

Geo. Whitehead, Enthus. above Atheis. says, p. 19. But Enthusiasm taken
simply, as a Divine Inspiration, or breathing into by a Deity, we do assert and
contend for in the best Acceptance. I never thought the Quakers would have
owned themselves to be Enthusiasts in Print: But what may they not come to in
time? Page 22, 23. he says, We do therefore assert the sufficiency of this
Divine Illumination, as being of it self able to show and reveal to us, what we
ought to believe and do in all things. And p. 24. he says, By their Preaching
and Writing they proclaim the sufficiency thereof. And p. 52. to show that they
are free from Error and Incongruity, he says, It is true, that we affirm the
light of Christ within to be an Absolute Rule, teaching men that follow it,
what they ought to know, believe, and do. And in the same page, he says, That
he, viz. his Antagonist, falsely supposes a defect in the Light, and in our
Ministry directing thereto. Then they must be both of them sufficient and
infallible, if there be no defect in either.

But to proceed: In p 69. he says, The Apostles Doctrine contains Rules, but
the Light within that gave it forth, was the Rule, the chief or highest Rule,
for Guidance and Power, and that wherein was the Power of Rule and Government
to all true Christians. And in p. 58. he is displeased much, because his
Antagonist does not believe, that their Light is sufficient to direct men to
believe in Jesus Christ. But is it not manifestly insufficient? for that the
Quakers who pretend to be guided by that Light, do not believe in him, as I
have made appear. Now when G. W. has thus asserted the sufficiency and
infallibility of the Light; at the close of his Introduction, p. 16.
Dictator-like, he comes forth like a Pope and General Council, with a most
dreadful Sentence against all that will not believe him in these words: To deny
the true God, who is Light, is Atheism; But to deny his immediate Light in man,
is to deny the true God. Surely this is a higher piece of Incharitableness than
Mr. Ives can be supposed to be guilty of, in saying, The Quakers are no
Christians. I could have alleged many more Testimonies, but these are
sufficient.

Now to prove that this is no new Doctrine, let us hear what the Popish Priests
say to this point.

The Papist says, It is that Body called the Church (or Divine Revelation)
which is the Infallible Rule.

A Book, entitled. A Manual of Contr. written by a Pomish Priest, lays this
down for an Article of Faith, That the Church of Rome is Infallible in all her
Propositions and Definitions of Faith, and is so to be received under pain of
Damnation: And this is known to be their professed Principle.

Bellar. de verb. Dei Interp. Those that speak against the Popes Decrees and
Humane Institutions, are false Teachers: For the Pope has Power and Authority
to judge in all Controversies in Doctrine, and to give forth the right meaning
of the holy Scripture; and no man may appeal from his judgment.

Charon's Third Truth, chap. 2. having said, That the Church and the Scripture
are Judges together: He adds, But the Church is primarily, and principally, and
with great pre-eminence; and a little after, The Scripture is not, nor cannot
be the last Rule, and Soveveign Judge of Doctrine And chap. 3. p. 2. Faith that
is necessary to Salvation, comes from the Churches speaking, and not from the
Reading of the Scripture: Without knowing of which, after a sort, yea, and
without believing or obeying it expressly, a thousand millions are saved. And to
be short, a man may be a Christian, and a good Christian, and be saved, without
the Scripture; but not without the Church: for the Scripture has no Authority,
Weight, or Power over us, but only so much as the Church does allow and assign
unto it.

In a Boook, entitled, Reason against Railery, etc. p. 7. are these words, It
may be asked when one pitches upon a determinate sense of any place beyond what
the Letter inforces, by what light he guides himself in that Determination? And
then answers, That that Light, whatever it is, and not the Letter, is indeed
the formal Revealer, or Rule of Faith. (...) in the next Paragraph, The
Letter-Rule secluded, I advanced (says he) to prove, That Tradition, or that
Body called the Church, taken as delivering her thoughts, by a constant Tenor
of living Voice and Practice, visible to the whole World, is the absolute
certain way of conveying down the Doctrine taught at first.

In (...) Stillingfleeton, etc. Part 2. p. 19. it is said, That Divine
Revelation is firmer and more Authentic, than either Scripture, or our seeing;
and again, It is the sole standing, unextinguishable general Light, set up for
the assured Guidance of all men. And p. 27. They are certain, and know
themselves certain, and declare so much before the face of the Sun, and all the
eyes of Heaven, by their stability, fixedness, and immovability in Faith.

In another Popish Book, entitled, A Rational Compendious way, etc. p. 31. The
Roman Catholic Religion does not teach any thing as an Article of Faith, which
is either an Error, or a Corruption. And p. 30. The Roman Church is infallible
and perpetual.

Now from what has been said, we may draw this Conclusion:

1. That if W. L. say true, That he is no Christian who denies the Divinity of
Christ: If he means in the common sense, viz. as he is the Second Person in the
Divine Essence; then the Quakers are no Christians, for in that sense they deny
the Divinity of Christ, in denying the Trinity of Persons.

2. That they do really deny the Humane Nature to be a part of Christ; and that
Sacred Person whom God has Anointed with the Holy Spirit, who is both God and
Man, The man Christ Jesus, to be the Christ, the Savior of the World: And so
fulfill that Prophecy, Even denying the Lord that bought them.

3. From hence it follows, That the Quakers have no Christ at all, but one of
their own setting up and adoring: For the name Christ cannot be properly
applied to the Divine Nature, taken Abstractively; as I have fully proved. And
they confess they own no other Christ, but the Light within them; which they
say is only God, though in truth, it is but a created Light, and they
Idolaters, in worshipping a Creature, instead of the Creator.

4. If he be no Christian that has no Rule for his Faith and Practice, then
the Quakers are no Christians; for they have no Rule for their Faith and
Practice. For,

1. They confess the holy Scriptures are not their Rule.

2. It Is apparent (notwithstanding their high pretenses) they have not Divine
and Immediate Revelation for their Rule; for they cannot demonstrate it by
Scripture, right Reason, nor any other way.

Thus I have used my endeavor, according to the Exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth. And
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken
captive by him at his will. The Lord open the eyes of their understanding, and
bless this Treatise to all those good ends and purposes for which it is
intended: To whom be glory in the Churches by Christ Jesus throughout all Ages,
World without end. Amen.

William Russel.

Here follows a Letter from the Baptized-Congregation in Reading, concerning
William Luddington.
Brother Ives,
I Received yours, and advised with the Brethren, about it, and the Answer;
which is, That we do not own William Luddington in any such Relation as
Communion with us, neither do we know any Principle of Religion that he is
steadfast to. But about ten or twelve years since he was here in Prison, and
blamed much, for refusing to give God thanks for any of his Mercies, or to join
with them that did, with many other strange Humors, (as Mr. Mason can tell
you) not suiting with Christian Religion: But was looked upon by all to be a
Quaker, and sometimes a supposed Behmenist; which uncertain Fictions best
suited his wandering Fancy. Sometimes he is for universal Communion with all
sorts (as he calls it:) And sometimes speaking against Forms, and says, He
never preached for Baptism, nor never would: For that Text, Mat. 28. 19, 20. To
the end of the World, he says, was to the end of that Age. And he had wrote a
Book two years since to that purpose, and going to print it: But Mr. Maynard
persuaded him to the contrary. So that for this Ten years past, we have been so
far from any Communion, that we have had little Religious Converse; neither did
we ever find he desired any with us. And as for his writing on the behalf of
the Quakers, he has done them so little service here, that he has only
discovered his folly, and made his best Friends ashamed of him; and many others
say, they were deceived in him. So that we may say, He has here met with the
just reward of his folly, and is discerned by all sober, rational Christians;
and left only to be supported (if by any) by such giddy Brains, that will lay
hold on any rotten Post, to support a Tottering Building. But at last yours
came, and was so acceptable, that your Enemies say, you have gained great
Credit by your discrcet managing that Business: And you have morae raised the
hearts of all your (and the Lord's) truly loving Friends toward you. And as it
is common for men that want Wisdom, or good Argument for what they would have,
to supply it with Railing, and abundance of words, so your Adversaries have
done. But God has furnished you better, as appears by your managing this
business. To whose guidance we leave you, with our prayers, that you may be
kept to the end: And rest,

Your Brethren in Christ. Signed by consent, By Daniel Roberts.
Reading, this 6th of December. 1674.

