A LETTER FROM THE Here Lieutenant-Admiral DE RUYTER, TO THE States General of
the United Provinces; Giving an Account of the Late Engagement Between him, and
the FRENCH FLEET, On the Coast of SICILY.

Translated out of Dutch, as it was Printed at the Hague.

In the Savoy, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1676.

A Letter from the Here, Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruyter, written to the
States General of the United Provinces, giving an Account of the late
Engagement, between him and the French Fleet, on the Coast of Sicily.
High and Mighty Lords,
MY Lords, Since my last to your Hi. and Mi. of the 10 of December past, from
the Bay of Callary, we safely arrived the 20. following in the morning, with
the greatest part of your Fleet, in the Bay of Melazzo, and by my Secretary,
made known to the Marquis of Villa Franca, Viceroy of the Kingdom of Sicily,
our arrival, with the offer of our service. His Excellency did me the Honor
that very afternoon, to come and visit me on board my Ship, and to bid me
welcome; as I the next day, gave my Self the Honor to return his Excellencies
Visit. In both which Visits, nothing of importance happened. I received his
Excellency with all Civility, and at his going away, gave him the respect due
to a Person of his high Quality; and on the other side, his Excellency received
me with the civilities required, in respect to your Hi. and Mi. amidst the
Salutes of the Canon of the Town, and of the Castle, and in the same manner
dismissed me with great courtesy.

And that we might not here spend our time in vain, I thought fit,
provisionally, to appoint Capt. Nicholas Verschoor, Rear-Admiral, for this
Expedition, and to depute Jacob Benkhout, and the Count of Stirum, assisted by
my Secretary, to the Marquis de Villa Franca, to concert with his Excellency,
what ought to be most speedily undertaken against the common Enemy, with your
Hi. and Mi. Fleet, and withal, earnestly to press, that as many Spanish Men of
War and Galleys, as was possible, might be joined with us, that so we might be
the stronger, in case; a considerable force of the Enemies, should happen to
meet us at Sea; whereupon, with the most forcible Reasons, and by the
importance, and necessity of the thing, his Excellency was finally persuaded,
upon the 31 of the last month, to conclude; That we should, with your Hi. and
Mi. Fleet, pass the Fare of Messina, to cut off from the Enemy, who cruised to
and fro, between the Cape De la Molina, and the Cape d^ Arm, all succors
designed to Messina, while his Excellency, in the mean time, gave Order, that
the Spanish Men of War lying at Palermo, under the Command of the Prince of
Montesarchio, should, with all speed, be got ready; adding in the interim,
under your Hi. and Mi. Flag, the Spanish man of war, named Nostra Signora del
Rosario, mounted with 50 Guns, and 300 Men, Commanded by Capt. de Say, with 9
Galleys, Commanded by Don Beltran de Gavarra, Lieutenant, and Governour-General
of the Neopolitan Galleys. The night, between the 31 past, and the 1 instant,
the Vice Admiral de Haen, with the nine Ships under his Command, who on the 8th
of Nov. last, was separated from us in a Storm, happily joined us in the Bay of
Melazzo; and thereupon, the night of the said I instant, we set sail together,
taking our course along the Coast, toward the Straight of Messina, with
intention to pass the said Straight, and afterward the said appointed
Rendezvous, between the Cape de la Molina, and Cape del Arm; but in the latter
part of the night it was very calm, and the next day, the wind proved contrary.

The Second instant in the Morning, very early, the Spaniards in our sight,
Attacked a small place called Ibiso, which was Manned with French and Rebels,
and after three hours dispute, took it, with the loss of ten Men, and some
Wounded, and on the side of the Enemy, about sixty Killed, besides Wounded, and
feventy taken Prisoners, among which was a Colonel, a Milanese by Birth, who
had quitted the Spanish Service: In the mean time, the Marquis de Villa Franca,
Viceroy of the Island of Sicily aforesaid, sent several Feluccas to the Fare,
(where we continued Cruising till the fifth instant) with advice, that a
considerable Fleet of the Enemies Ships, were Sailed from Thoulon, for the
Succouring of Messina; and that they had been first seen by those of Leghorne,
and afterward from the Islands lying before the said Kingdom of Sicily, and
lately from the Isle of Lipari, whereupon, (finding, that by reason of the said
contrary Winds, we could not come to pass the said Straight,) I resolved to
Tack the sixth instant in the Morning, and to stand to the Westward, to find
out the Enemy; we advanced that day, close under the said Island of Lipari, but
could not from our Shrowds, as yet discover the Enemy, notwithstanding we had
advice, by Barks and Felucca's from all sides, that the said Enemies Fleet was
still observed from the shore. I endeavored to inform my self, how the Enemy
bore from us, and which way they steered, that so we might be the sooner with
them; the first they could well enough tell me, but in the latter, they did so
vary, that I was forced to send off one of my Lieutenants in a Felucca, with
some of the most knowing Felucca Men, toward the Island Salinas, if possible,
to discover from the Hills, (which are very high) the Enemies course; upon
whose return, we steered the night following Northwards toward them; the next
morning, with the opening of the day, the Wind S. S. W. a small Gale, we got
sight of them, being Thirty Sail, counting a Polacke and a Satie, about three
miles from us; and to oblige them to an Engagement yet that day, we, and all
the Ships of your Hi. and Mi. Fleet, put up all the Sail they could possibly
bear, the sooner to reach the Enemy, which we so far did, that some of the
forwardest of them, were forced to furl some of their Sails, and to stay for
those who were not so good Sailers, keeping in the mean time, as near the Wind
as was possible, to gain an advantage upon us; about three in the afternoon, I
gave the sign, to the end the head Officers, Captains, and Commanders, might,
pursuant to their general, and particular Instructions, put themselves into
their several stations, as was accordingly done, but in the mean time the night
came on; so that I resolved to defer the Attack for that day, and to call the
head Officers on board my Ship, to bid them hold themselves ready against the
next day, being the eighth instant, to Attack the Enemy, recommending to them,
at the same time, that for the Love of their Country, and the sooner to obtain
an Honorable and Lasting Peace, they would take care of their Honor and Oath,
which they all taking me by the hand, unanimously promised.

I sent a half Galley (so called) half way, between us and the Enemy, to
observe them in the night, directing the Capt. that so long as they held the
same course with us, he should every Glass fire a Gun; and in case the Enemy
happened to Tack, to retreat, shooting all the way to us; toward the latter
part of the night, the Wind increased, and blew so hard from the W. S. W. that
not only he was obliged to quit his Post, but likewise the other nine Spanish
Galleys, who stood toward Lipari, to cover themselves under the shore: In the
last of the Night watch, the Enemy gave the sign to Tack, whereupon, I
likewise gave the sign to Tack; at break of day, we again got sight of them,
they bearing along with us, but the Wind had sharpened upon us, six Points, and
was so bare, that the Enemy got the Luffe.

About 9 a clock, they being in good Order, and well ranked, came upon us like
Soldiers, as we courageously, and likewise in good Order expected them, so that
within an hour after the foremost Ships on both sides, began to fire upon each
other, which lasted about three hours so furiously, (that I never in my life
was in sharper firing) when one of the Enemies Fireships, under the favor of
the Smoke, and the Cannon of their Vice Admiral, came down upon us, but we shot
down his Masts, and disabled him, so that the Captain was forced himself to set
fire to her, for fear of her falling into our hands; about half an hour after,
a second of the Enemies Fireships had her Masts shot down, and was burnt; the
Fight lasted with the Reer-Admiral Verschoor, who had the Van, and with us,
till between four and five in the afternoon, and with the Vice Admiral de Haen,
who had the Rear, and consequently, came last into the Fight, till dark night,
which likewise parted them; with the setting of the Sun, a considerable Ship of
War of the Enemies sunk in our sight, others will have it, that there is a
second sunk, which neither I, nor any of my Ship saw; after the Fight, the said
Nine Galleys came to us again, and continued with us all the night. The head
Officers and Captains, of your Hi. and Mi. Fleet, fought bravely, and without
ceasing, as the Enemy likewise did on their side; during the Fight it was
extreme calm; we and all your Hi. and Mi. Fleet, has suffered great damage in
our Masts, Tackle, and Sails. The night past, we have been employed to put up
new Stays, to stop Leaks, bring new Sails to the Yards, and to mend our
Tackle, so that we, and most all of the other Ships, are in a condition to make
head against the Enemy, who, (as much as we can discern from our shrowds,) lie
on our Lee, but the weather is very calm, so that we shall not be able to get
up with one another this day.

Captain Gillis Schey, commanding the Ship Essen came the last night on board
me, and acquainted me that he had received one or more shots under water and
that he could not find the Leak, by which, much water was come into his Ship,
and had wet all h^^ Powder, and therefore desired that we would send (...)
Carpenter on board him, to help to find it; we sen^ the Captains Berkout, and
Van Abcoude, with ou^ chief Carpenter on board him, who heard the Leak^ but
could not find it, wherefore I desired Don Beltra^^ de Guavarra, Lieutenant
General of the said Galleys to send two of his Galleys to towe the said Ship
the Essen to Palermo, or some other Port, as the win^ should most favor, which
he immediately granted; (...) likewise put into the hands of Captain Schey, an
Act of Permission, to get the said Ship, into the first and most convenient
Port, and there to repair the same with all possible diligence; and for the
better executi^^ on of this Order, the Commanders Wybrandtz B^^rentz Commanding
a Snaw, and Jacob Statlander, i^ the Fluyt, the Swarte Tas, are directed to
keep with the said Captain Schey, to assist him in all things.

This Morning I called the Head Officers, Captains and Commanders on board me,
to know what damag^ they had sustained, and what they most wanted.

The Reer-Admiral Verschoor in the Fight yesterday, slept in the Lord in the
bed of Honor. W^ can fairly see the Prince of Montesarchio, with Nin^^ Sail
from our Ship, so that by the help of God, w^ hope to join his Excellency yet
this day.

Wherewith, etc. in the Ship the Erendracht Sailing Westward of the Island
Alicur, the Ninth of January, 1676.

Michiel Ad. Ruyter

FINIS.

