A True RELATION Concerning the late Fight at Torrington, Between the Forces
under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Forces under the command of
the Lord Hopton and others.

SEnt in a Letter to the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons, and by him appointed to be forthwith printed and published:

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Feb. 20. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
SAturday Febr. 14. the army marched from Crediton and the Quarters thereabout
to Chimleigh, being ten miles, the day very rainy, and the way very deep;
Sunday they marched very early to a Rendezvous some two miles in the way to
Torrington, with intention to have gone on; but our parties of our Horse
bringing in some Prisoners* by whose Examinations we could not certainly learn
which way the Enemy bent, the certain knowledge whereof would mightily
advantage us, by taking the benefit of that side of the River on which they
marched; whereupon another party was sent out of Col: Butlers Troop, the
Forlorn of which party being twelve, took twelve of the Lord Gorings
Lifeguard, and twenty four Horse, and brought them to the General; upon their
Examination it appears, the Enemy was ignorant of our Motion; That they were
drawn to no Rendezvous; That the Lord Hopton was in Torrington. Presently after
there came a Spy from Torrington, who informed that that morning he left the
Lord Hopton there, That they heard a kind of an Alarm, but no certain
Intelligence of our Motion. And being informed that a party of the Enemies
Horse was at Burrington, the General sent a party of Horse to meet with them,
who accordingly charged the Enemy, put them to a Rout, shot Lieut. Colonel
Dundash through the body, and took several prisoners, and brought Dundash three
miles on the way, but being mortally wounded, as himself conceived, was
enforced to leave him at Ringash, a Foot quarter of ours. This is the same
Dundash that ran to the Enemy when the Earl of Essex's army lay about Tame:
This Lieut. Colonel commanded the Lord of Clevelands Brigade; the party of
Horse that charged Dundash, was commanded by Captain Barry of Rutlandshire, who
lost never a man; but only his Brother run through the arm, and one Mr. Needler
of Captain Knights troop shot in the arm; we sent another party of horse
toward the East, who likewise met with their horse, and took three prisoners
and some horse, and shot Major Bret, who being well mounted escaped, those
Forces confess that Hopton was ignorant of our motion; by this time the Bridge
was made up some two miles off Chimleigh, the which the Enemy had broken down,
so that our army might with convenience march over: But the day being so far
spent, it was not held fit to march the whole army, so three Regiments of
horse, and three of foot marched some four milss toward the enemy; that night
the rest returned to Chimleigh with orders to march; by break of day we did
think the several alarms given them this day had so affrighted them, that their
Resolutions would have been taken before morning, whether to go East or West,
the certain knowledge whereof, was the thing we much desired, and would guide
us the better to pursue our designs. Monday Febr. 16. the General with that
party of the Army that was at Chimleigh, marched up to the rest of the Army to
Ringash, and had there a Rendezvous; and afterward, upon the Moor within five
miles of Torrington bad a general Rendezvous both of horse and foot, drew them
up in Battalia, and so marched up toward the enemy. When we came within two
miles of Torrington, our Forlorn hope of horse charged theirs, and put them to
a retreat; whereupon they came on again with a very strong party, and put ours
to a stand; the reserves of our Forlorn being come up, and some foot, forced
them to their Body again. When we came near Squire Rolls his house, we had
Intelligence that there was a party of 200 Firelocks and Musketeers left to
defend that place; therefore the Army made an halt half a mile in the Eastside
thereof, till the Foot came up; which the enemy perceiving, as they might
easily do, by reason of the Hills and clearness of the day, quit the house,
and drew their Forces to Torrington: Our Forlorn of horse and foot advanced to
Squire Rolls his house, half a mile further toward Torrington, there being
several skirmishes in the narrow Lane, between the Forlorn hope on both sides,
and several prisoners taken on each; but most by our party. The enemy drew
their foot out of the Town into the Closes about a quarter of a mile: our
Forlorn hope of foot lined the hedges, and so faced each other for about two
hours, within half a musket shot, exchanging course Language and Bullets, now
and then; after all, the Foot and Horse were come up, and drawn up in Mr. Rolls
his Park: a party of 800 foot was sent to second the Forlorn. In case the enemy
should endeavor to put any affront upon them also, a Regiment was immediately
sent to assist them, who were no sooner come up to the rest, but it began to be
dark, a Council of War was called, what was fit to be done; whether to engage
before day or not, for that it being dark, the enemy might lay Ambuscadoes,
they knowing the ground better then we; whereupon the General, Lieutenant
General, with the rest of the Colonels, deferred a Resolution, and rid from Mr.
Rolls his house up to the Forlorn hope, to see in what posture our forces were
set, and by prisoners to know what the Enemy intended while they were there.
The Tattoo was heard to beat in the town, which assured us the Enemy still
continued in the town, not flying away as several Reports would have made us
believe; but to be certain of the same, six Dragooners were commanded to creep
under a hedge near the Barracadoes, and to give fire, to see if they would
answer; by which we might know whither they stood to defend the town. The Enemy
received the charge, and answered it with a very sharp volley of shot. Our
Forlorn hope seeing the Dragooners engaged, they gave fire; whereupon the Enemy
gave fire all along the hedges and works, thereupon the Reserve to the Forlorn
came on to Relieve them, and so being engaged, the whole army advanced; and
about eight at night the Battle begun some six fields from the town, and so we
fought from hedge to hedge, until we beat them into their Barracadoes, which
they maintained for an hour after very manfully, our men being often repulsed,
yet at last got over the Barracadoes, and forced the Enemy into the town;
whereupon the the Horse were let in, who scowring the streets, were received by
the Enemy, and a hot charge given by both parties; yet it pleased God at last
we drove them out of the Barracadoes at the furthest end of the town, and by
this time many prisoners were taken, and put into the Church: but far more
escaped, being dark, over the hedges and by-ways, which was not possible for
us to prevent, throwing down their Arms, and every man flying several ways for
life: our forces were no sooner possessed of the town, but the enemies Magazine
which they left in the Church was fired; whether on purpose by the enemy, or by
accident, we cannot yet learn: but it proved a terrible blow, not only blowing
up the Church with all the Wood and Lead that was upon it, deforming many
houses in the Town, but killed some of the prisoners in the Church, and some of
our men that were in the Church yard; two great Webbs of Lead fell within twice
a horse length of the General; but it pleased God he escaped, though in
imminent danger; many others being hurt, both with the Timber, Stones and Lead,
most of the Town was shaken by this blow, being the terriblest that has been
seen in the memory of man, there being near eighty Barrels, of Powder blown up
together, and one whole Barrel which were blown out of the Church into the
street, which took not fire: The Enemy perceiving their Magazine to be thus
fired, gave one Charge more with their horse up to our Barracadoes, commanded
by Sir John Digby, Brother to the Lord Digby, but our Musketeers gave fire;
whereupon they took their farewell. Our horse instantly advanced through the
Town after them, and begun the pursuit about eleven at night; and I hope will
give a good account of the business. Thus it has pleased God in an instant to
scatter those Forces of the Lord Hoptons, his Infantry being taken, slain, and
totally routed, his Horse, many taken and dispersed, and the rest gone in great
disorder toward Cornwall, as we hear, where shortly I hope we shall meet with
the remnant left of that Crew, and put an end to the field Enemy in the West of
England, they confessed they had eight Regiments of Horse, consisting of two
thousand five hundred men; some other of that their Officers that are prisoners
say Three thousand; be they more or less, they are very resolute men, fought
valiantly; and after they were chased from hedge to hedge, defended their
Barracadoes and works at push of Pike, and with the But-end of their Muskets,
till our foot got over a hedge, flanckt them, that they were forced to quit it:
They were old Cornish foot, and all Greenviles and Gorings old Soldiers,
English and Irish, were engaged in this Service, but now are scattered, threw
down their Arms, and fled for their lives. We have abundance of men wounded,
Officers and Soldiers more then has been at any storm since the Army came
forth: For indeed every hedge was it were a Bulwark to the Enemy; so strong are
the hedges in these parts; but few slain, we killed many of the enemy, both
horse and foot. The particulars of this business you will have more fully
hereafter; let the glory be given unto God, I am Sir

Your most faithful Servant, I. R.
Torrington Feb. 17. SOme of their Horse we hear are going toward Barnstaple;
Colonel Cook is that way: However, it will be needful Colonel Whaley quarters
near Newbery with some of his Horse to follow any party that may come to
Oxford, and not divert our Horse that are on so probable a design to further
the weal of England.



FINIS.

