A FUNERAL SERMON, Preached at the OBSEQUIES Of the Right Reverend Father in
God, JEREMY Lord Bishop of DOWN:

Who deceased at LYSBURNE August 13th. 1667.

By Dr. GEORGE RUST, Dean of CONNOR.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler for Richard Royston Bookseller to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, 1668.

Imprimatur.
Tho. Tomkyns RRmo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Gilberto Divina
Providentia Archi-Episcopo Centuar^en^ a sacris domesticis.

Ex Aedib. Lambethanis October. 26. 1667.
A Funeral Sermon.
1 John 3. 2. It does not yet appear what we shall be.
GLorious things are spoken in Scripture concerning the future Reward of the
Righteous; and all the words that are wont to signify what is of greatest
Price and Value, or can represent the most enravishing objects of our desires
are made use of by the Holy Ghost, to recommend unto us this transcedent State
of Blessedness: Such are these; Rivers of pleasures, A fountain of living
water, A treasure that can never be wasted, nor never taken from us, An
inheritance in light, An incorruptible Crown, A Kingdom, The Kingdom of God,
and the Kingdom of Christ; The Kingdom of Glory, A Crown of Glory and Life, and
Righteousness, and Immortality; The Vision of God; Being filled with all the
fullness of God, An exceeding eternal weight of Glory, (...), Words strangely
emphatical, that cannot be put into English; and if they could, they would not
be able to convey to our minds the Notion that they design: for it is too big
for any Expressions; and, after all that can be said, we must resolve with our
Apostle, It does not yet appear what we shall be.

At this distance we cannot make any likely guesses or conjectures at the glory
of that future state. Men make very imperfect descriptions of Countries or
Cities, that never were there themselves; nor saw the Places with their own
eyes. It is not for any mortal Creature to make a Map of that Canaan that lies
above: It is to all us that live here on the hither-side of Death, an unknown
Country, and an undiscovered Land. It may be, some heavenly Pilgrim, that with
his holy thoughts and ardent desires, is continually traveling thitherward; he
arrives sometimes near the borders of the promised Land, and the Suburbs of the
new Jerusalem, and gets upon the top of Pisgah, and there he has an imperfect
Prospect of a brave Country, that lies afar way off; but he cannot tell how to
describe it, and all that he has to say, to satisfy the curious Enquirer, is
only this, If he would know the glories of it, he must go and see it. It was
believed of old, that those places that lie under the Line, were burnt up by
the continual heat of the Sun, and were not habitable, either by man or beast:
But later Discoveries tell us, that there are the most pleasant Countries that
the Earth can show; insomuch that some have placed Paradise it self in that
Climate. Sure I am, of all the Regions of the Intellectual world, and the
several Lands that are peopled, either with Men or Angels, the most pleasant
Countries they lie under the Line, under the direct beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, where there is an eternal Day, and an eternal Spring; where is
that Tree of Life, that bears twelve manner of Fruits, and yields her Fruit
every Month: Thus we may use Figures, and Metaphors, and Allegories, and tell
you of fruitful meads, and spacious fields, and winding rivers, and purling
brooks, and chanting birds, and shady groves, and pleasant gardens, and lovely
bowers, and noble Seats, and stately Palaces, and goodly People, and excellent
Laws, and sweet Societies; but this is but to frame little comparisons to
please our childish fancies: and just such discourses as a blind man would make
concerning Colors; so do we talk of those things we never saw; and disparage
the state whilst we would recommend it. Indeed it requires some Saint or Angel
from Heaven to discourse upon this Subject; and yet that would not do neither:
for though they might be able to speak some thing of it, yet we should want
ears to hear it. Neither can those things be declared but in the language of
Heaven, which would be little understood by us, the poor inhabitants of this
lower world; they are indeed things too great to be brought within the compass
of words. Saint Paul, when he had been rapt up into the third Heaven, he saw
(...), things unlawful, or unpossible to be uttered; and, Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive, what God
has prepared for them that love him; and, It does not yet appear what we shall
be, said that beloved Disciple, that lay in the bosom of our Savior.

You will not now expect, that I should give you a relation of that which
cannot be uttered, nor so much as conceived; or declare unto you what our
Eagle-sighted Evangelist tells us does not yet appear: But, that you may
understand, that that which sets this state of happiness so beyond the reach of
all imagination, is only its transcendent excellency; I shall tell you
something of what does already appear of it, and may be known concerning it.

First of all we are assured that we shall then now labor under: Vanity and
Misery they are two words that speak the whole of this present world; the
enjoyments of it are dreams and fancies, and shadows, and appearances; and, if
any thing be, it is only Evil and Misery that is real and substantial. Vanity
and folly, labor and pains, cares and fears, crosses and disappointments,
sickness and diseases, they make up the whole of our portion here. This life it
is begun in a Cry, and it ends in a Groan; and he that lives most happily, his
life is checkered with black and white, and his days are not all Sunshine,
but some are cloudy and gloomy, and there is a Worm at the root of all his joy,
that soon eats out the sap and heart of it; and the goard in whose shade he now
so much pleases himself, by to morrow will be withered and gone. But Heaven is
not subject to these mixtures and uncertainties; it is a Region of calmness and
serenity, and the Soul is there gotten above the clouds, and is not annoyed
with those storms and tempests that are here below. All tears shall then be
wiped from our eyes; and though sorrow may endure for the night of this World,
yet joy will spring up in the morning of Eternity.

We are sure we shall be freed from this earthly, and clothed with an heavenly
and glorified Body. These bodies of ours they are the graves and sepulchers,
the prisons and dungeons of our Heaven-born souls; and though we deck and adorn
them, and pride our selves in their beauty and comeliness, yet, when all is
done, they are but sinks of corruption and defilement: they expose us to many
pains and diseases, and incline us to many lusts and passions, and the more we
pamper them, the greater burden they are unto our minds; they impose upon our
reasons, and by their steams and vapors cast a mist before our understandings;
they clog our affections, and like a heavy weight depress us unto this earth,
and keep us from soaring aloft among the winged Inhabitants of the
upper-Regions: But those robes of light and glory, which we shall be clothed
withal at the Resurrection of the Just, and those Heavenly Bodies which the
Gospel has then assured unto us, they are not subject to any of these
mischiefs and inconveniences, but are fit and accommodate instruments for the
soul in its highest exaltations. And this is an argument that the Gospel does
dwell much upon, viz. the Redemption of our bodies, that He shall change our
vile bodies, that they may be like unto His glorious body; and we are taught to
look upon it as one great price of our Reward, that we shall be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven; that this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal immortality: that, as we have born the image of
the earthly, so we must bear the image of the heavenly Adam, who was (...) of
heaven heavenly; as the first man was, (...), of the earth earthy. And
therefore, I think, the Schools put too mean a Rate upon this great Promise of
the Gospel, The Resurrection of our bodies; and, I believe, it might be
demonstrated from the principles of sound Philosophy, That this Article of our
Christian Faith, which the Atheist makes so much sport withal, is so far from
being chargeable with any absurdity, that it is founded upon the highest
Reason; for, seeing we find by too great an experience, that the Soul has so
close and necessary a dependence upon this gross and earthly Mass that we now
carry about with us; it may be disputed with some probability, whether it be
ever able to act independently of all matter whatsoever: at least, we are
assured, that the state of conjunction is most connatural to her; and that,
Intellectual pleasure it self is not only multiplied, but the better felt, by
its redundancy upon the body and spirits: and if it be so, then the purer and
more defecate the Body is, the better will the Soul be appointed for the
exercise of its noblest operations; and it will be no mean piece of our reward
hereafter, that that which is sown (...), an animal, shall be raised a heavenly
body.

We are sure, that we shall then be free from Mesech, and to have my habitation
in the Tents of Kedar; that there should be so many Goliah's within me, that
defy the host of Israel; so many sons of Anak that hinder my entrance into the
Land of Promise, and the Rest of God; that I should toil and labor among the
bricks, and live in bondage unto these worse than Egyptian Taskmasters. Thus
does he sit down by the Rivers of Babylon, and weep over those ruins and
desolations that these worse than Assyrian Armies have made in the City, and
House of his God. And many a time does he cry out in the bitterness of his
soul, Wretched creature that I am! Who shall deliver me from this body of
death? And though, through his faith, and courage, and constancy, he be daily
getting ground of his spiritual enemies, yet it is but by inches, and every
step he takes, he must fight for it; and living as he does in an Enemies
country, he is forced always to be upon his Guard; and if he slumber never so
little, presently he is surpised by a watchful Adversary. This is our portion
here, and our lot is this; but when we arrive unto those Regions of bliss and
glory that are above, we shall then stand safely upon the shore, and see all
our enemies, Pharaoh and all his host, drowned and destroyed in the Red Sea;
and being delivered from the World, and the Flesh, and the Devil, Death, and
Sin, and Hell, we shall sing the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, an Epinicion,
and Song of eternal triumph unto the God of our Salvation.

We shall be sure to meet with the best company to the innumerable company of
Angels, and the general Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, and to the
Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant. The Oracle tells Amelius, enquiring what was become of Polinus's
soul, that he was gone to Pythagoras, and Socrates, and Plato, and as many as
had born a part in the Quire of heavenly love. And I may say to every good man,
that he shall go to the Company of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Moses, David, and
Samuel; all the Prophets and Apostles, and all the holy men of God that have
been in all the ages of the World. All those brave and excellent persons that
have been scattered at the greatest distance of time and place, and in their
several generations have been the salt of the earth to preserve mankind from
utter degeneracy and corruption; These shall be all gathered together, and meet
in one Constellation in that Firmament of Glory. O Praeclarum diem, cum ad
illud divinorum animorum concilium, coetumque proficiscar, atque ex hac turba
ac colluvione discedam! O that blessed day, when we shall make our escape from
this medly and confused riot, and shall arrive to that great Council and
general Randevouz of divine and godlike Spirits! But, which is more than all,
we shall then meet our Lord Jesus Christ, the Head of our Recovery, whose story
is now so delightful unto us, as reporting nothing of him, but the greatest
sweetness and innocence, and meekness and patience, and mercy and tenderness,
and benignity and goodness, and what ever can render any person lovely or
amiable; and who out of his dear love and deep compassion unto mankind, gave up
himself unto the death for us men, and for our salvation. And if St. Augustine
made it one of his wishes, to have seen Jesus Christ in the flesh; how much
more desirable is it, to see him out of his terrestrial weeds, in his robes of
Glory, with all his redeemed Ones about him! And this I cannot but look upon,
as a great advantage and privilege of that future State; for I am not apt to
swallow down that Conceit of the Schools, that we shall spend Eternity in
gazing upon the naked Deity; for certainly the happiness of man consists in
having all his faculties, in their due subordinations, gratified with their
proper objects; and I cannot but believe, a great part of heaven to be the
blessed Society that is there; Their enravishing beauty, that is to say, their
inward life and perfection, flowring forth and raying it self through their
glorified bodies; The rare discourses wherewith they entertain one another; The
pure and chaste and spotless, and yet most ardent Love, wherewith they embrace
each other; The ecstatick Devotions wherein they join together: And certainly
every pious and devout soul will readily acknowledge with me, that it must needs
be matter of unspeakable pleasure, to be taken into the Quire of Angels and
Seraphims, and the glorious Company of the Apostles, and the goodly Fellowship
of the Prophets, and the noble Army of Martyrs; and to join with them in
singing Praises, and Hallelu-jahs, and Songs of joy, and Triumph unto our great
Creator and Redeemer, The Father of Spirits, and the Lover of Souls, unto Him
that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

We are sure we shall then have all our capacities They hunger no more, neither
thirst any more; for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters. What vast degrees of
perfection and happiness the nature of man is capable of, we may best
understand, by viewing it in the person of Christ, taken into the nearest union
with Divinity, and made God's Vicegerent in the World, and the Head and
Governor of the whole Creation. In this our narrow and contracted state we are
apt to think too meanly of our selves, and do not understand the dignity of our
own natures, what we were made for, and what we are capable of: but, as
Plotinus somewhere observes, We are like Children, from our birth brought up in
ignorance of, and at a great distance from, our Parents and Relations; and have
forgot the Nobleness of our Extraction, and rank our selves and our fortunes
among the Lot of Beggars, and mean and ordinary persons; though we are the
offspring of a great Prince, and were born to a Kingdom. It does indeed become
creatures to think modestly of themselves; yet, if we consider it aright, it
will be found very hard, to set any bounds or limits to our own happiness, and
say, Hitherto it shall arise, and no further. For that wherein the happiness of
Man consists, viz. Truth and Goodness, the Communication of the Divine Nature,
and the Illapses of Divine Love, it does not cloy, or glut, or satiate; but
every participation of them does widen and enlarge our Souls, and fits us for
further and further Receptions; the more we have, the more we are capable of;
the more we are sill'd, the more room is made in our Spirits; and thus it is
still and still, even till we arrive unto such degrees as we can assign no
measures unto.

We shall then be made like unto God Areopagite, Salvation can no otherways be
accomplished, but by becoming God-like; It does not yet appear what we shall
be, but when he shall appear we shall be like him, says our Evangelist; for we
shall see him as he is. There is no seeing God as he is, but by becoming like
unto him; nor is there any enjoying of him, but by being transformed into his
Image and Similitude. Men usually have very strange Notions concerning God, and
the enjoyment of him; or rather, these are words, to which there is no
correspondent conception in their minds: but if we would understand God aright,
we must look upon him as Infinite Wisdom, Righteousness, Love, Goodness, and
whatever speaks any thing of Beauty and Perfection; and if we pretend to
worship him, it must be by loving and adoring his transcendent Excellencies;
and if we hope to enjoy him, it must be by conformity unto him, and
participation of his Nature. The frame and constitution of things is such, that
it is impossible that Man should arrive to Happiness any other way. And if the
Sovereignty of God should dispense with our obedience, the nature of the thing
would not permit us to be happy without it: If we live only the Animal Life, we
may indeed be happy, as Beasts are happy; but the Happiness that belongs to a
Rational and intellectual Being, can never be attained but in a way of holiness
and conformity unto the Divine Will: for, such a temper and disposition of mind
is necessary unto Happiness, not by virtue of any arbitrarious constitution of
Heaven; but, the eternal Laws of Righteousness, and immutable respects of
things, do require and exact it: Yea, I may truly say, That God and Christ
without us cannot make us happy: for we are not conscious to our selves of any
thing, but only the operations of our own minds; and it is not the person of God
and Christ, but their Life and Nature, wherein consists our formal happiness:
For, What is the happiness of God himself, but only that pleasure and
satisfaction that results from a sense of his Infinite perfections? And how is
it possible for a creature to be more happy, than by partaking of that, in its
measure and proportion, which is the happiness of God himself.

The Soul being thus prepared, shall live in the presence of God, and lie under
the influences and illapses of Divine love and goodness; Father I will that
they whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory. They that fight manfully under the Banners of Heaven, and overcome their
spiritual Enemies, They shall eat of the hidden Manna, and become Pillars in
the Temple of God, and shall go no more out: They shall stand before the Throne
of God continually, and serve him Day and Night in his Temple, and he that
sits on the Throne shall dwell amongst them; God shall put under them his
everlasting Arms, and carry them in his bosom, and they shall suck the full
Breasts of eternal goodness: For now there is nothing can hinder the most near
and intimate conjunction of the Soul with God; for, things that are alike, do
easily mingle with one another: but the mixture that is betwixt Bodies, be they
never so homogeneal, comes but to an external touch; for their parts can never
run up into one another. But there is no such (...), or resistance, amongst
spiritual Beings; and we are estranged from God ((...)) not by distance of
place, but by difference and diversity of Nature; and when that is removed, He
becomes present to us, and we to Him: (...) etc. like the Magnitudines congruae
in Mathematics, Quando prima primis, media mediis, extrema extremis, parts
denique partibus usquequaque respondent, each of whose parts do exactly answer
one to the other. This therefore is the Soul's progress from that state of
purgation to illumination, and so to Union. There are several faculties in the
Soul of Man, that are conformed to several kinds of objects; and, according to
that Life a Man is a waked into, so these faculties do exert themselves; and
though whilst we live barely an Animal Life, we converse with little more than
this outward World, and the objects of our Senses; yet there are Faculties
within us that are receptive of God, and when we arrive once unto a due measure
of purity of Spirit, the Rays of Heavenly Light will as certainly shine into
our minds, as the beams of the Sun, when it arises above the Horizon, do
illuminate the clear and pellucid air: And from this sight and illumination,
the Soul proceeds to an intimate union with God, and to a taste and touch of
him. This is that (...), that silent touch with God that fills the Soul with
unexpressible joy and triumph: For, if the objects of this outward world that
strike upon our senses do so hugely please and delight us; What infinite
pleasure then must there needs be in those touches and Impresses, that the
Divine Love and goodness shall make upon our Souls? But these are things that
we may talk of, as we would do of a sixth Sense, or something we have no
distinct Notion or Idea of; but the perfect understanding of them belongs only
to the future state of Comprehension.

Lastly, we shall have our Knowledge, and our Love, which are the most perfect
and beatifying Acts of our Minds, employed about their noblest objects in their
most exalted Measures; For a Man to resolve himself in some knotty Question, or
answer some stubborn Argument, or find out some noble Conclusion, or solve some
hard Problem, what ineffable pleasure does it create many times to a
contemplative mind? We know, who sacrificed a Hecatomb for one Mathematical
Demonstration; and another that upon the like occasion cried out, (...), in a
kind of Rapture: To have the secrets of Nature disclosed, and the mysteries of
Art revealed; but above all, the Riddles of Providence unfolded, are such
Jewels as I know many searching and inquisitive Spirits would be willing to
purchase at any Rate; when we come to Heaven (I will not say, We shall see all
things, in the mirror of Divinity, for that it may be is an Extravagancy of the
Schools; nor, that any one true Proposition through the concatenation of Truth,
will then multiply it self into the explicit knowledge of all Conclusions
whatsoever, for I believe that a Fancy too, but) our Knowledge shall be
strangely enlarged, and, for ought I can determine, be for ever receiving new
Additions, and fresh Accruements; The Clew of Divine Providence will then be
unravelled, and all those Difficulties which now perplex us, will be easily
assoyl'd, and we shall then perceive that the Wisdom and Goodness of God, is a
vast and comprehensive Thing, and moves in a far larger Sphere than we are
aware of in this state of narrowness and imperfection: But there is something
greater and beyond all this; and S. John has a strange Expression, That we
shall then see God even as he is; And God, we know, is the wellspring of
Perfection and Happiness, the Fountain and Original of all Beauty; he is
infinitely glorious, and lovely, and excellent; and if we see him as he is, all
this Glory must descend into us and become ours: for we can no otherways see
God (as I said before) but by becoming Deiform, by being changed into the same
Glory. But Love, that is it, which makes us most happy, and by that we are most
intimately conjoined unto God, For he that dwells in Love, dwells in God,
and God in him: And how pleasant beyond all imagination must it needs be, to
have the Soul melted into a flame of Love, and that Fire fed and nourished by
the enjoyment of it is Beloved; To be transported into Ecstasies, and Raptures
of Love; to be swallowed up in the embraces of eternal sweetness; to be lost in
the Sourse and Fountain of Happiness and Bliss, like a spark in the Fire, or a
beam in the Sun, or drop in the Ocean.

It may be you will tell me, I have been all this while confuting my Text, and
giving you a Relation of that which S. John tells us, does not yet appear what
it is; But my design has been the same with the Holy Evangelist's; and that is,
to represent unto you, how transcendently great, that State of Happiness must
needs be; when as, by what we are able to apprehend of it, it is infinitely the
object of our desires, and yet we are assured by those that are best able to
tell, That the best and greatest part of the Country is yet undiscovered, and
that we cannot so much as guess at the pleasure of it, till we come to enjoy
it: And indeed it is impossible it should be otherwise; for Happiness being a
matter of Sense, all the words in the World cannot convey the Notion of it unto
our Minds, and it is only to be understood by them that feel it; (...).

But though it does not yet appear what we shall be; yet so much already
appears of it, that it cannot but seem the most worthy object of our endeavors
and desires; and by some few Clusters that have been shown us of this good
Land, we may guess what pleasant and delightful Fruit it bears: And if we have
but any reverence of our selves, and will but consider the dignity of our
Natures, and the vastness of that Happiness we are capable of; methinks we
should be always traveling toward that Heavenly Country, though our way
lies through a Wilderness, and be striving for this great Prize and immortal
Crown, and be clearing our eyes, and purging our sight, that we may come to
this Vision of God; shaking off all fond passions, and dirty desires, and
breathing forth our Souls in such aspirations as these:

My Soul thirsts for thee, O Lord, in a dry and barren Land, where no Water
is; O that thou would distill, and drop down the Dew of thy Heavenly Grace
into all it is secret Chinks and Pores; One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that will I seek after, That I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days
of my Life, and behold his Glory, for a day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand, and I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of the Lord, than
dwell in the Tents of wickedness. All the Kings of the Earth, they are thy
Tributaries; the Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles, bring Presents unto thee;
the Kings of Sheba and Seba offer Gifts! O that we could but pay thee, that
which is so due unto thee, the tribute of our Hearts! The Heathen are come into
thine Inheritance; thy holy Temple have they defi'ld: Help us, O God of our
Salvation, and deliver us, and purge away our sins from us, for thy Name's
sake! O that the Lord whom we seek, would come to his own House, and give Peace
there, and fill it with his Glory! Come and cleanse thine own Temple, for we
have made it a Den of Thieves, which should have been a House of Prayer! O that
we might never give sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids, till we have
prepared a House for the Lord, and a Tabernacle for the God of Jacob! The Curse
of Cain it is fallen upon us, and we are as Vagabonds in the Earth; and wander
from one Creature to another! O that our Souls might come at last to dwell in
God, our fixed and eternal Habitation! We, like silly Doves, fly up and down
the Earth, but can find no rest for the sole of our feet; O that after all our
weariness and our wanderings, we might return into the Ark, and that God would
put forth his hand and take us and pull us in unto Himself! We have too long
lived upon Vanity and Emptiness, the wind and the whirlwind; O that we may
now begin to feed upon Substance, and delight our selves in Marrow and Fatness!
O that God would strike our rocky Hearts, that there might spring up a Fountain
in the Wilderness, and Pools in the Desert; that we might drink of that Water,
whereof whosoever drinks, shall never thirst more; that God would give us that
Portion of Goods that falls to us, not to waste it with riotous living, but
therewith to feed our languishing Souls, lest they be weary and faint by the
way! We ask not the Childrens Bread, but the Crumbs that fall from thy Table;
that our Baskets may be filled with thy Fragments, for they will be better than
Wine, and sweeter than the Honey, and the Honeycomb, and more pleasant to us
than a Feast of fat things! We have wandered too long in a barren, and howling
Desert, where wild Beasts, and doleful Creatures, Owls and Bats, Satyrs and
Dragons, keep their haunts; O that we might be fed in green Pastures, and led
by the still Waters, that the Winter might be past, and the Rain over and gone,
that the Flowers may appear on the Earth, and the time of the singing of Birds
may come, and the Voice of the Turtle may be heard in our Land! We have lived
too long in Sodom, which is the place that God at last will destroy: O that we
might arise and be gone; and while we are lingering, that the Angels of God
would lay hold upon our hands, and be merciful unto us, and bring us forth, and
set us without the City; and that we may never look back any more, but may
escape unto the Mountain, and dwell safe in the Rock of Ages! Wisdom has
killed her Beasts, she has mingled her Wine, and furnished her Table; O that
we might eat of her Meat, and drink of the Wine which she has mingled! God
knocks at the doors of our Hearts; O let us open unto him, those everlasting
Gates, that he may Sup with us, and we with him; for he will bring his Cheer
along with him, and will feast us with Manna, and Angels food! O that the Sun
of Righteousness might arise and melt the Iciness of our Hearts! That God would
send forth his Spirit, and with his warmth and heat, dissolve our frozen Souls!
That God would breathe into our minds, those still and gentle Gales of Divine
Inspirations, that may blow up, and increase in us the flames of heavenly Love!
That we may be a whole burnt Offering, and all the substance of our Souls be
consumed by fire from Heaven, and ascend up in Clouds of Incense! That as so
many sparks we might be always mounting upward, till we return again into our
proper Elements! That like so many particular Rivulets, we may be continually
making toward the Sea, and never rest till we lose our selves in that Ocean of
Goodness, from whence we first came! That we may open our Mouths wide, that God
may satisfy them! That we may so perfectly discharge our selves of all strange
Desires and Passions, that our Souls may be nothing else but a deep Emptiness,
and vast Capacity to be filled with all the fullness of God! Let but these be
the breathings of our Spirits, and this Divine Magnetism will most certainly
draw down God into our Souls, and we shall have some Praelibations of that
Happiness; some small glimpses, and little discoveries whereof, is all that
belongs to this state of Mortality.

I Have as yet done but the half of my Task: and I have another Text yet to
preach upon, and a very large and copious one, The great Person, whose
Obsequies we here come to celebrate: His fame is so great throughout the World,
that he stands in no need of an Encomium; and yet his worth is much greater
than his fame; It is impossible not to speak great things of him, and yet it is
impossible to speak what he deserves; and the meanness of an Oration, will but
sully the brightness of his Excellencies: But Custom requires that something
should be said, and it is a duty and a debt that we owe unto his Memory: and I
hope his great Soul, if it has any knowledge of what is done here below, will
not be offended at the smallness of our Offering.

He was born at Cambridge, and brought up in the Free School there, and was
ripe for the University, before Custom would allow of his admittance; but by
that time he was Thirteen years old, he was entered into Caius-Colledg; and as
soon as he was Graduate, he was chosen Fellow. Had he lived amongst the ancient
Pagans, he had been ushered into the world with a Miracle, and Swans must have
daunc'd and sung at his birth; and he must have been a great Hero, and no less
than the Son of Apollo, the God of Wisdom and Eloquence.

He was a Man long before he was of Age; and knew little more of the state of
childhood, than its Innocence and Pleasantness. From the University, by that
time he was Master of Arts, he removed to London, and became public Lecturer
in the Church of St. Paul's; where he preached to the admiration and
astonishment of his Auditory; and by his florid and youthful beauty, and sweet
and pleasant air, and sublime and raised discourses, he made his hearers take
him for some young Angel, newly descended from the Visions of Glory; The fame
of this new Star, that outshone all the rest of the Firmament, quickly came to
the notice of the great ArchBishop of Canterbury, who would needs have him
preach before him; which he performed not less to his wonder than satisfaction;
His discourse was beyond exception, and beyond imitation: yet the wise Prelate
thought him too young; but the great Youth humbly begged his Grace to pardon
that fault, and promised, If he lived, he would mend it. However the grand
Patron of Learning and Ingenuity, thought it for the advantage of the World,
that such mighty Parts should be afforded better opportunities of study and
improvement, than a course of constant preaching would allow of; and to that
purpose he placed him in his own College of All Souls in Oxford; where love
and admiration still waited upon him: which so long as there is any spark of
ingenuity in the breasts of men, must needs be the inseparable Attendants of so
extraordinary a worth and sweetness. He had not been long here, before my Lord
of Canterbury bestowed upon him the Rectory of Vphingham in Rutland-shire, and
soon after preferred him to be Chaplain to King Charles the Martyr of blessed
and immortal memory. Thus were preferments heaped upon him, but still less than
his deserts; and that not through the fault of his great Masters, but because
the amplest honors and rewards were poor and inconsiderable, compared with the
greatness of his Worth and Merit.

This Great Man had no sooner launched into the World, but a fearful Tempest
arose, and a barbarous and unnatural War, disturbed a long and uninterrupted
Peace and Tranquillity; and brought all things into disorder and confusion; but
his Religion taught him to be Loyal, and engaged him on his Prince's side,
whose Cause and Quarrel he always owned and maintained with a great courage
and constancy; till at last, he and his little fortune were shipwrackt in that
great Hurricane, that overturned both Church and State: This fatal Storm cast
him ashore in a private corner of the World, and a tender Providence shrouded
him under her Wings, and the Prophet was fed in the Wilderness; and his great
worthiness procured him friends, that supplied him with bread and necessaries.
In this Solitude he began to write those excellent Discourses, which are enough
of themselves to furnish a Library, and will be famous to all succeeding
Generations, for their greatness of wit, and profoundness of judgment, and
richness of fancy, and clearness of expression, and copiousness of invention,
and general usefulness to all the purposes of a Christian: And by these he soon
got a great reputation among all persons of judgment and indifferency, and his
Name will grow greater still, as the World grows better and wiser.

When he had spent some years in this retirement, it pleased God to visit his
Family with sickness, and to take to himself the dear Pledges of his favor,
three Sons of great hopes and expectations, within the space of two or three
Months: And though he had learned a quiet submission unto the Divine Will; yet
the affliction touched him so sensibly, that it made him desirous to leave the
Country; And going to London, he there met my Lord Conway, a Person of great
Honor and Generosity; who making him a kind Proffer, the good man embraced it,
and that brought him over into Ireland, and settled him at Portmore, a place
made for study and contemplation, which he therefore dearly loved; and here he
wrote his Cases of Consciences: A Book that is able alone to give its Author
Immortality.

By this time the wheel of Providence brought about the Kings happy
Restoration, and there began a new World, and the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Waters, and out of a confused Chaos brought forth Beauty and Order,
and all the Three Nations were inspired with a new life, and became drunk with
an excess of Joy: among the rest, this Loyal Subject went over to congratulate
the Prince and People's happiness, and bear a part in the Universal Triumph.

It was not long ere his Sacred Majesty began the settlement of the Church, and
the great Doctor Jeremy Tailor was resolved upon, for the Bishopric of Down
and Conor; and not long after, Dromore was added to it; and it was but
reasonable that the King and Church should consider their Champion, and reward
the pains and sufferings he under-went in the defense of their Cause and
Honor. With what care and faithfulness he discharged his Office, we are all
his witnesses; what good Rules and Directions he gave his Clergy, and how he
taught us the practice of them by his own example. Upon his coming over Bishop,
he was made a Privy-Councellor, and the University of Dublin gave him their
Testimony, by recommending him for their Vice Chancellor; Which honorable
Office he kept to his dying day.

During his being in this See, he wrote several excellent Discourses,
particularly his Disswasive from Popery (which was received by a general
approbation) and a Vindication of it (now in the Press) from some impertinent
Cavillers, that pretend to answer Books, when there is nothing toward it, more
than the very Title Page. This great Prelate improved his Talent with a mighty
industry, and managed his Steward-ship rarely well; and his Master, when he
called for his Accounts, found him busy and at his work; and employed upon an
excellent Subject, A Discourse upon the Beatitudes; which, if finished, would
have been of great Use to the World, and solved most of the Cases of Conscience
that occurr to a Christian, in all the varieties of states and conditions. But
the All-wise God has ordained it otherwise, and has called home his good
Servant, to give him a portion in that Blessedness that Jesus Christ has
promised to all his faithful Disciples and Followers.

Thus having given you a brief Account of his Life, I know you will now expect
a character of his Person; but I foresee, it will befall him, as it does all
Glorious Subjects, that are but disparaged by a commendation; One thing I am
secure of, that I shall not be thought to speak Hyperbolies; for the Subject
can hardly be reached, by any expressions; For he was none of Gods ordinary
works, but his Endowments were so many, and so great, as really made him a
Miracle.

Nature had befriended him much in his Constitution; for he was a person of a
most sweet and obliging Humor, of great Candor and Ingenuity, and there was
so much of Salt and fineness of Wit, and pretiness of Address in his familiar
Discourses, as made his Conversation have all the pleasantness of a Comedy, and
all the usefulness of a Sermon; His Soul was made up of Harmony, and he never
spoke, but he charmed his Hearer, not only with the clearness of his Reason;
but all his Words, and his very Tone, and Cadencies were strangely Musical.

But, That which did most of all captivate and enravish, was, The gaiety and
richness of his Fancy for he had much in him of that natural Enthusiasm, that
inspires all great Poets and Orators; and there was a generous ferment in his
Blood and Spirits, that set his Fancy bravely a work, and made it swell, and
teem, and become pregnant to such degrees of Luxuriancy, as nothing but the
greatness of his Wit and Judgment, could have kept it within due bounds and
measures.

And indeed it was a rare Mixture, and a single Instance, hardly to be found in
an Age; for the great Tryer of Wits has told us, That there is a peculiar and
several Complexion, required for Wit, and Judgment, and Fancy; and yet you
might have found all these, in this great Personage, in their Eminency and
Perfection. But that which made his Wit and Judgment so considerable, was the
largeness and freedom of his Spirit, for truth is plain and easy to a mind
dis-intangled from Superstition and Prejudice; He was one of the (...) a sort
of brave Philosophers that Laertius speaks of, that did not addict themselves
to any particular Sect, but ingenuously sought for Truth among all the
wrangling Schools; and they found her miserably torn and rent to pieces, and
parcell'd into Rags, by the several contending Parties, and so disfigured and
misshapen, that it was hard to know her; but they made a shift to gather up her
scattered Limbs, which as soon as they came together by a strange sympathy and
connaturalness, presently united into a lovely and beautiful body. This was the
Spirit of this Great Man; he weighed Men's Reasons, and not their Names, and was
not scared with the ugly Vizars men usually put upon Persons they hate, and
Opinions they dislike; nor affrighted with the Anathema's and Execrations of an
infallible Chair, which he looked upon only as Bug-bears to terrify weak, and
childish minds. He considered that it is not likely any one Party should wholly
engross Truth to themselves; that Obedience is the only way to true Knowledge;
(which is an Argument that he has managed rarely well, in that excellent Sermon
of his, which he calls, Via Intelligentiae,) that God always, and only teaches
docible and ingenuous minds, that are willing to hear, and ready to obey
according to their Light; that it is impossible, a pure, humble, resigned,
God-like Soul, should be kept out of Heaven, whatever mistakes it might be
subject to in this state of Mortality; that the design of Heaven is not to fill
men's heads, and feed their Curiosities, but to better their Hearts; and mend
their Lives. Such Considerations as these, made him impartial in his
Disquisitions, and give a due allowance to the Reasons of his Adversary, and
contend for Truth, and not for Victory.

And now you will easily believe that an ordinary Diligence would be able to
make great Improvements upon such a Stock of Parts and Endowments; but to these
advantages of Nature, and excellency of his Spirit, he added an indefatigable
Industry, and God gave a plentiful Benediction; for, there were very few Kinds
of Learning, but he was a Mystes, and great Master in them: He was a rare
Humanist, and hugely versed in all the polite parts of Learning; and had
thoroughly concocted all the ancient Moralists, Greek and Roman, Poets and
Orators; and was not unacquainted with the refined Wits of the later Ages,
whether French or Italian. But he had not only the Accomplishments of a
Gentleman, but so universal were his Parts, that they were proportioned to
every thing; and though his Spirit and Humor were made up of Smoothness and
Gentleness, yet he could bear with the Harshness and Roughness of the Schools;
and was not unseen in their Subtilties and Spinosities, and upon occasion,
could make them serve his purpose; and yet, I believe, he thought many of them
very near akin to the famous Knight of the Mancha, and would make sport
sometimes with the Romantic Sophistry and fantastic Adventures of
School-Errantry. His Skill was great, both in the Civil and Canon Law, and
Casuistical Divinity; and he was a rare Conductor of Souls, and knew how to
Counsel, and to Advise; to solve Difficulties, and determine Cases, and quiet
Consciences. And he was no Novice in Mr. I. S. new Science of Controversy; but
could manage an Argument, and make Reparties with a strange dexterity; He
understood what the several Parties in Christendom have to say for themselves,
and could plead their Cause to better advantage than any Advocate of their
Tribe: and when he had done, he could confute them too; and show, that better
Arguments than ever they could produce for themselves, would afford no
sufficient ground for their fond Opinions.

It would be too great a Task to pursue his Accomplishments through the various
Kinds of Literature: I shall content my self to add only his great Acquaintance
with the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers, and the Doctors of the first and
purest Ages both of the Greek and Latin Church; which he has made use of
against the Romanists, to vindicate the Church of England from the Challenge of
Innovation, and prove her to be truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolical.

But Religion and Virtue is the Crown of all other Accomplishments; and it was
the Glory of this great Man, to be thought a Christian, and whatever you added
to it, he looked upon as a term of diminution; and yet he was a Zealous Son of
the Church of England; but that was because he judged her (and with great
reason) a Church the most purely Christian of any in the World. In his younger
years he met with some assaults from Popery, and the high pretensions of their
Religious Orders were very accommodate to his Devotional Temper; but he was
always so much Master of himself, that he would never be governed by any thing
but Reasons, and the evidence of Truth, which engaged him in the study of those
Controversies; and to how good purpose, the World is by this time a sufficient
Witness: But the longer, and the more he considered, the worse he liked the
Roman Cause, and became at last to censure them with some severity; but I
confess I have so great an opinion of his Judgment, and the charitableness of
his Spirit, that I am afraid he did not think worse of them than they deserve.

But Religion is not a matter of Theory and Orthodox Notions, and it is not
enough to believe aright, but we must practice accordingly; and to master our
passions, and to make a right use of that (...) and power that God has given us
over our own actions, is a greater glory than all other Accomplishments that
can adorn the mind of Man; and therefore I shall close my Character of this
Great Personage with a touch upon some of those Virtues, for which his Memory
will be precious to all Posterity. He was a Person of great Humility; and
notwithstanding his stupendous Parts, and Learning, and Eminency of Place, he
had nothing in him of Pride and Humor, but was Courteous and Affable, and of
easy Access, and would lend a ready Ear to the complaints, yea to the
impertinencies of the meanest persons. His Humility was coupled with an
Extraordinary Piety; and, I believe, he spent the greatest part of his time in
Heaven; his solemn hours of Prayer took up a considerable portion of his Life;
and we are not to doubt, but he had learned of St. Paul to pray continually;
and that occasional Ejaculations, and frequent Aspirations and Emigrations of
his Soul after God, made up the best part of his Devotions. But he was not
only a Good Man Godward, but he was come to the top of St. Peter's gradation,
and to all his other Virtues added a large and diffusive Charity: And, whoever
compares his plentiful Incomes, with the inconsiderable Estate he left at his
Death, will be easily convinced that Charity was Steward for a great proportion
of his Revenue. But the Hungry that he fed, and the Naked that he clothed, and
the Distressed that he supplied and the Fatherless that he provided for; the
poor Children that he put to Apprentice, and brought up at School, and
maintained at the University, will now sound a Trumpet to that Charity which he
dispersed with his right hand, but would not suffer his left hand to have any
knowledge of it.

To sum up all in a few words; This Great Prelate he had the good Humor of a
Gentleman, the Eloquence of an Orator, the Fancy of a Poet, the Acuteness of a
SchoolMan, the Profoundness of a Philosopher, the Wisdom of a Counselor, the
Sagacity of a Prophet, the Reason of an Angel, and the Piety of a Saint: He had
Devotion enough for a Cloister, Learning enough for an University, and Wit
enough for a College of Virtuosi(...); and, had his Parts and Endowments been
parcell'd out among his poor Clergy that he left behind him, it would perhaps
have made one of the best Diocese in the World. But alas! Our Father, our
Father, the Horses of our Israel, and the Chariot thereof; he is gone, and has
carried his Mantle and his Spirit along with him up to Heaven; and the Sons of
the Prophets have lost all their beauty and luster which they enjoyed only from
the reflection of his Excellencies, which were bright and radiant enough to cast
a glory upon a whole Order of Men. But the Sun of this our world after many
attempts to break through the Crust of an earthly Body, is at last swallowed up
in the great Vortex of Eternity, and there all his Maculae are scattered and
dissolved, and he is fixed in an Orb of Glory, and shines among his
Brethren-stars, that in their several Ages gave light to the World, and turned
many Souls unto Righteousness; and we that are left behind, though we can never
reach his perfections, must study to imitate his Virtues, that we may at last
come to sit at his feet in the Mansions of Glory; which God grant for his
infinite mercies in Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, through the Eternal
Spirit, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, Worship and Thanksgiving, Love and
Obedienee, now and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books and Ser(...) written by Jer. Ta late Lord Bishop of Down and Conor.
ENIAUTOS, A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in folio. 2. The History of the Life and Death of the
Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, the 3d. Edit. in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises of
Holy Living, in 8. 4. The Rule and Exercises of Holy Dying, in 8. 5. The Golden
Grove, or (...) of daily Prayers, fitted (...) days of the Week, together with
a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. A Collection of Polemical and
Moral discourses, in (...) newly reprinted. 7. A Discourse of the Nature,
Offices, and Measure of Friendship, in 12. new. 8. A Collection of Offices or
forms of Prayer, fitted to the needs of all Christians, taken out of the
Scriptures and Ancient Liturgies of several Churches, especially the Greek,
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David after the Kings Translation in a
large 8. newly published. 7. Ductor Dubitantium, or the Rule of Conscience,
fol. in two Volumes. 10. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance, describing
the necessities of a Strict, a Holy and a Christian Life: Serving as a
necessary Supplement unto the Rule of Conscience. 11, `(...), A Supplement to
the '(...), or course of Sermons for the whole (...) All that have been (...)
published (since the (...)) to which is adjoined, his Advice to the Clergy of
his Diocese. 12. The Worthy Commu(...)cant, or a Discourse of the Nature,
Effects, and Blessings consequent to the worthy receiving of the Lord's Supper,
Printed for J. Martin. 13. A Discourse of Confirmation in 8o. new. 14. A
Dissuasive from Popery, in 8o. new. First Part: 15. The Second Part of the
Dissuasive from Popery: in vindication of the First, in 4o. new.
A Funeral Sermon, preached at the Obsequies of the Right Reverend Father in
God, the Lord Bishop of Down.

All sold by R. Royston.


