THE PRESENT STATE OF THE MOREA, Called Anciently Peloponnesus: Which has been
near Two Hundred Years under the Dominion of the Turks; and is now very much
Depopulated.

Together with a Description of the City of ATHENS, Islands of ZANT, STRAFADES,
and SERIGO.

Faithfully Described by BERNARD RANDOLPH, who resided in those parts from 1671
to 1679.

By His Majesty's Special License.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Tho. Basset in
Fleetstreet, John Penn under the Arch in the Temple, and John Hill in
Exchange-alley. 1686.

MOREA, sometime called PELOPONNESUS, and by the Turks MORA.
THE Isthmus or Hexamile is a Neck of Land which joyneth it to the Continent of
Greece, and makes it a Peninsula. The Length is about ten Miles, and the
Breadth at the narrowest place not above Six. There are the Ruins of Three
Castles, and a Wall which reached from the City of Canchrea on the Egean Sea, to
Lechaeum on the Gulf of Lepanto. There is also a Valley where they endeavored
to have both Seas joined.

CORINTH, by the Turks GOVRDESE,
Is an Ancient City which stands on a Rising Ground, about Two Miles from the
Sea of the Gulf of Lepanto. The Houses are much scattered, having many Fields
amongst them, together with which they take up above three Miles in compass.
There are many pleasant Gardens with all sorts of Fruits. The Houses here are
more for Trade and Pleasure than Security, most having other Houses up in the
Castle, which stands upon a Hill. To this they retreat when any Pirates come to
annoy them, which is often in the Summer time; they coming with their
Briganteens, to the Isthmus, which is not above six Miles off. The Hill on
which the Castle stands is very high, it was formerly called the Acro
Corinthus, and is very steep round about; the part toward the West, North and
North East being almost Perpendicular. It is above two Miles from the Town to
the Castle. The way up is much winding, and also steep. The Hill is all Stone.
The Fortifications are very Ancient. There are two Walls before you pass into
the chiefest part of the Castle. The Hill is Walled round at the Top, which is
above three Miles. There are some Guns which are of no other use than to Salute
any Great Person, or to fire on their Festivals. From the Northermost part is
one of the most pleasant Prospects the World affords, looking into the Gulf of
Lepanto, Aegean Sea, and several Mountains at great distance, together with
those most pleasant Plains of Corinth, and Basilico, which abound with
Olive Trees, Vine-yards, and many small Villages. In the Castle the Land is
good, where are many Pasture Fields, and plenty of Water, so as it may endure a
long Siege; to the West there is a Spring which gusheth out from the Top of the
Hill, and falls down above Fifty Fathom. In the Plains of Corinth were the
first Current Vines Planted.

VOSTIZA,
Is about twenty Miles within the Mouth of the Gulf of Lepanto, Seated on a
Rising Ground about a Quarter of a Mile from the Seaside. It is but a small
Town without any Fortifications. The Plain about it affords Corn, Currants, and
Wine, Olive Trees there are not many, it lying too open to the Northerly Winds,
which bring very cold Blasts from the Mountains on the other side the Gulf.
The Mountains to the South, are not above Five Miles from the Town, which are
very high, and continue to the Plains of Basilico, betwixt which and the Sea is
the Road to Corinth, which is very bad way to pass in the Winter, there being
no cut Rivers, and the Floods overflowing make several Waters, some above a
Mile broad. There are no Inhabitants between the Plain of Basilico and this
Place, nor is the Soil good, being most Stony, and having many Woods, nor is it
above two Miles from the Sea to the Mountains in most places. There is no Port
at Vostiza, nor any Shelter for Boats on all this side of the Gulf.

PARTRASS, formerly called PATRA,
Is an Ancient City. It stands about Nine Miles without the Castles, at the
Mouth of the Gulf of Lepanto, on a Hill about a Quarter of a Mile from the
Sea. The greatest part of the Town runs down toward the South East,
overlooking the Plain. The Houses are thick, and are above two Miles about,
including the Castle, which stands to the North above the Town. The Castle is
well built, having very high Walls, to the Eastward is a dry Ditch with a low
Wall; toward the Sea is a round Tower well built, high and strong, which has
Six very long Guns to command the Road, but they lie too high to do any harm to
Ships, except a Shot should chance to hit any of the Masts. There are many
Ruins about the City. To the Eastward is a very great Mountain, the Foot of
which is about ten Miles from the Town. The Plain is very delightsome, having
many pleasant Gardens with all sorts of Fruits. The largest, and best Lemons
are here of any place in the Morea: At the Sea side there are only a few
Storehouses. About a Quarter of a Mile from them to the South, are the Ruins
of a Great Church which was Dedicated to St. Andrew. There are no
Fortifications by the Seaside nearer than the Castles at the Gulf. In the
Summer time there is a continual Watch by the Seaside, of both Horse and Foot;
the Town dividing into several Parties, one Party goes down every night
scouting along the Marine, not suffering any Boats to come a shore till it be
Day. Before this place was the great fight betwixt the Christians and the
Turks, in October 1571. when the Christians were Victorious.

GASTON, formerly called ELIS,
Stands in a very large Plain about Eight Miles from the Bay of Chiarenza. The
Houses are very much scattered; without Walls or any Fortification. The
greatest part of the Inhabitants are Husbandmen. The Country about it is very
pleasant. There are several large Woods about it. The Land is most Plowed, and
Pasture Land, having very few Olive or Fruit trees. In the time of War with the
Venetians, here is usually a Bassha with a Number of Horse. who guard the
Coast. There is no Fortification by the Seaside from the Gulf of Lepanto to
Navareene, except the Castle of Arcadia a Mile from the Sea. From Partrass to
Gaston the way is plain, and so continues to Navardene a long the Sea side. The
Black Mountains, and Castle Tornese are left on the Lest hand.

Castle TORNESE, by the Turks called CLOMVTCH,
Stands on a high Hill on a Promontory, the most West of all the Morea. It is
about Six Miles from the Ruins of Chiarenza, and not above Eighteen Miles from
the Island of Zante. At Sea it seems to be an Island. The Castle is well built,
having the Walls very high, but much out of repair. It has no Ditch about it,
nor has it any other Strength than from the Situation, not having above twenty
Guns. Under the Walls is a small Town where Sir Henry Hide (who was sometime
Consul for the English Nation in the Morea) lived in great State, built a small
Church, and a fair House with many Gardens and Vine-yards about it. The Church
remains entire. The Situation is very pleasant, and was by the Venetians
called Bell videre.

ARCADIA, formerly called CYPARISSA,
Stands in a Great Bay about a Mile from the Sea. The Castle and Town stand on
scragged Rocks, under high Mountains. The Castle is much out of repair, nor can
it be made strong to resist any Enemy, the Mountains so overlooking it. Before
it is a pleasant Plain along the Sea side. It has no Harbor for Shipping, so
that they carry their Oil and other Merchandise to Navareene. In time of Peace
with the Venetians, they carry them to Zante. The Town is small and not much
inhabited.

NAVAREENE, formerly called PYLVS,
Has the best Harbor in all the Morea. It is about five Miles long, and three
broad, having an Island lying before it called Spactoria. Formerly there where
two Entrances into the Harbor, but in the Year 1571, when the Christians
obtained the great Victory over the Turks before the Gulf of Lepanto; the
Turks having several Ships, and Galleys in the Harbor, and fearing the
Christians would come in and destroy them, stopped up the Entrance to the West
of the Island (so as only small Boats can now pass;) and built a very strong
Castle to the Eastward called New Navareene, which is very well built, and
commands the Entrance. It has about Forty Guns, which are most toward the Sea.
The Land to the South East lies high. To the west end of the Harbor stands Old
Navareene (formerly called Pylus) on a high Hill very steep; the Walls are very
much out of repair, great part being fallen down, there are very few
Inhabitants in it. It might be made impregnable, no hills being near it. I
cannot say whether they have any Guns in it. This place in other Maps is put
down above 20 Miles from the Sea, and the Island of Spactoria (which makes the
Harbor) left out.

MODON,
Is a very strong Castle which stands on a low Point of Land. The Sea washes
the Foundations of the Walls above three Quarters round: the Walls are very
high. The Port is to the Eastward, it has a small Mole to contain two or three
Galleys; the Port is not secure for Ships, South West Winds having too great
Power here. To the South lies the Island of Sapienza about two Miles from the
Point of the Castle. To command the Passage a round Tower is built, which has
several great Guns, that lie equal with the Water. Toward the Land by the Port
is a dry Ditch five Yards deep, and about twenty Yards broad, between which and
the main Castle is a very strong Battery of about ten Guns. There is a dry
Ditch, and Draw-bridges to pass into the Body of the Castle. To the North West
is another Battery to secure that Mount, where are very good Guns. On the Walls
toward the Port are three Towers, in each of which are small Guns: in all,
they say, here are about One hundred Guns. The Town stands about half a Mile
from the Castle, being inhabited by Greeks. In the Port is a small Island on
which a Battery might be raised and do much harm to the Castle, it being as
high as the Walls. The Castle is above a Mile about.

CORON,
Is situated on a Point of Land which runs out about half a Mile. It is much
higher toward the Land then at the Point. The Sea goes two Thirds about it.
The Walls are high, and their Foundations on scraggy Rocks. The Fortification
is in much better repair than at Modon. Toward the Land the Walls are above
Forty Foot high, and here is a round Tower above Sixty Foot high, in which are
several very good Guns to answer the Land, which runs higher than the Walls. At
the Southward part of the Castle the Land goes sloping down toward the Sea
side, from the Walls of the Castle, the ground is not Rocky in that part. There
are about seventy good Guns about the Wall, and several of the Works are Arched
over. To the North is a round Tower which stands low to command the Road. Here
is no Harbor for Galleys, nor is the Road very secure. It had formerly a good
Mole which is now sunk; which, with other Ruins has so choked up the harbor,
that most buoy up their Cables with Cask to keep them from ground.

CALAMATA, formerly called THVRIVM,
Is at the bottom of the Bay of Coron, about a Mile from the Sea. The Castle is
but small. The Town is near a Mile in Circumference, well Peopled, standing on
a rising Ground. To the West is a very large and fertile Plain, in which are
many Greek Villages, and two small Towns, the one called Cochiuk Magna, the
other Niscia. The latter is most small Islands, which little Rivers make. (
Niscia signifying Islands in the Vulgar Greek.) The Plain about Calamata
toward the Sea is all planted with Vineyards, Olive, Figg and Mulberry-trees.
On the West part of the Bay by the Sea side, are the Ruins of Old Messina,
which the Lacedaemonians besieged with a powerful Army. The Messineses seeing
they were not able to withstand their Enemies Power, fired their City, embarked
themselves, and went to Sicilia, where they built the present City of Messina.

MESITHA, formerly called LACEDEMON,
Is situated at the side of a large Plain on a rising Ground, about twenty
five Miles from the Sea side, having very high Mountains all to the West of the
Plain. The Castle stands to the West on a very high Hill, steep on the West,
and South part, where it is inaccessable, but sloping to the North, having two
old Walls which cross the Hill from the North to the South, dividing the Hill
almost into three Parts. The way into the Castle is very difficult. The Walls
of the Castle are well built, but very old. It is near half a Mile about,
having two Gates to be passed. The Town is large, and is esteemed the second
for bigness in all the Morea, yet Patrass has more houses. The Ruins about it
are very great, and toward the South they reach above four Miles, having in
some places the Foundation of a thick Wall, which they say was the Walls of
Sparta. To the North about a Quarter of a Mile from the Town, is a great and
high Building, which they say was an Arch of an Aquaeduct. The Plain is very
pleasant, full of small Villages, Olive, and Mulberry trees. This Place and
Calamata make more Silk than all the other parts of the Morea. The River which
runs through the Plain is now called Vasili Pottamo. In Winter it spreads very
large, but in Summer toward the City is almost dry. Though the City stands
remote from the Sea, and free from dangers that ensue from thence; yet the
Manjotts are a People apt to prey upon them.

MAINA, which some write BRAZZO di MAINA,
Is that Country where the Manjotts inhabit. It lies West of the Plain of
Misitha, and so runs down to the Sea, being Mountanous and full of Woods, and
very difficult to come at, either by Sea, or Land. In the Year 1667, they
rebelled and sent to the Venetians and Malteses who came to their assistance,
bringing with them Powder, and other Ammunition. Many Parties of them would
often make Incursions into the Turks Dominions, and did much harm. But the
Captain Bassha, who went with Forty Galleys, to relieve a Castle called
Zarnata, reduced them to their former Obedience. Articles were drawn up, in
which the Manjotts consented to pay a small Tribute. Yet do they continue to
cruise about with their Briganteens. If they take any Turks, they sell them to
the Malteses, and Legorneses, as they do the Christians to the Turks. If any
Ship come to Anchor on their Coast, many arm themselves and go to the place,
over against where the Ship does ride; some of them will be in Priests Habits,
walking by the Sea side, with their Wallets, in which they will have some Wine
and Bread. Their Companions lie hid behind the Bushes at some convenient Post.
When any strangers come ashore, who do not understand their Language, the
feigned Priests make signs to them, showing them their Bread and Wine, which
they offer to them for money, by which the strangers being enticed from the Sea
fide (and it may be to sit down and taste their Wine) the hidden Manjotts come
and make their Prey. The Priests will seem to be sorry, and endeavor to make
the strangers believe they were altogether ignorant of any such design. So a
white Flagg is put out, and a Treaty held with the Ship for their Ransom. The
Priests endeavor to moderate the Price, showing a great deal of respect to
their Companions, who are clothed in Turkish Habits. Many Ships have been thus
served. Such a business happened to some English Ships, who (having the Winds
contrary) came to Anchor near the Island Cervi, (in one of which Sir Paul
Rycaut was a Passenger going for Constantinople;) several Young Men were taken,
and they paid dear for visiting the Manjotts, and though the Earl of
Winchilsea, (then Ambassador (from his Majesty) at Constantinople) made
complaint of it, no redress could be had. In the Plains are many Olive Trees,
and Vine-yards: In the Woods there are many wild Vines. There are great
quantities of Quails, so as they Salt them up, and send them to several other
parts. Powder and Shot is here scarce, but they do so well manage the Sling, as
is to admiration, with which they kill Birds on the Wing. The Sea Ports in
Maina, are, Chetri, Vitulo, Porto Quaglio, Yaracaria, Pagana, Rapana, with
several other small Ports and Creeks, where they shelter themselves when they
are pursued. The Garrisons which the Turks have in Maine are Zarnata, Vitulo,
Kifala, and Passava. Here are two Famous Pirates, the one called Manetta, the
other Giracare, being the chief for Family and Power amongst them.

MALVASIA, formerly called EPIDAVRES,
Is a strong Castle standing on a Rock about twenty Miles to the North of the
Cape St. Anzolo in the Archipelago. It has a narrow and difficult Passage to
the Continent. It is very well Fortified with good Works, having about 100 good
Guns; notwithstanding it stands in the Sea, and seems to be all Rock, yet it
has on the top a fine Plain with Gardens and several Springs, with good Water.
This place stands very convenient for transporting Men and Provision for Candy,
not being above thirty Leagues distance from Canea: Hence the Vizier Kupri-Ogle
sailed when he went for Candy, and more Soldiers were Shipped from hence for
Candy (in the late War) than from any other Port of Turkey. It is very populous,
and the Seamen are esteemed the best of any in these parts. Here are the
choicest Wines, esteemed at Venice to be the best of all in Greece.

NAPOLI,
Is a large City, now the chief in all the Morea, being above two Miles in
Compass, the Sea going almost round it. The houses stand thick, and very full
of People. It is the Seat of the Bassha. The Castle is well seated to the
North, standing above any part of the Town. There is but one way into the City
by Land, which is at the side of high Mountains, very difficult. The Harbor is
very secure, having a narrow entrance, passing Rocks so as but one Gally can
come in at a time. Before which Entrance is a Fort built on low Rocks, where
are several very good Guns. It stands about 300 Paces from the Haven, have
shoal Water round about it. No Ships can come to hurt the City with their Shot,
it being covered to Seaward from any danger, by high and strong Walls, on which
and in the Castles are above 200 Guns.

ARGOS,
Is about twenty four Miles from the Sea. It stands in a very fine Plain,
having more Houses and Inhabitants than Corinth, but not so much scattered. The
Castle is seated on a Hill very pleasantly. The Walls are much gone to ruin,
having but few Guns, and those without Carriages. The Ruins are above three
miles about the Castle. The Plain is very delightsome, abounding with Wine,
Oil, and all sorts of Grain.

TRAPOLIZZA, formerly called MEGALOPOLIS,
Has the Name of a City, though it be not so big as some Towns. It is now the
chief place of all the (once Famous) Province of Arcadia. The Turks call it
Mora Orta, that is, the Center or Middle of the Morea. Here are very rich
Turks, who have their Wealth in Land and Cattle; most being Graziers and
Husbandmen. This is the only place which deserves the Name of a Town in the
whole Province. The Great Moske was formerly a Heathen Temple. The Houses are
very mean: The Turks live most in their Farms, which they call Cheftlicks, not
being in danger of Pirates. The Province of Arcadia is all surrounded with
Mountains, most of which are covered with Woods. Yearly they burn the Grass and
Briars to clear the ground against the Spring, then very good Pasture grows up
in its stead. There has been many Villages, some have been Cities, but now the
Albaneses, (who are the Shepherds, and three times the Number, as the Turks,
and Greeks which are in these parts) live most in Tents, removing their Tents
and Herds according to the season of the Year. In the Summer time they are up
in the Mountains, and in the Winter they are in the Woods by the Sea side,
being more or less Tents together. There are a sort of these Albaneses which
have a great Village called Syleman, as the Mountains have the same Name. These
Albaneses have often Rebelled and kept themselves up in the Mountains, doing
much mischief by Robbery. They were so strong in the Year 1679, as the Bassha
went with 500 Men to reduce them by granting a General Pardon.

LEPANTO, formerly called NAVPACTVS,
And now by the Turks Einabackti, stands on the Rumili shore about three Miles
within the Castles at the Entrance of that Gulf. It is situated on the side
of a high and steep Hill, having six Walls from the Waterside to the Castle,
which cross the Hill, all which and the Castle are furrounded with a high Wall,
which runs up at each side of the City. The Houses stand scattering between
these several Walls, but the greatest part are by the Seaside. The Castle
stands on the top of the Hill. It is kept in very good repair. There are about
twenty very good Guns. The Port is almost Oval, having a very narrow Entrance.
There is a Chain which passes from one side to the other. At each side of the
Entrance are places for many Guns, though now they have not above three or four.
The City is well Peopled being a Nest of Pirates. It yielded to the Turk in the
Year 1499, after a long Siege before. The Turks having the Castles at the
Entrance into the Gulf, the Christians had no hopes of Relief, so were forced
to yield themselves up to their Mercy, who gave them free leave to depart. In
the time of War with the Venetians the Briganteens of this place were a
continual Plague to the People of Zant, and Ceffalonia. A Famous Corsare of
this place called Durach Beigh, went with Eleven Briganteens and in the Night
time Landed at Cherri, on the South part of the Island of Zant, taking away
above 200 Slaves, and at Day break appeared before the Port of Zant with
Colors flying, and firing his Guns, gave them notice of his Prize, almost as
soon as they had the News by Land; so got safe to his Port with this great
Success. The day before was a solemn Feast kept at Cherri, and many People came
from the City of Zant to pay their Devotions to the Panaija there. Since the
Peace with the Venetians, they go upon the Coast of Apuglia, and take poor
Contrymen, bringing them to miserable Slavery. The City of Lepanto has the
whole trade of the Gulf, here being the Customer who takes his Duties on all
Boats that go in or out. The plains are very pleasant, at each side of the
City, with many Olive Trees, and Vine-yards. To the Eastward of the City about
a quarter of a Mile out of Town, there is a great Spring which gusheth out of a
Rock at the Foot of a high Mountain; it divides into several Streams which
makes some Islands, these Islands are most cut square, which are covered by
vast high Plane-trees, that stand very thick, and so, as at Noonday it is
shady all about the Spring. In the Summer time here are continually many Turks,
bringing their Victuals with them, and tarry most part of the day. About
Fifteen Miles from hence, upon the same side of the Gulf, stands a small
Village called Vitrenizza, near unto which Sir Giles Eastcourt was Buried,
traveling in Company with Mr. Francis Vernon; and in his way toward Mount
Parnassus, Sir Giles complained in the Morning, but would not be persuaded to
tarry at Lepanto, hoping it would pass: he called to his man to help him down,
and in less then half an hour he Dyed, and was Buried with the assistance of
Greek Priests, who live in Vitrenizza.

There are two Castle at the Entrance of the Gulf of Lepanto: One is on the
Morea shore, the other on Rumili; the Entrance between them is not above a
Mile and a half, nor can any Ship pass without danger of being sunk, there
being several Guns in each Castle which lie level with the Water. The Castles
also sland very low.

NATALICO,
Is a large Town standing in a Bay, which has lying before it, two Islands
that keep off the main force of the Sea. From the Eastern part at the Entrance
of the Bay up to the Town, is a Pescaria or Fishery, it being very shallow, and
the bottom muddy, with Weeds; but that part to the Northward of the Town is
very deep. No Boats of any Burden can come within a Mile of the Town, nor into
that part above it. They have abundance of Monoxylos, or Cannows, which pass
through narrow Channels; with these they carry all their Goods to, and from the
Town. The Inhabitants are Greeks, no Turks living with them, except some of the
Customers Officers, the Customer himself living at Mezzalnnzi, a place about
ten Miles distant, upon the side of this Bay. Both these Towns are well
Peopled: Neither of them have any Fortification; no Enemy can come by Water to
annoy them. On the Eastermost Island is a small Chapel called St. Sosti,
against which Ships do Anchor when they come to load. Their Loading is brought
from the Town to this Island with Monoxylos, from whence it is carried aboard
in the Ships Boats.

THE Inhabitants of the Morea, are Turks, Greeks, Albaneses and T'Zackonians.
The Turks for the most part live in, or under the Command of Castles, and at
their Farms in the Country (where they sometimes are;) they have Towers built
about Thirty Foot high, the Door of which is about ten Foot from the ground;
against which a Wall with Stairs is built, about five Foot from the Tower, to
which Wall a Drawbridge is let down from before the Door where they enter:
it is every Night drawn up to secure them from Pirates; some have only a Ladder,
which they take up into the Tower. There is a continual Watch in the Summer
time, all along the Sea Coasts. Of Turks' there are not above 30000
Inhabitants; the Christians are three times as many. The Greeks have free
Exercise of their Religion. Their Priests are very ignorant; scarce any
understanding the old Greek; nor are they so Superstitious in their worship to
Pictures, as those who live under the Venetians. They have several Monasteries.
Near unto Vostiza is one, which is called, La Madona di Spiglia, it being at
the side of a Mountain in a large Cave, where there is a Church, in which is
the Picture of the Virgin MARY, which (they say) was brought hither from
Constantinople, by Angels at the time when the Turks took that City. There was
another Madona near Misithra, which did many Miracles; and every Year great
numbers of Greeks flocked from all parts to pay their Devotions to it. The
Bassha of the Morea having notice, went to see the Ceremony, telling the
Priests he was desirous to see some Miracle; they telling him it had done many,
he ordered one of his Men to bring him another Picture out of any House, which
being brought, he asked the Priests what difference there was betwixt those two
Pictures, they answered, that, that Picture which was in the Church was a most
Sacred thing. But the Bassha caused a Fire to be made, and both Pictures to be
put into it, saying, he would Worship that which escaped the Fire; but both
were burnt, and the Bassha laughing at their Superstition, went his way. The
Christians live much better here than in Asia. The vulgar Greek is the general
Language, and there are few Turks but can speak it. Every Town has Greek
Elders which they call Yerondo's.: These appear upon all Public Matters, and
levy Taxes on the Towns-People, proportionably to their Abilities. The
Albaneses are of the Greek Church. They generally live not in Towns, yet have
several Villages; one of which is very large, called Sylemen. It stands in the
Mountains near the City of Arcadia, which Mountains have the same Name. They
live most in Tents, being for the most part Shepherds. The T'Zackonians are
most in Towns, they are a very poor People, serving as Porters, both Men and
Women carrying very great Burdens. There are also a great many Jews, who for
the most part are Merchants and Shopkeepers, living but poorly; the Athenian
Merchants supplying most of the Country with all sorts of Merchandises, and
chiefly from Venice. The Turks are very rich in their Clothing here, their
Vests being most made with fine Venice Cloth.

The Merchandises of the Morea, or Product of the Land, are Olive-Oyl,
Raw-Silk, Wax, Honey, Soap, Cordovan-skins, Sheepskins, Butter, Cheese,
Raisons, Currants, Figgs, Wines, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Oats, dried Acorns (which
the Venetians call Valania, and which are used in Italy for Tanning of Leather,
as we use the Bark of the Tree,) Fustick Wood, and Pernicoke Seed, which Seed
is for Dyeing of Scarlet. It grows on a Shurb-Oak-tree, rising at the stemm of
the Leaf, like a Blister, something bigger than a Pea, out of which comes Dust
(or Powder) which being dry turns to small Worms, which when quickened they kill
with Wine. The Soil of the Land is very good. They Plow with two Oxen, and
without Wheels, nor are they at the pains to dung the Ground. They have many
Weeds, and the Liquorice Root is very troublesome being deep. They reap their
Corn much in the manner as we do, but have no Barns, only Threshing-floors,
(which the Turks call Chirman.) They are on high ground, and open to the Winds.
Here they tread it out with Horses, which are made fast to a Post, round which
the Corn is put; the Horses trampling upon it make great dispatch: with the
Wind they cleanse it, and send it home to their Houses; that which they intend
to keep they put into great Earthen Jarrs, and Baskets made with slit Canes,
which Baskets are dawbed over with wet Cow Dung, which being well dried, not
only keeps in the Corn, but also preserves it cool. The Turks are usually at
these places with a Watch, well Armed (if near the Sea) all the time of the
Corn treading. They have great quantity of Grass, but make no Hay, feeding
their Horses with chopped Straw and Barley; they Litter them with Horse-dung,
which being dried in the Sun, and shaken, falls asunder, and is very soft. In
the Spring they feed them with green Barley, tying one of their hinder-leggs to
a Stake, which they remove twice a day, keeping them to an allowance. Besides
the Common Grass, they have a sort of Clover Grass, which they give them Green,
after their feeding on Barley, bringing it home to their Stables. In August the
common Grass is usually parcht and dry, which therefore they burn, and new soon
springs up in its place.

The Trees in the Woods are several sorts of Oaks, Pine, Firr, wild Chestnut and
wild Pear.

In their Gardens they have Orange, Lemon, Citron, Pomegranate, Apricock,
Peach, Plum, and Cherry-Trees; Apples and Pears they have not many, nor are
they so good as usually they be with us; Cypress-trees and Wallnuts they are
plenty. In the Plains near any Springs, are most stately Plane-trees, which are
very shady. They have all sorts of Garden Herbs as we have, and great quantity
of Musk-melons, Water Melons, and several sorts of Gourds.

In the Month of December, they begin to make Oil, continuing it till the
beginning of March, or according as the quantity of Olives is. February, March,
and April, are for making Butter and Cheese, also for sheering their Sheep. May
and June is the time for cutting their Corn. In June and July they are employed
in gathering Mulberry Leaves to feed their Silkworms. August, September, and
October, are for gathering and drying their Currants, Figgs, Raisons, Valania,
Pernicoke Seed, and Tobacco; also for making their Wine and taking up their
Honey and Wax.

Their Oil they put into great Earthen Jarrs, which are made of hard Clay, well
baked in Furnaces, but not glazed, which therefore will not keep Water from
soaking through them. These Jarrs are sent to Candy, and other places for
Merchandise. To preserve their Cheese they sift Earth, mix it with Salt and
Water, then with it Coat over the Cheese, which keeps it cool, but makes it
very Salt. A great quantity of this Cheese is yearly carried to Venice: It
serves the ordinary People, who sometimes grate it upon their boiled Macaroons,
and Rice, instead of Parmisan.

Though the Turks drink no Wine, yet they take New Wine and boil it up to a
Syrrup (which they call Becmez, and we call Cute,) putting it into small Jarrs,
they drink it mingled with Water, for this they account to be no Wine. They
call new Wine Shira, and old Wine Shirab.

Their Buildings are most of Bricks made of Clay, and chopped Straw, and dried in
the Sun. The Foundations of the Walls are of Stone, and Lime. Few Houses are
above two Story high; they are covered over with Pan Tiles. There are not many
great Houses in all the Morea, the best being at Napoli, Misitha, and Corinth:
Not above three deserve the Name of Seraglios (as they call Palaces.) Flesh and
Fowl is plentiful, but Fish is scarce. The Air is very temperate; there is
seldom any Rain from April to August. The Winter is also very moderate, and
lasts not above two Months any thing Cold: There is seldom any Snow in the
Plains

A Description of the CITY of ATHENS.
IT is the Head City in the Province of Attica, and was once the greatest
Mistress of Learning in all Europe. The Plain is about Sixteen Miles Long, and
Five Broad, being surrounded with Mountains, all but toward the South, where
it is washed by the Egean Sea. The Olive Trees stand so thick to the West of
the City that they seem to be a Wood, reaching Six Miles in Length, and Two in
Breadth. Whilst I was there, a Tahrirge (or Surveyor) came down from
Constantinople to Survey the Place; he found above Fifty Thousand Olive Trees
in this Plain, and other places about the City. There are several small
Villages, where are very pleasant Gardens, which afford all sort of Fruit and
Saleting, having Walks round them covered with Vines, of which there are two
sorts; the one is in the Turkish Language called Barmak Vzumi, a long White
Grape; the other Hevengh Vzumi, a round Red Grape, both which growing in very
large Bunches. Of the latter Mr. Vernon weighed one Bunch which was near Four
Oaks (about Ten Pound English.) These Red Grapes are not ripe till September,
then they cut them off, and hang them up in their Houses for Winter store.
Neither of these Two sorts grow in Vineyards. The Vine-yards are planted most
betwixt the City, and the Sea. The City is now not above Three Miles about:
Being Four Miles from Porto Lion, (which formerly was call Pirea) having a
Castle to the South. The Houses are better built here than in any part of the
Morea, most having little Courts, with high Walls, in which are Arches with
Marble Pillars; few Houses above Two Story high: They also patcht up with the
Ruins of old Palaces, and in most Walls are abundance of old Inscriptions. The
Governors are in the same manner as they be in other Cities under the Turks.
The Greeks live much better here than in any other part of Turkey, ( Scio
excepted) being a small Commonwealth amongst themselves. They choose eight
Magistrates, who adjust all differences, and appear in all Public Matters.
Their Protector (at the Port) is the Grand Seigniors Chief Eunuch, who has the
disposing of that Government. The City is not Walled about, but has Gates at
the Streets end, which every Night are shut, to keep out Privateers, who often
Land and do much mischief. Here is an Archbishop whose House stands to the
South West of the Town, near unto the Mount Ariopagus: He lives in great esteem
amongst them. Below his Palace toward the North, stands entire the Temple of
Theseus, which is a fair and large Building, all of White Marble, having a
Portico about it with Pillars. The Temple is Seventy Three Foot long, and
Twenty Six in Breadth: The Length of the Portico (which goes round it,) is One
Hundred Twenty Three Foot: It is now a Greek Church, and Dedicated to St.
George. To the South East part of the Castle are Seventeen Marble Pillars,
being the remainder of One Hundred and Twenty, on which the Emperor Adrian had
his Palace: And upon some of the Pillars which stand toward the East, is to be
seen part of the Foundation. These Pillars are of a pure White Marble, with
bluish Waves, Schollop-work, being Fifty Foot in height, and Nineteen and a
half round. The Ground is very even about them, which they say was formerly
Paved with Marble. Close to these Pillars Eastward, is a square Piece of
Ground, which is Walled in with a low Wall, being Green: It is kept very smooth
and free of Stones; at the South End close to the Wall, is a place (raised with
Two Steps) about Two Foot high, almost in Form of a Throne. In the time of
their Byram, the Turks come to this place, where their Emam or Priest (sitting
on the raised place) Preaches to them, showing them the Vanity of the World,
the Greatness of their Emperor, and the Valor of the Ottoman Forces,
concluding with a Prayer for the Grand Seignior, which is answered with Three
Shouts from the Auditors, with a loud Voice crying, Amen.

The Castle stands on a Rock, which is high and steep, having but one way up,
and three Gates to pass through into the Body of it: The Walls are much out of
repair. The Situation makes it strong. This Castle stood almost in the middle
of Old Athens: The Place most worth Observation in it, is the Temple of
Minerva, which remains entire, being esteemed (by all who have seen it) to be
one of the Most Glorious Buildings in Europe. It is all pure White Marble: The
Length of the Body of the Temple is One Hundred Sixty Eight English Feet, and
the Breadth Seventy One: There are Seventeen Pillars at each Side, and Eight at
the Front: The Circuit of the Pillars are Nineteen Foot and a Half: The Length
of the whole Temple Two Hundred and Thirty Feet. The Temple is very dark,
having only some Lights to the Eastward. The Greeks did Consecrate, and
Dedicated it to the Blessed Virgin. Since that, the Turks have perverted it
with their Worship. The Turks have White-wash'd the Inside, notwithstanding it
is all of pure Marble. In and about Athens, are Two Hundred Greek Churches,
(most of which have been Temples) but not one quarter of them are now used. In
the Plain and on most of the Hills, there are many small Chapels. The Ruins
are above Six Miles about, of which the Reader may have full satisfaction by
reading the Travels of Sir George Wheeler, who has given a large and true
Account of this City. Some Geographers call it Settines, which name was never
known to the Inhabitants; the Turks call it Atinna, and the Greeks Athine. The
Air is very good. The Soil rich. It has a River to the South, close by the
Ruins of Adrians Palace, called Illisus or Calleroy; which is almost choked
up, and in Summer is dry. The Harbor of Porto Lione is very secure from the
danger of any Wind, but there is no Fortification, so that it is frequented by
Pirates. In all the Villages and Country about Athens, the Inhabitants are most
Albaneses; and they are here more populous than in the Morea. It affords the
same Commodities: and all Provision is as reasonable, but their Wines in
general are not so good.

The Island of ZANT, formerly called ZACYNTHVS,
Is under the Venetians, lying about 15 miles from the South West point of the
Morea. The West part is all Mountains, and to the North East is another
Mountain (called Scopo) between which it is very low land, so as from the
Southward at Sea it appears to be two Islands. The chief Road has the name of
the Island. The Town stretches it self above a mile along that Bay; it is well
built, with Freestone, but the Houses are low, by reason of the Earthquakes,
which are very frequent. To the West, over the Town, stands the Castle, on a
high and steep Hill, and is a small City in it self: The Wall is above a mile
about. The Governor is a Nobleman of Venice: There is an Italian Bishop, and
three Italian Churches: But the Greeks (who are the chief Inhabitants (have a
Proto Papa, and all Festivals are observed according to the old style. In the
Island is above 30 Villages, and more than 60000 Souls. The Corn which grows
here will not suffice above three months; but in time of Peace with the Turks,
they are well supplied from the Morea, and in time of War Corn is brought from
Apuglia, and other parts in the Gulf of Venice. One year with another it
produces near 10000 Tun of Wine, 200 Tun of Oil, and 2000 Tun of Currants; and
may be compared, for pleasantness and richness, with any Island (of its
bigness) in the World. The Currants grow on Vines, and spread themselves on the
ground like other Grapes: In July they gather them, and spread them on a very
smooth part of ground, where they lie until they are well dried, then they fall
off from the Stalks; so are carried and put into Warehouses, where they are
kept till the Merchants buy them.

STRAFADA Islands.
They are two small Islands which lie about 20 miles from Zant, and 30 from the
Morea. On the bigger is a Monastery well built, which has a high Tower: There
is about 40 Priests of the Order of St. Basil. They work the ground, and have
all sorts of Fruits and Sallating; but their supply of Bread, Oil and Wine, is
brought them from Zant, where they have possessions. They never eat Flesh. When
any Pirates come to molest them, they shut themselves up in the Tower of the
Monastery. There is no Harbor for Ships, so as seldom any come to trouble them.

PRODINO and SAPIENZA Islands
Are not Inhabited, but afford secure Harbors for Shipping, especially the
latter, where the Venetians often lie, to look out for Pirates of Barbary, who
use to cruise about Navareene, and Modon.

SERIGO, formerly called CYTHERA,
Is under the Venetians, and withstood the Turks Forces which Landed there
several times; the Inhabitants (who are Greeks) retired to the Castle, which is
strong, yet the Turks might have taken it, but thought it not worth the loss of
his men, there being no good Harbor for Shipping; nor is the Land fruitful,
being most Stony. The Governor is a Nobleman of Venice.

FINIS.

