portrait of author, Paul Ryeant Sr. Paul Ryeant many years Consul. of Smyrna,
now his Brittanique. Majties. Resident at Hamburgh, and Fellow of the Royal
Society.
P. (...) Pinxit.
R White Sculpsit.


THE HISTORY OF THE TURKS.

BEGINNING With the Year 1679.

Being a full Relation Of the Last Troubles in Hungary, with the Sieges of
Vienna, and Buda, and all the several Battles both by SEA and LAND, between the
CHRISTIANS, and the TVRKS, until the End of the Year School, and 1699.

IN WHICH The Peace between the Turks.

AND THE Confederate Christian Princes and States, was happily Concluded at
Carlowitz in Hungary, By the Mediation of His Majesty of Great Britain, and the
States General of the United Provinces.

With the Effigies of the Emperors and others of Note, Engraven at Large upon
Copper, which Compleats the Sixth and Last Edition of the History of the Turks.
In Two Vol. in Folio.

By Sir PAVL RYCAVT, Knight. Eighteen Years Consul at Smyrna, now his Majesty's
Resident at Hamburg, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavell, in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Abel Roper
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCC.

TO THE King's Most Excellent MAJESTY WILLIAM III. King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Great SIR,
THE Dedication of this following History of the Turks, may most justly be
Addressed to the Clemency and Patronage of Your Majesty for Two Reasons. First,
Because the greatest Part of this Treatise was Written at Hamburg, whilst I was
actually employed for the space almost of Eleven Years in the Service of Your
Majesty, the which, I hope will not be looked upon as a Point of my Demerit, or
Neglect in my Duty, to have taken out so many Hours as this Work might Require
from the Service of Your Majesty. For I can safely say, and that Your Majesty's
Secretaries also in England, and Abroad, can Attest for me, that I have been
diligent in my Office, and have neglected nothing therein, which my Duty and
Services to Your Majesty might require, and expect from me; for it was Written
at my Vacant Hours, when nothing of my other Services could give me the least
Avocation.

But what may chiefly oblige me farther to this Dedication, is the Healing,
Powerful, and Successful Hand which Your Majesty has Applied by Your
Ambassadors, in making that Peace at Carlowitz, between the Christians and the
Turks, which will ever be remembered in Future Ages, and which (as Your former
Actions showed the World You were a great Captain in the Arts of War) so this
will give good Proof You were a Wise and Prudent Governor in the Exercises of
Peace; And may deserve to have that Motto inserted in Your Escocheon, Beati
sunt Pacifici.

And so may Your Majesty be always Blessed and Prosperous in this Life, and
Your Great Good Works Rewarded in Heaven. Which are the most Devout Prayers of

Your MAJESTY's Most Obedient Subject, and most Humble, Devoted, and Dutiful
Servant, Paul Rycaut.
Hamburgh Jan 15. 1700.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Would not have Thee entertain a worse Opinion of this History, by Reason of
the Place where it was Wrote and Finished, being at a far distance both from
Constantinople and Vienna: Though perhaps it might have been more lively, had
its Colors been laid on in the Places themselves, where the Actions were
performed; and at a time when the Humor of the Turks, and the Idea I conceived
of their Actings, had taken so strong an Impression in my Mind, that whilst I
was upon the Place, I could suffer nothing to pass my Pen, without its due
Observation. Being thus accustomed to such Contemplations as these, in my more
Youthful Days, I could not let pass the continual News, and the constant
Intelligences I received from Hungary, and other Parts which were the Seats of
War between the Christians and the Turks, without making some Reflections
thereupon.

After which, I might justly challenge the Privilege of an Exauctorate, or of a
Miles Emeritus: And I think I need not Blot any more Paper for the future on
any Subject relating to the Turks; for having arrived, at that great Period of
the last Wars, concluded between the Emperor of Germany, and all his Allies
against the Turks; It may appear how much the Ottoman Force is able to avail,
when it is put into the Scale and Balance against all Christendom.

It has been an ancient Custom, and Policy amongst the Turks, in the time of
their prosperous Successes by which their Empire was enlarged, never to
continue a War longer than for three Years, in which time they always advanced
considerably, and would make no Peace with their Neighbors, until their
Triumphs and Acquisitions would answer the expenses, and effusions of their
Blood, and Treasures: After which they commonly fixed Twenty Years for the
Settlement, and Security of those new Conquests and Plantations; in which time
many young Soldiers being Born and Bred up in Arms, they not only took those
Habitations for their Native Soil, but esteemed them also to be by the
Mohammedan Religion obliged ever to defend and maintain them. But these last
Wars, have quite put the Turks out of their Ancient Methods; for instead of
maintaining a War no longer than Three Years, they have been forced to continue
it for more than Twenty, to the great Ruin and Destruction of their Empire. I
have always been of Opinion, That the Turks could never maintain a War for
longer than Three Years, I mean with benefit, and profit to the advancement of
the Ottoman Empire, of which I once made very perspicuous Observations. Whilst
I was in the Camp with them, I found the Timariots very poor, and wanting at
the end of that Term, so that they stoal from each other their Bridles and
Saddles, Lances, and all other necessaries of War, and would excuse themselves
by saying, that they could not do otherwise in so long a War of more than their
Three Years: And in like manner the Janisaries by their ancient Constitution
might challenge a Privilege to quit the Service at the end of the Month of
October, and in case they were not called, they might then Disband themselves,
on St. Demetriu's Day, which is the 28th Day of October, at which time the
Janisar Aga, could not without danger of his own Life in some mutiny deny them
dismission for that Year's Campaign: Which the Janisaries esteemed always a
Privilege due to their Order, but the Asiatick Timariots called Timar Spahcelar
were always sooner dismissed, in consideration of the long Journies they were
to make to their VVinter-Quarters, some of them being as far distant, as Bagdat
or Babylon, as Damascus or Scham, as Aleppo and Iconium, and other Parts, which
to Travel backwards and forwards would take up commonly four or five Months
time: After which to pass a Summers Campaign, was very Laborious for the
Asiatick Forces to undergo, (who commonly are esteemed a soft People) which yet
they were obliged to do on Forfeiture of all their Hereditary Estates; in which
the Turks by their ancient Constitutions were so Rigorous, that they would
admit of no excuses for their absence, even of Death it self; for in case the
Father died lealeaving an Infant Son of a Year old, even then he was obliged to
the War, though he was carried in the Arms of his Nurse. The Hungarians
consequently, being always in Action, and obliged to a perpetual Duty against
the Enemy, were never excused from a strict vigilance over all the Motions of
their Neighbors, whom in the times of Peace we might properly call Enemies;
for they Fought very often, and yet without War so called; for in case they
met, and engaged in the Field with a less number than Five thousand Men on a
side, and without Cannon, it was not called War, but a Martial Exercise in the
times of Peace; and that is the reason, why we find so many Palancas raised
over all Hungary on one side, and the other, which are designed to give a stop
to any sudden Irruption of an Enemy, within which Palancas (so called) the
Poor Inhabitants on either side, Shelter their Wives and Children, their
Horses and Cattle, with all their Faculties and Substance, it being not lawful
for the Enemies on either side to possess them.

Besides, on their Highways and Roads to a Market, every thing was to be
secured, and neither side could touch the same without Justice performed upon
due Complaints made to the Pasha, or Christian Governor of the Province. This
was the Ancient Constitution whilst the Turks prevailed in Hungary: But since
the last War and Peace concluded, things no doubt have been set upon another
Foot, and other Provisions have been made to secure the Christian Cause and
Interest; for before this time the Turks were become the most Insolent People
in the World, and would never do Justice to a Christian; for unless it were
consistent with their own Interest and Design, they would show themselves
Proud, Haughty and Supercilious, expecting Gifts, and returning none, expecting
for a Flower a piece of Gold, or some piece of Cloth of the finest Dye and
Spinning we have in England; and to this Pass were the Turks come, that they
called the Presents made to them by the Christians to be their Tribute, and the
Ambassadors sent to them, they acknowledged for no other, than for Mahapous (as
they called them) which signified Hostages given for Peace, and the Security of
the Good-behaviour of their Masters toward the Port: Their Pride was also so
extraordinary, that they would never vouchsafe, to require any Counterpart from
the King, or Prince with whom they Treated, or Copies, unless such as were
conserved amongst their Archives, or Office of the Reis Effendi, or Chief
Secretary; inferring that the Power of the Grand Seignior was able to make
good, whatsoever he should require on the Score of the Royal Signature; which
no Sovereign Prince will now receive from a Proud and Insolent Turk: For
praised be that God of the Christians, who has brought down that Imperious
Spirit of the Turks to such a Degree, That they can now own their Weakness and
be ashamed of their former Follies, which rendered them insupportable in their
Conversation with Christians.

portrait of Ottoman Sultan Mehmet IV Mahomethes Quartus Magnus Turcarum
Jmperator Qui Regnat. Anno. 1687.
Sold by Robert Mariell and Abel Roper



THE HISTORY OF THE TURKS From the Year 1678, to the Year 1699.
Anno 1679.
WE have in our preceding History represented the Ottoman Empire for several
years past, under many Circumstances of Happiness and Glory. The Turks had been
successful in their Wars abroad, having increased and enlarged their Empire by
adding Newhausel in Hungary thereunto, with the Country belonging to it. They
had gained and conquered all the Island of Candia, with that invincible
Fortress, and thereupon had put an end to a War with the Venetians, which had
continued for the space of Twenty six Years. After which they carried their
Conquering Arms into Poland, where they took the strong Fortress of Caminiec,
which is the Key of that Kingdom; and thence marched into that Country as far
as Leopolis, which they brought under the Tribute of Eighty thousand Crowns
a year, and so returned back again into their own Dominions without any
Opposition, or so much almost as the Appearance of an Enemy: And to render this
Action the more observable, it was attended with the least Expense of Blood and
Treasure, of any Enterprise of so bold and daring a Design; and proved an
Expedition so profitable and beneficial, that scarce a Janizary or Horseman
returned without Spoil, or Plunder, or Slaves of both Sexes. All which Wars
were acted within the space of Thirteen Years, during the Government of Achmet
Kuperli, with such Intervals also of Peace, that War seemed but an
Entertainment to exercise the Soldiery, and amuse their Minds, lest they should
fall into Mutiny and Sedition; all the Particulars of which we have already at
large related. And here I cannot but observe, and say, That Justice is the
proper means to render a People flourishing and happy; an Instance whereof we
have through all the Government of Kuperli, who being a Person educated and
skilful in the Law, administered Justice equally to the People; his Eyes were
not blinded with Avarice, which might biass or thwart him in giving Judgment;
he was not cruel, or bloody, or inclined to take away Men's Lives for the sake
of their Riches; nor more ambitious than what served to make him jealous of his
Honor, and zealous to conserve and keep up his Fame and Reputation in the
World; which is necessary for Ministers in his sublime Station. Wherefore let
us look on those Times which were as quiet, calm and peaceable as any that ever
had smiled on the Ottoman State, and justly ^^r bute those Blessings to the
Favor of Heaven, which was pleased in those Days to behold so much Justice and
Equity dispensed to a People unaccustomed thereunto, and perhaps in Reward
thereof, to make the Government more easy and pleasant, than either before or
since those Halcyon Days. But now that Kara Mustapha comes to succeed in the
Place of so just and equal a Governor, a Person of Violence, Rapine, Pride,
Covetousness, False, Perfidious, Bloody, and without Reason or Justice; we have
nothing to represent at the beginning of his Government, besides his
Oppression, Extortion, Cruelties and Acts of Injustice beyond any thing that
was ever practiced before in the Reign of the most Tyrannical Princes: and in
Process of time becoming vastly Rich with the Spoils and Ruin of many
thousands of Families, he accomplishes the full Measure of his Iniquity by the
persidious Breach of the Truce between the Emperor and his Master the Sultan:
For though it wanted only three Years of being expired, yet trusting to the Power
and Force of his ill-gotten Wealth, he had not Patience to expect so long a
Term, being pushed forward by his own Destiny, and incited thereunto by
covetous and ambitious Desires, joined to a Scorn, and a mean Opinion of the
Christians, to whom he would scarce allow either Understanding, or Courage, or
Conduct in War: In which vain Confidence and Presumption of his invincible
Power, he precipitated the whole Ottoman Empire into a dismal and direful
Condition and State, from whence proceeded nothing but Slaughter, and
Tragedies, fatal both to his own self, and to his Master, as will appear in the
Progress of this History. But before we enter on those greater Matters, let us
first consider this Grand Vizier in his Behavior toward the Turks, and others
who were Subjects to the Sultan. It is certain, that he had his first Rise from
Kuperli the Father, and married his Daughter, and was afterward on the score
of that Alliance, favored by the Son: he was made Capitan Pasha, or Admiral of
the Fleet; but being as it were out of his Element, and not pleased with the
Sea, he was constituted Chimacam, and placed with the Grand Seignior, and at
all times next his Person when the Vizier was absent, and employed in the Wars:
In which Capacity and Condition (as we have before related) he behaved himself
with that gentle and assable Behavior toward all Persons, as gave Hopes and
Expectations of better and more temperate Government when he should come to be
Vizier. But being raised to that sublime Station, he soon changed his Humor,
and began to show the Fierceness of his Nature, which he had long suppressed.
In Evidence of which, we have so many Instances and Examples of his Cruelty and
Injustice to produce, that had we no other matter than his Management of
Affairs in the time of Peace, without Regard or Reference to Foreign Wars, his
Proceedings were so irregular and unreasonable, as might for the Extravagancy
of them, deserve to be kept in Memory: But they are too many to be recounted,
and therefore we shall content our selves with some few which have relation to
the English Nation, and to the Subjects of other Princes in Peace and Alliance
with the Turk.

The Case of Mr. Samuel Pentlow, who lived about Thirty Years a Merchant at
Smyrna, will never be forgotten by the English Factory of that Place: The
matter is so extraordinary as might deserve to be related at large, with all
the Circumstances of it; but I shall confine my self to a short and brief
Narrative, which was this.

Mr. Pentlow had by a long Trade, in tract of time, gained very considerable
Riches, besides an Estate in Land left hi^ by his Father in England; to i^^^
which, being desirous to have Heirs his own Body, he married a Greek Woman of
mean Extraction. The Grand Vizier having received intimation thereof, and of
the Riches of Pentlow, which were magnified to him, according to the Account
made on Rich Men, whose Fortune it is to have their Estates always over-valued;
he immediately swallowed in his Thoughts all his Wealth and Estate, as if he
had been a Pasha, or some other Subject who had grown fat and wealthy to a
degree worthy the Grand Seignior's Notice and Acceptance. And to bring him
within the compass of such a Seizure, he declared, That whosoever had married a
Woman, who was a Subject to the Grand Seignior, did by Virtue of such a Match
become, ipso facto, a Subject, and yield himself to the same Condition with his
Wife; which being a Law never before made or declared, was levelled only at
Pentlow to hook in his Estate; having never before been practiced, and perhaps
will never be again, unless the same Circumstances concur of such a Vizier,
and such a Person as this our Merchant was.

Pentlow had notice of this new Law which the Vizier had promulged, and was not
unsensible that it was levelled at his Estate: But yet I know not what Star
guided him, or what Charm affixed, or wedded him to the Country, he provided
not against the Snare laid for him, which he might easily have avoided by
exporting his Estate, as Merchants commonly do, into other Countries; but
instead thereof, he keeps all about him, and finding himself sickly and
decaying, he made his last Will and Testament in a formal manner, Mr. Gabriel
Smith and Mr. John Ashley.
and constituted two Merchants to be his Executors, without Reflection or
Thoughts how the Vizier had decreed the Grand Seignior to be his Heir, which
accordingly succeeded in a short time afterward: For Pentlow being dead, the
News was speedily carried to the Chief Customer at Adrianople, who had laid the
Plot to seize his Estate; and by him the Grand Vizier was informed of the great
Wealth fallen to the Sultan by the Death of his English Subject. The covetous
Desire of so vast Riches, which was magnified five times beyond its real Value,
caused the Vizier with all Expedition to dispatch a Capugi-Basha to Smyrna to
take all the Estate of the Deceased into his Hands, for the Use of the Grand
Seignior; and in case the Executors refused to make a free and clear
Resignation accordingly, then to bring them up Prisoners to Adrianople. The
Executors not complying as the Officers required, were carried up by him to
Adrianople: Where to extort from them a confession of the whole Estate, they
were threatened with the Galleys, with the Rack, the Wheel and other Tortures.
In fine, after an Imprisonment of some Days, with a Collar of Iron about their
Necks, to which a Chain was fixed and rivetted to a Post with Manacles on their
Hands; and after a thousand menaces of farther Punishment, they were forced so
far to comply, as to Promise, and give Obligation to pay unto the Vizier, or
his Order, the Sum of Ninety thousand Dollars within a certain time after their
Arrival at Smyrna. To raise this Money against the Term prefixed, such have was
made, that the Goods of the Deceased were Sold at such low Rates, that they
amounted not within Five or Six thousand Dollars of the Sum, for which the
Executors had Engaged; which they refusing to pay out of their own Estates;
were again Imprisoned at Smyrna, where they lay for the space of five or six
Months, until such time as a Composition was made, and Expedients found for
their Enlargment. Many other passages occurred of the like injustice, through the
whole course of this matter, which for brevity sake we purposely omit: In
regard that what we have said already, is sufficient to give the Reader an
instance of this Vizier's avarice and injustice: Of which the Turks, He was
afterward Grand Vizier, and cut off with the Grand Seignior.
as well as the Christians were so sensible; that Solomon, the late Vizier's
Kiaja, or Steward, and then Imbrahor or Master of the Horse to the Grand
Seignior, demanding one day concerning the Avania of Pentlow, could not
suppress his Thoughts (though much a Courtier) but said, In this Man's time the
Musselmin or Believers, cannot expect better Usage or Treatment than the Gaurs
or Christians. But this single instance is not sufficient to express the
unjust, and rapacious Humor of this Vizier; who in an unparalleled manner of
proceeding did ever incline to the Plaintiff; in whose favor having given
Sentence against the Defendant to the utmost Asper demanded, his method was to
cause the Money immediately to be paid; and took it to himself, giving the
Plaintiff some small share thereof, not worthy the Trouble or Expense of the
Suit: In this manner he dealt with another Merchant of our Nation, on whom one
Pizzamano an Italian made a false pretense of Six thousands Dollars, which
Cause being brought before the Vizier, he readily condemned our English
Merchant; and having forced the payment by a rigorous Imprisonment, he
appropriated the whole Sum to his own Use; giving the Plaintiff about Thirty
Dollars, as a gratuitous Reward for turning Turk; he having in compliance with
the Vizier, and to gain his favor, renounced his Faith, and Sold his Religion
at so vile a Price. In a short time after which the Vizier extorted from our
Turkey Company Fifty thousand Dollars, and demanded an increase of the usual
Presents which at certain times were made to him, and to all the Officers of
the Court: The which, and the like manner of Proceedings, though they gained him
the hatred of all Men, yet the constancy of the Grand Seignior to his
Ministers, and his method in making his Master sharer with him in all his
Rapines, seemed to secure him from all apprehension of Danger: For when the
Grand Seignior upon Complaints made to him, told him of the ill Reports he had
received; The Vizier answered, That his Majesty might be pleased to weigh the
Benefits he had received by his Administration of Affairs, which would appear
by the Increase of his Treasury; and that if he desired to have his Empire well
Governed, he must suffer him to use the means proper for that end; otherwise
his Head was at his Command, which he might take off, and supply the Office
with a better Minister.

Many and frequent were the Examples of his unheard of injustices, as well to
the Turks as to the Christians.

The Valide Kiajan, or the Queen Mother's Steward, whose place was always
esteemed quiet, and free from danger, and Independent of the Meri, or the Grand
Seignior's Treasury; and their Estates permitted to go to their Children
without any Interruption: Yet dying very Rich by the benefit of his Office,
which he had enjoyed 18 Years; The Vizier was desirous to partake of the
Estate, and taxed his Heirs at 1200 Purses, for Payment of which the Grand
Seignior at the Instigation of the Vizier caused a Vakuf, or an Estate given to
the Church to be seized; which was such a piece of Sacrilege, as was never
known, or heard of before in that Empire.

Draco Bey, a late Prince of Moldavia, Draco Bey tortured.
falling short in the Payments he was to make to the Grand Seignior for Tribute
of that Principality, had the Torture given him in Prison at least six times
with Fire, and other ways, which cause the acutest pains; during which, they
forced his Son to stand by him, and threatened to put him into his place, in
case the Father died under the Torture.

But more hard and severe than all this, The Ragusean Amb^ssador Imprisoned.
seems the Case of the Ragusean Ambassadors, from whom, besides the Annual
Tribute demanded of that Republic, the Vizier required 300 Purses as a Fine
for what they had received on account of Customs, which the Turks Trading into
their Ports had paid them during all the time of the Venetian War; the benefit
of which was esteemed so great, and their Town so much enriched by the grand
acquisitions of Trade, that 300 Purses, or 150000 Dollars, seemed a mean
exaction from a People so well improved and enriched as the Raguseans were
adjudged to be. It is true, their City being advantageously Situated in the
Gulf of Venice, did for a long time during that War reap a considerable benefit
by Trade, it being made the chief Mart or Scale for all the Commodities which
Bulgaria, Hungary, Transylvania, and the Countries thereabouts, yielded for the
supply of Italy: To advance which, the Raguseans had erected a Factory at
Sophia, which as I remember, (for I was at that Place three times) consisted of
about 30 Merchants, whose Employment was to buy Hides, Tallow, Wax, and the
like, and send them by Caravan to Ragusa, from whence they were transported to
other parts of the World. The Vizier hereupon making up an account of the
Profit which this little Republic could, or might have gained in so many
years, esteemed it reasonable, that the Grand Seignior, by whose Wars they had
gained, should partake of a share in their Profits, which by a Computation he
made out of his own head, or with the help perhaps of his Jew-Broaker, or of
the Customer of Constantinople, he valued at so high a Rate, that 300 Purses
were esteemed a moderate allowance to the Grand Seignior out of such vast
Riches which they had acquired. With this notion of the matter the Vizier
called the two Ragusean Ambassadors to his presence, Commanding them
immediately to write unto their Principals to provide with all speed the 300
Purses which the Grand Seignior required from them in return of the favor and
protection he had given them, during his Wars with Venice. The Ambassadors who
were well acquainted with the Poverty of their State, which had for several
years past labored under great difficulties to pay the Annual Tribute which
the Turks exacted from them, endeavored to possess the Vizier with a true
sense of the impossibility of raising such a Sum within the compass of their
narrow Dominions; alleging that in the Year 1666. their whole City had been
subverted by an Earthquake, in which all the Inhabitants perished, excepting
5000 Persons only, who by God's Providence being directed to the Fields, or
Streets, were conserved from this Universal Ruin: The which Desolation was so
grievous, that two Ages could not repair their Losses, nor increase their
People to their former numbers. But the Vizier who could endure no
contradiction, nor excuses in opposition to his covetous desires, Commanded the
Ambassadors immediately to write to the Government to send the Money, for
payment of which no more than 3 Months would be allowed; at the expiration of
which, the Raguseans being in no Capacity to comply, the Ambassadors were sent
Prisoners to the Seven Towers, and threatened with Tortures, and drubbing on the
Feet, unless speedy payment were made. After more than a Years Imprisonment, at
the beginning of the Year 1680. by the Mediation and Interposition of Friends,
the Business was Compounded for 120 Purses, but broke off again upon the time
of payment; which the Vizier required to be satisfied, together with the Annual
Tribute in one Payment in August following: But they alleged the impossibility
thereof, by reason of the extreme poverty of the Place, which had now for two
years been deprived of all Commerce, and the benefit of the Saline, from which
their chief Revenue did arise, and therefore humbly desired to pay it at
thrice; that is, 40 Purses the next August, and as much the Years following,
with the usual Tributes. But the Vizier not contented with these Conditions,
commanded them in his rage to be cast into a Dungeon of the Prison, and
threatened to have the Torture given them. The Mufti interceded in their behalf,
and laid before the Vizier the injustice of the Act, but in vain: The
Kadilescher or one of the Chief Justices refused to Sign a Hoget, or Sentence
in the Case, without positive command from the Grand Seignior. Howsoever they
were remanded to Prison without other legality of Sentence than the Vizier's
Boyardi and Command, where they remained until the time that the Vizier marched
into Hungary, when with some mitigation of the Sentence, together with some
drubs, they were set at Liberty.

We shall only add one instance more to demonstrate the manner and method of
this Vizier in his Judicial Proceedings, The Secretary of Holland drubb'd.
which was in the Case of Monsieur Debrosses Secretary to the Ambassador of
Holland, who having a Demand on the Metropolite, or Greek Bishop of Scio, for a
Debt of one thousand Dollars, upon non-payment of the Money called his Debtor
to Justice; the Patriarch appeared at the Divan to defend the Cause, with
several other Metropolites, some of which might resemble the Debtor; Debrosses
being asked whether he knew his Debtor, he not having seen him in several
years, made answer, That perhaps he did, or perhaps he did not, and pointed to
a wrong Person; whereupon the Vizier called him Telbis, or Robber, to which he
replied, That Franks were not Men of that Profession, or who made false
Pretenses: The Vizier enraged with this Answer, ordered him immediately in his
presence to have 300 drubs given him; of which having received 193, he lay
stunned, and for dead; and then upon the humble intercession of the
Bostangi-Bashee a remission was granted of the remainder. Nor did the Patriarch
and his Bishops carry off their Cause so clear and easy, but were forced to
pay unto the Vizier a good part of that Sum which the Plaintiff demanded, in
reward and acknowledgment of that justice which was done them.

The Character of Kara Kiaja.
He that made at this time the greatest Figure at Court next to the Vizier, was
Kara Kiaja, of whom, to know him, we need give no other Character, than that he
was the Vizier's great Confident, and intimate to all his Councels; for having
all the ill qualifications, and mischievous Arts of the other, he was the most
likely Person to succeed the Vizier, which we shall find verified some years
hereafter. He was Capitan-Pasha, or Admiral of the Galleys, which is esteemed
one of the greatest Places of Trust and Honor in the whole Empire; but he was
removed from that Station, not in disgrace, but by favor of the Vizier, who
knowing him to be a Person like himself, and of his Humor and Principles,
placed him near the Person of the Grand Seignior, with Title of Chimacam; and
in recompense for the Commission which he had laid down, he was gratified with
the Revenue of three Passalicks in Anatolia, which had been given to the late
Vizier after his return from Candia in his Place. Capitan Passa (of whom we
have formerly made mention) was made Capitan Pasha, and this year dispatched
with Sixty Galleys into the Black-Sea, for building the two Castles upon the
Boristhenes: Other Preparations were not made this year for the War of Muscovy,
for the Turks intending for this Campaign to remain on the defensive part,
designed only to build those Forts which were to Command the passage of that
River, and for the future to stop the Excursions and Pyracies of the Cossacks
into the Black-Sea. The Muscovites, though desirous of a Peace with the Turk, yet
out of dullness, or ignorance, made faint applications for it, by the means of a
single Letter only, which was sent from Mosco by the hands of an Armenian who
was turned Russe, that is, one who had reconciled himself to the Russian
Church, and had no other business than only to deliver this Letter; the
Contents of which was, That the Turks should quit Verania, and desist from
Building their Forts on the Boristhenes, both which Proposals were rejected,
and no Answer returned unto the Letter.

So that now the Thoughts and Preparations for War giving no disturbance at the
Port, the Grand Seignior applied himself to the most soft Pleasures. He was not
now so eager in his Huntings as formerly, but attended to the more common
Delights of the Seraglio; he had gotten together a parcel of Dancing and
Singing Girls, which had been presented to him, for he would not be at the
expense to buy them; though he was so kind to them, as to have three of them at
the same time with Child by him, and kept in the Seraglio; where hereafter they
may prove a reserve to the Ottoman Line, when the Soldiers shall become more
want only profuse of the Blood of their Emperors. At this time likewise Kul
Ogli, Favorite to the Grand Seignior, who (as we have before related) had in
the year 1675. Married the Grand Seignior's Daughter at Adrianople, a Child
then of 7 years of Age, being now become ripe for her Husband, he Bedded her at
the beginning of this year.

And farther to increase the Pleasures of the Court, Pleasures of the Court.
the Grand Seignior for his Divertisement caused a Dunalmah or Triumph to be
made, which was represented on the Water by multitudes of Boats hanging out
Lights, and Fireworks on the Walls of the Seraglio; and a Float was made in
the Sea, representing the Island of Malta, which was battered on all sides by a
Fleet of Galleys.

But for all these Triumphs Constantinople, Fire in Constantinople.
which has ever been infested by Pestilence, and grievous Incendiations, was
greatly afflicted this year by many Fires; the greatest was on Christmas-Eve,
which, by common compute burnt down 2000 Houses, all that quarter called the
Fanar, with part of the Greek Patriarchs Church, the remainder being with much
difficulty saved. After which, another Fire happening near the Old Palace of
Constantine, a Boy found in the Rubbish a Diamond that weighed 96 Carats, which
he sold for 3 Paraws, or about two pence halfpenny; and the Buyer re-sold it
again for a Zelot, or about half a Crown, to one of those Shops near Sultan
Bajazet's Mosch, which sell Stones for Seals, and pieces of Crystal for Rings;
and there it lay for some time unregarded, until at length the Owner not
finding a Chapman, brought it to an Armenian to set in Silver. The Armenian
being a Jeweller, soon apprehended the nature of the Stone, but the largeness
of the size causing him to mistrust his own judgment, he Consulted two others,
and upon Trial, it proved to be a real Diamond; so when the Owner came for his
Stone, it was pretended to be lost, and with a Dollar and half they contented
him. But the Jewellers disagreeing in the division of so great a Purchase; and
one fearing to be betrayed by the other, he that had it in Possession
discovered it, and sent it to the Grand Seignior. 'Twas said to be the most
perfect, and best Water that ever was seen. It was very old, and given to be
new Cut. It was judged to have been a Jewel belonging to the Greek Emperors; it
not being entered into the Register of the Seraglio, where all Jewels of value
are Recorded.

ANNO 1680.
1680.
THis year began with the most solemn Council that was ever known to have been
held at Constantinople, A Council called.
within the memory Man. Those present at it, were all the Pashaes of the Bench,
the Janizar-Aga, Topegi-Bashee or Master of the Ordnance, the Chief of the
Spahees, the two Kadileschers, or Chief Justices; in short all the Great Men,
then present, of the Empire. The Council was summoned at the motion of the
Grand Vizier, who having a Breach with the Christian Emperor then in prospect,
had a desire to feel the Pulse and try the Inclinations of the great Men, how
they stood affected to such an Enterprise. But it seems the Proposal did not
very well relish; for that a Moscovite Ambassador being on his Journey to the
Port, the Issue or Event of his Negotiation was first to be expected: And in
the mean time, it was concluded most safe, and prudent not to Engage in another
War. Besides, the Emperor was then actually in Treaty to renew the Truce with
the Grand Seignior, which in few Years terminated; and to that end, had sent an
Envoy extraordinary to the Port, but he died before his Negotiation was
accomplished, as did also three other Residents in less than the compass of one
Year,

The preparations for War this year being thus laid aside. The Vizier was at
leisure to Marry his Daughter to the Grand Seignior's Hazna-Kajasee, The Vizier
Marries his Daughter.
or Privy-purse, who thereupon was promoted to be a Pasha of the Divan, or
Vizier of the Bench; he was esteemed the Richest Man in the Empire; which the
Grand Vizier soon found to his high Advantage; for he dying 40 Days after his
Marriage, the Vizier in right of his Daughter entered into a vast Inheritance.
The Widow remained not long in her desolate Condition, before she was promised
to Osman then Pasha of Grand Cairo, who had formerly been Bostangi-Bashee, or
Chief of the Gardiners, and Chimacam of Constantinople.

By these means the Vizier was grown so Rich, and Great, and Insolent, Faction
against the Vizier.
that he created many Enemies; but the most dangerous to him, was a Faction at
Court, the Chief of which were the Kuzlir-Aga, or Prime Eunuch of the Women,
and Solomon the Imbrahor, or Master of the Horse, the which made it their
business to cross the Vizier, in all his Proceedings; and disappointed him of
preferring a favorite of his, to the place of second Master of the Horse,
which was lately become vacant by the death of that Officer; and one preferred
thereunto at the recommendation of Solomon Pasha, who was his Friend, and had
been Treasurer to the late Vizier. Upon which defeat the great Vizier fearing
that he lost ground, and decayed in his power and interest, thought fit to
hasten his own Marriage with the Grand Seignior's Daughter, a Child of 8 years
of Age; who like other Sultanaes was Married to no other end, than that her
Husband might have the Honor to maintain her a Court, and Equipage agreeable
to a Lady of her Degree and Quality.

This near Alliance to the Ottoman Blood, and familiar Conversation with the
Sultan, could not be procured and maintained without a vast expense to the
Vizier; who was commanded by the Grand Seignior to Treat him once, and
sometimes twice a Week, and at every Meal, it cost him 25 Purses of Money,
besides other presents to the Valide, or Queen Mother, and other powerful
Persons at Court to an incredible value: To support which Charge, Rapine and
Violence were necessary, and nothing but a share in the Booty and Pray could
stop and fortify the Ears of the Sultan, and Ministers of the Court against
the Cries, and Groans of oppressed Wretches.

One of the ways to Raise Money, (and that esteemed none of the meanest) was by
Avanias, or false pretenses to be made on the Ambassadors, or Residents of
Christian Princes, then actually residing at the Port; the violation of whose
Character and Office the Vizier esteemed to be no Sin or Offense; being in his
Opinion but Gaurs and Infidels, and such as were sent for Pledges, and Pawns
for the Fidelity of their Masters to the Turks: Besides which, he conceived so
mean an esteem of all Christian Princes, and undervalued their power and
courage in War; that he believed no Indignities or Dishonorable usage could
provoke them to a Resentment, or a Revenge for any injuries received: And so
far had this belief generally prevailed, that the Pashaes, and Governors who
lived at a distance from the Port, would tell the Merchants, that in case their
Estates were seized, and one of their Hands cut off, and expelled the Country;
yet so wedded were they to their own Interest, and to the Delights of the
Turkish Air, that the next Year they would return again, The Vizier Treats the
Christian Ministers with Scorn.
and adventure the like Treatment rather than forego the hopes, and sweetness
of that profit, which they had tried, and expected in the Dominions of the
Grand Seignior. The Vizier had certainly thoughts like these, and the same poor
and contemptible esteem of Christian Princes in comparison with the Ottoman
Force, which was no doubt one of his chief Motives to commence that fatal War,
which in a few years afterward he unhappily begun. And in the mean time acting
on these Principles, he treated all the Christian Ministers at the Port with
equal Scorn and Contempt.

To begin with the French, he denied to that Ambassador the Privilege of
Sitting on the Soffra, when he admitted him to Audience; an Honor formerly
allowed to Christian Representatives; but now out of the height of Pride
over-looking all the World, and not enduring to see a Christian to sit either
so near or equal to him, the Vizier made it a standing Rule, That no Ambassador
whatsoever should have his Stool placed on the Soffra: But his most Christian
Majesty, who was always tender in Points which concerned his Honor, gave
positive Commands to his Ambassador: Not to accept of Audience on any Terms
derogatory to the ancient respect; and the Vizier as Resolute on the other
side, procured the Grand Seignior's command, to confirm that method of
receiving Ambassadors, so that it was no longer an act of the Vizier's but of
the Sultan's Determination: In which resolves on both sides the Vizier went to
Adrianople, intending never to retract his Words; which afterward proved true;
for greater Thoughts, and Employments diverted him from other Treaties on that
Matter. But before things proceeded thus far, the Vizier called this Ambassador
to an Account for what the Frenchmen of War had acted against the Tripolins,
by violating the Grand Seignior's Port of Scio, for that People having
committed many Pyracies on the French Nation, and then actually in War with
them, were Roving in the Seas of the Archepelago, and there unhappily meeting
with their Enemy, the French, they took Refuge and Shelter under the Castle of
Scio: The Frenchmen of War being animated against their Enemy, and tempted
with the sight of their Prey so near, and within their view, entered the Port
and made several Shot at the Tripolins, some of which coming a Shore and doing
some little Damage to the People; it was interpreted as a Breach of the Peace,
and Violation of the Grand Seignior's Port. the French Ambassador imprisoned.
Complaints whereof being brought to Constantinople, the Vizier sent for the
Ambassador to his Seraglio, and without seeing him, committed him Prisoner to
the Custody of the Chaous-Bashee; Demanding Two hundred thousand Crowns for
reparation of the Damages which the French Ships had done at the Port of Scio,
and also in satisfaction for the affront which they had done to the Grand
Seignior in the Violation of his Port, which amounted unto no less than an
absolute Breach of the Peace. The Ambassador remained some Nights under this
restraint with menaces, and threats of being removed thence to the Seven
Towers: During which time the Customer ( Husaein-Aga, (who was always made the
Agi^ator between the Vizier, and the Frank Nations) pressed the Ambassador with
much earnestness, to an accommodation with the Vizier: And indeed there was
Reason for it, because it was the first time, that ever the Vizier had right in
his demands; for certainly the Actions of the French Ships at Scio were not to
be justified, nor otherwise to be judged than as Acts of Hostility. The
Agreement was carried so privately between the Ambassador and the Customer,
that after a confinement of three Days and Nights, the Ambassador was set at
Liberty, with a Rumor over all the Town of being acquitted and cleared without
any payment, or engagement whatsoever. But time, which brings all things to
light, did by the event discover about three or four Months afterward, that
the great Sum demanded was to be paid though in such a manner, that the Payment
seemed notional and figurative only, by which a tenth part was taken for the
whole. And not to concern the King's Honor therein, the tender of this
Satisfaction was not to be made in Presence of the Ambassador, but by the
Secretary and some Merchants; who were to give it out to the World, as an Act
of their own, and as if they had paid the price at their own expense, rather
than their Trade should be obstructed by an open Rupture. But whatsoever was
rumoured abroad, and what Tricks were jugled under Hand, the Grand Seignior
took it for granted, that the Money or the value thereof in Goods was to be
laid down, and that the King by his Ambassador or Agents under him, was to be
concerned in the Atonement which was offered in Satisfaction for the late
Trespass: And that he might not be deceived herein; the Grand Seignior contrary
to his usual Custom, which was to refer all such Negotiations as these to the
management of the Vizier, would himself be present at this submission; perhaps
because he would fancy that Great King actually at the foot of his Throne,
offering his Presents and Sacrifices for a Reconciliation. And indeed the Scene
opened not much unlike it, for when the Curtain was drawn up, behold the Grand
Seignior seated in Majesty on his Throne, and beneath him the Secretary and
Agents of the French Nation, prostrating themselves with their Presents before
him; and then the Usher of the R. Presence Proclaimed with an audible Voice,
Behold the Agents sent from the King of France to humble themselves before our
Mysterious Emperor, and in the Name of that their King to offer their Presents
in satisfaction for that Assront and Insult which the French Ships offered at
the Port of Scio. After which the Presents were produced according to the List,
and an Estimate set upon them. As namely, Here is a Piece of Satin value so
much, a Piece of Cloth of Gold so much, a Clock at such a Rate, all Prized and
Estimated at ten times more than their worth; Matters jugled between the Turks,
and France.
which the Grand Seignior did either little understand, or at least was willing
to oversee; having perhaps other more secret Intrigues then in agitation
between himself and the Court of France, things at that time tending to a
Breach between the Turks, and the Emperor of Germany. Or perhaps the Grand
Seignior was well enough satisfied in gaining his Point, which was to see
Agents from France humbling themselves before him in that submissive Address.

Nor did the English Ambassador receive much better treatment, for besides
several preceding Avanias, one whereof was cast on the Turkey Company in
general, on occasion of a vast Sum of Lion Dollars imported to Aleppo, which at
that time was the most hopeful Trade. Upon notice of the Importation of so
immense a Sum in ready Money, the Vizier's heart was enlarged, so that he
swallowed down a great share thereof within his imagination and desires;
Troubles on the English Merchants.
and to bring the substance nearer to him, he pretended that they were false
Money, and brought into the Grand Seigniors Dominions to Cheat and Defraud his
Subjects with Coin of a low and base Alloy. To prove the truth of this
Allegation, Commands were sent to Aleppo to try the Money, which accordingly
was done, in the presence of the Chief Officers; and though they received a full
demonstration of the true intrinsic value, according to the legal Standard of
that Money, yet there was need of Presents to obtain such a favorable Report
as might satisfy the Vizier, and make the Money current in the Country. But be
the Hoget or Report what it would, it could never content the Vizier, who
insisted that the Certificates were false, and gained by Bribery and
Corruption; and therefore for his better assurance, he would send for the Money
to Constantinople, or at least for a great part thereof, that an assay or proof
of its goodness might be made in his presence. In short, to avoid so great a
loss and mischief to the Merchants, 17000 Dollars were presented to the Vizier
and his Officers to take off farther pretenses from that Money; which, with the
Presents and Charges at Aleppo, amounted to more than 20000 Dollars.

Some Months after this, the Vizier wanting a new Pretense to draw more Money
from the English Nation, he signified to the Ambassador, Sir John Finch, his
desire to have the Capitulations sent to him by the hand of his Interpreter, on
pretense of reading some particular Articles therein for his own Information,
and Instruction. The Vizier accordingly having them in his hand, detained them,
saying, A Trick put on the English Ambassador.
That there were several Articles therein, which being contrary to the Turkish
Law, and prejudicial to the Grand Seignior's Power and Revenue were to be made
void and null, which he would take care to expunge, and would afterward return
unto the Ambassador another Capitulation. This new Method of proceeding was
very surprising to Sir John Finch, then Lord Ambassador, and the whole English
Nation; who being divested of their defensive Arms, and of those Articles on
which all their security in that Country was established, looked on themselves
and their Estates as exposed to the will and arbitrary pleasure of the Turks.
It seemed now as if our Nation remained in a state of War, or in a Condition of
Outlawed People, being deprived of our Law and Privileges. The Consuls did
usually carry the Authentic Copies of the Capitulations with them, whenever
they appeared before the Kadies, or Justices; but the Original Exemplar being
taken away, the force of the Copies ceased, and those Articles could not be
produced, in Plea for us, as formerly they were. This Matter relating to a
state of War and Peace, was transmitted home to his Majesty's Consideration;
who was humbly entreated by the Turkey Company to take notice thereof in
Letters directed to the Grand Seignior, and the Vizier. But in the mean time
the inconveniences were so great, and the obstructions to Trade so
insupportable, that it was thought fit to ransom our Capitulations out of
Captivity at any rate, rather than to hazard all our Interest by the want of
them. So that a Treaty being commenced, it was agreed, that upon payment of 50
Purses of Money, being 25 thousand Dollars, the Capitulations should be
restored, which was accordingly performed.

In this Condition things stood, when the Lord Chandois, another Ambassador
from his Majesty, arrived at Constantinople, bringing, besides his Credentials,
Letters to the Grand Seignior and Vizier, containing no other matter than
Complaints of that unworthy Seizure of the Capitulations, and of the Price and
Ransom paid for them; an Action so strange and new, that an Example of the like
nature was never known, or heard of in the World. The Vizier, contrary to his
usual Custom, being touched with a sense of shame for so mean an Action; did
desire that the Letter of this Tenure from our King to the Grand Seignior might
be smothered, and not delivered; promising to make restitution of the Fifty
purses, he had taken on that occasion. This offer from the Vizier seemed a
thing incredible, and as impossible to redeem a Soul out of Hell, as a Purse of
Money out of his Coffers: Howsoever, so touched he was with the sense of this
Act, of which the Grand Seignior had as yet no knowledge, nor taken any share
in the Booty, that he ordered Twenty nine purses of the Money to be restored;
but with so ill a Grace, and so unpleasant a Countenance, that our Merchants
apprehended some other Contrivances, and Machinations to be repaid again with a
severe interest; which might probably have been expected, had not the Vizier
been diverted from these low acquisitions to matters of higher concernment in
Hungary: Howsoever, before his departure he left those menacing promises behind
him, which threatened no less than Ruin and Destruction at his Return. We might
here recount several other Acts of injustice passed on our Nation: As the
encouragement of the Pasha of Tunis, to make demands on our Ambassador for what
Goods the Corsaires, or Pirates had taken from him, on one of our English
Ships: And though out of the respect and deference which the Great Duke of
Tuscany, and the Great Master of Malta bore to the Majesty of our King, and by
the industry and good management of Sir John Finch, then Ambassador at
Constantinople, the greatest part of the Goods and Money taken were restored,
for which the Pasha declared himself satisfied; yet this Pasha receiving
countenance and encouragement from this Vizier in his pretensions, demanded 450
Purses to be paid him by the Ambassador, for the remaining Goods which were not
recovered. And though this pretension in the late Vizier's time, (a Man of more
Justice and Reason than this present) was cast out, and quashed; yet the Pasha
looking on this conjuncture, as the most seasonable of any, when the most
extravagant demands would be heard and favored, renewed his Suit, and pleaded
it before the Vizier with as many Lies, and false Testimonies as were required,
or could be invented to give color to an evil Case. The Vizier hearkened most
devoutly to all the Allegations, and with a bended Brow, and a stern
Countenance told the Ambassador, That he was to answer for the Blood and
Estates of the Turks, which were lost Aboard our English Ships: And again
turning to the Pasha told him, That his Demands were too unreasonable and
extravagant; and so mediating, as it were, sometimes on one side and sometimes
on the other, with design to take on both Hands, he at length fairly dismissed
the Audience: And in the Afternoon made a proposal by his Kaja or Deputy
absolutely to supersede the Cause, provided that Fifteen purses, were given to
him, and Seven to his Kaja, and Reis-Effendi, who is Secretary of State. In
short, after diverse Treaties on this Subject, an Accommodation was made with a
great Sum, other businesses being entered and passed in the same Agreement.

The next which comes into play is the Venetian Bailo or Ambassador, who about
the beginning of this Year 1680, was sent by that Republic to reside at
Constantinople, his name was Ciurani, a Noble Venetian, and one who had
formerly been General in Dalmatia; he was esteemed an Avaritious and a
self-interessed Person, a great Merchant, and a great Politician, and one made
up of Intrigues and Designs. His first Enterprise, which was to Cheat the
Turks, proved unlucky: For having brought a great quantity of Cloth of Gold
with him, which was his own Merchandise and Adventure, The Venetians in trouble.
he endeavored to save the Custom by Landing it under the notion of Presents,
which were to be made to the Grand Seignior, and the Officers of his Court. The
Goods were privately conveyed a Shore in the Night by Boats belonging to the
Ships of War, which had brought the Ambassador, and defended by a Guard of
Albanians, who are a company of lusty Fellows, to the number of Thirty,
maintained by the Republic only to carry Letters to Zara, or Cataro in
Dalmatia, from whence by a Felucca they are Transported to Venice: A Party of
these Men I say conducted these Goods, and in despite of the Customer's
Officers carried them to the Bailaggio, or House belonging to the Venetian
Ambassadors. The Customer Usaine Aga, who had notice of all that passed,
dissembled at first his knowledge thereof, and contrived with the High
Treasurer to send one of his Servants to Buy a considerable parcel of the Cloth
of Gold for the use of the Seraglio: And in regard different Sortments and
Colors were demanded, it was necessary to open and unpack diverse Chests; by
which means they came to a full discovery of all those Goods, which had
privately been conveyed away by Night. When these Chapmen had concluded their
Bargains, and agreed on the Prices, which amounted unto 3500 Dollars, they gave
an Assignment for the Money on Usaine Aga the Chief Customer; who willingly
accepted the Bill, but to abate it out of the Customs due for those Goods,
making up the Account after his own fashion: But not content herewith, he
obtained a Warrant from the Vizier directed to the Judge of Galata, to examine
the manner of carrying these Goods a-shoar in the Night by Force and Violence;
which being made out by several Witnesses, a report thereof was sent to the
Vizier, who immediately thereupon gave Orders to the Vaivod, and Captain of
Galata to make Search in the House of the Customer for those Goods, which had
not paid the Custom. Seignior Ciurani Alarmed at this manner of Proceeding, and
not willing to give an occasion to the Turks to violate the respect due to the
House of Venice, (which until that time was ever esteemed a Sanctuary, and
place of Refuge) seasonably compounded for his unjustifyable miscarriage by the
Payment of 30000 Dollars.

But this trouble was no sooner ended, before another of worse Consequence
began, arising from certain Slaves to the number of about Fifty, which had
saved themselves aboard the Venetian Men of War which had brought the
Ambassador, of which Complaint being made by the Masters unto the Vizier,
Orders were given twice to make search aboard the Ships for them; but by help
of a little Money, Inquisitions were made so superficially, that Returns were
given of none to be found. But the Complaints daily increasing, new Orders were
given to renew the Search, the execution whereof was committed to a Capugee and
a Hasakee, who are Officers belonging to the Seraglio, together with a Naip or
Kadee's Notary, who was to write down and record the proceedings. These persons
being come aboard, and rudely making search after their manner, the Soldiers
arose against them, and beat them off, wounding some and throwing the Naip and
others into the Sea. Upon report whereof the Vizier was so enraged, that he
would have had the Ships brought to the Arsenal, there to be laid up and
confiscated to the Grand Seignior's Service. The two Venetian Ambassadors
fearing also some violence to their Persons from these disorders, betook
themselves to their Ships, there to remain until Matters were a little
pacified; and to make the business more easy, the Slaves (about whom was all
the controversy) were privately conveyed ashore: And a Search of the Ships
submitted unto by consent, and Proposal of the Ambassadors themselves. The
Vizier being a little mollified with this compliance, the Chiaus-bashee (or
Chief of the Pursuivants) with 200 Men were sent aboard the Ships to make a
search, where being received without opposition, they left no corner of the
Ships unsought and unlooked into, and none being found, the Chiaus-bashee gave
them a favorable report upon payment of 300 Chequins: After which the Bailos
or Ambassadors returned ashore, referring a farther Accommodation of their
Matters to Usaine Aga the Customer, who was a most dexterous Person, both in
raising Avanias or false Pretenses, and in the Ways and Arts of composing them.
And he accordingly so managed the matter, that with payment of Seventy purses
to the Vizier, and Ten to the Kaja, with other petty rewards to Usaine Aga
himself, and other inferior Officers, which might in all amount to about 50000
Dollars, all Displeasures were reconciled, the new Bailo was Friendly admitted
to Audience, and the old one suffered fairly to depart: The Masters lost their
Slaves, and the Vizier got the Money. But the Troubles of the Venetian
Ministers did not end here: For not long afterward, some Desturbances arose in
Dalmatia between the Turks and the Subjects of that Republic, in which above a
Hundred Turks, as was reported, The Venetian Bailo Imprisoned.
being Cut off, the Vizier in a Rage sent the Bailo Prisoner to the seven
Towers, Threatening to put him to Death; but with the Atonement of 200.000
Dollars, the Vizier's gentle Heart was melted, and all things salved up and
reconciled again once more. But the Republic of Venice to whose expenses the
Sum of 300.000 Dollars was charged, could not so easily digest this Extortion;
and knowing that with the Turks there was no other remedy but patience until
such time as opportunity happened to revenge it, did in the interim show their
resentment, by their displeasure against Seignior Ciurani their Ambassador,
whom they recalled speedily from his Employment, and constituted the Secretary
in his place; and afterward levied a great part of the Money paid unto the
Turks out of his Estate, and out of the Estate of Morosini the old Bailo.
Foscari formerly Consul at Aleppo was made Inquisitor to examine the matter,
who upon enquiry thereinto found, that the Goods which Ciurani brought were to
the value of 60.000 Dollars, and others which had not paid Custom at Venice,
were in pena di contrabanda, condemned in 30.000 Ducats; such success as this
have such old Politians, who pretend to a craft and cunning above other Men.
And thus we have given a Relation of the Treatment which the Vizier used
toward the Venetians, in which we have been the more large, to inform the
World of the beginnings and grounds of the War, which soon afterward ensued,
and the Reasons which moved the Venetians to join themselves in League with the
Emperor against the Turk.

The next Foreign Minister which must taste of the Vizier's kindness, was the
Genoese Resident. And though neither the Business, nor the Actions of that Nation
did Administer any ground of pretense to extort Money from them; yet, the
Vizier made an Avania of 5000 Dollars upon them, for what cause no Man knows,
nor do the Genoese themselves declare any. It is conjectured he would not
suffer their Resident Seignior Spinola to depart without payment of that Sum,
upon pretense that during all the time of his Residence, he had never seen the
Grand Seignior.

The new Resident who succeeded to Spinola, had been the Sopra-cargo of a Ship,
and was rather a Factor than a Public Minister; for the State of Genoua had
refused to have any concernment in Turkey: Howsoever, they lent their name to
certain Merchants for 6000 Dollars a year, who in Consideration of the
Consolage to be confirmed to them, were to maintain a Resident at
Constantinople, and a Consul at Smyrna. After which the Camera was to know
nothing of any expense, but all sorts of Charges and Avanias were to be born by
the Undertakers; who allowed their Resident 1500 Dollars per annum, which with
the benefit of making Strong Water, and selling of Wine in his House, and with
ways of Thrifty living, was esteemed a good subsistence for a Person of his
quality.

The Dutch in Troubles.
The Dutch Minister which had for a long time escaped Troubles, and Avanias
rather by good fortune than any good cunning, did at length, on occasion of an
unavoidable Dispute with Usaine Aga the Customer, fall within reach of the
Vizier's Hand: And though the Resident foresaw the Mischief, and would have
avoided the Blow by submitting every thing to the Judgment of the Customer
himself; yet, to gain the Merit of bringing such a Client before the Vizier,
who could never depart from before his Tribunal without paying roundly for his
Justice, he immediately preferred his Memorial against the Dutch Resident;
saying, That he would not be Judge and Party, least he should be overpartial to
himself, but would rest content and submit to any Sentence which the Vizier
should pronounce in public Divan. Accordingly a Boiardee, or Warrant was sent
by a Chiaus to cite the Dutch Resident's Druggerman, or Interpreter to appear
in Divan with the Capitulations; which being brought thither, were there
detained after the manner of the English, on pretense that the Vizier would
peruse them; though as appears by the sequel his Intentions were to make them pay
their Ransom as our Capitulations had done before; which the Dutch objected
against us, as a leading Card to them, and that our easiness in yielding to
such an unparalleled Extortion, had given the Vizier Encouragment to
enterprise the like upon them. It was in the year 1610, when the Dutch first
made their Capitulations with the Turks; since which time they were but once
renewed, about Forty six years ago in the time of Sultan Morat; and then their
Articles were not described at large in many Points, only in general it was
declared, That they should extend to all the Particulars as largely, and in as
ample a manner, to all Privileges and Immunities, as did the English. The
Vizier upon Consideration of the matter, was not willing to find particulars in
generals, nor to interpret Articles with such vast Comprehensions as diverse and
caetera's would imply; and therefore told the Dutch, That they must either
receive their Capitulations back, with such Concessions only, as were expressed
in open Terms; or otherwise be contented with the expense of renewing of them,
in such an Explicit manner as might refer nothing to an interpretation out of
Generals. The Dutch who were contented with their old Capitulations, and
affrighted with the Charge of new ones, knowing how apt the Vizier was to
inflame the Reckoning, kept off at a distance for some time, Arguing the
unreasonableness of such a Constraint, and the validity of their present
Articles, than which they desired no others. Howsoever, the Vizier kept the
Capitulations, and the Customer interpreted them after his own Sense, and in
his own Favor. The Dutch had at that time several Ships under Convoy of their
State's Men of War arrived at Smyrna, to which they gave Orders not to enter
the Port, but to lie off without the Castle, as if they intended to break off
all Commerce; and in case their Capitulations were not restored, to cause their
Fleet to return back to the Ports from whence they came. But the Vizier and the
Customer were not moved with this Bravade; for though they were not very well
versed in Maritine, or Mercantile affairs, yet they were not ignorant how far a
Master of a Ship was obliged to deliver the Goods laden on his Vessel at the
Port, to which they were designed; nor did they unreasonably calculate the
Charge of returning the Convoy. with the loss and overthrow of their Voyage, to
be far greater than the Bargain which was to be made for Restitution, or
renewal of their Capitulations. Howsoever, the Dutch were of Opinion, That this
Suspension of Trade would mortify the Customer, and incline the Vizier to
better Terms; when after Fifty days hanging off, and that diverse great Ships of
their Convoy had lain almost all that time upon an expensive and heavy
demorage; at length the Resident being sooner weary thereof, than the Turks
were sensible of the failure of Trade, became desirous to Treat about an
Accommodation. The person employed herein was the Vizier's own Jew Broker, (for
all the great Men in Turkey have one of this Race depending on their Families,
who serve them for Setters and Pandors to their interest and pleasures.) This
Jew being dexterous in his mystery of making Bargains, concluded with the Dutch
to have their Capitulations renewed; and to have all the dubious Points
explained and distended at large, in the same manner as the English are: And
then in satisfaction, and return for so favorable an Indulgence, Fifty purses
of Money were to be paid to the Vizier, Ten to his Kaja, Three to the
Reis-Effendi, or Chief Secretary, and Eight to Usaine Aga the Customer: After
which Orders were sent to the Convoy to enter within the Port of Smyrna, which
might have been done at first without expense or loss of time; for certainly
the detention of the Convoy served nothing to the easier, and more ready
Accommodation of this Affair. I have known many Examples of this nature in my
own time in Turkey; and could never find that the stopping Ships from entering
into Port, did ever Operate upon the Turkish Officers, and only served to
increase our Expense, and add to the Afflictions of our other Aggrievances,
which we received from the Turks.

Thus did the Vizier Treat all the Ministers of Foreign Princes with a Scorn,
and Contempt as became such as were his Vassals, or Tributaries to his Master,
neither showing them Respect or Honor, nor affording them Justice: And when at
any time an injured Ambassador asked of him the Reasons why he was so severely
used, and what Crime he had committed, he would readily answer, Do you not
Breath in the Grand Seigniors Air, and will you pay him nothing for it?
Wherefore we may not wonder, that the Venetians on the Provocations
beforementioned, should in so few years after the Conclusion of a long War,
break out again with the Turk, and join with the Emperor against this Common
Enemy, whom neither Articles, nor Solemn Promises could keep within the Bounds
of Common Humanity. And when we consider, how the just God does humble the
Proud, we may not wonder to see how manifestly, the Divine Providence has
appeared in Defense of the Christian Cause, even to a Miracle against the
Turks, who at that time had exalted themselves to such a pitch of Pride, and
Opinion of their own Force, as if they had been Omnipotent and Invincible, and
were minded to verify their own saying, That God had made the Earth for their
Dominion, and Enjoyment, and the Sea only for the Christians.

Thus had Pride, Rapine and Avarice arisen to their Zenith and highest Sphere
unto which they could reach, and all those Corruptions and Irregularities in
Justice, which usually overthrow Kingdoms and Empires seemed now to be
consummated, and the Governors to have fulfilled the measure of their Iniquity.
Luxury and Lasciviousness may weaken and enervate a People, but Tyranny and
Injustice most commonly Subvert the whole Fabric of Government. Avarice, which
is the root of all Evils, and which provokes and incites to Tyranny and
Violence, was the ruin of the Ottoman Empire; of which we shall produce a most
pregnant Example in the Conduct of this Vizier, when we come to Treat of his
Conduct in the succeeding War, before he laid Siege to the City of Vienna.

ANNO, 1681.
WE are entered now into another year, A. D. 1681.
and still the Vizier continues unchangeable in his violent Resolutions of
getting and amassing vast Sums of Money. He had for some time given a little
respite to the Christian Ministers, from whom he had diverted his exactions to
exercise them on the Turks themselves; he laid an Imposition of two Aspers upon
every Oak of Flesh eaten within the City; An Oak is 2 l. English.
of which an Old Man complaining, who was employed to buy Flesh for the
Janissaries, as being dear and bad, the Vizier turned him out of his Office,
with a Reward of 300 blows on the Soles of his Feet.

The Grand Seignior having built a Seraglio on Galata side, near the Bosphorus,
many of the Workmen, and poor Laborers, both Turks and Christians not being
paid, gave a Petition to the Grand Seignior for their Money; the Grand
Seignior readily gave them an Assignment under his own hand for their Payment,
directed to the Tefterday or Lord Treasurer; but he sent them to the Vizier,
who clapped twenty three of them into Prison, and next day in public Divan,
ordered them to be drubb'd; telling them, That if he heard more of their
Complaints, he would send them to the Galleys.

But all these were petty Matters in Comparison with that greater Design he had
of raising Money; which was by laying a Tax on all Lands throughout the Empire,
called the Sorsat, whereby it was proposed to levy at least fourteen thousand
Purses, of which the Vizier made an account of at least two thousand for his
own share; (the Sorsat is the greatest Tax the Turks impose on their People,
being laid on every Acre of Glebe Land where the Plow goes.) The pretense for
which was, the Grand Seignior's Removal to Adrianople, for adjusting the Limits
of Poland. But this Design was disappointed by the contrary Faction of the
Kuzlir Aga, and Solomon Kaja, who by the Queen Mother represented to the Grand
Seignior, that this Journey being only of Pleasure, and not designed in order
to a War, he could not without an oppression of his People raise such a Tax,
which in former times was never Levied by their Wisest Emperors, but on great
Emergencies, and on occasion of pressing Exigencies; so the Grand Seignior,
like a good Prince, gave answer to the Vizier, That he would spare his Subjects
for the present, in regard that he, and the Valide Sultana, had sufficient in
the Treasury wherewith to defray their own Expenses.

Howsoever the Vizier still insisted on this Point, arguing that the intent of
removal to Adrianople was not a Journey of Pleasure; but (if the Grand Seignior
so pleased) in order to a War against the Emperor of Germany; for never was
there a Conjuncture more favorable than at present, when the Rebels under the
Command of Count Teckeley invited them to a Conquest of all that Country; and
particularly of Raab, which having been formerly under the Dominion of the
Turks, could not without dishonor to the Empire, and scandal to Religion be
relinquished, and suffered to remain in the hands of the Christians, when it
might without much blood or expense be recovered. To which the Grand Seignior
made answer, That Raab had not been lost in his days, nor in the Reigns of his
Father, or Uncle, and therefore that the recovery thereof did less concern him;
and that for his own part, he had sufficiently enlarged his Empire by the
addition of Newhawsel, Candia, Caminiee, Ukrania, and the appurtenances
thereunto belonging; the which Conquests had so harassed his Soldiers, and
burdened his People, that he was resolved to put an end unto his Wars, and
give repose and ease unto his Dominions.

At present there was neither Peace with the Moscovites, nor open Wars; the
Treaties were in a manner ended, no great Preparations were making for the
following year, Things doubtful with Moscovy.
but every thing remained in a kind of suspense; and in this Condition of
Affairs the Vizier advised the Grand Seignior to remove with his Court unto
Adrianople in a Warlike posture, which might alarm the Moscovites, and incline
them to better Terms and Articles of Peace. The Grand Seignior assented
thereunto, and about the beginning of November arrived at Adrianople.

But before the Vizier was well settled in that City, he was forced for his own
safety to cut off his beloved Kaja, a Creature of his own, who was admirably
fitted for his purpose; for he was grown so scandalously avaritious, and so
publicly rapacious, without any fear or shame, that he was hated and detested
by all Mankind. And here, if ever, the Curse of David was really fulfilled of
him and his Master; Let a Wicked Man be set over them, and let Satan stand at
his right hand. And though the Vizier had no great need of a Tempter to provoke
or incite him to catch at his Prey, yet this Devil being most excellently
Sagacious in finding out and starting Game, and skilful in all the Arts of
Intriguing, he was most intimate and dear to his Master, and esteemed the more
useful Instrument, because he was so bold as to be content to bear the
disgrace, and to stand between the Vizier, and the Clamours of the People;
which were now become so common, and general by the outcries of the multitude,
that the Vizier to save himself, was forced to offer him a Sacrifice to their
tumultuous rage. The occasion was this.

The last Summer the Grand Seignior at the instigation of the Mufti, and of
other Zealots of the Mahometan-Law, had issued out diverse severe Edicts against
Taverns, and Boza-Shops. This Boza is a certain sort of Liquor made of that
Grain which by us is called Millet, which is fumatick, The Cause that moved the
Vizier to cut off his Kaja.
and as inebriating as our strongest Ale; and with which the Turks would be as
drunk, and more quarrelsom and mutinous than if they had drank of the juice of
the Grape; and therefore the Ulamah, or Expositors of their Law, gave their
Opinions that it was as unlawful as Wine; for that since it was their Prophet's
intention to prohibit Drunkenness, it was an illusion of his Precept to forbid
Wine, and at the same time to allow of other more intoxicating and inebriating
Liquors; wherefore as often as the Grand Seignior renewed his Decrees against
Wine, he enjoined the same Penalties against drinking Boza, which was a very
heavy and grievous Lesson to the People; for Boza-shops were become almost as
common in Turkey, as Alehouses are in England, and to suppress them, would be
a like inconvenience. Wherefore upon return of the Grand Seignior last year
unto Constantinople, the Boza-Housekeepers made their Addresses to the Vizier
for a Dispensation with the Sultan's Decree and License to sell Boza publicly
as before; the Kaja boldly enters into a Treaty, and concludes with them for
sixty Purses, which so soon as the Grand Seignior was departed were paid, and
the License given, and the Cape, or Chief of that Trade was with Ceremony
vested by the Chimacam, who came also into a share of the benefit. But this
matter could not long remain a Secret before it was made known to the Sultan by
the contrary Faction to the Vizier, who having the good fortune to have Kara
Kaja his Friend then present when the Complaint was made; at which he observing
the Grand Seignior to grow very angry, immediately interposed in behalf of the
Vizier, excusing him as ignorant in the matter, and that none was guilty
therein besides Hassan the Vizier's Kaja, who was the sole Actor and Contriver
of the Offense. The Grand Seignior, who had always been constant to his prime
Minister, was willing to see him covered with such a screen, and without
farther delay Signed a Command to take off the head of the Kaja, which was
dispatched away by the Salahor, or Chief of the Querries belonging to the
Stables. Kara Kaja a very bad Man, who was Friend to the Vizier, dispatched
with all expedition this Advice unto him; which he having received, and fearing
left his Kaja should be carried away alive to the Grand Seignior, and betray
the whole truth of their Combination, not staying for the Command, immediately
ordered him to be strangled. It was early in the Morning when the Letter came,
and at the same moment the Vizier sent for Ali Aga, who had been Talkishgee to
the late Vizier, (that is the Officer who carries Messages to the Grand
Seignior) and then Agent at the Port for the Tartar Han, and bid him go to
Hassan Kaja and take his Place. Ali Aga surpised and confused with this
direction, went as he was ordered, and whilst he was speaking to Hassan, and
telling him that he did not well understand the Vizier's Pleasure, in came the
Master of the Ceremonies with a Vest, with which (after the Turkish fashion) he
Clothed Ali Aga, bidding Hassan to retire into the inward Chamber; where being
entered, The Viziers Kaja strangled.
two lusty Arnouts, who were selling Cimnels in the Streets, were brought up
and ordered to strangle him; the Cord was thrown down before him, which seeming
stiff, and not prepared to slip easily, he desired his Executioners to make use
of his own Girdle. But before he died, he instantly urged that it might be
permitted him to see the Vizier, to whom he had many things of Importance to
Communicate. But it would not be granted; and as the Cord was putting about his
neck, he Cursed the Vizier, saying these last words; O Treacherous World, now I
know thee! Being a strong Man he was long in dying; and some few hours after
his Execution being observed to move, the Vizier ordered the Principal Jailer
to watch him until he was Enterr'd. And so was the Grand Seignior's Sentence
forestal'd, for he was in his Grave before that arrived.

After his death, the next thing was to ransack his Houses, where great Riches
were found, both in Furniture, Clothing, Jewels, and Money; he had four hundred
and twenty Horses in his Stables; to the Meri or Exchequer fifteen hundred
Purses of his Money were brought, but his Houses and Lands were assigned to pay
his Debts, all which he had gained in the space of three years. In one of his
new Houses he had enclosed forty thousand Chequins within a Wall, which his
Steward discovered, and that he had murdered the poor Masons whom he had
employed in the Work. When this Vizier was Chimacam, (as he was for several
years) this Man was once his Kaja, but he was so shameless a Villain, that his
Master drubb'd him, and turned him out of his Service. Howsoever, being now
Vizier, and knowing that he had need of such an Instrument, he took him again
into the same Office; and calling to Mind that when he was Pasha of Silistria,
in the time of Old Kuperlee, he saved himself by cutting off another Kaja, he
reserved this Rogue for the same purpose.

The new Kaja was a much better Man, and therefore little confided in by the
Vizier, and consequently made no great Figure at his Court; his Chief Confident
now was the Reis-Essendi, or Principal Secretary, by whose hands all Treaties
and Negotiations passed. In short, by these Arts and Means the Vizier kept up
his Credit with his Master, and in despite of the Faction which was against
him, he stood firm on his Basis, such was the favor and constancy of the
Sultan to his prime Ministers.

On the twenty third of November, Caplan Pasha, who had for some years been
Capitan Pasha, and of whom we have had occasion to make mention often in our
former History, died at Smyrna, being grown almost to a Dotage; he had just
such another Kaja as the Vizier had, who miserably pillaged and oppressed the
poor Islanders in the Archipelago, from whom he extorted two hundred Purses;
such another Sum would totally have ruined them.

A Page of the Grand Seignior's, who was Selictar-Aga, or Sword Bearer
succeeded in the great charge of Capitan-Pasha, or High Admiral of the Naval
Forces, he was a Creature of the Viziers, and Born in the same Town with him;
by whom his Party was strengthened against the contrary Faction.

At this time the Vizier was meditating a War against the Emperor; but having
differences with Poland and Moscovy on his Hands, as yet not decided, there
being neither an open War nor a declared peace as yet with either, The Vizier
designs a War on the Emperor.
he resolved so soon as possible to bring Matters unto an Accommodation with
them both: And having made Peace with all the World, and super-induced a
calmness over the Face of all the Ottoman Empire, he might then have a pretense
to break out into a new War against the Emperor; to which though he might meet an
aversion in the Grand Seignior for the Causes before mentioned, and in the
Mufti, and Viziers of the Bench, upon the Truce which wanted Two years of being
expired; yet having such a favorable conjuncture of Affairs to offer, than
which nothing could be more inviting, he assured himself that he should prevail
with the Grand Seignior and his Chief Ministers; and herein he missed not his
aim, for laying before them the Successes of the Malcontents in Hungary, who
were powerful and strong, and had of themselves worsted the Emperor's Forces in
all their Battles and Skirmishes: And that these People declared their
intentions to throw off their Obedience and Allegiance to the Emperor, and
offered themselves Subjects, and Tributaries to the Grand Seignior, on the easy
and reasonable Condition only of affording them his Assistance, and granting
them his Protection: So that to let slip this favorable opportunity, on the
Nice point of a Truce not yet expired, were, said he, to give up the Mohammedan
Cause; the advance and increase of which were a sufficient ground to hallow any
thing, which may stand in opposition to it. There were other things also
alleged, in reference to secret Encouragements given from France, which though
they carried not such weight with the Council, so as to depend on them, yet
they served for probable inducements to incite forward unto a War. With which
Reasons the Grand Seignior and the Council being convinced, a War was
determined, and great preparations made in order thereunto. And now in regard
we are come to a Crisis of time, which gave a turn to the successes of the
Turks, and has shaken and almost subverted the whole Fabric of the Ottoman
Empire; it may not be an impertinent digression to look back to the Troubles of
Hungary, which were the Causes and Original of that War, which has proved
fatal to the Turks, and brought the Kingdom of Hungary under the entire and
absolute Dominion of the Christian Emperor: We shall therefore give a succinct
Account of the beginning of those Troubles, as reported by the Author of that
Tract called Vienna Oppugnata, adjoined at the end of the History of Isthuanus
formerly Vice-Palatine of Hungary, whose words are to this purpose.

The Turks having in the Month of August 1664. received an Overthrow with the
Slaughter of 10000 Men near St. Gothards, The Original of the Troubles in
Hungary.
a Town in Hungary, by the Imperial Army, under the Conduct and Command of
Raymond Montecuculi, a Peace or Truce rather was immediately concluded
thereupon, to continue for the space of Twenty years: During which time the
Kingdom of Hungary long harassed with War, might have recovered its pristin
happy Estate, had not certain Miscreants, the barbarous and degenerate
offspring of that Country, disturbed the Tranquillity and Quiet thereof; and by
Machinations and Plots against the Life of their Sovereign, drawn upon
themselves that destruction which they designed for others. But God be praised,
their Treason was detected, and the chief Conspirators, namely, Francis Count
Nadasti, Chief Justice of Hungary, Francis Marquis of Frangipani, and Peter
Serini a Count of Croatia, all of them Eminent both for Arms and Letters, were
taken, arraigned, and being found Guilty were put to Death, and their Goods and
Estates confiscated to the use of the Emperor. But so soon as this Rebellion
was suppressed, another of more dangerous consequence was raised, being
fomented by the Nobility, and Persons most considerable for their Estates and
Power in Hungary, of which Emericus Count Tekeli was declared the Chief; the
Causes and Grounds of which they delivered under these Heads.

First, That contrary to the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, a Palatine
had not been constituted to supply the vacancy of the former deceased.

Secondly, That the Hungarians were excluded from all Offices and places of
Trust, and Strangers introduced into their stead.

Thirdly, That the German Troops were forcibly quartered upon them, and the
numbers daily increased: And all the Forts, Castles, and places of defense
garrisoned by German Soldiers, and no Trust or Confidence reposed in the
Hungarians, to the great oppression and discouragement of that People.

Fourthly, That by the Counsel and Advice of the Jesuits, the free exercise of
their Religion was not only taken from them, but they were also ejected out of
their Churches and places where they worshipped God: For which Reason they
desired, that the Jesuits might be banished out of Hungary.

And though the Emperor did in his Wisdom foresee all the mischiefs which did
ensue, and with a gracious Clemency endeavored to apply those Lenitives, which
might appease the Spirits of his discontented Subjects; and in order thereunto
called a Diet to be held at Cassovia, where he offered to condescend unto all
the Propositions which the Malcontents did demand: And afterward summoned
another Diet to be held at Presburg, at which, before the Coronation of the
Queen, he assisted and presided in Person, and there made new offers to grant
Liberty of Conscience, and a free exercise of Religion to all Protestants, and
to restore to them their Churches taken from them, with as many other
Privileges and Favors as could be desired: So that there was all appearance
imaginable of Peace and a fair Accommodation. But matters were permitted to go
too far before they received a Check: For the Malcontents were engaged with
the Turks beyond any power of retractation: And having received Assurances from
them of Assistances which were daily expected, and Promises (as it is said) of
Money from the French, all thoughts of accommodation were laid aside, from
whence that terrible War has ensued, fatal to the Turks and pernicious to
Christendom.

All this is a short Epitome of the Troubles and Unquietnesses in Hungary, for
the space of about Eighteen years, which having been the occasion of the great
War, which has altered the state of the whole World; We shall not content over
selves with this short Relation, but shall proceed to render an Account of the
rise of these Troubles, the continuance of them, with the several Successes,
until the Entire conquest of Hungary by the Emperor.

The People of Hungary are naturally of a mutinous and unquit Temper,
complaining of War, and not well contented with Peace. The Emperor toward the
end of the Campaign 1664. had gained a Victory (as is said) over the Turks, and
made the good use thereof, as with that opportunity to clap up a Peace. The
Hungarians who before that time, and even during the War with the Turk, bad
been unseasonably incensed by many Insults and Outrages committed on them by
the German Soldiers; but more sensibly touched by having their Churches taken
from them by the Counsel, and advice of the Jesuits and Clergy of Rome; were
not content with the Peace made by the Emperor with the Grand Seignior:
Alleging that they ought to have been made Parties to the Treaty, it being
their Country which was chiefly concerned: That after so Signal a Victory,
better and more advantageous Articles might have been obtained from the Turk,
and perhaps Newhawsel it self might have been Surrendered and Restored, but by
default hereof their Condition was rendered far worse than before, for by
virtue of the new Articles lately concluded: The Pasha of Newhawsel pretended
to bring all the Villages on the Frontiers of Moravia under Contribution; and
to add unto the new Conquests all the Country and places on this side the
Danube, which are nearly adjoining to Gran, Alba-Regalis and Kanisia, wherein
was comprehended the greatest part of the lower Hungary: Which they exclaimed
against as Terms so disagreeable unto them, that a War had been much better;
and therefore to prevent and disappoint all farther proceedings thereon, they
seized on the Secretary of the Imperial Resident then remaining with the
Vizier, on the way as he was carrying the Articles of Peace to be Ratified by
the Emperor, and took from him his Horses and Money with his Dispatches, which
they for some time detained, and restored not without much difficulty.

The Emperor being informed of this Affront, cited the Chief Lords of Hungary
to appear at Vienna: Where the Prince Lukovitz President of the Imperial
Council told them, That the Conditions of Peace which his Master the Emperor
had concluded with the Turk, were not so disadvantageous as they imagined; for
that the first overture of Peace came from the Turks themselves, with whom it
was agreed and concluded, that Transylvania was to continue in its ancient
Liberty, and not subjected to the Government of a Pasha in nature of a
Mohammedan Province. That the Counties of Zatmar and Zambolish, which were
anciently esteemed dependencies on Transylvania, were to be transferred into
the power of the Emperor. That the better to secure the Frontiers of the upper
Hungary, and to prevent the Incursions of the Turks on the other side of the
Danube, It was provided in the Capitulations, that the Emperor might Build
Forts on each side of the River Waagh; which would very much annoy and restrain
the Turks of Waradin and Newhawsel from making Depredations, or Incursions on
that side of the Country. Now considering that this Peace was thus
advantageous, as well to Hungary as to the Hereditary Dominions; his Imperial
Majesty judged it convenient to embrace so fair an opportunity; expecting that
the Hungarian Lords would likewise concur with him in Confirmation of the
Treaty, and restrain their Soldiers from committing farther Outrages on the
Frontiers. That his Imperial Majesty as to his part, was resolved to withdraw
all his German Regiments out of Hungary; Provided, That they themselves would
take care to furnish, and supply those Garrisons with Soldiers of their own,
and at their own charge repair the Fortifications of Levents, Schentra, Neutra,
Schella and Gutta, which are Neighboring places to Newhawsel, and to furnish
them with all sorts of Ammunition, and Provisions necessary for their
Maintenance and Defense.

The Hungarian Lords returned no present answer to this Discourse; having not
Authority so to do, until they had first consulted with the Nobility of the
Upper Hungary, who had often protested that they would never agree to any
thing, which was concluded without their consent, and revenge themselves on
their Palatine, in case he should engage them in matters without their Privity
or Concurrence first obtained.

In fine, after Consultations had with the Estates, an answer was giving in
Writing to this effect. That to conclude a Peace without the Privity and
Concurrence of the Estates, was against the Statutes, and Privileges of the
Kingdom. That in case they could flatter themselves so far, as to believe that
true Tranquillity and Ease would be the effect, and consequence of the late
Truce made with the Turk, which would be the greatest blessing that could befall
a Nation, (which above all the People in this World had been harassed with
War:) Yet it was difficult, and almost unpracticable for them to build the
Fortresses intended upon the Waagh, and in the mean time restrain the Turks
from their Incursions; and let them do what was possible for them, yet still
Hungary would lie open, and exposed for at least 60 Leagues space to the
Incursions of the Turks, and to the extortions and insolences of the German
Soldiers: In short therefore, they resolved to Ratify nothing; they would
neither exchange the Garrisons nor Build new Forts, nor Repair old ones; but
leave every thing to his Majesty to provide what was necessary for the defense,
and conservation of that miserable and unfortunate Kingdom.

This memorial being given in with a kind of sad and a discontented behavior,
despairing (as it were) of the welfare of their Country; the Hungarians were
retiring from the Emperor and his Council, when the Prince Lubkovitz reassumed
in a calm and sober manner his former Discourse, which he pressed on them with
new and persuasive Instances: Telling them, That he could not imagine upon what
Grounds or Reasons they did desire a continuance of War, the Stage and Theater
of which was to be their own Country. That out of a sense of those Miseries
which were to ensue, and from a pious and gracious regard he conceived for the
repose of Hungary, the Emperor had concluded a Peace with the Turk, which he
was contriving to secure against all violences and irruptions of the Enemy. And
that entire satisfaction might be given to the Hungarian Lords, his Imperial
Majesty declared, That he would build those Forts upon the Waagh, which were
designed to restrain all Incursions from the Garrison of Newhausel, The
Emperor's Grant to the Hungarians.
at his own expense and charge: That he would withdraw the German Troops from
burdening the Country, and quarter Hungarians in their places; That whilst
these Forts were in Building, the Guards thereunto belonging should consist of
Hussars and Heydukes: That all places of Trust and Profit, both Civil and
Military, should be put into the Hands of Hungarians. And that they might at
their own will and pleasure, put what Forces and Commanders they pleased into
the Garrisons of the Mountain Towns and other places.

These Concessions from the Emperor being so gracious and free, as nothing
could be desired more ample and satisfactory; the Hungarian Lords acquiesced
and signed the Treaty with the Turks: So that all things began to put on a
Face, and clear aspect of Tranquillity and Repose, as well in reference unto
Foreign Wars, as to civil and intestine differences: And thereupon the Crown,
wherewith the Hungarian Kings were usually Crowned, and which the Lords had
removed from Presburg, to prevent the Emperor from taking it upon him with
Right of Inheritance, was again returned by them, and restored to its former
place.

But these fair promises and assurances given by the Prince Lubkovitz in behalf
of the Emperor, proceeded no farther than to words, for neither were their
Churches restored; Nor the German Forces recalled out of the Country; Nor the
Towns of Nitria and Levents, lately taken from the Turks delivered into their
Hands, as was promised: But instead thereof, German Garrisons were put into
Tokai, Zatmar, Kalo and Onod, Towns which are bordering on Transylvania, and
were belonging to Prince Ragotski.

In short, nothing being performed as was promised, the Spirits of the
Hungarians were so exasperated, that they desponded of any good from the
Imperial Court, but rather beheld it as a Cabal, contriving and meditating only
to bring them under an Arbitrary power, and an unsupportable Slavery. And this
general Humor of discontent, so spread it self in the Minds of the People;
that they grew Sullen, and Angry in an Instant; and both the Roman Catholics
and Protestants, and all sorts of Religions in that Nation became so concerned
for the Liberty and Privileges of their Country; that they freely and openly
declared, That they would rather subject themselves to the Turks, than become
the Slaves of the Germans.

The consequences of which War have been so dismal, and even the Imperial
Victories gained at the expense of so much Blood and Treasure, as all Germany
as well as Hungary, has felt the fatal effects of it: So that Men are apt to
look back with Indignation on the Authors of these Troubles, and to think them
worthy of the extremest Punishments, that have brought their Country to such
Ruin and Desolation. The greatest part of which Censures will without doubt
fall upon the Protestants, whose Arms have wanted even Success; that popular
justification, and whose Cause labors under two such fearful appearances, as a
defection from their Prince, and the joining with the Common Enemy of
Christendom, though perhaps a considering Man will be apt to reflect on that
Cruel severity, which forced them to take shelter in the Arms of an Infidel; at
least he will see a fatal instance, of the unhappy Consequences of driving Men
to Despair, by subverting their Laws, Liberties and Religion. I shall therefore
give an impartial Account of the Causes, that exasperated the Protestants of
Hungary to this degree; and leave them to the Readers judgment, either to be
condemned or acquitted. And therefore let us hear what Account the Protestant
Writers give of this matter; when the Protestant Religion began first to
insinuate it self into Hungary, under the Reign of King Lewis, Anno. 1523.
it met there with the same fate it did in other Countries, (viz.) Opposition
and Persecution. But this King unhappily engaging himself in a War against the
Turks, fell in Battle, and leaving no Heir Male, the Hungarian Nobility were
divided in the choice of a Successor; one part Electing John Zapolya Vaivode of
Transylvania, and the other Ferdinand the first. But John dying soon after his
Election, Ferdinand remained in sole possession of that Kingdom; who the better
to gain the affection of his Subjects, granted free exercise of Religion to
Cassovia, Bartphia, Eperias, Leuchenia and Libinia; the five free Towns of
upper Hungary, and afterward to several of the Towns of lower Hungary, besides
the same Privileges which he gave to diverse of the Nobility. Notwithstanding
which, there being several Commotions and Disturbances on account of Religion,
still remaining in the year 1606. at the Pacification of Vienna, made between
Rodolph Emperor and King of Hungary, and Stephen Botscai-Kis-Maria; in the
first Article it was said, That as to the business of Religion, that
notwithstanding the first Constitutions, and the last Article of the year 1604.
according the Resolution taken by his Imperial Majesty: All the Inhabitants and
Persons of what Order or Condition soever within that Kingdom, as well the
great Lords, as the Cities and Privileged Towns immediately belonging to the
Crown, or upon the borders of that Kingdom; as likewise all the Soldiers of
Hungary, shall have free and entire Liberty of Conscience, without being
troubled or molested: Nevertheless without prejudice to the Roman Catholic
Religion, so that that Clergy, the Churches, and the Temples of the Catholics
may remain in the State wherein they are, without Violation or Molestation: And
that those which had been taken by one side or other, should be restored to
their lawful owners. Afterward the Emperor Matthias himself explained that
Clause, (nevertheless without prejudice to the Romans Cath. Religion) by assuring
them, That it was put in upon a good design, and that it only meant that
neither Party should be disturbed in the exercise of their Religion. This
liberty was afterward often confirmed, as you may see in the Grievances
presented to the Emperor, which are affixed to the end of this History. The now
Reigning Emperor Leopold solemnly confirmed this Article at his Coronation;
Vide the sixth Condition in the Imperial Patent running thus: Ordered, That the
exercise of Religion granted to the States of Hungary, according to the
Constitution of Vienna, and those Articles established before our Coronation
shall remain entirely free, as well for the Barons, Lords, Gentlemen, as free
Cities, and all Orders and States of the Kingdom of Hungary; as likewise for
the Towns, Villages and Hamlets that will accept of it, so that no Person of
what Condition soever, shall be hindered in the exercise of his Religion, in
what manner, or under what pretense soever. Given in the Royal Citadel of
Posonium, June the 25th, 1655.

In despite of all these Edicts made in favor of the Protestants; the Clergy,
especially the Jesuits, had so much interest in the Court of Vienna, as to get
a Manifest published there; and Entitled, Truth declared to all the World, or a
Treatise wherein is proved by three Argument, that his Caesarean Majesty is not
obliged to tolerate the Lutheran, or Calvinist Religion in the Kingdom of
Hungary: Writ by George Barzon titular Bishop of Waradin, Priest of the
Society, and Councellor to his Sacred Majesty. The first Argument was drawn
from three Conditions, under which the liberty of Religion was granted at the
Pacification of Vienna. The first, That it should be with out prejudice to the
Protestant Religion, which Condition being impossible ought to pass for
nothing. The second, "That the Clergy, and the Catholic Churches should remain
in their former Condition without being touched, which was violated by Bethlem
and Ragotski. The third; That what was taken either by one side or the other
should be restored, which the Protestants had not performed. To this was
answered, That it did by no means follow, that if one Condition or Clause was
looked upon as impossible, and so null, that the whole Treaty should be so also;
and besides, that the Emperor Matthias himself had explained the Condition by
declaring, that it was not to be made use of for the ruining of that liberty
which was granted. That whatsoever Bethlem or Ragotski had done, this Liberty
was notwithstanding confirmed by the Edicts and Ordinances of the Emperor: That
if it had been so, that Protestants, who being daily provoked by the Papists,
had gone a little too far, yet the innocent ought not to suffer. That the
Destruction of Temples, which were made use of during the Troubles only
regarded those, that Botskai had taken in the War, and not such as had been for
a long time in their Hands. The second Argument is, "That this liberty was not
established by the unanimous consent of the States of the Kingdom, to whom it
belongs to make Laws with the Consent and Approbation of his Majesty, and
consequently that those Articles ought to be abolisht. But it was urged, that
this was extremely injurious to those Kings, who had confirmed and ratified
them, and who no question were not so ignorant of the rights of the Kingdom of
Hungary. That when this Affair was managed at Lintz 1645. Though the Archbishop
of Strigonium, George Lippai, and some seculars opposed it, yet Count Palfy
President of the Chamber, and diverse Catholic Lords consented, notwithstanding
that opposition; so that the Affair, being extremely hindered by that
Archbishop and his adherents, the Protestants were upon the point of
complaining to his Majesty, had they not been stopped by the Declaration that was
made, that they voluntarily subscribed to the Articles of the Pacification of
Vienna, which they called the Foundation of the Kingdom: So that this Edict of
Lintz was ratified and inserted in the Articles of the year 1647 with this
Clause, Notwithstanding the opposition of the Clergy and other Seculars, which
shall have no force or vigor for the future. Besides the Subscription of the
Pacification of Vienna, made by all the States both Ecclesiastic and Civil,
runs thus: We underwritten do, with common consent, in the name of all the
States and Orders of the Kingdom of Hungary, and the places annexed to it,
promise freely and voluntarily, etc. The third Argument was, That if the
Lutherans and Calvinists must be tolerated, then those only must be tolerated,
which are of the Confession of Ausbourg, and the Confession of the Swisses: But
both one and the other had abandoned those Confessions; and they instanced in
several Articles from which they had deviated. But this last seems only a
frivolous shift, and shows the Resolution the Clergy had taken to oppress the
Protestants; and indeed this they had always done, when they thought themselves
the stronger, and notwithstanding, that this Liberty was often confirmed, as
particularly in the Treaties with Botskai, Bethlem and Prince Ragotski; yet the
Roman Catholic Lords and Gentlemen, and especially the Archbishops and
Bishops, persecuted them with Fire and Sword, massacr'd them in their Churches;
and used all manner of Cruelties toward them, as far as their Power and
Authority could reach; so that there remained scarce any place of Rest, or
Security for the Protestants, but in the free Cities, and those too quickly
after were involved in the same misfortune: For Nadasti, Serini, Frangipani,
and other Catholic Lords taking part with Prince Ragotski against the Emperor,
in the year 1670. the Austrian Troops entr'd Hungary and carried all before
them, and with them Troops of Bishops, Archbishops and Jesuits, whose Actions
out-did the Fury of the Soldiers; and took this opportunity of dispoiling the
Protestants of their Goods, Churches, Ministers, and constrained a great part
of the People to change their Religion: The Protestant Lords were taxed at
immense Sums, Soldiers quartered upon them, and by these means several forced
to turn Catholics. In short, all Upper and Lower Hungary with all the Free
Towns, fell into the Hands of the Catholics, whose Severities and Cruelties,
as they found nothing to oppose them, so they suffered nothing to escape them:
And this miserable Kingdom labored at once under the License and Rapine of the
German Soldiers, and the Rage and Fury of the Jesuitical Converters. The
Protestants were hanged up at their Church Gates, and several of their Towns
burnt. One John Backi a Minister, was burnt a live at Comarin, and the Widow of
Laurent le Sur, who was of the same Profession, had her Head cut off in the
same Town: And multitudes of both Sexes, and all Ages and Conditions were
banished. -- To Authorize these Cruelties, at least to give them a fair gloss,
they constituted a Chamber of Justices at Poson, composed of Ecclesiastics and
Seculars, all sworn Enemies to the Protestants; where it was first ordered,
That the most considerable Persons should be cited to appear, and clear
themselves of the Crime of Rebellion laid to their charge. They began with
those of the Nobility, which they thought the easiest to be wrought upon. They
which made their appearance were thrown into Prison, without being judicially
heard, condemned to great Fines, and were each minute solicited to change their
Religion. A Declaration was presented to those whom they found most firm and
constant, whereby they were required, that to satisfy his Imperial Majesty of
their Loyalty and Obedience, they should no longer protect their Ministers, and
should promise not to hinder the Priests from saying Mass in their Churches, or
performing other Ecclesiastical Functions, till they were enlightn'd from
above, saw their Errors, and were converted to the Catholic Church.

But the greatest Storm fell upon the Ministers, at whom they chiefly aimed;
and that they might get rid of them the better, they established three Courts
of Judicature: One at Tirnavia for those of Poson, and two at Poson for the
rest of Hungary: Nor were they all cited for fear of making too much noise, but
a few and those of the Ausbourg Confession, to try what success they were like
to expect from the Prosecution of the rest: And, because they chiefly designed
to ruin the Protestant Religion, under pretense of Rebellion, they presented
those that appeared these following Articles to sign. 1st, That all the
Ministers of both Confessions, Schoolmasters, Readers, Students, etc. to
escape the Punishments which they had incurred for their Rebellion, should
promise under their Hands to renounce all their Functions both public and
private, and pass the rest of their Lives peaceably and quietly, upon pain of
Death if they disobeyed. Or 2ly, That they should be banished for ever, with
promise never to return to their Country, or to any of the Hereditary Lands, or
other dependencies on the Empire, nor yet to go over to their Enemies. Or 3ly,
"That they should change their Religion, which his Majesty chiefly wished and
designed, and which would be most agreeable both to him and to the Courts of
Justice.

The 25th of September 1673. Some Ministers to the number of 32 or 33 appeared,
and being threatened to be sentenced to die, if they signed not the foregoing
Articles; some consented, others chose to be banished, and one changed his
Religion. This lucky beginning encouraged them to proceed, and finding fear to
be the strongest motive to work upon them; they cited all the Ministers,
Regents, Schoolmasters, etc. of Hungary to appear before them, which caused a
strange consternation amongst them, and produced very different effects; some
of them the Nobility would not suffer to appear, others fled, some again
abandoned themselves to the care of Providence, made their appearance at Poson,
to justify their Innocence from these horrible Calumnies, with which they were
blackn'd, to testify their obedience and submission to the Magistrate, and to
satisfy their Churches, who earnestly begged of them not to forsake them in
that calamitous Condition. There were 250 Ministers that appeared, and by their
Trials (two long to repeat) it appears, That their Religion was the chief
Crime, and though other things were laid to their Charge; yet all was but
pretense; they used all means to intimidate them, and to shake that great
constancy which they showed for their Religion; they sentenced them to death,
imprisoned them, threatened them with the Galleys, and employed all the
pernicious arts of torment and vexation, that a persecuting spirit could
contrive, to shake or surprise the Frailty of Man; dragged them into their
Churches, forced them upon their Knees to adore the Host and their Images, let
loose the fury of the Soldiery upon them, and encouraged them to torment them;
in the midst of this barbarous usage, they would sometimes pretend to show a
glimpse of Pity, and endeavor to allure them by the promises of the Imperial
favor and protection, offering them preferments, upon Condition they would
change their Religion; at length finding them proof against all their arts,
they stigmatized several and sold them to the Spanish Galleys, from whence
afterward they were redeemed by the famous Ruyter, Admiral of Holland; others
were thrown into vile, loathsome Prisons in which some perished, the rest who
outlived their misfortunes, were released by the importunities of the States
Ambassador at the Imperial Court. These matters of fact are too public to be
denied, and the Reasons that are given, seem by no means sufficient to palliate
such Barbarities. Those Letters in Cipher which were produced against them, to
prove them Guilty of Treason are justly suspected; but grant them true, they
were but from particulars, and one or two Men's Guilt cannot render a whole body
of Men liable to punishment. As for those Accusations which were laid upon them
of being Murderers, Robbers, Ravishers, etc. they were only alleged, not
proved, and consequently likely to be mere Calumnies. To conclude, that they
were Rebels because some fled from the Persecutions they saw pouring upon them,
seems to be no very good consequence, and to show not so much their guilt as
their fear; at least, this cannot be urged against those that made their
appearance; and that there were several which signed the Paper that was
presented them, argued, they indeed weak but not criminal; and the rigours that
were used to bring them to sign it, do extremely diminish, if not absolutely
take away all the force of that Argument: So that I doubt not, but it will
appear to the impartial Reader, that the conduct of the Popish Clergy has had
too great an influence on these last Troubles, and that their persecuting
Maxims, are as ruinous to the interest of a State, as contrary to the Spirit of
our Christian Religion.

And from this Original began that War, which has ever since continued with
great effusion of Blood, and strange vicissitudes of Fortune; which not only
reduced Hungary to the pit of despair, but even Germany it self to the brink of
Destruction; until God was pleased to take the Cause into his own Hands, and
avenge Christendom from their Enemies, whose Sins (it seems) were more ripe for
the Divine vengeance, than those of the Christian people. The discontents on
both sides grew so high, that the Emperor resolved to perform nothing on his
part, of what he had promised to his Hungarian Subjects, nor they any thing on
theirs, which respected Duty and Allegiance to their Prince. Both Parties stood
in defiance to each other; the Emperor would not lose the benefit of the charge
and expenses he had been at, to fortify the frontier Garrisons against the
Turks: Nor would the Hungarians restrain themselves from their usual
Incursions, notwithstanding the Treaty so lately signed by them: By which the
Emperor received frequent complaints from the Turks. So all was now private
Machinations and open Defiances.

September, That the three years were expired, at the end whereof according to
the Statutes of that Kingdom a Diet was to be Assembled at Presburg, for
redress of those aggrievances of which the Subjects complained. It was usual
for the Emperor to be present there, but some jealousies being whispered of a
Plot to seize his Person, his Majesty refrained from making his appearance at
that Diet; which being by that means put off, the Sovereign Chamber of the
Kingdom, The Hungarians complain.
taking all matters into their Consideration, sent their Deputies to complain
unto the Emperor, That Colonel Spaar Governor of Zatmar, had extorted Money
from the Citizens, upon pretense of paying his Soldiers, though in reality to
appropriate it to his own benefit and service. That the German Soldiers were
still quartered in the Countries, notwithstanding all the Promises and
Engagements given to the contrary; the which aggrievances together with that of
taking away their Churches, was such a Scandal and block of Offense, as caused
great Commotions in that Kingdom, whenever that matter came into dispute.
Hence it was, That the Protestants chose three Leaders, or Chiefs of their
Faction and Party; against which Prince Ragotski, and Apafi opposed their
Forces in favor of the Palatine Wesselini; Palaffi Imbre appeared as one of
the Chief of the Malcontents; but having not sufficient Force to sustain his
party and interest, he craved assistance and succor from the Turks, to whom he
offered his Son for a Hostage, and the Town of Debin, with the dependences
thereunto belonging, as a farther security for performance of Articles.

All was now divided into Sects and Parties: Count Peter Serini, of whom the
Emperor had not the least jealousy, entertained secret consults with the
Malcontents; and with Nadasti raised Forces upon pretense of giving a stop to
the Turks, in their passage to Dalmatia; but with real design to seize the
Person of the Emperor at Puttendorf, a place appertaining to Count Nadasti; as
he was Riding post with Prince Lubkovitz, Chief Steward of his House, and with
about 12 Gentlemen of his Retinue to meet the Empress; but that Plot took not
effect, for their Ambuscade missing the Emperor, he happily met the Empress on
her Journey out of Spain.

This Conspiracy being thus disappointed, 1667^
Count Nadasti desired the Emperor, that he might be made Palatine of Hungary,
in the place of Wesselini lately deceased: But the Emperor not being well
satisfied of the Faith and Integrity of that Person, refused to confer it upon
him or any other, until he saw the Tranquillity and Peace of that Kingdom
better secured; At which Nadasti being enraged, corrupted a Carpenter in
revenge to set fire to the new Appartment, which was building in the Palace for
the Empress Eleonora: In expectation that in such an affrightment and
confusion, the Conspirators might seize on the Person of the Emperor: But God
conserved his Imperial Majesty, though that Plot was not detected until Nadasti
received the reward of his demerit.

The Deputies of the upper Hungary made new Addresses to the Emperor,
Hungarians, and loyal to himself, to whom he could confide that Important
Charge; did for some time keep the Office in his own hands; which with the
refusal made to restore the Protestant Churches, was so generally displeasing,
that the Nobility denied to be present at the Coronation of the Empress, until
they were a little mollify'd and appeased, by having the Revenue and Rents of
their Churches released to them.

Besides the Office of Palatine, the Government of Carelstadt became vacant by
the decease of the Count Aversperg, which being in Croatia, and lying
commodious for Serini, he immediately made applications for it, by means of his
Lady; who with her good air and address, and the vivacity of her Spirit, and
fluency of her Language, thought nothing difficult for her to obtain; but
missing thereof, for Reasons best known to the Emperor, who judged it not good
policy to add greater Authority to a person who was Vice-King of Croatia, and
possessed already more Power and Interest than he could willingly afford him,
the Lady was forced, Count Serini's Lady disgusted.
much against her Nature, to acquiess in a denial; but not being able to
suppress the violent commotions of her Spirit, she openly breathed out her
menaces against the Emperor; and finding an humor in the People generally
inclined to a Revolt, easily persuaded her Son-in-Law Prince Ragotski, and the
other principal Nobles of Hungary to enter into an Association and Conspiracy
against the Emperor.

The Deputies make their Complaints to the Emperor.
The first thing they did, was to complain of the German Garrison in Tokai; and
being assembled at Zemblin, they sent their Deputies to represent unto the
Emperor, that according to the Laws and Privileges of that Kingdom, all their
Forts and Places of Strength ought to be Garrisoned with no other than Soldiers
of their own Country. That the Protestants received all sorts of ill treatment
and discountenance, their Churches were taken away, and not restored, as was
promised and agreed; besides several other Aggrievances which they laid before
the Emperor, supplicating his Imperial Majesty to grant them ease and redress
therein, according to the Constitutions and Privileges of that Kingdom, which
his Majesty at his Coronation had Sworn to maintain. To all which, the gentle
and sweet temper of his Imperial Majesty, and the sense of his Conscience was
inclined to yield a benign and gracious Answer, had not Father Emeric a Jesuit,
Emeric a Jesuit hinders an agreement with the Hungarians.
and his Confessor, instilled other Principles and Motives into his Mind;
giving him to understand, that it had always been the Prerogative of the Kings
his Predecessors, to dispose Garrisons in all places of that Kingdom,
consisting of such Nations as he should judge most for the safety and security
thereof. And that whereas at present the Hungarians were inspired with an humor
of Rebellion and Revolt, there was no reason to trust or confide in them, but
in the Germans only, whose Loyalty and Duty was sufficiently known, and
approved by his Majesty. Farther he added, that the Hungarians had in the late
War against the Turk suffered Waradin to be lost; and at the Battle of St.
Gothards upon the River of Raab, had appeared in such small numbers for defense
of their Country, as if they had intended to have betrayed it; had it not been
for the German and other Foreign Forces, the whole Kingdom had become a Prey to
the Turks.

With such Discourses as these the Deputies were entertained, The Deputies
return with dissatisfaction. The Evils thereof.
and dispatched away without other satisfaction; at which the Nobles and People
were so displeased, that they gave a stop to the Payments they had begun to
make toward building the Forts, and cut all the Germans in pieces which they
found quartered about the Country; and particularly they killed forty Soldiers
of the Regiment of Spaar near Xants; the which piece of Blood and Slaughter was
again returned by the Germans, and Force repelled again by Force. So that now
all was open defiance, War, and Massacre.

To carry on the Great Designs in hand, The Malcontents assemble at Kivar.
the Malcontents assembled at the Castle of Kivar, upon the Frontiers of
Transylvania, about two Leagues distant from Ghibania, where the Gold and
Silver Mines arise. The Principal Persons there present, were Ladislas Giulaf,
Gabriel de Kende, Benedict Seredey, Jonas Veradt, the Calvinist Minister of
Cassovia; also Derus Bansi General of the Transilvanian Forces; Janos Betlem
the Chancellor, Michael Talha Governor of the Frontiers, with some others;
where a League was formed between the Hungarian and Transilvanian Protestants,
to drive and expel the Germans out of the Kingdom, to demolish Zatmar, and to
arm themselves in defense of their Religion. In this accord the Wife of Prince
Apafi appeared extremely zealous, being a Woman of a Masculine Spirit, a fierce
Protestant, and one who had a hand in all Matters, whilst her Husband applied
himself to Hunting, and to the Conversation of Learned Men.

In the mean time Count Nadasti having failed in his late Treason against the
Emperor, Count Nadasti Plots how to Poison the Emperor.
contrived to Poison him at a Magnificent Banquet, which he had prepared for
him; at which the Persons present, were the Empress, the two Imperial
Princesses, Prince Charles of Lorain, with all the Court. The fatal Dish
prepared for the Emperor was a Pidgeon Pie, which he extremely loved; but God
preserved his Sacred Person, by means of the Lady to the Count; who being
endowed with greater Sentiments of Honor and Religion than her Husband,
beseech'd him on her knees to desist from so black and so detestable a
Wickedness; but not being able to prevail upon him, she Ordered the Cook to set
another Pie of the same fashion before the Emperor, in the place of that which
was poisoned; of which he having eaten without any hurt, Nadasti apprehended
the dealing of his Wife therein; and least the Cook should discover the Secret,
he killed him the same day with his own hand.

Count Serini, though he was contriving all this time, yet it was not in Matters
of so black a nature as these. He entertained several Conferences with Count
Tassembach, a Person of as Ambitious and unsettled an humor as any whatsoever,
Turks with them in the whole Enterprise. A Treaty held with the Turk.
But lest it should come to be discovered to the Emperor's Resident at
Constantinople, by the openness of the Turks, who can keep no Secret, it was
resolved that the Matter should be Negotiated by the Transilvanians; who being
already Subject to the Turks, and under their protection, might with less
suspicion propose this Treaty.

The Turks hearken to the Hungarians.
This Overture being made to the Turks, they immediately embraced it, being an
Offer which at the first sight appeared very advantageous; but then the next
Condition required by the Chimacam, who was Kara Mustapha, (the Grand Vizier
being then at the Siege of Candia) was, That in Consideration of the aid and
protection which the Grand Seignior was to give unto the Hungarians, they were
to become his Tributaries, in the same manner, and on the same Conditions as
the Transilvanians were. This Demand, tho it seemed hard to the Hungarians, yet
they resolved to pursue their Design; and accordingly sent their Agents to the
Vizier at Candia, hoping by the lenity and moderation of his Nature to obtain
more easy terms than those demanded by the Chimacam; and in the mean time to
notify their intention of Revolt unto all the World, they caused a Standard to
be erected, with two S^ymeters died with Blood, and a Crescent or Half Moon
over them.

The Grand Vizier at Candia dismisses the Agents from the Rebels.
The Grand Vizier being then laboring at the Siege of Candia, and in a
doubtful Condition of Success, was not willing to entertain thoughts of a new
War, until he had put an end to that which he had then in hand, and in which he
was daily engaged. Howsoever, not to seem diffident of his own Successes, or
negligent and cold in the entertainment of Propositions so apparently
advantageous to his Master's Interest, thought not fit to dismiss them with a
slight Answer; but causing their Propositions to be taken in Writing, and
examined, he disspeeded the Messengers with fair Words and Promises, referring
their Matters to be farther debated by the Officers actually present with the
Grand Seignior, who had more time to consider their Affairs than he had, who
was daily engaged in Batteries, and continual Assaults upon the City.

The Transilvanian Messengers being come to the Port, Conditions demanded of
them by the Turks.
the Conditions required of them by the Turks were very severe. For in the
first place, they demanded of Ragotski, who was Chief of the League, that the
five Towns in Hungary which belonged to him should be delivered up into their
hands; That Count Serini should cause Copranitz, an impregnable Fort in Croatia
to be surrendered to them; and that an Annual Tribute should be paid for the
Kingdom of Hungary.

The Commissioners for the Malcontents, who thought these Proposals very hard,
did yet endeavor to come as near an accord as was possible; for tho they were
unwilling to surrender up their own Towns and Demesnes to the Turks, yet they
promised to fight for them, and deliver such Towns and Fortresses as they
should take from the Emperor into their hands.

The Grand Vizier Kuperlee was by this time returned Triumphant from Candia,
Venetians. Howsoever though the Propositions offered by the Malcontents were of
such advantageous Consequence as the like could not be expected, yet they were
rejected by the Vizier; for whether it were out of a sense of Faith to the
Emperor, Kuperlee unwilling to break with the Emperor.
with whom he had concluded a Peace but five years before, and which he had no
cause given him to break, or by reason of a War designed against Poland; and
some umbrages and Clouds of discontent, began with the Moscovites; he was not
of a mind to enter into a War so soon with the Emperor; howsoever he underhand
encouraged it, and gave private Instructions to the Pasha's on the Frontiers to
aid the Malcontents in such sort, as that their union and actings with them
might not amount unto a Rupture, or breach of the Peace.

During all this time the Imperial Court had only suspicions and jealousies of
what was Plotting, rather than any certain advice or knowledge thereof. And the
Emperor's Resident at Constanstinople had as yet received but some obscure
Notions, of what was treating by the Transilvanian Agents, which afterward
came to a clearer Light, by the means of an English Gentleman as we have before
declared in our preceding History: And which being once made known, other
things appeared to put the matter out of all doubt or question. And as a
particular Evidence to discover this Truth; the principal Servant of Count
Tassembach, and one in whom he had reposed the greatest confidence, having been
put in Prison by him for Robbing him; this Traitor that he might be revenged on
the Count and obtain his Liberty, discovered much of the Plot, by producing one
of the original Papers, all written with the proper Hand of Tassembach, which
contained a Scheme of the whole method of their intended proceedings, as agreed
and concerted between him and Count Serini, dated the 11th of September 1667.
This Paper being Read in the Council at Vienna, served to open the Eyes of the
Emperor, and of the Government, and caused them to watch all the motions of
Tassembach, and of Serini and the other Accomplices.

To evidence and farther confirm that there was a Plot, advices came from
Schaketorno in Croatia, that Count Serini was in Arms and had levied several
Troops. A Plot discovered.
The original Letter also appeared which Serini wrote to Frangipani, giving him
an account of the Resolutions and Proceedings of Tassembach; the which Letter
(by what means is not known) was found with a Soldier belonging to Frangipani,
who carelessly made use of it, for a stopper to his Powder-horn: Another Letter
was intercepted from Frangipani, directed to one of his Captains in whom he
reposed his greatest confidence: Signifying the offers which he had made to the
Turks of subjection to them; that the Germans intended nothing more than to
ruin their Country; and therefore, that he should keep his Forces in a
readiness to oppose them in case of necessity.

These and several other Evidences were a clear conviction of a Plot designed;
and a ground sufficient for the President of the Council of Grats, to seize the
Person of Count Tassembach, and commit him to safe Custody. After which his
House was searched, where was found a considerable quantity of Powder and
Ammunition: And his Papers being also seized and examined, it thereby appeared,
that the Arms and Ammunition were designed to furnish therewith 6000 Men, which
he intended to raise: and upon farther enquiry into this matter, several
questions being put to him; Tassembach owned the whole Design and Conspiracy,
and the Engagements which were between him and the Count Serini. Whereof Copies
with the Process being sent to the Emperor, the whole Plot was discovered, and
no further doubt or question made of a Rebellion, and General revolt of the
whole Kingdom.

This discovery was seconded by advices of the constant intercourse and
correspondences held between Serini, and the Pasha's of Buda, Bosna and
Kanisia: And more particularly by a Letter, which Marquis Frangipani
Brother-in-Law to Count Serini wrote to Captain Tscolnits, containing the whole
secret of the business, and served to demonstrate the inveterane Malice, which
the Marquis had conceived against the Emperor, and the whole German Nation.
Tscolnits, had at first entertained a correspondence with the Malcontents, but
making reflections afterward on the persons, with whom he was to engage; that
they were rash and heady, and Men of no solid Foundation or good Temper, he
retracted from his former Engagements, and showed the Letter to the Emperor.

But matters were proceeded too far, to be wholly suppressed or defeated: For
those in the upper Hungary appeared openly in the Field under Ragotski, who
threatened to take Mongatz, where his Mother held her Court of Residence, and to
seize on the Treasure, Transylvania.

The time being come in which the Malcontents had appointed to draw their
Forces into the Field, on pretense of enterprising something against the Turks:
For we must note, that in times of Peace, it is allowable for both sides either
Turks, or Christians to make Incursions upon each other, to Rob and drive away
Cattle, and to fight in the Field with strong Parties both of Horse and Foot,
provided that the numbers of them do not exceed 5000, and that no Cannon be
brought into the Camp. Such is the miserable Condition of that unfortunate
Kingdom: The Malcontents, I say, having with this pretense drawn their Forces
into the Field; convened a Diet at Cassovia, A Diet at Cassovia.
without out the knowledge or authority of the Emperor; where the Nobility and
the Deputies of the several Towns, and Cities in the lower Hungary were
Assembled; to the end, that they might have an understanding together, how to
raise Money, and how to manage the War.

The Emperor, though not ignorant of all these Motions and Consults; yet wanting
a sufficient force to suppress these first beginnings of Rebellion, thought fit
to temporize and use Lenity for a while; though in the mean time he declared
against the illegality of the Diet; which the Malcontents excused, The Emperor
declares against it.
and disguised under the color of an Assembly, in which nothing more was
intended, than only to raise 8000 Foot and 4000 Horse, to oppose the continual
Depredations and Incursions of the Turk. But the Emperor saw farther into the
manner of their actings, than to believe their words; for Princes have just
cause to suspect the Loyalty of their Subjects, Malcontents to appear at
Newsol, The Chiefs are cited to Newsol.
there to render an account of their Actings to his Commissioners appointed to
examine those matters, namely the Count of Forcatz, the Archbishop of
Strigonium, Zitzchi, who was President of the Royal Chamber, and Nadasti, who
had not as yet declared himself of the contrary party, which he underhand
encouraged and countenanced. The Malcontents yielded no obedience to this
Citation, and refused to make their appearance; and instead thereof 13 Counties
entered into an Association, and raised Soldiers, which were commanded by
Ragotski, who thereunto joined 2000 Men of his own, whom he leavied and
maintained at his own expense.

Count Staremberg Imprisoned.
Ragotski, who thought it now time to cast off his Disguise, invited Count
Staremberg to Dinner, and in the mean time invested the City of Tokai, of which
he was the Governor, with 8000 Hussars; but the place was so well defended by
the watchfulness and valor of the Lieutenant Governor, that his Men were
repulsed with a considerable loss. Nor was he more prosperous in his attempt
upon Mongatz, which, at the news of his approach, was defended by his Mother,
who caused the Bridges to be drawn and the Cannon levelled against him,
preferring the Loyalty toward her Prince before the natural tenderness to a
Son, to whom she sent those Reproaches of his Treachery, as became a Lady of
that great and generous Virtue.

In the mean time the Malcontents in despite of the Emperor held their
Meeting, Cassovia; The Malcontents offer their aggrievances to the Emperor.
and having concerted all their matters, and agreed on a Scheme of their
Affairs, they drew up a Remonstrance of their chief Aggrievances, which they
offered to his Imperial Majesty, desiring that the Churches taken from the
Protestants might again be restored to them: That all their Towns and
Fortresses might be freed and eased of German Soldiers, and that in place of
them, their Garrisons might be supplied with Hungarians: And Lastly, That they
might have liberty to make War on the Turks, with their own Men, and at their
own expense. These Propositions were rejected by the Emperor at the instigation
of his Chief Officers and Ministers of State, who swallowing in their desires
all the Riches and Possessions of the Hungarians, hoped to force them into a
Rebellion, by which their Lands and Estates might be forfeited to the Emperor,
that they might beg them for their own benefit and enjoyment.

The Emperor communicated all these matters to the Diet at Ratisbon, giving
them to understand how necessary it was to suppress these Disturbances and
Insurrections in their beginnings: And immediately before he sent his Forces
into the upper Hungary, he thought fit to cause Major General Spankau to March
into Croatia against Serini with 6000 Men. Upon the news of the approach of
these Forces, Sereni unresolved.
Serini was greatly surprised, and in such a consternation that he knew not
what to resolve. He was disappointed of Money to pay his Army, with which
Ragotski had promised to supply him out of his Father's Treasury at Mongatz,
but that failed as we have showed before. The Valachians had likewise deserted
him, and adhered to Count Herberstein Governor of Carolstadt. Nor was the time
as yet come, that the Malcontents had appointed to stir in the upper Hungary;
in the mean time his own Forces were weak and inconsiderable, not exceeding
2000 Morlaques in his City of Chiacatorno, and those ill provided either with
Money, Ammunition or Victuals to maintain a Seige. What then was to be done?
Why, nothing but submission to the Will and Clemency of the Emperor; which
being resolved, Father Forstal an Augustine Friar, and an intimate Friend of
Serini, was employed to Vienna to manage this Accommodation: Where being
arrived, He submits to the Emperor.
he applied himself to Prince Lubkovitz, the Emperor's principal Minister of
State, to whom having imparted his Message; it was received by him with much
kindness and joy; and was the more acceptable, because Serini was his Kinsman,
and nearly allied to him: And therefore frankly told him, That two things were
expected from Serini. First, That he should send his Son for a Hostage to
Vienna: And Secondly, That he should subscribe a blank Paper, signifying, that
he would accept of such Conditions as the Emperor should be pleased to impose
upon him: Both which being performed, (as is here proposed) Prince Lubkovitz
did promise in behalf of the Emperor, Serini should not only receive a General
Pardon, but should also conserve his Liberty, Places and Offices of Trust,
Dignities and Privileges; only in case the Emperor should think fit to remove
him from the Office of Vice-King of Croatia, Offers made by Prince Lubkovitz to
Serini.
he promised that in lieu thereof he should have the Government of Carolstadt
conferred upon him, or some other of equal importance. And farther, this
Prince, to demonstrate his concernment and respect to this Family (of which he
was a Member) offered out of his own Estate to pay the Debts thereof, which
amounted to 400000 Florins, and for ever to espouse the interest of Serini, and
of those related to him. Father Forstal returning with this Dispatch, received
at the Hands of Count Serini, his only Son to be carried for an Hostage to the
Emperor, with a blank Paper signed, promising to receive German Soldiers into
all his Garrisons.

But before Forstal could finish his second Journey to Vienna, Spankau arrived
with the Imperial Army before Chiacatorno. And though Serini sent him forth a
Message, acquainting him of his Accommodation with the Emperor, and his Treaty
now in hand negotiated by Forstal; yet General Spankau, having received no such
advices or directions from the Emperor, pursued the Tenure of his first
Commission, and accordingly besieged Chiacatorno, and so straightly pressed it,
that Serini and his Brother-in-Law, the Marquis Frangipani, were forced to
escape and abandon the City, and leave it with all that was dear and precious
to them for a Prey to their Enemies. Serini es apes out of Chiacatorno.
with intention to submit, and lay themselves at the Feet of his Imperial
Majesty, they unfortunately committed themselves to the guidance and direction
of Count Keri, who pretending great Friendship to them, received them into his
Castle with 5 or 6 Servants, pretending that he could not receive, or entertain
a greater number for want of Furniture, or Conveniences fit for their better
Accommodation. So soon as these two Lords with their Servants were within the
Walls of the Castle, Keri caused the Bridge to be drawn up, and his Soldiers to
stand to their Arms, and placed Guards in all parts and avenues of the Castle.
The two Counts though very sensible of the Treachery of Keri; yet dissembled
their resentments thereof, and suffered themselves to be carried Prisoners
without any resistance to Vienna; Are made Prisoners.
where they were at first Lodged in the Suburbs, in the Convent of Augustine
Friars, from whence they were carried to the Swan Inn, where they stayed until
toward night, and then were separated, and carried to diverse places; Serini
was conducted to the House of Baron Ugart, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment
then in Garrison at Vienna; and Frangipani to the House of Count Daun Major of
the Town, where they were both so civilly treated, that they were not sensible
of being under any restraint; being visited by all the Persons of Note and
Quality in Town; but by degrees the crowds of Visitants became thin, and
addresses faint and cold, which were sure Indications of some thing evil
intended against them. For though his Imperial Majesty, out of his natural
Clemency, was graciously disposed to have pardoned them; yet having his Spirit
exasperated by such as had a mind to enter into their confiscated Estates,
Process was made against them, and things carried on to the highest Severity.

In the mean time Count Herberstein Governor of Carolstadt, seized on all the
places belonging to Serini and Frangipani without much difficulty or
opposition; only at Coade, the Governor refused to surrender upon Summons, but
instead thereof displayed two Bloody Flags on the top of a high Steeple; and
return d answer, That he would be buried in that place before he would tamely
yield it up, and betray the charge committed to him; which accordingly followed
the same Evening, for by that time Herberstein had by Force of Arms made his
Entry into the Town and Castle, where taking the Governor and seven other
Officers, he hanged them up wrapped in the same Red Flaggs, which they had so
lately displayed.

Thus were the measures of the Malcontents broke for some time, Preparations
for a War made by the Emperor.
and the whole Party discouraged. The Emperor on the other side prepares for
War, and raises a considerable Army. The Duke of Brandenburg offers himself to
serve in Person against the Rebels; the Duke of Saxony had already Commanded
600 Horse, 400 Dragoons, and a thousand Foot to march for the Service of the
Emperor, under the Command of the Great Marshal Christian Ernest, a Captain in
those days of great Reputation. The Count de Vaudemont offered moreover to
contribute to his assistance with several Troops of Lorrainers; but his
Imperial Majesty being provided with a sufficient force of his own Subjects,
civilly refused their offers, intending to reserve the same for times of
extreme and more pressing difficulties; for it is the policy of Wise and
Cautious Princes never to admit Stranger Forces into their Dominions, without a
violent necessity; to which the Emperor was not reduced, because as yet the
Turks had not joined their Forces with the Armies of the Malcontents.
Howsoever both sides were in motion, and big with Design one against the other.
Ragotski was preparing to Besiege Tokai and Zatmar, and the Imperialists were
making a Bridge of Boats near Presburg, to open a passage into the upper
Hungary. Count Sporke in the mean time with some Troops of Horse defeated a
Party of 2000 Hungarians, killing 300 on the Place, and taking ten Colors,
with the loss only of nine Men.

Ragotski also received a Repulse before Tokai and Zatmar, which though blockt up
by him for some time, yet having received late Recruits both of Men and
Provisions, they refused to surrender at his Summons, which put him out of all
hopes of prevailing against those Places. And with these, and the like
Successes, the Spirits of the Malcontents becoming more low and debased,
Ragotski labors to make his Peace with the Emperor.
Ragotski the Chief of the Association entertained thoughts of submitting to
the Emperor; and to make his way more easy thereunto, he freely set Count
Statemberg at Liberty, with the other Officers whom he had detained Prisoners,
desiring them to interceed with his Imperial Majesty for his Pardon. And
farther, to evidence a true Repentance for his late defection, and real
intentions to return to his due obedience, he raised the Siege from before
Tokai, and caused his Forces to march into Transylvania; and particularly he
employed Count Colonitz, who had been his Prisoner, with others, to Negotiate
in his behalf at the Court of the Emperor. But this Count not being able to
obtain other than ambiguous and general Answers from the Emperors Council, it
was not thought safe for Ragotski to rely on those terms and methods which had
before failed in the Cases of Serini and Frangipani. And therefore the Princess
his Mother, to play a surer Game, and to take off all jealousy, engaged, in
the name of her Son, that he should receive into all places of his jurisdiction
such Garrisons as the Emperor should please to impose upon him, and maintain
them at his own Charge.

Thus did the Troubles of Hungary seem to incline toward a Composure, caused
indeed by the evil directions of the Emperor's Council, who to introduce an
Arbitrary Power into a Free Kingdom, and to make that Crown Hereditary which
was Originally Elective, and to force a Religion on them contrary to their
Principles, and Consciences, had taken away their Churches and places where
they assembled to serve God, and compelled them to receive German and Foreign
Garrisons into all places and Fortresses of strength within that Kingdom.
Hungarians had all those Arguments which might be deduced from the Topics of
Law, Natural Liberty, and Self-preservation to plead for them.

But notwithstanding this submission of Ragotski to the Emperor, by which the
Troubles seemed in some measure to abate, and the Malcontents to lay their
Arms and Pretensions down, yet still the Animosities were high, and the minds
of those who were Loyal and well-affected to the Emperor, grieved and afflicted
to see their poor Country overrun and harassed with German and Foreign
Soldiers; The Loyal Hungarians Petition the Emperor.
wherefore in a sense thereof, they sent their Deputies to the Emperor,
representing their Fidelity and constant Allegiance to his Majesty, from which
they had never suffered themselves to be seduced; and therefore they humbly
prayed that they might not be numbered with the guilty, nor their Towns and
Lands made a prey to the Liberty and Licentiousness of Soldiers. In case any of
their Countrymen had offended, they ought to be legally Cited before the
Tribunals of Justice; but to make his Loyal Subjects equally noxious with the
Disobedient, was a Severity unagreeable to the known Clemency of his Imperial
Majesty. But all the moving Language which the Deputies could use in behalf of
their Principals availed little; for General Sporke being recruited with a
considerable Army which General Heister had brought out of Bohemia, was
Commanded with all expedition to march into Hungary; the appearance of which
not only troubled the Hungarians, The Turks alarmed at the coming of German
Forces on the Frontiers.
but alarmed the Turks, who assembling in great numbers about the Quarters of
Kanisia, dispatched several Messengers one after the other to Vienna, to know
and to be satisfied of the Reasons and Causes which moved the Emperor in a time
of Peace, to send so considerable an Army to lodge and encamp on the Frontiers
of the Grand Seignior's Country. In like manner the Pasha's of Newhawsel and
Agria being alarmed with the near approach of this Christian Army, prepared for
a Defense; and withal sent a Chiaus to General Sporke to assure him, that the
Grand Seignior had resolved not to assist or afford Aid unto the Malcontents,
nor to enter on the Emperor's Lands, or to do any thing to the infringment, or
violation of the Truce some few years before concluded: And on the other side,
the Chiaus told General Sporke, that the Grand Seignior did conjure him to let
him know the Causes, and design which moved the Emperor to appear with a Force
so considerable, and in the times of Peace so unusual on the Frontiers. To
which the General returned answer, General Sporke's Answer to the Turks.
That the Emperor his Master had no design, or intention to pass the Limits of
his Dominions, or to act any thing toward a Rupture, or to the Infringement of
the Peace between him and the Grand Seignior; and that the Commission he had
received from the Emperor, was only to suppress the Rebellion of his own
Subjects, who had taken up Arms against him: And thus much he supposed to be
lawful, without any concernment of the Grand Seignior therein. With these
assurances the Chiaus departed, and Suspicions and Jealousies seemed to clear
up on the side of the Turks. And herewith did the Clouds in all quarters seem
to disperse for a while: Ragotski Kar^oned.
For Ragotski, who was chief of the League being brought into favor by the
intercession of his Mother, and all things accommodated by a Treaty which he
held with the Prince of Holstein and General Heister, a Passport or Writing of
Safe Conduct was sent him by the Emperor, and all the Offenses and Crimes which
were past, were pardoned and forgiven to him. And Ragotski on the other side,
that he might make a Return agreeable to so much Goodness and Clemency of the
Emperor, published his Edicts in all parts of his own Dominions, forbidding his
Subjects to Rise in Arms, or to favor the Cause of the Malcontents, either
directly or indirectly, upon pain of losing their Noses or Ears, or being more
severely proceeded against, by Punishment of Death.

Ragotski had thus wisely made his peace with his Sword in his Hand; whilst
poor Serini, and Frangipani had partly by their own Fears, ill Conduct and
Treachery of others, fallen into the power of their Enemies: With whom at first
they received a kind Treatment, and hopes of being set at Liberty with
restitution to their Estates, Dignities and Privileges: But afterward, time
discovering many private Practices, which at first were unknown and lay
concealed, the Chief Ministers of State, for the Reasons before mentioned, and
to make some Examples of the Emperor's Indignation for the late Revolt,
persuaded his Caesarean Majesty to proceed against them by Impeachment of High
Treason; which when Serini perceived, he wrote an Expostulatory Letter to the
Emperor to this purpose.

Serini justifies himself.
That though the Hungarians had much to say for themselves in regard to their
Laws, and their Country, which Nature and Religion obliged them to defend: And
though the Provocation was high, when the House of Austria labored to make that
Kingdom Hereditary, which was originally Elective; and to subvert the Laws and
Liberties of the People, who were by their Constitutions free as any Nation of
the World, and to introduce upon them Tyranny and Oppression, with the loss of
their Privileges and Religion; yet he would not justify himself upon any of
those Topics, but rather insist on his Innocence, and Avow that he did never
Enter into any League with the Turk, nor take up Arms against his Sovereign;
against whom, neither by himself, or his Subjects he had committed any act of
Hostility; but to the contrary had blindly obey d the Commands of his Imperial
Majesty, the which appeared by the Negotiation of Father Forstal in his behalf;
by whom he sent his only Son for a Hostage, and with him a blank Paper, that
the Emperor might inscribe therein what Articles and Conditions he judged fit;
moreover, that he had enjoined his Son-in-Law, Prince Ragotski, to submit unto
the Emperor, at a time when he was at the Head of an Army, and possessed the
Narrow passes leading to the Mountains, and other advantageous places of great
importance. He deny d all Intercourse and Correspondence with the Turks, unless
it were with intention to betray them; and that when they tempted his Faith and
Fidelity to the Emperor with large offers of reward, he discover d all to the
Count of Rothal, to whom he Read the very Letters which were sent to him; and
held no Treaty with any, but what he had made known to his Imperial Majesty. He
highly insisted on the promises made him by the Baron Oker Lord Chancellor,
who assured him that the Disgrace into which he was fallen, should serve to
raise him to higher Dignities; and that Prince Lubkovitz had, in the presence
of Baron Oker, promised him great rewards, in case he could take of^ Prince
Ragotski, his Son-in-Law, from the disaffected Party: Which he had accordingly
done, and so well succeeded therein, that immediately upon the Receipt of his
Letter, Ragotski had set Count Staremberg at Liberty, and entirely submitted
himself with all his Forces to the Will and Devotion of his Majesty: After all
which and much more, that he could allege in justification of himself, he
might reasonably hope, that his Majesty, who was a Prince of unparallell d
Clemency, would deal with him after the generous Example of Julius Caesar, who
burnt the Letters of Pompey and Scipio without Reading, though thereby he might
have discovered the Names, and Plots of all the Conspirators against him: And
though he could not hope for, or desire such an implicit manner of proceeding;
yet he expected so much Justice, as to have his Cause try d before Wise and
Impartial Judges.

This Leter had much availed with the Emperor, had not Count Nadasti, Nadas^i
betrays Serini.
Brother-in-Law to Serini, insinuated to the Council, the Fictions and false
Colors contained therein: To which discovery even Prince Ragotski his
Son-in-Law much contributed, by resigning into the hands of the Emperor's
Ministers, all those original Letters written to him by his Father-in-Law, by
which all the methods and measures of the Design were plainly laid open and
exposed: And his Enemies supplied with sufficient Crimes to lay unto his
Charge, and to fill an Endictment against him. Such is the falsity of this
World, in which there is no Faith either amongst Friends or Relations. In the
mean time the General of the Imperial Army advanced his Forces against the
Malcontents, who still stood out, and entertained thoughts of Retiring with
their Families into the Dominions of the Turks: To prevent which he marched
with 15 Regiments against Padock, Mongatz and Erschet, places belonging to
Ragotski: In the first of which the Princess Ragotski, going before, prepared a
Magnificent Banquet for General Sporke, to whom, after the Entertainment, she
delivered the Keys of the place, and presented him with a Horse and Furniture
rated at the value of about Eleven thousand Roman Crowns: And having here
placed a Garrison, as also in Padock, Czalos, Serentz and Mongatz, Lieutenant
General Heister Marched to Erschet, where many and the most considerable of the
Malcontents were retired, and refused to receive any Garrison, either from the
Emperor or the Prince Ragotski, Erschet stands out.
until first a Pardon or act of Oblivion were given them in due form and
manner; and herein they so resolutely persisted, that they levelled their
Cannon against the Imperial Forces, by which the Landtgrave of Hesse had his
Horse killed under him; and would have maintained their Post to the last
extremity, but that General Sporke being more willing to use Lenity than
Rigor, sent to the Besieged a blank Paper, promising, on Condition of
Surrender, to yield unto all the Articles that they should write therein; which
being accepted, Surrenders on Conditions.
and the Capitulations drawn, the Town was delivered. The City of Cassovia
following the Example of Erschet, opened their Gates to the Imperialists,
Cassovia yields.
and promised to give Free quarters to the Soldiers, provided they might have
and enjoy a free exercise of their Religion: This City of Cassovia, since the
time it had acknowledged the Austrian Family for their Sovereigns, had never
been violated, or saw entrance forcibly made thereinto: For which Reason, the
General was pleased to make a Triumphant Entry, and to pass with his Army
through the midst of its Street with Trumpets, Hautboys, and all sorts of
Warlike Music; and having left a sufficient Garrison therein, he proceeded to
take in other Towns and Countries, which for the most part submitted to the
prevailing Power; though with much Regret and Displeasure to see themselves
subjected by Foreign Forces, and by Garrisons stronger than the Inhabitants;
especially the County of Zemplin highly contended, and seemed resolved to
oppose themselves against such masterless Guests, Zemplin refuses to take
German Garrisons.
until General Sporke threatened to give them no Quarter, and in case of
resistance, to enter their Country with Fire and Sword.

Bassory, and other Chiefs of the discontented Party, being affrighted with
these Menaces, desired Apafi, Prince of Transylvania, The Malcontents fly into
Moldavia.
to grant them Protection and Refuge within his Dominions: But he being
forbidden by the Turks to receive their Persons, or own their Cause, absolutely
refused to grant them quarters or safety within his Country: Upon which denial
they fled into Moldavia and Valachia, where they dispersed and concealed
themselves, until a more proper time presented to assert their Liberty.

Thus was all Hungary entirely subjected to the Command and Power of the
Emperor; excepting only Muran, which was the City and Seat of the late Palatine
Wessellini, and which was then guarded and defended by his Widow; and was, as
believed, the place where the Consultations were held, and where the Plots and
Factions were carried on. Muran yielded.
To take in this place Prince Charles of Lorrain appeared before it, with a
considerable party both of Horse and Foot, against which the Countess being not
able to make any long resistance, yielded the place upon honorable Conditions.
Amongst other Malcontents which were there seized, Nagiferents who had been
the Chief Confident of the late Palatine Wessellini, Nagiserent^ seized.
and Secretary of the League, was there secured with all his Papers, which made
a discovery of the whole Plot, and of the Names of the principal Actors
therein. These Papers were contained in five Chests, consisting of Letters,
Instructions, Treaties, Acts, etc. which being sent to Vienna and there
examined, it plainly appeared thereby, what part Count Nadasti was to perform,
and how far he was engaged: It discovered farther, all the proceedings both of
Serini and Frangipani, Nadasti discovered to be in the Plot.
and furnished their Enemies with Articles against them: And several Letters
were intercepted, which made the Countess of Wessellini to be one of the
Accomplices, and concerned in the Conspiracy. Nadasti had all this time
dissembled his Party, and seemed zealous for the Emperor against the
Malcontents, keeping himself quiet, and retired within his Castle of
Puttendorf. But so soon as he understood, that the Secretary with his Papers
was seized, his Conscience smote him, so that he provided for his Escape,
intending with 500 Horse to make his way for Venice; but before he could
prepare to be gone, his Castle was Invested by the Lieutenant Colonel of the
Regiment of Heister; and he himself seized in his Bed and carried to Vienna;
where by order of the Emperor, he was lodged in the Common House belonging to
the Nobility of Hungary, where after he had remained 3 days he acknowledged his
Crimes, and humbly begged the mercy and pardon of the Emperor; but his Crimes
were too black, and wrote in too large and plain Characters to deserve a
remission. His Pardon denied.
And besides, he was possessed of vast Riches, having eight Millions of Livers
in ready Money by him; which being a Prey that the Chief Ministers of State
might vouchsafe to stoop unto, they colored his Actions with a dye more black
than those Accusations which were objected against Serini, or Frangipani.
Whilst these things were in agitation, and the Indictments drawing up against
these three great Personages, The Assembly at Leusch require a maintenance of
their Privileges
the Assembly of Hungarians met at Leusch, represented unto the Emperor, That
it was their undoubted Right according to the Constitutions of that Kingdom (to
the observation of which the Emperor had religiously Sworn) to be the Judges
themselves of the Nobles, and others of their Country who were accused of
Treason, or other Crimes; and therefore they desired that a speedy day might be
fixed for the Trial of those three Counts, whose Cause was only to be heard
before the Palatine and Deputies of that Kingdom. Moreover they presumed to
represent unto his Imperial Majesty, That it was one of the Fundamental Laws
and Constitutions of their Country, to have the Office of Palatine supplied
soon after the vacancy; which having now been void for a considerable time, all
those Acts which have passed since, ought to be esteemed null, and of no effect.

The Emperor who was well enough satisfied within himself that what was here
alleged, was the true and undoubted Right of the People of that Kingdom (to
observe which he had Sworn at his Coronation) was inclinable to gratify his
People with a concession of these just Privileges; The Reasons why the Emperor
denies to allow them.
but his Chief Ministers and Counselors dissuaded him from it, alleging that
such a Condescension as this, would raise again the Spirits of the Malcontents
to such a degree, as would blow up the fire of Rebellion into a flame: That it
was improper and incongruous to put the Trial of the three Counts into the
hands of those who were Conspirators and Accomplices in the same Plot with them:
That the People of Hungary had forfeited all their Charters and Privileges by
their Rebellion and Revolt, having sought for aid and protection from the
Turks, who are mortal Enemies both of the Emperor, and all Christendom. That
Serini, and Nadasti, were actually Officers and Servants of the Emperor; the
first being Vice-King of Croatia, and the other President of his Majesty's
Privy Council; and for that Reason could not decline the Jurisdiction of that
Court, which his Imperial Majesty should erect for their Trial.

These Reasons being given to the Assembly at Leusch, little reply could be
made thereunto, nor knew they well how to proceed in other Matters; in regard
that being composed of different Religions and Interests, their Meeting broke
up abruptly without any Conlusion.

It will not be necessary in this place to enlarge upon the several Trials of
the Counts, Serini, Nadasti, and Frangipani; as also of Count Tassembach, and
Nagiferents Secretary of the League; The three Counts are put to death.
let it be sufficient for us, to say that they were all Judicially Arraigned,
and received Punishments agreeable to the blackness of their Crimes; only we
shall add, that Nadasti was Executed at Vienna, Serini and Frangipani at
Newstadt. The Emperor out of his innate Clemency and Mercy restored their
Estates in Land to their Children, with Orders only to change their Arms, and
Names. And accordingly, Their Children change their Names.
the Children of Nadasti, which were eleven in number, took the Names of
Creuzemberg, and the Son of Serini was called Gade, who was a Gentleman of such
Integrity, and of that Loyalty to the Emperor, that when his Father was living,
and would have given him for a Hostage to the Turks, he refused to submit unto
such a dishonorable Character, protesting that he would continue incorrupt in
his Allegiance to his Prince. Howsoever afterward being provoked, and
resenting highly the death of his Father, he deserted those Principles, and in
revenge joined himself with the Malcontents in their defection. Tassembach
used such Arts and Subterfuges, supported by the interest of powerful Friends,
as conserved his Life for seven Months after the death of the aforesaid Lords,
though afterward he was forced also to submit unto his Fate.

Notwithstanding all this Care and Severity of the Emperor, the fire of
discontent could not be smothered, but in other places under different Heads
and Leaders burst forth into a flame. Count Tekeli the Father Rebels.
Count Tekeli the Father was one of those who appeared openly in the Field;
declaring, That though he had ever owned all Fidelity and Allegiance to the
Emperor, yet he desired to be numbered amongst those good Patriots, who were
obliged both in Honor, Conscience, and Religion, to maintain and defend the
Rights, Privileges and Liberties of their Country.

Count Tekeli to maintain this Cause, fortified himself in his Castle of Kus,
with a Garrison of 800 Hussars, and caused all his Subjects with the Morlaques
to take up Arms for his defense. Col. Heister with a considerable Force was
dis-speeded to suppress this Party, which was the only open Enemy then
appearing in the Field; but whilst preparations were making to Besiege this
Castle Count Tekeli died therein, Old Tekeli dies.
and resigned up his Cause and Country to be maintained by his Son; who
afterward was the grand Incendiary that again kindled the fire of War, which
continued for many years; and in conclusion miserably wasted the Kingdom of
Hungary, and proved fatal to the Ottoman Empire. And though in course of time the
Turks were driven out of that Kingdom, and the Emperor gained an absolute
Dominion therein, as of a Conquered Country, yet it was done with such an
effusion of Christian blood, and with the loss of so many brave Captains, and
valiant Soldiers, that the price or purchase thereof seems to have been gained
at a dear rate.

His Castle is surrendered.
In fine, I say, Count Tekeli the Father died in his Castle, which being hardly
pressed by the German Forces, was Surrendered to Count Paul Esterhasi General
of the Kingdom. But young Tekeli, together with his Kinsmen, Kizir de Paragozi,
and Petrozzi, made their escapes, and retired to Licoua; but being also pursued
unto that place, which could not long stand out, these young Lords made a
second escape from thence by night, and fled to Husse a very strong Castle in
Transylvania, but Paragozi was taken Prisoner in his way thither, and carried
to Vienna, and Licoua was Surrendered.

Hungary, and that Esterhasi, the General, with Colonel Heister, were returned
to Vienna, fresh Advices were brought to the Emperor, that the Chiefs of the
Malcontents with great numbers of People were fled into Transylvania, under
protection of the Turks, and that Prince Apafi by Order of the Port, had given
them assurance of Safety within his Dominions; upon condition that as Subjects,
they should pay Carach, or Pole Money, to the Grand Seignior. But what
Administered the greatest apprehension, Fears from Apafi.
was the rumor that Apafi had been at Constantinople, and there concerted and
agreed upon the methods of War; and that upon his return the Malcontents had
held long Conferences with the Pasha of Varadin, and with the Ambassadors of
Tartary, and the Agents from Moldavia, and Walachia; and that all the Troops
which were in their Quarters near Adrianople had Orders to march into Hungary,
where the Garrisons were to be reinforced, and the Stores and Magazines
replenished. Apafi maintains the Cause of the Malcontents.
It Is certain that Apafi being of the Protestant Religion, was affected with
much compassion toward the poor Hungarians, who for that Reason, and for
maintaining the Liberties and Privileges of their Country, Turks to engage them
in this Quarrel.

The Emperor on the other side alarmed with these Preparations, The Emperor
alarmed hereat, treats his Subjects more mildly.
sends strict and severe Orders, enjoining all the Officers and Commanders of
his Forces on the Frontiers, carefully to abstain from Incursions within the
Dominions of the Turks: And a little to assuage the exasperated Spirits of his
discontented Subjects, he resolves to treat them with more kindness, and gentle
usage than formerly. And in the mean time, for fear of the worst, and to
provide against the dangers so imminently hanging over their heads, he gave
Orders that a Survey should be made of all the Magazines and Arsenals on the
Frontiers, and an account taken of the Cannon and Arms. But the Emperor
remained not long in these doubtful apprehensions, The Turks refuse to assist
the Malcontents.
before he received Intelligence from his Envoy, lately dispatched to
Constantinople to sound the minds and intentions of the Vizier, The Reasons why.
For whether it was, that this Vizier out of a Principle of Justice denied to
side or join with Rebels against their own Prince, or out of a sense of Honor
to that Peace which he himself having made, did esteem Sacred. Or whether it
was, that he thought a War against Poland at that time would be more Honorable
and Advantageous to the Empire; or perhaps all these Considerations together
might divert him from designs against Hungary. The War was reserved for another
Vizier, and until the space of ten years afterward, of which dismal effects we
shall discourse in their due places. The Emperor sends Presents to the Grand
Seignior.


In the mean time the Emperor dispatched Secretary Perez with Presents to the
Grand Seignior, and Grand Vizier, to confirm the Peace, and renew the Truce
(for so it may be called, rather than a Peace) of twenty years, longer; the
which Presents were accepted, and all matters established to the satisfaction
of both Princes.

Now had the Emperor time to seize on the forfeited Estates of the three
Counts, who were lately Executed for High Treason, so their Jewels and Plate
which were very valuable, together with the Treasure of Nadasti, The Estates of
the three Counts converted to the use of the Emperor.
who was Richer than all the others, were carried on 8 Wagons to Vienna, and
the Castle of Puttendorf, with the Gardens and Houses of Pleasure belonging to
Nadasti, were given to General Montecuculi. Nor were the movables of Tekeli
the Father lately deceased,

Conditions made with Prince Ragotski
The Prince Ragotski, who (as we have said before) proceeded more warily than
his other Associates, had seasonably made his peace with the Emperor, and
obtained his Pardon, on Condition that he should renounce his right of
Sovereignty over the Town of Trenschin; That he should send 200000 Florins to
that Town for payment of the Garrison there, and should send a like Sum to the
Emperor's Coffers at Vienna, and that he should out of his own Revenue maintain
500 Soldiers in the upper Hungary, and supply them with Ammunition, and all
things necessary for the War.

The Inhabitants and Soldiers of Cassovia Fight.
About this time the Inhabitants and Soldiers of Kalo, and Tokai, fell at
variance together about their Quarters and Provisions; and at Cassovia the
Citizens Conspired to make a Massacre in one Night of all the German Soldiers;
but the Plot being discovered, both sides came to an open Fight together, which
continued long; but at length the Soldiers gained the advantage, having killed
and made Prisoners almost all the Citizens.

A Diet at Presburg.
This Accident made but an ill preparation for a Diet, which the Emperor had
Summoned to meet at Presburg on the first day of the ensuing year, and called
thereunto by especial Writ all the Nobility and Deputies of the upper and the
lower Hungary. But when the time came, there was but a small appearance; most
of the Deputies declaring that they absented themselves, by reason that they
would not concur with their own consents to the abrogation of their ancient
Laws and Privileges of their Country, which the Emperor designed to reduce to
the same Constitution with that of his Hereditary Dominions.

The Deputies afraid to meet.
Other Deputies refused to appear without Letters of License, or safe Conducts
and Pardons from the Emperor for what was formerly done by them in the late
Commotions. But this Act of Grace and Clemency being denied, by reason of that
constant Correspondence which the Malcontents held with the Turks; the
Emperor's Commissioners, namely the Count Rothal, who was Chief
Plenipotentiary, the Archbishop of Gran, and others, proceeded to open the Diet
upon the 24th of January, to which time the Assembly was adjourned; but neither
then, nor on the 3d of February, to which time a farther adjournment was made,
not one of the Deputies of the upper Hungary making their Appearance, his
Majesty being desirous to provide for the safety of his Subjects, even against
their own wills, made this following Declaration; which we have thought fit to
insert, for better understanding of this History, and contracted for brevity
thereof.

LEOPOLD, by the Grace of God Emperor of the Romans, etc. This is to make known
unto all Men, that having happily extinguished the Fire of Rebellion in this
Our Kingdom of Hungary, and punished those ungrateful Persons who were the
Chief Incendiaries; and who growing wanton with those Benefits which We had
heaped upon them, violated their Bonds of Allegiance to Us, and seducing to
their Party many of the Nobility, with diverse Towns, and all the Estates of
this Kingdom, called Strangers to their aid and assistance, and raised an Army
to oppose Our Power and Dominion. In pursuance whereof, they Besieged Tokai,
where We had placed a Garrison, killed great numbers of Our Soldiers, taken the
Convoys which we had sent for supply of Zatmar; fought against that Army which
We had sent to suppress the Troubles of Hungary; and to abate and diminish Our
Authority, several unlawful Assemblies were held for contriving and carrying on
a War against Us; by which Councels Our good Subjects being disturbed, the
Turks Invited into Our Dominions, Our Royal Treasury pillaged, Incursions made
into Austria, Stiria, Moravia, and other Our Hereditary Dominions, and at
length a Conspiracy was made against Our Life, which was prevented by the
Divine Providence of God Almighty. And now whereas it is a Duty incumbent on Us
to provide for the safety of those People which God has committed to Our
Charge; and that Christendom and Hungary may not for the future be exposed to
the like Disorders, We have by Our Absolute Power and Imperial Authority made
an exact Regulation of the Military Quarters; allotting the number of Soldiers
which every County is to maintain; and the Orders and Decorum which Soldiers
are to keep, that they may not molest or trouble the Inhabitants where they are
Quartered. And We require all Persons concerned, without Excuse, Delay, or
Conditions whatsoever, to submit unto that power which God has given Us over
them; which We have been compelled to maintain by force of Arms, and which We
shall continue so to do. And therefore We give notice to all Our Subjects, that
they peaceably submit unto Our power, lest Our Clemency be turned into
Severity; and that contrary to Our Nature, being provoked by so many Injuries,
Treasons, and Rebellions, We be enforced to execute Our Wrath on those who have
abused Our Indulgence, and cause them to taste the direful effects of Our
Rigor.

Given at Vienna the 21st of March, 1671.

The Declaration enforced.
The Emperor to establish and confirm this his Remonstrance by force of Arms,
caused his Regiments which were in Bohemia, Silesia, Moravia and Austria to
march with speed into Hungary, with Cannon and all the Train of Artillery:
Which when the Malcontents perceived, and considered their ill Fortune and
Successes, having in every place been worsted in all the Fights and
Reencounters against the Emperor's Forces, and that the Grand Vizier had
forbidden Apafi Prince of Transylvania, and all the Pashas of Hungary to yield
Assistance or Protection to them: They began then to think they had taken false
Courses against their Sovereign Prince; and resolved for the future to submit
with blind obedience to the Commands and Decrees of the Emperor, The Hungarians
repent, but too late.
serving themselves only of Prayers and Petitions to obtain his Pardon, and a
remission of his Rigours and Oppressions. But it was now too late, for his
Imperial Majesty being highly provoked by their frequent Rebellions, was so far
from granting their Requests; That besides their usual Taxes and Impositions,
he laid a farther charge on them of maintaining an Army of 30.000 Men, which
were quartered in their Cities and Towns, and upon their Lands and Estates of
Inheritance.

With these Successes, and the Destruction and Death of the Chief Leaders of
the Malecontented Party: Hungary was considered by the Imperialists as a
Conquered Kingdom, The Emperor alters the Government of Hungary.
The great Office and Dignity of Palatine, who was always a Person of the
noblest Descent and highest Degree; was by the ancient Privileges of that
Kingdom elected at a Diet, consisting of the several Orders of the Nation: But
now the Emperor assumed this Power unto himself, pretending that the same was
forfeited to him by the Revolt of the People; and so in the lieu of Palatine,
he thought fit to Govern by such a Person as he himself should choose, and
impose without the Concurrence of the States, by the Name and Title of Vice
King: And in lieu, and by way of resemblance of a Diet, he erected a Sovereign
Chamber, or Council consisting of a President, Chanceller, and two Secretaries,
one a German and the other a Hungarian, with about six or seven Counselors, or
so many as his Imperial Majesty should think fit to add, to whom the
Administration of all the Affairs of that Kingdom was committed. The Person
destinated and appointed for this considerable charge, was John Gasper
Ampringhen Prince of the Empire, and Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, which
was an Office so considerable, that the late Archduke Leopold, Uncle to the
present Emperor, did not disdain to own; this Prince being an Hungarian by
Birth, and qualified with many Virtues, and having performed many brave Actions
and Achievements, was esteemed worthy of this August honor. His zeal for
Religion, and advancement of the Christian Cause was well known to all the
World; The character of the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order.
having in the year 1664 brought two Regiments, one of Horse and the other of
Foot to the Imperial Army, commanded by the Cavaliers of his own Order, and
maintained at his own expense during all the time that that War lasted. After
which, and that the Turks renewed their War again in Candia, he sent a
considerable body of Foot, Commanded by several Cavaliers of his own Order,
into the Service of the Venetian Republic; and afterward went himself in
Chief to Command them within the besieged City, where he performed such noble
Actions of Chivalry, as obtained the acknowledgement of the Senate, and
procured likewise a Brief from the Pope with such obliging Expressions, as
denoted the singular esteem he had of his Person and Merits. In fine, such were
the deserts and qualifications of this Grand Master, that the Emperor remained
entirely satisfied with his Abilities, as being agreeable and every ways
suiting with this Honorable Promotion; to which being called, he appeared at
Vienna, attended with a great and an expensive Equipage, and with many Knights
of his own Order.

ANNO 1673.
This new Vice-King having taken his Instructions, and Leave from the Emperor
departed from Vienna, and made his Entry into Cassovia on the 22d day of March,
with Acclamations and universal Contentment of the People. Great was the
expectation which the World conceived of the wisdom and good conduct of this
new Vice-King, as the only person who was able to appease the Disturbances, and
compose the Disorders of that Kingdom. And indeed he so well behaved himself,
together with the Sovereign Council over which he presided, that Justice took
its course, the Poor were relieved from the Oppression of their unmerciful
Lords, and a stop given to the proceedings of those wickednesses, The good
Government of the Vice-King.
which in the Licentious times of War had passed without punishment: All orders
of Men began now to yield due obedience to their Superiors, Innocence was
protected and Offenses punished; the Soldiers lived under the good Discipline
of their Officers, and the Citizens in good Correspondence with the Soldiers.
Many wholesome Laws were made for the benefit of the People, and for their
Security from the violence of the Army, especially in their Marches. And above
all the Vice-King endeavored to reconcile the affections of the Malcontents
by his gentleness, and moderation toward them.

The Clergy disturb the quiet of the Country.
But what the Civil Magistrates acted in order to a composure and setlement, was
disturbed and over-thrown by the Ecclesiastical Courts, whose business being to
extirpate Heresy (as they called it) thy proceeded by methods agreeable
thereunto, which were to take away their Churches, Seize and Imprison their
Pastors and Teachers, and prosecute the People with the severity of their
Courts: The which Persecutions so exasperated the Spirits of the Protestants
against the Emperor and his Government, that the Fire of War, which had for
some time been covered with Embers, was ready to break out into a more violent
Flame than before: A War breaks out.
For now the Protestants were encouraged by an Alliance they had made with the
Transilvanians, and by the Protection which the Turk had promised to give them
within his Dominions, notwithstanding the assurances formerly made to the
Emperor by the Vizier to the contrary. The Transilvanians pretended a quarrel
for recovery of the Counties of Zatmar and Zambolich belonging to their
Principality, which the Prince Ragotski had without right yielded to the
Emperor. The Turks declared themselves offended, by the daily Hostilities
committed by the Imperialists, who pursuing the Malcontents within their
Dominions, did not abstain from those Violences, which are usually practiced in
an Enemies Country; and by such Actions as these, both Nations were ready to
break forth into an open Rupture.

With these hopes and encouragements, the Malcontents betook themselves again
to their Arms under the Command of Erdedi, Petrozzi, Succhai, Kende, Zepeti,
and several other Lords, and Persons of power and interest in their Country.
The time appeared favorable and advantageous to their enterprise, for the
Walls of most of the Towns were then beaten down, and the old Works slighted,
with design to Rebuild, and make them stronger according to the new way and
manner of Fortifications. The time chosen for the War.
Provisions were also wanting in most of the Garrisons, and the German, as well
as the Hungarian Troops were in Mutiny for want of pay. And this was the time,
which the Malcontents chose to put themselves in Arms, and renew the War.

At the beginning whereof being 12000 strong, they gained the Passage of
Teyllas, Colonel Soyer defeated.
and advanced as far as Cassovia, which they blocked up, and Defeated five
Troops of Dragoons, under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel de Soyer, and by
the advantage of a dark and a rainy Night cut them to pieces, the Lieutenant
Colonel only with some few of his Soldiers making an escape into Cassovia.
After this Success they proceeded to Esperies and took it without much loss, by
the Cowardice of the Officer which Commanded it; and in diverse other Skirmishes
worsted the Imperialists.

The Emperor having received advices of this new Insurrection, The Imperialists
revenge themselves.
immediately dis-speed-General Kops with an Army of 10.000 Men into Hungary, to
which were 4 or 5000 Men more joined under the Command of Count Esterhasi, and
Valentine Balassi, composed almost all of Horse, and of Men true and loyal to
the Emperor's interest. Such an Army as this could not remain long without
Action, both Parties desiring to come to an Engagement, which soon afterward
happened at the Passage of Branitza; where Colonel Smith and Count Palfi, who
led the Vanguard charged the Malcontents who defended some narrow Passes with
so much valor, that they killed a 1000 of them on the place, besides many
others who were wounded and taken Prisoners, with the loss only of 15 or 16
Soldiers.

After this Defeat, Serentz, about two Leagues distant from Tokai, and invested
Zatmar; but a Sally being made out of the Town by Lieutenant Colonel
Staremberg, who Commanded there in Chief, they were forced to raise their
Siege, with the loss of several Colors and many Prisoners: Likewise General
Kops and Spankau pursued them so closely at the Heels, that with great loss and
difficulty they were enforced to pass the Theyss. Diverse places at the same
time surrendered, as the Castle of Meges, and the Town of Nagibania, the which
places were dismantled, and their Walls thrown down: And as the Imperialists
were toward the end of the year, returning to their Winter quarters, they met
a party of 500 Horse belonging to the Malecontented party, of which they killed
300 on the place, and took diverse Prisoners, one of which was the Son of
Succhai, one of the Chief Leaders of the Rebel party.

Thus whilst it went ill in all places with the Malcontents, the Popish
Clergy took courage to assert their right to diverse Churches and Chapels, The
Roman Clergy seize on the Protestant Churches.
which they pretended to belong unto them, and to those of their Religion, and
by force of Arms took possession of them, which they held until such time,
Nitria, Trenschin, Turoz, Stranian, Lippovia, and in several Towns and Villages
of the Mountains; where they set up and exercised the Popish Religion, with all
the Rites and Ceremonies, to the great Scandal and Displeasure of the
Hungarians. Particularly in the Month of June, at a Town called Senetz, the
Curate of the Parish was zealous to celebrate in a public, and solemn manner
the Festival of Corpus Christi, A Bloody Outrage committed.
and to carry the Sacrament in Procession: Which Feast happening to be on a
day, when a Fair was held at that Town, which brought a great concourse of
People thither, the Priest fearing some affront from the Multitude, desired the
Governor of Branitz to afford him a Sergeant and 12 Soldiers to accompany the
Sacrament, and defend it from the violence and profaneness of the Heretics.
Which being granted, as the Priest was carrying the Sacrament in Procession, he
was assaulted by the People, and killed by them, together with the 12 Soldiers
which were sent for his Guard. So soon as Count Staremberg had news of this
Sacrilegious Murder, he marched to the Town with his own Regiment, and several
Troops of German Horse, for punishment of the Authors of this abominable
wickedness; It is revenged.
which he executed with all the Rigor and Severity imaginable; for he pillaged
and burned their Houses, and put every one to the Sword, excepting those who
saved their Lives by escaping into the Woods.

After all these Defeats and many others given to the Malcontents, and this
vast effusion of Blood, it might well be imagined, that an end would have been
put to this War, The obstinacy of the Malcontents.
which had neither a settled Council, nor a Fund of Money, nor an Interest of
great Men to support it. Howsoever, such was the force and power, which the
Preachers used in their Sermons to the People, inciting them to a Defense of
their Religion, the Exercise of which the Emperor (as they said) had determined
to take from them, that they resolved to die in the maintenance thereof; being
persuaded that their Friends and Companions, who had already sacrificed their
Lives in that Cause, were real Martyrs, and had obtained the Crown which was
laid up in Heaven for them. Nor were the Protestants only in the mind to Wage a
War, but even the Roman Catholics also, who being moved by another Principle
of defending the Privileges and Freedom of their People, thought it their Duty
to rise up and assert the Cause of their native Country and Nation. For though
they owned all Duty and Obedience to the Emperor, yet being but an Elective
King, and one to whom the People had sworn Allegiance on Condition that he
should maintain them in the ancient Rights, and Prileges of that Kingdom, they
held themselves no longer obliged thereunto, after he had violated all their
Laws, and absolutely subverted the ancient Fabric of their Government, which
he had apparently done in three instances. First, The aggrievances of the
Hungarians.
In quartering German Soldiers in the Country and Towns, with intent to
overawe and govern them by an absolute and an arbitrary Power. Secondly, By
imposing a Vice-King upon them, constituted solely by the Imperial Commission,
in lieu and place of a Palatine, who according to the ancient Constitutions was
to be elected by a Diet, composed of the several Estates of that Kingdom. And
Thirdly, Instead of such a Diet the Emperor was pleased to erect a Sovereign
Council consisting of such Members, as he himself did think fit to nominate and
appoint, over which the Vice-King was as Chief Commissioner to preside. And
thus the Parties of both Religions being disgusted and animated to Fight pro
Aris and Focis, for their Laws, their Country and Religion; Fury and Despair
served them in the place of Counsel, Money, and other Nerves and Sinews of War:
So that when one party was cut off, another arose in greater numbers, and like
Hydra's increased the more by being destroyed.

Amongst which appeared a bold Fellow named Strisiniski, who pretended to be
sent by the Governors of the Mountain Towns, calling himself Duke John, and
with his own name signed and issued out Commissions, and dispersed them every
where, as if he had been the Sole and Sovereign Prince of that Country. Many
persons adhered to him, and followed his Standard, looking on him as a bold and
a daring Fellow, who seldom gave quarter to any, much less to Jesuits and
Priests, Cruelties exercised on both sides.
to whom he never showed mercy, whenever any of that character fell within
his Power. The which was again revenged by Count Strazoldo, notice thereof,
sent their Orders to him to use better moderation in his future actings, and to
treat the Hungarians with more gentleness; which though he observed in respect to
the Sword of his own Soldiers, who were forbidden to Massacre, or shed their
Blood; yet being directed to take and bring them before the Courts of Justice,
by which a speedy Sentence was passed, and some were condemned to be hanged,
some be quartered, others to be empaled, this way of process seemed much more
cruel and severe, than a speedy Execution by the Sword of the Soldiery.

ANNO, 1674.
The Turks underhand assist the Malcontents.
Though the Grand Seignior had not as yet publicly owned the cause of the
Malcontents; howsoever the Pasha's and Officers had received private
Instructions to countenance and favor their Cause, without open denunciations
of a War, and many Turks in hopes of Plunder and Booty habited themselves in
the Hungarian fashion, and joined with their Troops; and several parties of
Turks in great numbers, pretending that the Christians in a Hostile manner had
made Incursions within their Territories, came openly to revenge them, and
marched as far as Schentha, from whence they carried away an Hungarian
Gentleman with 7 Soldiers. Upon this Advice, Lieutenant Colonel de Soyer with
his Dragoons, and Hussars, Sallied out of the Town to the rescue of the
Prisoners; but being surpised by 5 Companies of Turkish Foot, who issued out
of an Ambuscade, where they had concealed themselves, Soyer himself was killed,
with 2 Lieutenants, 1 Ensign, 4 Sergeants, and 80 common Soldiers.

The Garrison of Newhawsel encouraged with this Success, continued their
Incursions along the River of Waagh, and made some depredations; but being
pursued by the Hussars, and Heydukes of Comorra, they were forced to surrender
200 Head of Cattle, together with all the Booty and Plunder they had taken.

Other Cruelties performed.
Thus whilst Matters succeeded with various Successes, but most commonly in
favor of the Emperor, both Parties acted their Cruelties upon each other, the
Malcontents as often as the Priests fell into their hands, they used them but
very scurvily; they buried one of them alive, of others they cut off their
Noses and Ears, and hanged or strangled others. In punishment of which, the
Emperor Ordered the Vice-King to drive the Protestant Ministers out of his
Dominions, and to seize upon all their Churches to the use of the Catholics;
and not to suffer them to meet or exercise their Religious Worship therein. In
pursuance of these Orders, The Popish Bishops seize the Livings of the
Hungarian Clergy.
the Bishops of Colonitz, and Javarow seized upon all the Churches, Schools,
Livings, and Benefices whatsoever belonging to the Protestant Clergy within
their Diocesses. And the Archbishop of Strigonium, Primate of that Kingdom,
cited all the Protestant Ministers to appear before him, and put many of them
to the Question, forcing them to confess who those were who for the two last
years were the chief Incendiaries of Seditions, and Authors of the Rebellion.

Nor were the smaller sort of the Malcontents only persecuted, but some of the
great Men and chief Ministers in the Emperor's Court were suspected, and
accused of correspondence and intelligence with the Rebels. The Prince
Lubkovitz suspected, and his Estate seized.
The Prince Lubkovitz President of the Council was suspected and accused; but
whether that jealousy arose from the near alliance in Blood he had with the
Family of Serini, or from malicious Informations is uncertain; howsoever his
Secretary by Order of the Emperor was put to the Torture; and though therein he
confessed nothing which could accuse or reflect on his Master, yet he was
treated as a guilty person, and all his Estate real and personal in Austria and
Bohemia were seized, and confiscated to the use and benefit of the Emperor.

Count Souches had the like misfortune to have his Fidelity and Loyalty
suspected, but in regard nothing could be proved against him, he was commanded
to leave the Court, and retire to his Government of Waradine, or some other
part of his Estate. The Son also in resentment of this hard usage of his
Father, abandoned the Court, and all the Offices he enjoyed therein.

ANNO, 1675.
At the beginning of this year the Turks began more openly to assert the Cause
of the Malcontents, The Turks join with the Malcontents.
making their Incursions as far as Freystadt within the Neighborhood of
Presburg; forcing the People to do Homage, and pay Contributions to the Grand
Seignior; and for default thereof, they burnt many Villages, and committed
other acts of Hostility. The Malcontents at the same time defeated a great
part of a Croatian Regiment, under the Command of Colalto. By which, and the
Advices that the Turks were assembled in a Body of 14000 Men, within the
Neighborhood of Newhawsel, the Emperor fearing lest they should join with the
Malcontents, convened the chief Lords and Gentlemen of Hungary at Presburg,
The Emperor assembles a Diet at Presburg
to which place he sent Count Siaki to tender them Conditions of an
accommodation, of which Prince Apafi frankly offered himself to be the Mediator.

At this Assembly some of the more moderate Men, who were desirous to bring
Matters to a good understanding, represented unto their Companions the ruin
and destruction which must necessarily ensue from a Civil War; and though the
exercise of their Religion ought to be dearer to them than their Lives, and to
be preferred before all earthly benefits; yet the same Religion taught them not
to rebel against their Prince, or make Wars for the sake thereof, whose
foundation and design was peace; much less could they justify the engaging the
Turk therein, unless whilst they professed themselves Protestants, they acted
like Mahometans.

But these and many other things were spoken in vain to Men who were possessed
with a Zeal for their Religion, The People possessed with Zeal to their
Religion.
And in regard those of them who were in Hungary were not able to keep the
Field, they were forced to fly and seek refuge in Transylvania, to the number
of 5000. from whence they sent one Fabian to Constantinople to Solicit for
assistance from the Grand Seignior; but the Affairs of the Turks not being as
yet in a state for answering such demands, Fabian returned with fair words, and
with Orders to Prince Apafi to give protection, and to assign Quarters to as
many Malcontents as should seek for refuge within the Principality of
Transylvania, to which Country though the chief Heads and Leaders of that party
were retired, yet there were several flying Troops in Hungary which infested
the Country, and drove away Cattle from parts near unto the Gates of Zatmar,
and burnt all the Villages round, which would not assent to pay the
contributions they demanded of them.

In the mean time the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, now Vice-King of
Hungary, together with the Archbishop of Gran, and other Chiefs of the several
Estates, having had diverse Conferences about the Condition of that Kingdom, and
of the manner how they might raise a considerable Sum of Money toward
maintenance of the Troops which for conservation of the Peace were sent into
that Country; but not being able to agree thereupon, nor upon what Fund the
same might be levied, they went to Presburg with design to renew the Treaty
with the Malcontents; A Treaty renewed at Presburg.
that coming to a good understanding with them, a Tax or Imposition might be
equally charged by the common consent and agreement of the Estates; and which
coming with that Authority would be paid frankly without scruple, or opposition
of the People. To bring Matters to this happy condition, the Vice-King offered
in the Name of the Emperor, to grant a General Act of Pardon unto all those who
would lay down their Arms, and submit to the Emperor's Authority; promising
that they should be restored to their Lands and Estates, and to a free exercise
of their Religion; but in regard they were obliged to receive German Soldiers
into all their Fortresses and Towns; all offers seemed grievous and of no
force, in respect of the oppression they must find by such unruly Guests, under
whom they could promise themselves no enjoyment or security; and being by these
proposals become more bold and desperate, they appeared before Zatmar with
about 7000 Men;

Prince Apafi who had at all times underhand favored the cause of the
Malcontents, Apafi seeks a quarrel.
and granted them protection within his Dominions, did now begin openly to seek
a quarrel on his own score with the Emperor, demanding the Counties of Kalo and
Zatmar to be delivered to him, with the Fortress of Tokai, to which he
pretended a Right by a grant from Prince Ragotski his Predecessor. To which
Answer was made, That those Counties were of the Ancient Demesnes belonging to
the Kings of Hungary, and since confirmed to the Emperor by several Treaties;
and particularly by the last made with the Ottoman-Port.

Howsoever, not to irritate Prince Apafi overmuch, and to keep Matters from an
open rupture at a time when the Emperor had many Enemies to deal with, it was
Ordered that these Demands should be referred to the Examination of
Commissioners; and in the mean time an Envoy was sent to the Vizier at
Adrianople, to complain of those exorbitant pretensions. But Apafi not
attending an Answer, entered with a formidable Force into Hungary, and having
defeated General Spankau, he laid Siege to Zatmar; but the Season of the Year
being far spent, and a Valiant Resistance made, they were forced to raise the
Siege, and retire.

About the 15th of September, The Malec ntents hold a Conference together.
the Winter approaching, the Malcontents held a Conference at Sombro, a place
in Transylvania, to resolve in what manner to manage the next Campaign, and how
they might best engage the Turks in their Defense and Quarrel, without which
they could not hope for any great Success. After which meeting they entered the
County of Zipt, and there set Fire to many Towns and Villages, and took above
500 Prisoners; About the same time the Garrison of Newhawsel, both Horse and
Foot made an Incursion as far as Presburg, Acts of Hostility.
and burnt several Villages depending thereupon, and surprised a Castle guarded
by the Heydukes, whom they put to the Sword, without sparing so much as one
Person. A new Viz^er arr^ves at Buda.
Whilst these things were acting, a new Vizier arrived at Buda, where the
Turks were making great Stores, and laying in Provisions both of Victuals and
Ammunition: On which occasion the Emperor sent Messigni, his Interpreter, to
Complement the Vizier upon his happy arrival at Buda, and to carry him the
accustomed presents; with instructions to discover underhand the designs and
intentions of the Turks, who every day under pretense of Contributions
committed a thousand Acts of Hostility: Of which, though complaints were made,
and no satisfaction given thereunto; yet the Emperor thought fit to seek
redress for these violences, rather by applications to the Port than by
Reprisals, Applications to the Port,
least the Turk should be provoked thereby, and furnished with just Causes to
commence a War. To prevent which, all caution and tenderness was used toward
the Turks, and endeavors made by Cardiati one of the Emperor's Council, And to
Prince Apafi without effect.
who was sent to Prince Apafi to Treat, and propose ways of an Accommodation:
But these labors were all fruitless, for notwithstanding the regard was had
not to molest, or provoke the Turk, a Chiaus arrived at Vienna from the Pasha
of Buda, to complain of the Fort of Schella, which the Emperor was making on
the Banks of the Waagh, to ruin which the Turks had raised a Battery just over
against it, on the other side of the River; The Forts of Schella and Scheinau
give offense to the Turks.
but in despite thereof the Work went on, and the Fortification was finished:
And so was the Fort of Scheinau, upon which a thousand Men were daily employed,
guarded with a considerable party of Horse and Foot, sufficient to repulse the
Enemy that should attempt to disturb the Work: Of which when complaints were
made by the Pasha of Buda, requiring that they should be demolished; and that a
new Assignment should be made of the Limits of the Empire, in which all the
places as far as Presburg should be included, and the Inhabitants thereof now
Subjects to the Emperor, commanded to pay homage to the Grand Seignior: To
which unreasonable demands, general answers were only given, with intent to
prolong the unhappy day, and stave off the Turks, as long as was possible from
an open War.

But neither this, nor other Acts of Grace nor the Orders given to the Governor
of Raab, The Turks grow proud with concessions.
to set several Turkish Prisoners at Liberty without Ransom, (which the
Garrisons of this place, and the Heydukes of Vesprin had taken) did not soften
or satisfy the Turks, who at the same time kept many of the Emperors Subjects
in Prison, without thoughts of making the like generous Returns: And likewise
the Malcontents proceeding in their usual Hostile manner, defeated some of the
Emperor's Troops, and plundered many Wagons laden with Merchandise coming from
Molda Fair, and killed all the Guard which convoyed them: And thus ended this
troublesome year.

ANNO 1676.
The Heats and Troubles of the People of Hungary increased with some; and as
years passed, so the quarrel grew higher. Blood had been drawn so frequently,
that one would think the Spirits of Hungary might have been evacuated by such
vast effusions. The Malcontents had provoked their Sovereign beyond hopes of
Pardon; and had no expectations of safety but in the Turk; with whom though the
Emperor had no mind to break, nor yet the Turks on the other side, during the
Government of the Vizier Kupriogli, who being as yet engaged in a War against
Poland, thought it not seasonable to come unto an open Rupture with Germany:
Yet so unhappily were the Affairs of the Malcontents interwoven with the
concernments of the Turks, that it was impossible to be avenged of one, without
irritating and disturbing the other. For so it was at the beginning of this
year, when the Count Strazoldo took Debrezin, Debrezin taken by Count Strazoldo.
a Town into which great numbers of the Rebels were retreated, and there held
their Cabals: But in regard it was a place which paid Tribute to the Port; The
Turks much enraged thereby.
the taking thereof put all the Turkish Governors and Officers into an Alarm,
and to so loud an Outcry of an open breach of the Peace, that though this Act was
performed by Order of the Emperor; yet he was forced to disown it, and cause
Strazoldo to Surrender up the same into the hands of the Turks, and to take
away all jealousy, to retire over the Theysse with his Forces; Disowned by the
Emperor.
and after all this to divert the Storm, a Gentleman was dispatched to the
Pasha of Buda, to excuse the matter, and testify the high displeasure of the
Emperor for this Action, declaring that it was performed wholly without his
Order. Though the Pasha of Buda seemed indifferently well appeased with this
address, and satisfaction which was given; yet the Pasha of Newhawsel continued
his Displeasure; and on the pretense of Debrezin, grounded his Reasons, why he
would not set diverse Prisoners at liberty, notwithstanding the Ransom which was
paid for them, and treated very scurvily and unworthily many Persons of
considerable quality, who were in the number of those Prisoners.

The Malcontents being much encouraged, by these misunderstandings between the
Imperialists and the Turks, fell upon a body of 600 Cuirasiers and cut them to
pieces: The Rebels refuse to Trea^.
And after another Fight between a party of Hussars commanded by Count
Esterhasi, and the Turks near Carolstadt in Croatia, in which the Turks were
worsted; and after many other Acts of Hostility, being well assured that the
Peace could not continue long, refused to hearken unto any Terms or Conditions
whatsoever, though again offered to them with advantage by Count Palfi, and the
Bishop of Agria. And indeed the Vizier himself, though inclinable in his own
nature to conserve the Truce which he himself had concluded in the year 1664,
The Vizier makes peace with the Poles.
until the full Term of 20 years, had been expired according to the usual
Customs and Constitutions of both Empires: Yet finding how impossible in a
manner it was, to remain unconcerned, The Reasons for it.
whilst the Emperor pursued his Rebels within his Dominions; and that the
Soldiers and Inhabitants of neither side being bred up to War, could be kept
within any Rules or Government; he then clapped up a Peace with the Poles, that
in case he should be induced to declare War against the Emperor, and march into
Hungary, he might have but one business, and one War on his Hands at the same
time to manage.

The Malcontents have success against the Imperialists.
that they adventured to fall into the Head quarters of Colonel Colalto near
Zatmar, where they cut three Companies to pieces, and took some Prisoners. And
in the Month of June, a party of them consisting of 4000, encountering with the
Regiment of Colonel Smith near Kalo, gave them a total Defeat, killing 300 upon
the place. In the Month of July, two Parties of the Malcontents, one of 1500,
and another of 600, pillaged and burnt all the places, and Villages near Zatmar
and Caschau, and defeated a Croatian Regiment under the Command of Count Palfi,
with a Detachment from the two foregoing Garrisons. Another party of them burnt
two Villages in the Upper Hungary, killed most of the Inhabitants, and carried
away great plunder and booty with them: And being met by Count Strazoldo, who
was desirous to intercept them in their Retreat, he was defeated by them, and
forced to fly with considerable loss: Another party of them surprised the
Castle of Balac in the Morning, just at the moment when the Gates were opened,
and killed, and made Prisoners all the People that were in it. The same party
defeated Colonel Scheveling, and killed many of his Hussars upon the place;
they took and pillaged the little Town of Newtra, and intercepted all the
Merchandice, which was carrying to the Fair of Stoez. They grow proud therewith.
And with such Successes as these, the Malcontents being greatly puffed up and
exalted, they demanded a Contribution of 14000 Florins from the Inhabitants of
the plain Countries, and took Hostages, as a security for payment thereof.

Nor were the Turks in the mean time idle, or unactive on their side, for from
the Garrison of Buda, they sent a very strong party to join with those of
Newhawsel, with design to take and demolish the Fort of Schella; whilst the
Malcontents attended the motions of the Imperialists with 8000 Men, and the
Transilvanians marched toward the Frontiers of their Country with 10000; but
by the care and vigilance of the Emperor's Soldiers, the design was prevented.

These misfortunes were followed by others of worse consequence, for the
Generals, Smith and Baragotzi, Smith and Baragotzi defeated.
were defeated by the Malcontents in diverse Incounters. The Towns of
Oedembourg, Zaltach and Dowar were plundered and burnt by them; and so greatly
they increased in their numbers, that Strazoldo with 3000 Men durst not appear
in the Field against them.

And now that the fate of War might be determined, Advices of the Death of the
Grand Vizier Achmet Kupriogli.
advices of the Death of the Grand Vizier Achmet Kupriogli were brought to
Vienna, by which all expectations of Peace failed: For by the Answers he had
made to the Malcontents, who solicited for assistance, and to the Imperial
Ministers, who labored to continue a good understanding, he evidenced an
aversion to this War, for Reasons which we have formerly declared: And perhaps
because at that time becoming Sick and Crasy, his Spirits were low and his
Thoughts rather inclining to Ease and Quietness, than to the bustles and
business of an active and raging War. Kara Mustapha mad^ Vizi^r resolves upon a
War.
But now Kara Mustapha succeeding into his place, a Person of that Temper,
which we have before described, the Imperialists despaired of a Peace, and
accordingly provided for a War; and indeed, considering the Temper of the Man,
and the conjuncture of the present Times; being invited into Hungary, and the
way opened into Germany by the Malcontents; and (as the Common Rumor will have
it) pushed on by Encouragements and Promises from the French Court, but more
especially by their own Fate, the Dice of Fortune were cast, and a War
determined, though contrary to the Inclinations of the Grand Seignior, the Mufti,
and other Counselors of State.

ANNO, 1677.
War not as yet denounced, and why.
But to carry on a War of such weight and consequence, preparations were to be
first made; Money was to be provided, which was amassed, and gathered by such
means as we have before related; Forces were to be called from the most remote
parts of the Empire, and great stores of all sorts of Provisions and Ammunition
were to be lodged in Belgrade, Buda, and the Frontier Garrisons, all which
required some years to effect. And in the mean time, as a prelude to this
devouring War, the Malcontents were to be encouraged, The Pashas of Hungary
Ordered to aid the Malcontents.
their hopes kept up, and the Pashas of Hungary allowed to succor them as
occasion required; which they acted with so little regard to the Peace, that
nothing was heard over all that Kingdom, but daily Slaughters, Battles,
Plundrings, Firing of Towns, and all the other direful effects of War.

Incursions made by the Turks.
Accordingly, to begin this Year, six thousand Turks passed the Raab over the
Ice near Furstemberg, which gave an alarm to all the Province of Stiria. About
the same time another party of them belonging to the Garrison of Canisia, made
a Sally from thence, with design to surprise the Island of Serini; but being
disappointed in that Enterprise, they put all the Country of Croatia into a
confusion, and forced Contributions from the People by Military Executions;
burning and plundring all those Towns and places which refused to comply with
the payment of such Taxes as they imposed upon them. And likewise another party
from Newhawsel, made Incursions to the very Gates of Freystadt.

These ill Successes, and the fears of a more dreadful War impending, moved the
Imperial Council to thoughts of Accommodation with the Malcontents on any
terms whatsoever, being almost droven to a necessity of making peace. New
Overtures made to the Malcontents.
In pursuance of which Resolution, General Baragotzi, who for his Services was
lately made a Count of the Empire, and one of the Lieutenant Generals of the
Armies, was dispatched to the Malcontents with new Overtures of Peace, the sum
of which was this: That besides the Act of Oblivion, and Pardon formerly
offered, the Emperor was pleased farther to condescend, that in every County
the Protestants should have two Churches allowed them, one for the Lutherans,
and another for the Calvinists, with full Liberty to exercise the Religion they
professed; and that they should be indifferently admitted into all Offices and
Places of Trust either Civil or Military, together with the Roman Catholics,
without any distinction whatsoever, unless with respect to the ability and
quality of the person. This Generous Offer, though it affected and inclined about
1500 of that party to abandon the interest of their Associates, yet there were
above 10000 others whose Spirits were exasperated and heated above the virtue
and power of any lenitive, Their Obstinacy.
whom nothing could appease nor soften but revenge, though at the dear price of
their Countries ruin, and the loss of their own Lives. And this Opinion was
softer'd and kept up by some ill Men, who persuaded the Commonalty that there
was no security nor Faith in the Emperor's promises; which would no longer
continue, than until such time as he saw them disarmed, and his Enemies at his
feet. Howsoever, not wholly to reject the terms of peace, Commissioners were
appointed on both sides to meet at Esperies, to offer and receive the
Propositions; which Treaty continued during the whole Month of March, and at
last concluded without any considerable effect; only Count Palaffi Imbre became
so touched with a sense of his Duty, that he embraced the Pardon, and accepted
the gracious Offers made him by his Imperial Majesty; and afterward had a
Command given him in Hungary, under Major General Baragotzi; in expectation
that by his Example others would be brought to Obedience.

But in Transylvania the displeasure of that Prince grew higher, A Plot against
Apafi.
upon discovery of a Plot against his Life, carried on by those who had more
Zeal than true Understanding of the Emperor's Interest; which caused Apafi, not
without some reason, to declare himself more than formerly in behalf of the
Malcontents. And so high were the Spirits of both Parties exasperated against
each other, that the Hussars pursuing a flying party of the Malcontents as far
as Rima, now a Town belonging to the King of Poland, in the Palatinate of
Cracovia, could not contain their fury against their Enemy with any respect to
the Prince or Dominion unto which they were fled; but in the heat of their
pursuit set fire to the Town. Which rash Act was so far resented by the King of
Poland, that it had caused a War between the two Crowns, had not some other
Considerations cemented the difference, and the common safety united the two
Princes against their powerful Enemy, as will appear some years after.
Howsoever, in the mean time, the King of Poland touched with a sense of this
Disgrace, gave License to some of his Troops (of whose assistance he had not
much farther occasion, The King of Poland gives leave to some o^ his Troops to
serve the Malcontents.
after the Peace concluded with the Turk) to join with the Malcontents, and
serve against the Emperor, under the Command of Count Boham.

These Polanders to the number of 6000, departed from Seratin on the 25th of
September, The Poles March into Transylvania.
taking their March directly toward Transylvania; to which Country this Count
Boham had dispatched his Major General Frebual before, to advise the Prince and
Nobility of his coming. The which News was so welcome, that 500 Horse, and 800
Foot were Ordered from a Castle appertaining to Wessellini to meet them on
their way, and join in a Body with them. These Troops conducted by Frebual, met
the Polish Forces at the Village of Nemet, on the Banks of the Theysse, about
four Leagues distant from Mongatz; and having passed that River, they Encamped
near the Village of Nimelsi, about 2 leagues from Zatmar, where they attended
the coming of Wessellini, the Hungarian General, with his Forces, to join with
them. Whilst they remained in this post, the parties which they sent abroad had
taken several prisoners; by whom they were informed, that Major General Smith
was advancing from Zatmar, with a considerable Body of the Imperial Army, much
stronger than that of the Poles, and that he marched with Cannon; upon this
Intelligence Boham called a Council of War, at which it was agreed to re-pass
the little River Battor, and the enclosed Country adjacent, and to post
themselves on a Ground of more advantage, that they might the sooner join with
their own Troops not as yet come up, and also attend the Attack of the Enemy in
a fast and a securer place.

Two Polish Gentlemen Revolt.
But before the Camp removed from Nimelsi, two Polish Gentlemen, with a Servant,
revolted over to the Enemy; and informed Smith then at Zatmar, that the Polish
Forces, together with the Tartars of Lipka were inconsiderable, very much
harassed with a long March, and weakened with want of Food and Necessaries to
sustain them; in which straightened Condition they were ready to Mutiny, and
would soon change their side, in case Letters were wrote to some of the Chief
of them, giving them assurance of good Quarter, and a kind Reception. Letters
were accordingly wrote, and dispatched by the Servant of the Polish Gentlemen
who arrived the same Night at Nimelsi, where the Treachery of the two Gentlemen
was discovered, and the Letters intercepted, Their Treachery discovered.
and publicly read, the substance of which was this; That Smith had a strong
Army well resolved, and provided of all things necessary, against which in all
probability their Forces were not able to stand: The Substance of Smith's
Letter to the Poles.
That therefore they should in time provide for their own security and safety,
by passing over to the Imperial Party, where they might assure themselves of a
kind Reception, and a hearty Welcome; and it would make their Merit much the
greater, in case they would seize the Papers, Money and Plate of all the
Officers, and particularly of the person of Uladislaus Wessellini, Son of the
late Palatine of Hungary, and Nephew to the present General of the
Malcontents. Farther advising such, that were thus well disposed, to bind
Straw about their Caps, which should be a Signal at the beginning of the Fight
of their good Intentions. And that Smith might give them security that these
promises should be performed, he affixed his Seal upon the Letter, with this
Motto; Per hoc assicurantur Domini Poloni.

No News being as yet come of Wessellini, A Fight between the Imperialists on
one side, and the Poles, and Tartars, and Hungarians on the other.
Boham had no sooner provided for his own security, and well posted his Forces,
and put them in Battalia, before the Vanguard of the Enemy Charged the
advanced Troops of the Poles so fiercely, that they put them to a Retreat, and
wounded Koreski Colonel of the Tartars of Lipka; with which the Imperialists
being encouraged, pressed the Hungarians and Tartars with such fierceness and
vigor, that the Tartars began to give ground and fly; and were pursued by some
Troops of swift Croats, who knew very well in what manner to make use of such
advantages, killing many, and taking some Prisoners. In the mean time Smith
made such have to come in to the succor of his advanced Troops, that he left
all his Infantry some Leagues behind, and Marched in the Front of 20 Squadrons
of Horse, much more strong and numerous than the Poles; Testifying by his
Countenance the great assurance he had of Victory. But when he was come near,
and had received the fire from a Regiment of Dragoons Commanded by Major
Zefold, and drawn up amongst the Bushes on the right hand of the Line; and
observed the good Order and Resolution of the Poles, he began then to be
sensible of his temerity, and the Snare into which he was drawn, by the false
Report of the two Fugitives.

The Hungarians and Tartars which were newly put to flight by the Vanguard of
the Enemy, The Tartars Rally.
seeing at a distance the valor of their Companions, rallied again, and
Charged with new Courage: so that the Imperialists being astonish d and
dismayed by the Clouds of Arrows, the continual Fire from the Infantry and
Dragoons, and the redoubled Blows of the Cut-lashes and Scimitars, and the
Multitudes of their dead Companions which covered the Field with their Bodies,
The Imperialists overthrown.
began to give ground, and breaking in one upon the other, betook themselves to
Flight in the most confused, and shameful manner that can be imagined, and were
pursued by the Enemy near two Leagues from the Field where the Battle was
Fought.

The number of those Slain were a Thousand, besides those, who endeavoring to
save their Lives by Swimming were Drowned in the River. The Officers Slain were
Count Hermestin, Colonel of Foot, and Governor of Zatmar, Colalto Colonel of
the Croats, besides many other Captains and Officers of Foot, whom Smith had
persuaded to leave their Companies, and attend him in this Enterprise, in which
he judged himself most secure of Victory. Smith himself was wounded in the
Hand, and was forced to quit his Horse to save his Life, which was afterward
the prize of a Tartar, with the Saddle, Holsters and Hoosings embroidered with
Gold. The Poles took four Kettle-Drumms, and the greatest part of their
Trumpets, with all their Colors, and 800 Prisoners: And had not the night
favored them, very few had escaped.

The praises of Boham and other Officers.
On this occasion Boham Signalized himself very greatly, and evidenced unto the
World by his Valor and Conduct, how much he deserved the chief Command of
those Troops: And indeed, all the Officers, as well Tartars as others, behaved
themselves like Soldiers and able Commanders: But Major General Smith, though
inferior to none in any thing which appertains to Martial Exercise; yet being
betrayed by his own Credulity, was blamed much at Vienna for his Rashness and
Precipitation. After this Success, Boham having Refreshed for two days his
Forces in the Field where the Battle was Fought, repassed the River of Battor,
and the Enclosures, and joined the Army of the Malcontents, which was 16000
strong, The Poles and Malcontents join.
under the Command of Count Wessellini: So that now being a formidable Army,
the Chief Officers at a Council of War agreed to Besige Tokai; to prevent which
General Kops, upon advice of the Enemies Motion, departed from Caschau with the
Imperial Army, intending to Attack the Enemy with the first Advantage: Which
Wessellini avoided until he had first secured a place of Retreat in case of any
Sinister fortune or disgrace: But Howsoever, sending Parties abroad, they Burnt
and Plundered seven Villages near to Mongatz; and in regard the Imperial Army
was marched at some distance from Caschau, adventured to Burn several Villages
also near to that Town; and had the Fortune to intercept a Convoy which carried
both Money, A Convoy with Money and Provisions taken by the Malcontents 1500
of the Imperialists revolt to the Enemy.
Victuals and Ammunition from Vienna, for Payment and Maintenance of the Army
under General Kops.

This loss of Money and Provisions proved of ill Consequence to the Emperor's
Army, which wanting Pay and necessaries for subsistence, many of them, to the
number of 1500, upon the Promises of Wessellini to bestow on every Officer 26
Ducats, with a command agreeable to his quality, and 10 to every private
Soldier, who should relinquish the Emperor's Service, were easily induced to
Revolt, and take up Arms in favor of the Malcontents. Kops being highly
incensed hereat, resolved on a quite contrary method of Action, supposing that
he might effect the same with Rigor and Cruelty, Kops his Cruelty.
which the Enemy had done by Allurements and Rewards; and that it was possible
to terrify, and affrighten the contrary party into their Duty and Obedience:
Wherefore, to make an experiment hereof, he killed all the Prisoners he had in
his hands, and empal'd several others: This piece of Cruelty against the Law of
War and Nations, was in like manner retaliated by Wessellini; who put the
Prisoners to death, to the number of Sixty, which the Polanders had taken in
the late Battle, together with Lieutenant Colonels, Majors and Captains, which
occasioned great Desturbances, and Murmurings in the Imperial Army: For which
he his blamed at Vienna.
And at Vienna this Conduct of Kops was highly blamed, and Orders sent him
never more to exercise the like unhumane Practices; for that many Officers of
good Note and Reputation, had absolutely refused to serve the Emperor in a War,
where no Quarter was to be expected.

About this time, Smith with his shattered Troops joined with General Kops near
to Butrack; two Leagues from whence the Malcontents were Encamped, and
Reinforced by 2000 Transilvanians, conducted thither by Count Tekeli, Count
Tekeli appears in the War.
who after the death of his Father (as before mentioned) had served Prince
Apafi in the nature of his Secretary, or one who had a chief hand in the
management of his Affairs; and now making this first entrance on the Stage, we
shall have occasion to mention him often hereafter, being the Person who is to
make the greatest Figure in this following History, and to prove the most
active General, after the destruction of many before him, and after various
Successes, of good and bad Fortune, and Honors and Di^ races received from the
Turks; we shall s^^d him still Boyant and above Water, even at the last
extremity, when the Turks themselves were beaten out of all Hungary.

The Imperial Army having been much diminished in numbers by the Sword and
Sickness, was again in part recruited by some Additional Forces, under the
Command of Count Warbenoren, and by 600 Men out of a Regiment in Silesia:
Howsoever, such was the Misfortunes of those Times, and the inauspicious Stars
which then reigned, that the Imperialists were worsted in all Fights and
Skirmishes, to the destruction almost of their whole Army: Whilst the Forces
of the Malcontents increased double to the numbers of the Emperors Army. The
Malcontents increase in their Forces.
And the Turks still forwarded these Mischiefs by their frequent Incursions
from Buda, Newhawsel, and all their Garrisons; which was a Course and Practice
which this Faithless People used, to make War without declaring it.

ANNO 1678.
The Emperor sends to treat with the Malcontents, and with the Turks.
The Emperor being sensible of his own weak and decaying Condition, and of the
Strength, and increasing Power of his mighty Enemies, labored to cure and
remedy the imminent evils and dangers by Treaties, which could not be done by
Arms: And in order thereunto he offered three Churches to the Malcontents in
the Upper Hungary, with other Propositions more large, and extensive than
formerly: And Hoffman, the principal Secretay of State and War, was sent to the
Grand Seignior to make Complaints of the Succors, which the Pashas of Hungary
daily afforded to his Rebellious Subjects: But neither the one, nor the other
of these Negotiations, had the success desired: For the Malcontents were so
far from hearkening to any Accommodation with their Sovereign Prince, that they
were contriving the manner, how they might absolutely throw off his Authority,
and acquit themselves of their Allegiance: The Malcontents propose to Elect a
King of their own.
And to that end, they proposed to Elect a King of their own Nation, and many
cast their Eyes upon a certain Count, who was of the House and Family of
Frangipani: But the different Interests, and variety of Opinions, obstructed
the Election, so that nothing was agrreed, or concluded in that affair. Nor
could much more be expected from the Negotiations of Hoffman at
Constanstinople; for the Vizier was so extravagant in his Demands, and so
unreasonable in his Proposals, that it plainly appeared, how far he was from
any intentions of renewing the Peace, or any other designs than that of War.
Only by force of the rich Presents which Hoffman brought, he prevailed with the
Vizier to strangle the Pasha of Waradin.

Howsoever, things ran not so smoothly in Transylvania, nor with the
Malcontents, but that they met with other difficulties and Enemies, besides
the Emperor. For a certain Person, Pedipol procures a Commission to be Prince
of Transylvania.
a Boyar of that Country named Pedipol, being ambitious of Government, offered
Money to the Grand Vizier for the Principality of Transylvania, alleging that
Apafi had Ruled there much beyond the time of other Princes: The Vizier, whose
business was Gain, entered into a Treaty with Pedipol, made the bargain, took
his Money and sold him the Principality; and procured the Grand Seigniors
Hattesheriff, or Royal Signature to constitute him Prince, and to divest, or
depose Apafi. When Pedipol came with this Authority to take Possession of the
Government, the People refused to receive him, and Apafi to Surrender: He is
opposed by Apafi and overcome.
Whereupon Pedipol with his Party endeavored to make good his Title, and
Establishment by Force of Arms. The Vizier upon the news hereof, to prevent
those Divisions, dispatched an Officer into Transylvania to decide the
Difference, by taking off the Head of that Person, who should be found
disobedient and averse to the Grand Seignior's Commands: But before this Order
could arrive, the dispute was determined by the Fortune of War; for the
Malcontents being sensible of the Obligations they had to Apafi, and of what
concernment his continuance in that Station would prove to them, offered him
all the aid and assistance they were able, to which the Poles likewise joining
their Forces, over-threw Pedipol in the Field, and caused him with some of his
Adherents to Fly into Valachia: Where raising new Forces, he marched again
toward Transylvania, with intention to make a second Attempt: But being met in
his way by the Pasha of Waradin, he was commanded by him in the Grand Seigniors
name, to quit his Pretentions to the Principality, and to content himself in a
private Condition: For the Vizier having got his Money, little cared what
became of Pedipol, whether he were a Prince or Paisant; only he thought it
necessary at that time to conserve Peace between the Friends, and Allies to the
Port, which was more easily done by supporting the interest of Apafi, who was
old and experienced in that Government, rather than by setting up Pedipol,
whose Circumstances were very disagreeable, both to the Transilvanians and the
Malcontents.

Howsoever, these differences contributed little to better the Condition of the
Emperor, who of late had been worsted in all the Conflicts, and Engagements
against the Enemy* As for Instance, a Party of Five hundred Horse, under the
Command of Azos Benas, The Emperor's ill Successes.
being advanced as far as Erlaw, belonging to the Lands and Demesnes of Count
Tekeli, were assailed by the Turks, and their whole Body defeated, and cut in
pieces. Another Party also consisting of two hundred Men, Commanded by Colonel
Wolping, were overthrown by a Detachment of Turks belonging to Newhawsel.

Representments of the Assembly at Altembourg.
These ill Successes in War, inclined the States of Hungary, then Assembled at
Oedembourg, to consent that all the Churches taken from the Protestants, should
with many other advantageous Propositions be consigned and granted to them. And
another Assembly at Altembourg did represent unto the Emperor, that the Change
made in the Government of Hungary, was the cause of all the late Troubles and
Wars in that Kingdom; to appease which, they were of Opinion that it was
absolutely necessary to re-establish the Charge and Office of Palatine,
according to the Ancient constitution of that Nation; and that a General Diet
should be convened to that purpose. But when the Imperial Ministers of State,
as well Ecclesiastic as Civil, came to Debate upon these Points, they offered
many Qualifications: The Emperor's Council qualify them.
As that the the Authority of Palatine should be limited, and restrained: That
the Emperor's Writs or Letters should be Imperative, rather than Mandative;
that is, that they should be penned in such a Style, as that they might appear
rather Assertive of the Absolute and Imperial Power, than to condescend unto
more moderate Terms anciently used in that Kingdom. And when they came to the
Article about restitution of the Churches (which was the main point on which
the Malcontents insisted) they Treated with such Niceties, and with so many
Provisoes and Savings, that the Deputies believed that the Imperial Ministers
came to speak for Colors, and Subterfuges, to evade and illude an
Accommodation, rather than with true and sincere affections to heal the
breaches, and compose the differences of the Nation.

Wessellini his death.
Whilst these Matters were in Negotiation, Count Paul Wessellini, who was
Brother to the late Palatine, and General of the Malcontents, died, and then
the Command of the Army was committed to Count Tekeli; Is succeeded by Tekeli.
who (as we have said) had gained such great Reputation in the Court of Prince
Apafi, that he made him his principal Minister of State; and though he was a
young Man, of about twenty four or twenty five years of Age, yet he so
distinguished himself by his Valor, Prudence, and Industry, that the eyes of
all Hungary were upon him, as a Person in every respect agreeable to the
present great Undertakings.

Tekeli being now at the head of twelve thousand Fighting Men, well appointed,
and fitted with all Necessaries, and a Train of Artillery of about twelve
pieces of Cannon, and four Mortars, looked on himself as in a Condition to
undertake some great Enterprise. Tekeli's first designs.
And having joined with the Forces of his Cousin Count Tekeli, and supplied
himself with some of the Emperor's Money out of the Mint at Nagibania, he held
a Council of War, and proposed to Besiege either Caschau, or Kalo.

Howsoever, He is in Love with the Princess Ragotski.
the Inclinations he had for the Daughter of Count Serini, Widow of the late
Prince Ragotski, directed him in the first place toward Mongatz, that he might
(if possible) come to a sight of that Lady for whom he had so great a passion.
But upon the approach of these Troops, her Mother-in-Law, who was zealous for
the Interest of the Emperor, gave Orders to the Forces which were raised within
her State, to fall upon Tekeli, Tekeli defeats the Troops of the Princess
Ragotski Dowager.
whose Quarters were not far distant from Mongatz. The Fight was bravely
maintained on both sides; till at length the Troops of the Princess were forced
to give way, and 200 of them being slain on the place, and many Prisoners taken
(amongst which the Count Serini was one) the rest were put to flight, being
entirely defeated. With these Successes the Army of the Malcontents daily
increased; to which an additional Force of eight or nine thousand Tartars being
added, the Emperor thought it necessary to recruit his Army with a Regiment of
Horse, under the Command of Count Stirum, and with some other Troops which were
in Bohemia, and Stiria.

And now to make it appear that God had destined a War with the Turk, for Ends
best known to his Divine Omniscience, a party of the Imperialists unadvisedly
fell upon the New Pasha, The Imperialists fall on the Pasha of Newhawsel.
as he was going to his Government of Newhawsel, and defeated his whole Party,
consisting of 200 Horse. Which Action, though pretended to have been done by way
of Reprisal, or Revenge for something of the like nature performed by that
Garrison; yet the Pasha of Buda highly resented this Breach of the Peace;
threatening not only to acquaint the Grand Seignior therewith, but in the mean
time to revenge the same by all the Acts of Hostility that he was able. And
accordingly, drawing some Forces out of the Garrisons of Erlaw and Waradin, he
caused them to March toward Sando, near Butrac, Is revenged by the Pasha of
Buda
pillaging and plundring all in their way, and afterward they returned with
portrait of 'Emeric Comte de Tekeli' EMERIC COMTE DE TEKELI p 44
M. Vander Gucht Scul.
two hundred Prisoners. Which Action the Pasha of Buda owned to have been done
by his Special Order and Command, by way of reprisal, and satisfaction for the
late Breach, and Act of Hostility. To which allegation, there being nothing
which in reason or sense could be replied, Count Wourmb, Co^nt Wourmb blamed.
who was General in those parts, was highly blamed by the Emperor, and many
Miscarriages of the like nature attributed to his ill Conduct, and want of
prudence, as if his Intentions had been to provoke the Turks unto a War. For
which Reason, he was recalled by the Emperor from that Employment, and Count
Lesly sent to Command the Forces in his Place.

The Emperor perceiving that he was very unable to resist the Forces which were
now in open Field, and in defiance against him, had his Recourse to the Old
Project of making New Propositions, and Offers of Peace to the Malcontents.
But this was always so unluckily managed, and with so ill a grace, that it was
no wonder if it found no better Success. But now, as if it were intended to
make things more plain and satisfactory to the World, without Disputes, or
Qualifications, a Manifesto was published by the Emperor's Command, The Emperor
publishes a Manifest.
Granting and Indulging unto all a General Act of Pardon and Oblivion, a
Restoration to their Estates, a Free Exercise of Religion, and a Right and
Privilege of being equally admitted into Places of Trust, and Offices of Court
with the Germans, and others of the Roman Catholic Religion; provided that
within the space of three Months they lay down their Arms, and submitted to the
Clemency of his Imperial Majesty. And as to those who should still stand out,
and obstinately persevere in their Rebellion, he required the States of
Hungary, and all his Loving Subjects of that Kingdom, to join their Forces unto
his, for the subjection of such Rebellious Persons, who were Enemies to
himself, and to their own Country.

But least these fair Offers should Operate any thing on the Minds of the
People, Tekeli offers new Aggrievances.
Tekeli at the same time, to make the Embroils more confused, sent a List to
the Emperor of fresh Aggrievances, for which he desired some Remedies might be
considered. All which the Emperor referred to the Examination of a Diet, which
was suddenly to Assemble. And in Order thereunto, the General Baragotzi sent
Passports to the Chief of the Malcontents, Passports given to meet at a Diet.
that they might freely come to the Diet, and return without molestation;
Insinuating unto them, that their Government by a Palatine should be restored,
and whatsoever they could expect to gain by force of Arms, should now be more
easily yielded, and granted by Covenants of an Amicable Agreement. But all
these Hopes and Expectations were overthrown by the heats which arose between
the Emperor's Ministers at Vienna, and the Deputies appointed by the
Malcontents to Treat and prepare Matters against the Meeting of a Diet. For
one day, The Diet disappointed, and how.
when the Differences were in debate, it happened that the Chancellor Oker
unadvisedly said, That the Hungarian Nation had always been Faithless and
Rebellious against their Prince. Which words being immediately caught at by
the Great Chancellor of Hungary. It is unjust (said he) to Charge the Crime of
some particular Persons on the whole Nation. To which Oker with more passion
than before, made this Reply; That it would be happy for the Emperor, if one in
twelve were found that truly and sincerely adhered to his interest. At these
words, Count Palfi the Treasurer of Hungary, not being able to contain himself
longer, burst out into a passion, and called the Chancellor Traitor, Knave, and
Rascal. And Count Harcani, another of the Deputies, as Gouty as he was, made a
shift to get upon his Legs, and persuade his Companions to break up the
Assembly and be gone, to avoid the noise of such Ribaldry, and affrontive
Language. And as they were going out of the Room, the Chancellor of Hungary,
and Count Forgatz added, Know (said they) that we have never betrayed our King,
nor pleaded for our Kindred, who were found guilty of base and perfidious
Actions. Consider that we have not forgot how far you Countenanced the
Governor of Freibourg. To all which Oker made no Reply, but returned to the
Emperor, to give him an account of what had passed at this Conference.

In the mean time Tekeli thinking of nothing less than Peace, The Proceeding
and Actions of Tekeli.
or means of Accommodation, burnt the Suburbs of Cassovia; and having received
a Recruit of four hundred Horse, which the Brother of Baragotzi, who Revolted
to his Party, had brought over to him, he seized on the Citadel of Zeilaverd,
where were found sixteen pieces of Ordnance. He then designing to pass the
River of Tourna, to re-take the Fortress so called, which the Enemy had lately
gained, he found the Passage obstructed by a Party of the Imperialists on the
other side; but bringing four pieces of Cannon to play on the Enemy, they
cleared the way, and kept them at a distance; by which means a Regiment of the
Poles first passed, and after them the whole Army. Thus Fortune favoring the
Malcontents, a hundred Soldiers of the Imperial Troops revolted over on this
Occasion to the Enemy, Some of the Imperialists revolt.
such prevalence has Success always on the Minds of Mankind; the which
facilitated also the taking of Tourna, which was Surrendered at discretion.

After this, Tekeli Marched toward Chiacatorno, and in his way he took
Zerenetz, and Melkasso, which yielded also at discretion, without any
resistance; but Podrach standing out was taken by force, and all the Garrison
put to the Sword, except some Officers, who were conserved, and made Prisoners
of War.

Tekeli Master of the Field.
Whilst these Successes attended the Malcontents, Tekeli remained Master of the
Field; so that the Count de Wourmb neither durst remove his Encampment from
before Esperies, nor Count Lesley adventure on a March to join with him; until
Tekeli removing from those parts toward Strigonium, and to make himself Master
of Leventz, the Imperial Forces found an opportunity to March as far as the
River of Waagh, where they joined with the Regiments of Dunewald, Holstein,
Massigni, Caraffa, and Strazoldo, which came lately out of Silesia; and though
these Forces were joined together, with those also of Count Lesley, yet they
were not sufficient to withstand the Army of Count Tekeli, which consisted of
at least twenty thousand effective Men, besides Garrisons, and several
Detatchments.

Tekeli writes Letters.
Tekeli being thus strong, and having made himself Master of Leventz, Wrote
circulary Letters in his own Name to all the Inhabitants of that Country:
Representing before them the ill Treatment, which all Hungary had received from
the Germans, and the Slavery they lay under by a Foreign Yoke. That he was
resolved with the chief of his Party, to defend the Liberties and Privileges of
Hungary with his Life and Estate: Exhorting all others to join with him in this
good Cause; and Threatening such, who either out of Cowardice, or Coldness
toward the welfare of their Country, or favor to the Emperor, should place
themselves in the Condition of a careless Neutrality.

No sooner had Count Wourmb raised his Camp from before Esperies, to join with
the Silesian Troops; Tekeli takes Esperies, and Arva.
but Tekeli observing his motion Invested the place, and took it in three days:
The like he did to the Castle of Arva, which Surrendered even in the sight of
Count Lesley, his Forces not being sufficient to give assistance or relief
thereunto. At this time Wessellini falling Sick and Dying, the Command of the
Hungarian Troops was given to Tekeli; Boham was Chief of the Auxiliaries, and
Tekeli himself Generalissimo of all; so that the whole management of the War,
was now in the Hands of these three Leaders. The Tartars as Flying, and
Independent Troops acted by themselves; The Tartars Plunder, and Burn.
they pillaged Newstadt, and burnt all the Country round within three Leagues
of Leopolstadt; and afterward made their Passage over the River Waagh near
Trenschin, which the Counts Forgatz and Esterhasi being not able to oppose, the
People of Moravia were so affrighted, that taking what Goods with them they
could, in so sudden and distracted a fear, they fled to the Mountains for
refuge.

Boham and Tekeli understanding that Count Lesley was quartered near to Zatmar,
they marched to Attack him; which when Lesley understood, Count Lesley
ove^thrown.
he divided his Troops into three Bodies, with a seeming resolution to Engage
the Enemy; but so soon as they came near, they showed some signs of
Irresolution, and a desire as it were to make a handsome Retreat: But being
pursued by Tekeli with six Battalions, he engaged them near Leutsch, and
Killed, or made Prisoners the greatest part of that Body. Boham in the mean
time totally defeated another Party, of which Four hundred Horse only escaped.
The third Body saved themselves in the Mountains, and other fast places. After
this Victory Tekeli sent a Detachment of his Forces to join with the Tartars in
Moravia, who took Barin, Tartars in Moravia.
the capital City thereof; which gave an Alarm to all the Hereditary Countries:
And at the same time one Colonel Josua, otherwise called Father Joseph, who had
been a Friar, but now turned Protestant, and a Soldier, such another kind of a
daring Fellow as Duke John before mentioned, Duke John.
joined with the Malcontents, and entered Austria with Six thousand Fighting
Men, raised at his own Charge, which put all those Countries into such a
Consternation, that the People abandoned their Towns, and Villages and fled
unto Vienna, for their place of Refuge. The courage and experience of this
Colonel Josua, Colonel Josua.
was so well known to the Archbishop of Strigoniam, that he persuaded the
Emperor, to take him off from the Malcontents, and engage him by Promises of
reward to his own Party: This Office was committed to the Management and
Conduct of Count de Wourmb, because Count Lesley remained Sick at Cassovia; but
such was the constancy of this Martial Friar to his Cause and Principles, that
nothing could avail with him to change his Party: Suspecting perhaps, that when
once the Archbishop should get him into his Power, he would immure him within
the Walls of his Convent, and oblige him to the performance of his Vow: But he
rejected all the offers, which were made him, and reserved himself for greater
Exploits, which happened the year following.

Such is the fury of Civil Wars, much more active and violent than Foreign,
that few days passed without Fights, or Skirmishes in one place or other. Count
Wourmb, having received all the Recruits that he could expect, marched directly
toward Tekeli and Boham, A Fight near Alsol.
and engaged with them early in the Morning, in a Fight which continued until
three a Clock in the Afternoon, with such equal Fortune, that the Malcontents
being sensible of the valor, and resolution of the Imperialists retreated with
good order under the Cannon of Alsol, a Town Situate on the River of Gran,
between Newsol and Kremnitz. In the mean time twenty Squadrons of the Rebels
endeavoring to pass the Mountains, were repulsed by Colonel Reyters, who at
the Head of his Regiment defended the Passages, and drove them back to their
Camp, having killed Five hundred of them on the place. But this loss was the
next day revenged by Tekeli, who took Bistrick by force of Arms, with much
Blood and Slaughter of the Inhabitants. Bistrick taken.
This Bistrick is a Town Situate in a Plain, encompassed about with little
Hills, famous for the golden Mines, and the Country well planted about it with
pleasant Vineyards; the Governors thereof would neither declare themselves at
first either for the Emperor, or for the Malcontents: But when the
Imperialists with their Army drew near to them, they could no longer conceal
their Affections, and good Wishes, but broke their Neutrality, and declared for
the Emperor: Soon after which Tekeli making himself Master of the place, put
six of the Chief Inhabitants to death, in punishment of their Infidelity, and
breach of Promise.

But before the end of this year, the Imperialists had their changes of good
Fortune, as well as the Malcontents, a Party of which the Garrison of Filek
entirely defeated: Filek.
Filek is Situate in the Road-way from the Mountain Towns in Hungary leading to
Transylvania and Cassovia, and lies about five Leagues Northward from Agria.
This Success was seconded by another Rout, which Count Esterhasi the Pope's
General gave to a party of Five hundred Spahees, Esterhasi defeats a Body of
the Turks.
and Two thousand Janisaries near Vesprin, who were designed to make Incursions
into the Emperor's Countries. But least this Action should be ill represented
to the Grand Seignior, and become the Cause of a Rupture, the Emperor
dispatched away an Express to Constantinople, to give a true account of the
Cause, and Reasons for this Engagement. And now being come to that Season of
the year, when Armies draw into their Winter Quarters. Both Parties being in
cooler temper began to Treat; so that a Cessation of Arms was agreed, A
Cessation of Arms, and a Treaty.
and the place appointed for the Conference was Oedembourg, where all the Chief
Lords of Hungary had agreed to Assemble. The person who was to preside for the
Emperor, was the Prince of Swartzembourg, and Count de Nostiz managed the
Treaty, applying himself with much Zeal and Diligence that this Negotiation
might be happily concluded.

ANNO 1679.
This Treaty with a Cessation of Arms continued till the end of the year, with
hopes that the beginning of the next would make that poor Kingdom happy with a
Peace. But the Emperor having as it were secured a Peace with France (which was
one of the greatest fears he had upon him, The Emperor falls off from his
former Offers.
in case of a War with the Turks) refused to yield unto the same terms which he
had frequently offered in former times to the Malcontents. It was now resolved
that the Office of Palatine should for ever hereafter be extinguished and made
void, An end put to the Truce.
put a stop to all proceedings of a Treaty, and an end to the Truce and
Cessation of Arms. And indeed the Malcontents were by this time so engaged
with the Turks, that on their part also they had put themselves out of all
possibility of Accommodation without their concurrence, and concernment in the
Treaty.

The Assembly at Oedembourg being dissolved, A Diet at Coloswar.
the Malcontents held a Diet of their own at Coloswar, alias Claudiopolis,
whereunto Prince Apafi, and the Neighboring Pashas resorted, to treat and
agree upon the measures which were to be taken for the ensuing year, in order
to carrying on the War. Whilst they were upon this Treaty, a Messenger arrived
from the Grand Seignior, who brought a Scymitar to Prince Apafi, which was a
certain Signal of the Sultan's favor, and acceptance of his Services, which
was much to the joy of all Persons there present; for that it was doubtful
before, how far the Grand Seignior would abott the Cause of Pedipol, to whom
(as we have mentioned) he had given his Commission to be Prince of
Transylvania, with exclusion of Apafi. Nor was the News of less concernment to
them brought at the same time, that the Grand Seignior was upon conclusion of
peace with the Moscovites, The Turks j^yn with the Malcontents.
by which the whole Ottoman Empire would be at leisure to employ all their
Troops against the Germans. And with the same occasion the Pashas of Hungary
were Commanded to join with Apafi, and to assist the Malcontents with such
Forces as they should desire; of all which the Emperor having certain
Intelligence from his Resident at Constantinople, Ordered three Regiments to be
sent into Hungary, for recruit of the Forces under Count Lesley, of which the
Malcontents having Advice, took the Field, and passing the Theysse, pitched
their Camp near Debrezin, to cover and relieve as occasion served the Castle of
Kovar. Debrezin.
This City of Debrezin, or Debrechim is situated between Tokai, and great
Waradin, and is very Rich and Populous. It was a Free Town, and conserved it
self in a Neutrality during the late Revolutions; but after Zolnock and
Cassovia were reduced, the Magistrates thereof desired his Imperial Majesty to
take them under his protection; with which, and by payment of a Tribute to the
Port, the Inhabitants lived quiet and free, until the year 1676. when it was
taken by Count Strazoldo, upon pretense that it was become the place of
Sanctuary and common Refuge of the Malcontents; though afterward, upon
complaints from the Turks, the Emperor withdrew his Forces from thence, leaving
them free, and in their former Condition of Neutrality.

In the mean time Tekeli falling in love with a Daughter of the Princess
Ragotski Dowager, who was extremely zealous (as we have mentioned before) for
the Emperor's Cause, refused to bestow her Daughter upon him, unless he would
first Relinquish the Interest to which he had adhered. Tekeli revolts to the
Emperor.
The passion which Tekeli had for the young Lady, was more powerful than his
Inclinations to the discontented Party; so that first seeming cold in his Old
pursuits, and declaring his Mind freely in open Discourse, his Troops began to
suspect his Fidelity, and left him, and put themselves under the Command of
Wessellini. Tekeli endeavored to persuade Palfi Imbre to join with him in his
Revolt; but not prevailing, he singly with some few Servants went over to
Vienna. Coming thus alone to the Emperor without his Troops he was the less
welcome; and indeed he was so little regarded, and his Merit so ill accounted
on, that when he made applications to the Emperor for Restitution of his Estate
which was Confiscated to the value of two Millions, those who enjoyed the
benefit of so great Riches, obstructed his Request; Is slighted.
Representing unto the Emperor, that the return to his Duty after a long
continuance in Rebellion, only in his own Person, and without his Troops,
deserved nothing, nor was it to be judged a satisfaction or an atonement for
the many mischiefs and disservices that he had already done; and that to
recover the Emperor's favor, there was something else to be done besides a
bare surrender of his Person: Howsoever fair words were given him for some
time; of which, and of tedious Addresses and frequent Applications, He returns
again to the Rebels.
Tekeli growing weary, he returned to his Old Friends again, with whom he was
received, and admitted to the Command of his deserted Troops.

About the same time the young Count Serini, Son of Nicholas Serini, who was
killed in Croatia, and not of Peter Serini who was Beheaded for High Treason,
being now of years able to bear Arms in Service of the Emperor; made his humble
Petition that he might be restored to the Estate of his Father, Young Count
Serini restored to his Estate.
which was seized and sequestered by the Collectors of the Emperor's Revenue,
for the Lands and Demesnes of Peter Serini the Uncle, whose Goods were
confiscated for High Treason. The which Request being considered in the
Privy Council, it was judged highly reasonable, and just that this young Count
should be restored to his Estate, and so it was accordingly Ordered.

Tekeli being now returned to his former Command, that he might both assure his
Associates of his Fidelity toward them, and reproach the Imperialists for so
lightly esteeming a Person that was able to serve them, Tekeli takes Kremnitz.
he surpised Kremnitz with three hundred Men under his Command, and ruined and
burnt all the Works and Storehouses belonging to the Silver-Mines, which with
much Charge had been erected by the Emperor; and afterward retired into the
Turkish Dominions.

Count Strazoldo having received Intelligence that Colonel Josua was advanced
with eighteen hundred Men, to ruin certain Powder-Mills, pursued after him
with four thousand Horse; and had the fortune to attack him, A Fight between
Count Strazold^, and Colonel Josua.
just at the time that he was thinking to draw off. Howsoever Josua according
to his usual Bravery Charged the Enemy, and Disputed the Fight for several
hours; until at length having his Horse killed under him, he was forced to
retreat, which he did in good Order; being again re-mounted, though he was much
incommoded by a Wound which he had received in this Engagement.

Col. Josua revenges himself.
But soon after this loss, Colonel Josua to revenge himself, taking the
Opportunity whilst General Dunewald (who Commanded in the Place of Count
Lesley, then lying Sick at Cassovia) was in his Quarters, surpised two hundred
Men belonging to those Recruits which were brought out of Silesia, and cut them
to pieces, allowing Quarter unto none, but only to a Lieutenant, and four other
Officers.

Thus when the Imperialists observed the ill Successes which daily for the most
part attended the War, they began again to change their Measures, and to esteem
Peace much more eligible than an unfortunate War. And notwithstanding the late
refusal to grant any thing that was formerly offered; the Emperor was resolved
now to condescend unto any thing that the Malcontents should demand, The
Emperor makes new Offers to the Malcontents.
and that no heavier burdens should be laid upon them, than such Taxes and
Duties only as were imposed on the Subjects of his Hereditary Countries. Count
Lesley being recovered of his Indisposition, found an Opportunity to Discourse
these Matters Personally with Colonel Josua; and so affected him with the
Justice and Reasonableness of the Propositions; that being absolutely convinced
how much a Peace made on such Conditions, was to be preferred before a War in
Conjuncton with the Turks; Col. Josua falls off to the Emperor.
he Wrote unto Tekeli, signifying his full and entire satisfaction in what was
offered by the Emperor, and that those Conditions were a sufficient ground for
a secure and a lasting Peace. But the Answer hereunto was retarded, by reason
of a Plague which beginning to rage at Vienna, A Plague at Vienna.
caused the Imperial Court to remove thence with much fear and have unto
Prague; and the Negotiation being then laid aside for some Months afterward,
time had so altered the state of things, that neither the Emperor was willing
to stand to the former Offers, nor the Malcontents to receive them. Howsoever
Colonel Josua remained firm and fixed to his point; and upon a Pardon granted
to him in ample form and manner, he took a New Oath of Fidelity to the Emperor,
and engaged his own Troops to follow him in his Dutiful Allegiance; Col. Josua
gives Testimonies of his Loyalty
and that he might give some undoubted Testimonies of his true Conversion, by
some Acts of Loyalty and Bravery, he persuaded Semey the Governor of Tourna to
Surrender up the Castle, and adhere unto the Cause and Interest of the Emperor.
And afterward Enterprizing farther with a Party of his own Horse, he
unfortunately fell into an Ambuscade, which a Famous Officer of Tekeli's had
prepared for him. After which, escaping to a small Fortress not far from
thence, he defended himself therein for the space of two days; and being not
able longer to maintain the place, he with much boldness set fire to the
Powder, and blew himself up, His death.
with all thereunto belonging. And thus this Valiant one ended his days; whose
Humor was much more agreeable to a Soldier than a Friar, and better fitted for
a Camp than a Monastery.

Nor did the Pestilence only Rage within the Emperor's Dominions, A Plague at
Newhawsel.
but the Infection dispersed it self with such violence and rage within the
Territories of the Turks, that five hundred Families fled out of Newhawsel, to
breath in a more free and healthful Air; but scarce were they removed a League
from the Garrison, before they were surpised by a party of five hundred
Hussars and Heydukes, who killed some of them, The People forsake the Town, and
are cut off.
and pillaged and robbed the others of all the Goods and Moneys which remained
to them for a poor support, and maintenance of Life. Such was the unhappy State
of that miserable Kingdom, where Men could neither be secure within the Walls
of their fortified Towns, nor permitted to breath in the open air of the
Country; but whilst they fly from the Judgments of God, they fall into the
cruel hands of merciless Men. The Poles and Moscovites send an Embassy to the
Emperor.


And yet notwithstanding these daily provocations given the Turk (I know not by
what Fate) the Emperor was of Opinion, that it was still possible so to salve
up Matters with the Grand Seignior, that a War might be avoided. Upon which
Opinion and Conceit so deeply rooted and fixed in the Imperial Councils, the
Emperor refused to join with the Moscovites and Poles in a League offensive and
defensive against the Common Enemy.

There had been of late a great talk in the World of a Peace concluding between
the Turks, and the Moscovites, The Moscovites send an Ambassador into Poland,
grounded upon an Embassy which the latter had dispatched to Constantinople;
when at the same time another Ambassador was sent by them into Poland, and
there Treating with that King to enter into a League offensive and defensive
with them; offering to defray a great part of the Charge of the War, provided
that the Armies of the two Nations might join and act together in the next
Campaign. The Poles neither seemed to accept nor refuse the Offer, but referred
the Agreement and Conclusion to the ensuing Diet. And another Ambassador to
Constantinople.
In the mean time another Ambassador of theirs arrived at the Port, to try and
discover the intentions of the Turk toward them. The Grand Vizier, who had
already been advised of their Embassies, dispatched into Poland, and Germany;
was desirous to discover the substance and intent of the Message before he
would admit the Ambassador to his Audience; to get a knowledge whereof, he
employed some Grave Kaloires or Greek Monks (for whom he knew the Moscovites
had great reverence and respect) to fish out if possible the meaning and
purport of the Commission; Their Negotiations with the Turk.
but the Ambassador kept his Business secret, and with some Indignation told
the Kaloires that the Embassy from the Czar his Master was not to them, but to
the Grand Seignior; and that the substance of his Business was contained in the
Letter, which he hoped to present unto the Sultan with his own hands. When the
Letter was opened, and read, the Contents thereof was to this purpose. That the
Great Czar of Moscovie did offer to make Peace with the Grand Seignior,
provided that the Turks would Surrender Czechrim unto him, with all the other
Places in the Ukraine, which the last year they had taken from him.

Thus had the Moscovites three Treaties on foot at the same time; one with the
Turk for Establishment of a Peace; and in case of such failure, then they
proposed to provide themselves with two such strong Allies, as the Emperor of
Germany, and the King of Poland. Such was the Policy of this Northern People.

ANNO, 1680.
Treaties between Turks, Poles, and Moscovites.
The greatest part of this Year passed in Treaties and Negotiations between the
Poles, the Moscovites, and the Turks; none of the three remained in perfect
good understanding with each other. The Poles had not as yet ratified their
Peace with the Turk, having according to their usual Custom deferred it to the
determination of a Diet, which was purposely delayed, until it appeared how
Matters would succeed in Hungary. The Moscovites entertained a Treaty with the
Poles, proposing a League Offensive and Defensive with them, with design to
create a Jealousy in the Turk; in expectation thereby to Conclude their Peace
on better Terms; and when they found the Turks inclining and condescending
toward them, they then seemed cold toward the Poles, and more remiss and
indifferent in their Negotiations with them. The Turks likewise played their
Game between both these Parties; not determining with which to close, because
Matters did not in all Points agree with their expectations. The Moscovites
acted doubly, and with reserve, but the Poles were more open and free in their
Proposals, and Action; they were sensibly touched with the loss of Caminieck,
which was the Fortress and Bulwark to their Kingdom. Nor were the Dependances
or Country thereunto belonging as yet set out or limited, which were at
present as large and extensive as the Turks were pleased to make and assign
them; they were Judges in their own Cause, and had power sufficient in their
own hands to make good whatsoever they should determine.

The Poles during these Negotiations, The Moscovites make a Peace with the
Poles.
Treated with the Sword in their hands, and prepared for War; and so far
pressed the League with Moscovy, that in fine it was concluded, which had been
a great security for Poland, in case the Moscovites had kept their Faith with
any regard, and respect to their League so lately agreed.

But whilst Couriers with Dispatches passed and repassed between the Courts of
Poland and Moscovy, the Turks having got notice of this Negotiation, presently
made such Offers to the Moscovite Ambassador residing at Constantinople, that
the Terms were accepted, They fall off from it, and agree with the Turk.
and a Peace clapped up between the Czar, and the Grand Seignior, which might
have tended to the utter ruin of Poland, had not the Design against Hungary
(which the Turks had meditated for a long time) diverted the storm and fury of
a War so much expected and dreaded by them. Nor was the Moscovite Ambassador in
Poland much out of Countenance, when he was reproached with the breach of
Faith; for that Nation was never esteemed in the World to have been easily
touched with a tender sense of Honor, or scruples of those Matters which are
called Faith, or Honesty; but rather have made such inconsiderable Trifles as
those to become subservient to their greater interest and advantages.

But lest the Turks should repent them of the Bargain they had made, and strike
up with the Poles, who had just reason to leave the Moscovites in the lurch, An
Ambassador sent to ratify the Peace.
the Czar dis-speeded with all have an Ambassador Extraordinary to the Port,
together with the usual Presents; such as two thousand Sable Skins, twelve
Hawks, and other Curiosities; signifying by his Letters, that his aim and
intention of that Embassy, was only to ratify those Articles of Peace which
were offered and agreed in a late Treaty. The Ambassador was received with such
an unusual Welcome, that he was surpised at the strange Caresses which were
shown him; which not only assured him that the former Conditions would most
certainly be granted; but he wished his Master had given him Instructions to
demand something of a higher and more important Nature from the Turk. In short,
when the Ambassador came to Treat upon Particulars, The Turks fall off from the
Moscovites
he found that this extravagant kindness was like the Embraces of a Strumpet,
false and vain; and that the Turks were so far from an Agreement, that they
would scarce grant or make good any one of those Propositions which they so
lately promised; so the Ambassador was obliged to return as he came, without
ease in any thing, unless of his Presents, of which the Turks took care to take
off the burden from him. With this piece of Policy had the Turks outwitted
the Moscovites, and exposed them to the disdain and reproach of the Poles; who
could not very speedily be persuaded to believe that either their Faith or
Friendship was worth the trouble of another League or Contract. Nor could the
Moscovites, as dull and stupid as they are, have the face to offer at another
Treaty with the Poles, which they had so lately rejected and violated for the
sake of their false Friend.

When the Ambassador was returned to Mosco, he found all that City and Country
in great Combustions, caused by the two Brothers contending for the Government,
after the Death of the Czar their Father: But so soon as those Troubles were
appeased, by agreement of the Brothers to participate equally of the Sovereign
Power, and jointly to Rule, Other Ambassadors sent from Mosco to the Port.
they dispatched other Ambassadors to the Port with new Instructions. Where
being arrived, their Presents were again kindly received, and their Persons
Treated in such a soft and gentle manner as the Turks commonly practice, when
they intend to delay and protract the issue of an Affair to an uncertain time.
For though the Turks were resolved to carry on the War in Hungary, yet the time
was not fixed when the same should be denounced; the term thereof depending
upon preparations and provisions of vast Sums of Money, and other Uncertainties
necessary thereunto. And for that Reason the Moscovite Ambassador was still
kept in hand, and detained at the Port.

But in fine, when it was resolved that the War should be carried into Hungary,
(which Resolution was first taken in the Year 1681.) then the Vizier concluded
a Truce with the Moscovites for twenty Years, upon Conditions which the Czars
sent by way of their Ambassador residing at the Court of the Tartar Chan,
called Baucha Sarai, whose chief Business there, was to Redeem and Exchange
Prisoners; the which Letter directed to the Grand Vizier, was to this effect.

AT the instance of the Tartar Chan We have wrote to the Czars, that he would
be pleased to grant you a Peace, as desired by you. In answer unto which, he
has given us to understand, that he will consent thereunto; provided, that
besides Kiovia, you renounce all Title and Pretense to Tripol, Staiki, and
Vasikow, which have always been Dependences thereupon. And that you farther
promise, that your People shall not Inhabit, nor hold Fairs, Commerce, or
Markets on our side of the Nieper; but that all that Country shall remain
desert, and waste as it is at present. And that from the Towns of Tripol,
Staiki, and Vasikow, to the Isles of the Cosacks Zoporoges, you renounce all
your pretensions unto us. This is what we demand, and without these terms we
shall conclude nothing with you.


The Vizier having resolved on a War against the Emperor, The Vizier accepts of
the Conditions offered by the Moscovites.
received these Propositions with full satisfaction; and immediately returned
Answer thereunto, in a Letter wrote to the Czars, full of their usual sublime
Expressions, and of high and fulsom praises of their Wisdoms and Grandeur.
Signifying that in the Name of the Grand Seignior he did accept and confirm all
the Conditions proposed; desiring him to send an Extraordinary Ambassador to
confirm the Treaty. But lest the Czars should refuse to send a new Ambassador,
before the other then residing was returned; the Vizier about six Weeks
afterward gave License for his Departure, and accompanied him with Presents of
greater value, than those which the Grand Seignior had formerly bestowed upon
the Czar.

Of all these Particulars, Kaunitz, who Resided at Constantinople, in the Place
of the Secretary Hoffman lately there Deceased, gave Intelligence to the
Emperor; signifying also, that after the Moscovite Ambassador was arrived with
Ratification of the Peace, the Grand Seignior would soon afterward remove to
Adrianople; in Order as was most probable, and in all appearance to a War
against Hungary.

This Matter was acted in the year 1681, which we have anticipated, that we
might not abruptly break off the Treaty with Moscovy, the nature of which may
be best understood, when it is carried forward in one Piece; which having done,
we must look back again to the year 1680. and to the Actions of the
Malcontents.

Tekeli was very active all this time in Recruiting his Army, and preparing for
War; and having composed a Body of four thousand Transilvanians, he marched
with them to the General Rendezvous, intending as he had done the year before,
to take upon him the Command of the Army. But when he came thither he was
strangely surpised to find the same refused to him by Count Wessellini, Son of
the late Paul Wessellini deceased; Tekeli and Wessellini Fight for Command.
who so resolutely contended for the Chief Command, that nothing could decide
it but the Sword. In short, both Parties drew out into the Field, and charged
each other; and after a long Dispute Tekeli got the Victory, and put Wessellini
and his Forces to the Rout; and having pursued them with a Detachment of his
Forces, the Competitor Wessellini was taken, and brought Prisoner to Tekeli;
who causing him to be tied on his Horse, sent him to Prince Apafi in
Transylvania; after which, Tekeli without a Rival took upon him the sole
Command of the Army.

The Emperor besides a War against his Rebel Subjects, was under great
Mortifications, and Troubles; his Imperial Palace at Vienna was burnt, the
Plague Raged violently in his Hereditary Countries, and in his Army, de
Kaunitz, The Paisants in Bohemia rise in Arms.
and other principal Officers died. And at the same time nine hundred Paisants
of the Circle of Braslaw in Bohemia arose in Arms against the Counts Galas, and
Bredaw their Lords, pretending that they were treated like Slaves, and refused
to pay the Contributions which were demanded for the Emperor.

Howsoever, to make the Justice of their Cause appear, they sent four Deputies
to Prague, to make known unto his Imperial Majesty their many Aggrievances,
which were so Tyrannical and Burthensom as could not longer be sustained; and
therefore they desired that Council might be assigned them to plead their Cause
against their Lords at the Bar of Justice. But instead of harkening to the
Petition of these distressed Paisants, the Deputies were Imprisoned; and to
stifle this Tumult in the beginning, two Regiments under the Command of Count
Piccolomini were sent to reduce them; upon the appearance of which, the
Mutineers dispersed, and fled every Man to his own home.

But this Combustion was not long suppressed, before it burst forth again in a
more violent and outrageous manner than before; for four thousand of these
discontented Paisants were got together in a formidable Body, Conducted by
several Reformed Officers, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, and with
Mottos on their Ensigns, which served to incite others to join in their
Rebellion. They at first attempted a Castle belonging to the Count de Thun,
(who was Envoy about that time in England, for the Emperor) where they expected
to find Arms; but missing thereof, they proceeded on other Designs, but were
interrupted, and stopped by Count Piccolomini, who was sent with Forces to
reduce them to Obedience. Whereupon these Rebels made a second Experiment, of
sending their Deputies to represent their Aggrievances, who were as before
clapped into Prison. But Advices coming, that some other Counties were up in
Arms in like manner, and for the same Cause, The Emperor accommodates the
Matter between the Lords, and their Tenants.
the Deputies were set at Liberty; and a General Pardon Granted to all those
who would lay down their Arms, and remit their Pleas to be Treated at the
Tribunals of Justice. Upon this Declaration, five thousand submitted, and
returned to their own Habitations. And the Emperor himself, upon hearing the
Cause between the Lords, and the Paisants, did determine that the Paisants
should be obliged only to Labor three days for their Lords, whereas formerly
they were constrained to the Service of five Days in the Week; having but one
single Day allowed them for the Care and Support of their Family.

In the mean time, The Poles press to have a Treaty Signed.
the Resident for the King of Poland, at Vienna, pressed very instantly to have
the League between his Master, and the Emperor against the Turk to be
Completed, and Signed; to which at length this Answer was given. That so soon
as the Poles had drawn the Moscovites into an Union with them; and that the
Turks had also declared a War, that then the Treaty which was already drawn,
should immediately be Signed.

Tekeli on the other side, offered New Propositions of Peace, and in the mean
time desired a Cessation of Arms. Upon which, the Emperor having called his
Council, it was Resolved by them, that all Treaties with him for the future,
should be absolutely denied; in regard, that by experience he had always been
found false, and perfidious in every Treaty, having broken his Faith and
Promises whenever it served his turn not to perform them. Besides, it was
well remembered in what manner he had formerly made use of Cessations of Arms,
The Emperor refuses to Treat with Tekeli
to debauch the Minds of the Emperor's Soldiers, and to seduce and divert them
from their Loyalty, and Allegiance. Moreover, the Propositions now tendered,
were of the same nature and temperament with those which had been so often
rejected, and which tended to the diminution of his Imperial Majesty's
Authority. And the Reasons why.
As namely, the Emperor was to suffer the People to make Choice of a New
Palatine, according to the Ancient Constitutions: That the Estates of the
Malcontents which had been Confiscated for their Rebellion should be restored;
and that the German Garrisons should be withdrawn out of all the Towns of
Hungary, and Troops of that Nation admitted into their Places. These being the
Old and Stale Points so often controverted and rejected; it was concluded that
Tekeli did not again repeat and make offer of them, in hopes of an
accommodation, but to amuse the minds of the People, and to serve some purpose,
which he desired to conceal.

At the same time Count Serini, to whom his Estate Confiscated had been lately
restored; had by some secret Informations fallen into suspicion of keeping a
Correspondence with the Malcontents; for which Reason he was taken into
Custody, Count Serini suspected, and Imprisoned.
and his Papers seized; and several other Hungarian Gentlemen committed to
Prison for Accomplices with him in the same Plot; and were all afterward carried
to Prague, where Orders were given to take the Informations, and draw up the
Indictment against them. Accordingly the Examinations were made, and a close
inspection into certain Letters wrote in Characters to Count Tekeli, which gave
just Cause of Jealousy and Suspicion of an unlawful Correspondence. Howsoever,
when the Letters came to be Decyphered, and nothing found to be therein
contained, but Arguments and Persuasions unto Tekeli to accept the Offers made
by the Emperor; the which he urged and enforced by assurances in such Case, of
being instrumental in the Marriage with his Sister the Princess Ragotski (for
whom he knew that Tekeli conserved a Passion) Serini was then acquitted, and
restored again to his Estate, He is cleared, and set at liberty.
after a Months Imprisonment; and License given him to Visit his Sister the
Princess at Mongatz. At his Arrival at this Court, he was joyfully Wellcom'd by
all those who had a tenderness for that Family; and the Princess her self
received a seasonable Consolation from the Company of her Brother; being then
in Mourning, and in Affliction for the Death of her Mother-in-Law, the Princess
Dowager; which Occasion Count Tekeli took to pass the Complement, by an express
Messenger of Condoleance with her.

Tekeli being now Recruited with considerable Numbers both of Turks, Tekeli
^ivides his Army into three Bodies.
and Tartars, divided his Army into three Bodies; the one Commanded by himself,
and the other two by Petrozzi, and Palaffi-Imbre, with intent to enter into the
Hereditary Countries by three several ways. Against which Forces the Emperor
sent Count Staremberg Governor of Vienna, and Major General Haran, with all
the Troops belonging to Moravia, Stiria, and Austria. Staremberg had the
fortune to Encounter one Party of them as they were breaking into Moravia, and
gave them a Repulse; howsoever in their Retreat they took a Redoubt, which was
built upon the Waagh, in which were three hundred Soldiers, whom they totally
Defeated. In Revenge of which, Count Dunewald Routed another Party of the
Malcontents, The Imperialists have several Successes.
consisting of five hundred, of which, three hundred were killed upon the
place, and fifty Officers and Soldiers taken Prisoners, with four Colors, on
which was this Inscription.

Comes Tekeli qui pro Deo, and Patria pugnat. Count Caprara with ten thousand
Men advanced as far as Erlaw, to observe the motions of Tekeli; Count
Staremberg attended Palaffi-Imbre, whose Design was to enter into Moravia, and
by a Detatchment from his Army, overthrew three thousand Men Commanded by
Petrozzi, who with much difficulty made his escape.

The Emperor being sensible that his Enemies increased, and that frequent
losses enfeebled and abated his Army, caused several New Regiments to be
raised, the Officers of which were all chosen and put in by Father Emeric the
Emperor's Confessor, and Abele the Chief Secretary of State, by which two the
good Emperor was entirely directed, and governed, which General Montecuculi
having observed, and how Men were preferred by favor only to Great Commands,
who were neither Soldiers, nor capable of those Trusts, he took the freedom to
advise the Emperor, Montecuculi's Counsel to the Emperor.
that in the choice of his New Officers, respect was had to Favor, rather than
unto Merit; and that little good Success could be expected from such unable and
improper Instruments. The Authority of so Wise a Minister of State, and so Old
a Captain, prevailed so far with his Imperial Majesty, that the former
Commissions granted by Recommendations of Father Emeric were called in, and
others issued, unto such who were Warranted and Vouched by more competent
Judges of Military Affairs.

Toward the end of this Campaign, Fortune seemed to favor both sides with
various Successes; Various Successes, and Chances of War.
what the Emperor gained in one Place, the Malcontents recovered in another;
so that all Countries were filled with Blood, and Ruin, and Destruction of the
People, without any hopes or prospect of coming to a conclusion. Upon
consideration of which, the Pious Emperor commiserating the Afflictions of his
People, Overtures of Peace made by the Emperor.
resolved to make one Trial and Essay more, to see if it were possible to bring
Matters to an end, by way of an Amicable Agreement; and to that purpose, he
convened a Diet at Oedemburg, where the Malcontents gave in these Grievances,
made in Transylvania, and Written Originally in Latin.

GRAVAMINA Binarum Superioris Hungariae Regiarum ac Liberarum, Cassoviensis and
Epperiensis, Civitatum Articularium, quibus ibidem degentes Universi Cives and
Incolae Trium Nationum Evangelici, partim in negotio Religionis Evangelico,
partim Liberate Civili-Politica, contra 25, 26, and 41 Articulos Diaetae
Soproniensis Anni 1681. graviter injuriati essent, cum adjunctis eorum
Postulatis. Quoad Negotium Religionis.
26 Articulo Soproniensi speciali suae Majestatis Serenissimae Gratia, per
expressum hisce formalibus verbis, In aliis vero locis, juxta benignam suae
Majestatis Resolutionem loca pro aedificandis Templis, Scholis, and Parochiis
erigendis, pro commoditate eorundem Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni
addictorum, per certos Commissarios designanda decernuntur, Sancitum esse, ut
Evangelicis, ademptorum templorum, scholarum, and parochiarum loco, per suae
Majestatis Serenissimae destinatos certos Commissarios, loca commoda, and
congrua, and quidem citra aliquam locorum exterorum restrictionem, in ipsis
civitatibus superioris Hungariae, juxta genuinum and literalem dicti Articuli
itae sonantis Clausulae sensum, Ac tandem in liberis ac Montanis Civitatibus,
etc. ac in Superiore Hungaria omnibus itidem civitatibus similiter loca pro
aedificandis templis, scholis, and parochiis assignanda conceduntur,
Designentur and assignentur; tantum tamen abest ut initio mensis Januarii Anno
adhuc, 1687. dudum transactis in superiorem Hungariam clementissime ordinata
Excelsa Commissio Regia huic suae Majestis pientissimae resolutioni
expressissimaeque and clarae menti ejusdem articuli satisfecisset, ut potius
maximo horum cum abusu perplacentique sua interpretatione, and evidentissima
liberi ejusdem Exercitii Evangelici, e meditullio memoratarum civitatum,
eliminatione, loca incommoda and dedecorosa, extraque dictas civitates, nulla
suburbia habentes, adeo remota existentia campestria, iisdem Evangelicis
designasset.

Proinde and sanctissimae eatenus declaratae suae Majestatis resolutioni, and
expressissimis allegati Articuli verbis; Firmiter insistentes, virtute horum
commemoratorum designatorum inconvenientium locorum totalem Cessationem,
aliorum vero commodorum and congruorum a quibuslibet censibus and
contributionibus Civilibus ad mentem Articulorum 8, 1647. and 12, 1649.
Annorum, eximendorum in memoratis civitatibus, earundemque maeniis, ita citra
ullam ambiguitatem sensus, innuente Artic. praecitato 26. interiora Civitatum
loca, non vero exteriora involvente, sibi, ceu veris legitimis Patriae civibus,
tam immerita e meditullio Civitatum relegatione haud dignis designandorum
justissimam concessionem, and benignissimam assignationem humillime exorarent.

Secundo: Innegabile etiam est articulo antecedenti 25 aeque ad benignissimam
suae Majestatis Serenissimae Resolutionem Clarissimis his verbis, Omnibus and
ubique per regnum (nullis scilicet Regnicolis Evangelicis, cujuscunque tandem
status and conditionis existentibus, sed nec ullo regni loco exceptis) juxta
artic. 1. Anni 1608, ante Coronationem editum, liberum Religionis suae
exercitium in genere permissum; ac insimul ut nullus regnicolarum in libero
religionis suae exercitio in posterum quoquomodo (sub severa alioquin poena
attacto 26 Artic. Soproniensi express allegata) turbetur, Cautum esse: Eo
tamen nihil pensi ducto, ubi iidem Evangelici Cassovienses and Epperienses
diplomatico hoc eorundem exercitii jure, quo ab antiquo semper public usi
fuissent, de caetero quoque intra easdem civitates earumque moenia (tanquam
loca, ut praemissum, articularia primitusque etiam solita and consueta) vel in
privata etiam domo ritu suo cum actibus suis ministerialibus, congrua item
juventutis Scholastica informatione, aliisque libere uti and frui idemque
continuare voluissent; per magistratum and clerum locorum, nullatenus sunt
admissi, verum severe prohibiti and interdicti; iisdem ceu alienigenis,
communiumque regni libertatum incapacibus, ad supra specificata incompetentia
loca, impraesentiarum usque relegatis and amandatis.

Quare hic quoque nixi benignissima suae Majestatis Serenissimae Resolutione
and Articulari indultu legalem omnino liberi religionis Evangelicae exercitii,
ad mentem citati articuli 1. An. 1608. priori suo statui, intra moenia nimirum
dictarum civitatum fiendam reductionem and restitutionem stabilemque and firmam
conservationem: ad usque vero commodam and opportunam erectionem and
aedificationem novorum templorum, scholarum, parochiarum (cum iisdem pro nunc
ob summam pauperiem, and graves portionum, bellicarumque contributionum
pensiones non sufficerent,) ejusdem exercitii ibidem interea in certis privatis
commodis aedibus ex integro cum convenienti Juventutis scholasticae hactenus
imperturbata institutione, imperturbati usus and fruitionis aequissimam
permissionem, and gratiosissimam facultatis attributionem dimississime
implorarent.

Tertio: Certum pariter campanarum and sepulturae praeprimis communem and
indifferentem usum saepe attacto 26 Articulo Soproniensi, expressis verbis, Usu
Campanarum and Sepulturae pro Catholicis ibidem degentibus, aeque ac ipsis
(scil. Augustanae ac Helveticae Confessioni addictis) libero relicto, oeque
Evangelicis atque Catholicis ubilibet liberum esse admissum and relictum:
Evangelicis nihilominus Cassoviensibus and Epperiensibus per Magistratum
Catholicum, and clerum locorum simplicissime est denegatum, denegaturque adhuc
dum Funerum porro eorundem intra moenia praefatarum civitatum cum solitis suis
cantibus, aliisque consuetis ceremoniis, condecens and publica deductio and
sepultura, aeque contra clementissimam suae Majestatis Serenissimae inclytis
statibus and ordinibus Regni, publica in Diaeta Soproniensi, 1681. die decimo
men's. December. gratiosissime alias datam resolutionem, iisdem severa cum
comminatione cavetur, and plane non admittitur.

Hinc, in eo etiam Articularem Campanarum communem usum funerumque
Evangelicorum tam intra, quam extra civitatum moenia, juxta pientissimae suae
Majestatis Serenissimae Diaetaliter, ut attactam datae Resolutionis
confirmitatem, public and imperturbate deducendorum, antea quoque solitam and
consuetam admissionem instantissime paterent.

Quarto, Manifestum quoque vi similiter saepius citati Artic. 26. ad finem
adjectae generalis clausulae, Salvis semper eatenus legibus Regni Diplomate
Regio firmatis, Quoad ulteriores Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni
addictorum legitimarum praetensionum suarum promovendarum Acquisitiones,
ablatorumque repetitiones, conditas leges Regni, salvas and illibatas relictas,
consequenterque quoslibet Potentiarios actus prohibitos esse, adeoque nullo
etiam (lege jure naturae, 206. A. de Reg. Jur.) ut contra ductum naturae, cum
alterius detrimento and injuria fieri debeat locuples, admitti his nihilominus
non curatis, praeattactorum utrorumque locorum Civilis Magistratus Catholicus
and Clerus, propria duntaxat licentia omnia Cassoviensium and Epperiensium
Evangelicorum pia legata, and certa dona possessionaria, ex pio Evangelicorum
zelo ad Ecclesiarum and Scholarum suarum necessitates and usus testamentaliter
ordinata and collata, coetum praecise Evangelicum concernentia, (Cassoviensibus
siquidem quatuor domos, intra moenia ejusdem Civitatis situatas, quarum unam
dictus loci Magistratus egregio Michaeli Domeczki judicatus sui in Officio jam
vendidisset, and abalienasset: Unum adhaec hortum, and certas terras arabiles
in territorio ejusdem Civitatis existentes; prout and unam vineam, alias
Varghaszolo dictam, in promontorio Tokayiensi adjacentem: Epperiensibus vero
certas itidem vineas, diversis in promontoriis partium superioris Hungariae
situatas, una cum reditibus and proventibus) via facti and potentiae
occuparant, and ad se pertraxerunt, quae de facto violenter tenerent, usuarent,
and majori ex part in prophanos usus contra sensum Articulorum 11 and 14 Anno
1647. summa cum Evangelicorum injuria and damno converterent, nec ipsi
restituerent.

Quocirca hoc in casu etiam ad praescriptam legem and Constitutiones Regni
provocantibus, praemissorum violenter ademptorum, occupatorum, and tentorum
omnium piorum legatorum and bonorum possessionariorum Evangelicorum, (sua, non
aliena, repetentium) cum suis reditibus, and proventibus, ex dictamine etiam
communis justitiae, unicuique suum tribuentis, effectivam and realem
rehabitionem and restitutionem jure merito impense sollicitarent.

Quinto: Constat similiter, quoad solutionem Catholicorum Plebanorum and
Ministrorum Evangelicorum non solum saepedicto 26. Artic. Clarissimis verbis,
Interea nec Catholici Ministris Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni addictis,
nec vero horum sequaces Plebanis Catholicis solvere obligentur: Sed ad mentem
etiam ibidem citati 11 Artic. 1647 anni, Ne Evangelici status Catholicis
Plebanis, and e converso status Catholicus Evangelicis Ministris ad ullas
solutiones pendendas sint obligati, Satis evidenter provisum esse, Immo
subsequenti 12 Artic. dicti Anno 1647, quoad Actuum Ministerialium quoslibet
usus expressa per haec verba, Ubi vero parochias non haberent Auditores
Evangelici, solutionem pendant suae Religionis Ministris, cujus videlicet
Ministerio, seu opera, usi fuerint, sicut and Catholici parochis Catholicis:
Ubi autem hactenus auditores Evangelici non solvissent plebanis Catholicis,
imposterum etiam ad nullas solutiones praestandas ullo sub praetextu cogantur
ad solvendum, prout nec Catholici Evangelicis.

Quoad stolarium vero proventuum solutiones, vigore ejusdem Artic. 11,
subsequentium verborum tenore, Stolares autem proventus, seu solutiones, in
quibusvis locis Plebani Catholici and Ministri Evangelici a suae Religionis
auditoribus totaliter percipiant.

Positivam exstare legem and constitutionem, ut Evangelici Evangelicis, and
Catholici Catholicis solvant: His tamen non obstantibus, ad solvendum praecise
Catholicis Plebanis aliisque, inviti coguntur Evangelici: Dum non solum
salarium hebdomadale cum aliis accidentiis, ex publico civitatum aerario, (in
quod Evangelici numero and frequentia Catholicis triplo Majores ac plures, ut
plurimum inferunt) per Magistratus locorum Catholicis Plebanis continue
penditur, sed and stolares etiam proventus praecise pro iisdem vendicati and
attracti ipsis solvuntur: Evangelicis vero Ecclesiae Ministris and Scholae
docentibus maxima cum injuria denegantur.

Eapropter quoad aequalitatem and aequitatem salariorum hoc in passu quoque non
citra legalem rationem, uti Catholicis Plebanis, aliisque, ita etiam
Evangelicis Ministris and Scholae docentibus, ex communibus proventibus,
publicoque civitatum aerario, parem and coaequalem, citra ullam difficultatem
pendendam exsolutionem: Secusne utri partium administrandam solutionem, verum
ad mentem praecitatorum articulorum, ut quilibet status suos interteneat and
exsolvat sibi servientes, iisque etiam suos pendat stolares proventus,
clementissimam, justitiaeque and juri consonam Constitutionem efflagitarent
quam subjectissime.

Sexto: Cuilibet in propatulo publicum est, vi Artic. 25 Praedicantibus and
Scholarum Magistris non solum liberum in regnum reditum, liberamque in Regno
mansionem, sed and liberam Religionis suae professionem and exercitii
functionem concessam: Adhaecque in partibus Hungariae superioribus vi
subsequentis 26 Artic. inter ceteras Regias ac liberas Civitates Cassoviensem
quoque and Epperiensem Civitates pro locis Articularibus, libere and public
ibidem Religionem Evangelicam exercendi, constitutas, and stabilitas, adeoque,
ut post hac nullae exercitii turbationes ab utrimque, sub poena in Artic. 8
Uladislai Decret. 6. expressa fiant, definitum esse. Civitatis nihilominus
Epperiensis Magistratus eo processit licentiae, quod omnes trium nationum
Evangelicos Ministros, citra alicujus promeritae caussae significationem, vel
alicujus benigni suae Majestatis Serenissimae mandati productionem praetextuoso
solum ut inauditum, titulo Dominii terrestris (quod nullum omnino vel in
civiles, semper pari cum eodem Magistratu communi civili liberate gaudentes,
nedum spirituales, speciali liberate exemptas Ecclesiasticas personas haberet,
sed nec etiam quoquomodo sibi vendicare posset, anniversario, eoque ambulatorio
Officio gaudens) ausa proprio and privato, maxima suae Caesareo Regiae
Majestatis Serenissimae Authoritatis cum diminutione, praespecificatorumque
articulorum vilipendio, eadem Civitate, ejusdemque territorio ipso festo S.
Bartholomaei Apostoli Anni praeteriti 1688, summo cum dedecore expulerit
Articularemque ecclesiam Epperiensem Evangelicam suis Ministris, maximo ejusdem
in spiritualibus exercitiis cum defectu and damno orbaverit and privaverit.

Ob id insontium and innocue exturbatorum exulantium Ministorum Evangelicorum
Epperiensium ad priora eorundem defungenda munia Ecclesiastica, realem and
effectivam restitutionem, nullamque amplius quorumcunque admittendam
expulsionem: Quin, qua horum Epperiensium, qua Cassoviensium etiam
Ecclesiasticorum Ministrorum Scholae docentium Evangelicorum, uti praesentium,
ita and futurorum, vi juris patronatus semper vocandorum, in domiciliis and
residentiis suis, sive propriis, sive conductitiis, intra moenia earundem
civitatum habentibus and habendis, secure and imperturbate semper permanendi
and habitandi, benignissimam concessionem, eorundemque perpetuam protectionem,
devotissimis supplicarent precibus.

Quoad libertatem porro Civilem-Politicam. Septimo: Nemo nisi legum expers
negaverit, initio specificato 41 Artic. Diaetae Soproniensis, gratiosissima
Regiarum ac liberarum Civitatum Communium libertatum ac privilegiorum
Confirmatione, desuperque ibidem allegatarum, ac passim etiam conditarum legum
and Articulorum Regni renovatione express constitutum esse. Ut eaedem leges
and articuli tam per Cameras, quam Officiales bellicos, ac alios quoscunque
strictissime observentur; neque (eaedem scil. liberae ac Regiae Civitates) in
libero Electionis Magistratus Civilis jure ac aliis Privilegiis, ipsorum longo
usu roboratis, a quopiam quoquo modo turbentur.

Adhaec tamen moderans memoratarum Civitatum Magistratus, ingessione inclytae
Camerae Scepusiensis Artic. 83. 1647 anni, alias prohibita, tantam sibi
vendicavit pro lubitu agendi licentiam, ut jam omnes Cassovienses and
Epperienses Senatores, aliosque Officiales Evangelicos ad publica officia and
dignitates civiles gerendas been meritos and aptos, ex mero duntaxat privato
affectu erga Religionem, contra manifestas praefati Artic. ibidemque citatorum
signanter vero Artic. 13. 1608 ante Coronationem 44. 1609 and 12. 1649. annorum
constitutiones, apertissimo, communium libertatum and privilegiorum civilium
cum praejudicio, notabili vero Evangelicorum civium oppressione a publicis
dignitatibus and honoribus, officiisque civilibus degradaverint and removerint:
horumque loco aut minus idoneos aut negotia civitatum nihil intelligentes,
magisque privata curantes cives Catholicos, summa dictarum civitatum cum ruina
damnificatione, and interitu, surrogaverit and constituerit. Quamobrem Primo:
Liberi Magistratum and Communitatem civiles eligendi juris, hactenus
diversimode, contra praespecificatas leges Regni positivas, per inclytam
Cameram Scepusiensem interturbati, ac ex part Evangelicorum penitus eversi,
unice and mere penes easdem Civitates, earundemque utriusque Religionis
Catholicae and Evangelicae juratos cives permanendi, priori suo statui
admittendam reductionem solidamque conservationem, nulloque amplius modo
ejusdem, a quopiam sub poena alioquin renovatorum, superiusque annotatorum
Articulorum intentandam interturbationem.

Secundo: Civilis mutuae concordiae conservandae, nocivarumque dissensionum and
simultatum fomitum reprimendarum gratia eorundem Magistratuum and Communitatum
civilium, absque ullo Catholicae and Evangelicae Religionis discrimine, ex
honestis, been meritis, iisque aptis juratis civibus, fiendam liberam
Electionem officiorumque, and quarumvis aliarum dignitatum civilium, ad mentem
praespecificatorum Articulorum 13. 1608. ante Coronationem, and 44. 1609.
annorum indifferentem and coaequalem collationem and distributionem, mutuamque
ad honores civiles publicos promotionem.

Tertio: Observandae alternatae aequalitatis, bonique civitatum publici caussa,
judicatus and Tribunatus officiorum, juxta praecitatorum and 12 Artic. 1649.
anni sensum, alternatim and mixtim annualiter gerendorum, gratiosissimam
annuentiam and permissionem, profundissima animorum cum humilitate rogarent and
postularent.

Praerepetitarum Liberarum ac Regiarum Cassoviensis and Epperiensis Civitatum
Universi Cives and Incolae trium Nationum Evangelici. Gravamen Regiae
Liberaeque Civitatis Carponensis Evangelicorum.
NOn sine gravi animi dolor suae Majestati Serenissimae repraesentandum quoque
duxerunt Regiae ac liberae Civitatis Carponensis universi Nobiles pariter and
ignobiles, Praesidiarij item, seu Confiniarij utriusque ordinis stipendiarij
milites, incolae simul and cives Evangelici: Quod dum juxta benignissimam suae
Majestatis Serenissimae resolutionem, Artic. 26, Soproniensis Diaetae Anni
1681. clementissime insertam, inter alia inclyti Regni Hungariae loca, pro
aedificandis novis Templis, Scholis, and Parochiis erigendis, pro commoditate
Augustanae and Helveticae confessioni addictorum per Commissarios designanda,
per expressum nomine tenus his verbis: In Generalatu Antemontano, Levae,
Carponae, and Fulekini, etc.

Eadem civitas pro Articulari loco, libere, and ex integro ibidem Religionis
Evangelicae exercitium usuandi and fruendi fuisset, essetque declarata, and
stabilita; excelsa, nihilominus Commissio Regia anno praeterito 1688, ad
montanas Civitates ordinata ad memoratam quoque civitatem deveniens, nescitur
quibus ex rationibus, ubi ad mentem praecitai Articuli and clementissimae suae
Majestatis Serenissimae ibidem contentae resolutionis and declarationis loco
ademti templi, scholae, and parochiae Evangelicorum pro commoditate
praespecificatorum ibidem existentium and commorantium Augustanae Confessioni
addictorum, alia loca omnino commoda and apta ad mentem Articuli 19. 1647.
designare and ordinare, eosdemque in pacifico usu ejusdem exercitij
imperturbatos relinquere debuisset, remotis potius in contrarium ab Officio
ejusdem Ecclesiae Evangelicae Ministris, and Scholae docentibus, universos
nobiles pariter and ignobiles, quae praesidiarios, qua incolas and cives
Evangelicos a continuo libero eorundem usu and exercitio, a memoria hominum
ibidem practicato and habito, in eodemque usu reali, ut praemissum,
articulariter relicto, certo licet cum respirio, ad ulteriorem nimirum suae
Majestatis Serenissimae benignissimam resolutionem, and gratiam, maximo tamen
exercitij spiritualis, nullam moram patientis, cum praejudicio, optimique
ejusdem juris Articularis verbo and indultu Regio firmati cum derogamine,
severa sub comminatione inhibuit, and penitus abstinere coegit. Inhaerendo
proinde firmissime Regio huic and articulari indulto, peterent instantissime,
sibi in eadem civitate, ejusdemque moeniis, non solum loca aedificandor.
Templi, Parochiae and Scholae commoda and idonea per quos interest, designari,
and exscindi, verumetiam articulare eorundem liberum Religionis exercitium cum
communi and indifferenti Campanarum and sepulturae usu, ita dictante etiam
praeallegato 26 Artic. Soproniens. suo pristino statui and ordini reddi, reduci
and restitui.

Gravamina regiarum and liberarum Veterozoliensis, Breznobaniensis and
Libethbaniensis Civitatum Evangelicorum.
AEQue lamentabili cum querimonia exponunt quoque earundem Regiarum and
liberarum Civitatum universi Evangelici afflictissimam and infelicissimam suam
in negotio Religionis suae sortem, ut qui tenore genuini and sani ensus
Articulorum Soproniensium libero Religionis suae exercitio omnibus and ubique
per Regnum degentibus, juxta claram and evidentissimam Artic. 1. ante
Coronationem 1608. editi, inque 25 Artic. Sopron. confirmati explicationem
(nullo Regni statu, minus quarto, qui Regiae and liberae Civitates Regni, qua
peculia sacrae Coronae, indifferenter essent Excluso) benignissimo indulto and
resolutione Regiis, alias concesso and admisso, vel in privato saltem
peragendo, privari minime potuissent, sed nec debuissent; immo vero virtute
subsequentis 26 Artic. Sopron. generaliter de civitatibus loquentis, ac non
nisi in exemplum ex utroque ordine tam Montanarum binas, quam liberarum
civitatum similiter binas adducentis and denominantis, pro se quoque
erigendorum novorum templorum, Parochiarum and Scholarum, loca commoda and
convenientia, ab ordinata Anno 1688. Regia Commissione obtentum and assignatum
iri, certo sperassent; horum tamen nihil consequuti, in majorem sui
aggravationem, and Religionis suae apertissimum exterminium, amotis, and
exturbatis per eandem Commissionem Regiam, omnibus ordinariis Evangelicae
Ecclesiae eorundem Ministris, totali liberate exercitij Religionis privati and
prohibiti essent: Universis actibus Ministerialibus Ecclesiasticis alibi
locorun apud Evangelicos uti volentibus, severe interdictis; e converso omnibus
stolaribus Proventibus, sicut and aliis solutionibus Evangelicos Ministros
praecise concernentibus, pro introductis Plebanis, paucos omnino in
Veterozoliensi and Breznobaniensi, Libethbaniensi vero Civitatibus nonisi unum
cives and incolas Catholicos habentibus contra expressam annuentiam Articulorum
11 and 12. Anno 1647. invitis Evangelicis, inconsuete, viaque facti vendicatis
and attractis, adhaec quoque Inhabitatores and cives, sine discrimine, ac
potissimum opifices and Mechanicos Evangelicos ad Caeremonias Religioni ipsorum
contrarias compellere omnimode conantibus, nec de facto desistentibus. Ob id,
pro Articulari liberi exercitij beneficio, pariterque ceu aliis ita his quoque
civitatibus, pari liberate cum iisdem gaudentibus, nec hoc in passu deterioris
esse conditionis valentibus, locorum novis templis, scholis, and Parochis
erigendis, and aedificandis omnino commodorum and idoneorum gratiosissima
admissione and per quos interest excisione, sicque integrali eorundem
restitutione, quam demississime instarent.

Gravamina Liberarum ac Regiarum Civitatum Sancti Georgij, Bazingae, Tyrnaviae,
Szakolizae, Kuszegh, and Ruszt.
LAmentabiliter deplorant and exponunt istae liberae and Regiae Civitates
afflictum and turbatum Religionis suae statum, adeoque infelicitatem, ubi
quamvis juxta genuinum sensum articulorum Soproniensium in hac Religionis
Materia conditorum libero Religionis exercitio omnibus and ubique per Regnum
degentibus, etc. concesso and admisso existente, eo magis clariori hujus
Articuli 25. explicatione in confirmato ibidem Anno 1608. Artic. 1. ante
coronationem contentae, ne quidem hae Civitates liberate hac exercitij vel in
privato saltem peragenda, privari possent ac deberent: imo beneficio articuli
subsequentis 26. Sopron. generaliter de Civitatibus loquentis, loca templis,
Parochiis and Scholis apud se erigendis sibi assignatum iri omnino sperassent,
nihil tamen praemissorum obtinuerunt: quin potius pro majori sui aggravatione,
and extrema Religionis suae internecione totale exercitium Religionis suae
inhibitum: Ministri ipsorum amoti and exturbati, ita ut ne Civitates quidem
istas iis ingredi liceat. Frequentatio talium locorum, ubi adhuc Religionis
exercitium vigeret, Baptismatumque, and aliorum Ecclesiasticorum rituum ibidem
usus and acceptatio absolute gravissimis sub poenis inhibita, adeoque ad
infirmos suos, and in agone constitutos admissio Ministrorum Evangelicorum in
totum vetita, generaliter vero totale exercitium Religionis suae contra sensum
praescriptorum articulorum denegatum, ex adverso vero Inhabitatores Evangelici
ad caeremonias contrarias compelluntur. Pro cujus exercitij liberi articulari
beneficio, simulque ad instar aliarum Civitatum locorum erigendis Templis, Par
hiis, and Scholis commodorum admissione and excisione (cum una liberate
gaudentes cum aliis, ne in hoc quidem sequior ipsorum conditio esse debeat)
humillime supplicant.

Gravamina Liberarum ac Regiarum Trenchiniensis and Modrensis Civitatum.
DOlenter sane conqueruntur hae duae liberae and Regiae Civitates, quod quidem
beneficio Articuli 26 diaetae Soproniensis, loca aedificandis templo, Parochiae
and Scholis iisdem excisa and assignata per Dominos Commissarios essent, atque
liberum exercitium Religionis suae permissum; circa hujus tamen nonnulla
Essentialia requisita and necessaria ipsos plane extra articulariter, imo
contra genuinum sensum eorundem articulorum per eosdem Commissarios esse
circumscriptos and coarctatos. Et primo quidem circa Ministros suos, seu
praedicantes, qui ad certum numerum essent restricti: imo ut defuncto, and e
vivis excedente eorundem aliquo, expost alterum in ejus locum introducere non
liceat. Vicinorum and circumjacentium locorum Evangelici (quibus etiam vi
praecedentis 25 Artic. generalis clausulae, Omnibus and ubique per regnum
degentibus, etc. liberum etiam exercitium concessum fuisset) ne Ministerio and
sacris eorum uti audeant and talia loca frequentent serio interdictum. Ipsis
denique Ministris visitatio infirmorum extraneorum and in agone constitutorum,
strictissime inhibita. Opifices and Mechanici contra similiter mentem dicti
Artic. 25. ad caeremonias sibi contrarias, processiones quippe, and ad has
consuetorum vexillorum comparationem sub gravi mulcta compelluntur. Baptismata,
and alij ritus Ecclesiae circumjacentibus Pagis administrari vetiti. Plebano
catholico ex publico proventu Civitatis salarium ordinatum, Evangelico vero ex
propria auditorum pecunia, sicut and Scholae Rectori, ut solvatur. Scholae
similiter triviales tantum, id est, aliquantum legere and scribere tradentes
concessae: super cujusmodi circumscriptionibus, siquidem praescripti Articuli
omnino silerent, singulas tales difficultates and gravamina sua ad genuinum
sensum eorundem articulorum and aliorum per hos confirmatorum, accommodanda and
reducenda, humillime instant.

Gravamina superioris Regni Hungariae, Zempliniensis, Abavyvariensis,
Unghvariensis, Saarossiensis, Thornensis, etc. Comitatuum insimulque oppidorum
submontanorum, in Dominio Rakocziano existentium Nobilium and Ignobilium
Incolarum Evangelicorum.
CUm maxima sui oppressione repraesentare coguntur iidem Evangelici suae
Majestati Serenissimae, quod quamvis sua Majestas Serenissima, in Artic. 26.
Soproniensis diaetae, duobus in locis, primum quidem tenore subsequentium
expressissimorum verborum, In aliis vero Comitat. veluti in Szalodiensi,
Vespriniensi, Jauriensi, Comaroniensi, Abavyvariensi, Saarossiensi,
Zempliniensi, Ugocziensi, Bereghiensi, Thornensi, Honchensi, Neogradiensi,
Szolnock and Heves, nec non Pesth, Pilis and Soldt unitis, item Szubolczensi,
Ungh and Szathmariensi, siquidem de praesenti essent in actuali usu omnium fere
templorum ibidem habitorum, ideo eadem pro actualibus eorundem possessionibus
usuanda relicta sunt. Expost vero subsequentis similiter Articularis clausulae;
Templa demum, in quorum actuali possessione iidem Augustanae and Helveticae
Confessioni addicti de facto sunt, modo praevio prae manibus eorundem, una cum
Parochiis and Scholis, proventibus que eorundem propter bonum pacis, ut nimirum
quiet and pacifice vivant, relinquuntur, sese benignissime resolvere dignata
fuerit, praeviis in comitatibus universa Templa, Parochias and Scholas cum suis
proventibus propter bonum pacis, unionis, internamque tranquillitatem Regni
publicam prae manibus ibidem existentium and degentium Evangelicorum actualiter
relinquenda and pacifice usuanda, positiva lege clementissime constituerit: eo
nihilominus non obstante, in Comitatibus signanter Abavyvariensi, Saarossiensi,
Zempliniensi, Thornensi and Ungh existentia Evangelicorum templa potiori ex
part per eosdem Evangelicos aut fundamentaliter erecta, aut ex imis ruderibus
re-aedificata, Scholae item and Parochiae, una cum eorundem proventibus,
similiter per Evangelicos testamentaliter collatis and applicatis, nec unquam
per dominos Catholicos possessis, contra apertissimum ejusdem articuli
Soproniensis sensum, gratiosissimamque suae Majestatis Serenissimae, occasion
etiam and beneficio novissimae Posoniensis diaetae in consolationem status
Evangelici renovatam and ratificatam resolutionem, in dominio praesertim
Rakocziano, oppidis Comitatus Zempliniensis, nominanter Szantho, Thallia, Mod,
Keretzthur, Tarczal, Liszka, Benye, Tolescua, Ughelly, Patak, Borssy, (quae
quidem oppida tum tempore conditi praespecificati Articuli Soproniensis, quam
expost etiam in actuali pacifico dominio Templorum, Parochiarum and Scholarum
suarum fuissent, ac ulterius etiam vigore ejusdem articuli imperturbate
persistere debuissent) prout and confinio Tokay (alias per eundem articulum in
dominio sui templi per expressum relicto and denominato,) pagisque quamplurimis
in eodem dominio existentibus, ipsis Evangelicis per inspectores eorundem
bonorum Manifesta vi adempta sunt.

His accederet, quod contra apertissimum Soproniensis similiter Articuli 25
sensum, praespecificatorum oppidorum in attacto comitatu Zempliniensi
existentium Incolae tam nobiles, quam alterius etiam conditionis post memoratam
occupationem templorum, apud privatas domos quoque continuatum Religionis suae
exercitium, alia virtute Artic. 1. Anno 1608. ante Coronationem editi, ad quem
se idem 25. Soproniensis diaetae articulus manifest referret, tam in Fisci
Regij, quam aliorum Dominorum Baronum ac Magnatum bonis liberum relictum,
severissimis sub minis seponere tam hactenus coacti sunt, quam de praesenti
etiam coguntur.

Praedicantes vero eorum benignissima suae Majestatis Serenissimae resolutione,
vigore praescripti 25. Artic. ab exilio revocati, intra praefixos jam aliquot
vicibus terminos, sub amissione bonorum and capitis, e dominio eodem aut exire,
aut reversalibus ad nulla umquam munia Ecclesiastica ibidem exercenda sub eadem
cautione sese obnoxios reddere coguntur.

Praeter haec, quamvis praecitati Articuli Soproniensis, and quidem 25. ne
Augustanae and Helveticae confessioni addicti ad caeremonias religioni suae
contrarias quoquo modo compellantur: Articulus vero 26. ne Catholici Ministris
Augustanae and Helveticae confessioni addictis, nec vero horum sequaces
Plebanis Catholicis ad mentem Artic. 11. 1647. solvere obligentur, manifest
declararent; tamen in utroque, and praesertim in solutione Plebanis Catholicis
fienda, militari quoque brachio assumpto, in contrarium coguntur.

Quin utut tenore saepius allegati Artic. 26. usus sepulturae and campanarum
indifferenter, uti Catholocis ita and Evangelicis esset liber relictus,
nihilominus exsanguia Evangelicorum corpora contra ipsum jus Christianitatis in
solito sepulturae loco terrae mandari impediuntur. Sed nec usus campanarum per
Evangelicos licet comparatarum, and fieri curatarum, ipsis admittitur. Imo,
quod manifestam omnino persecutionem Evangelicorum saperet, ipsis quoque
Nobilibus certa bona quamvis exemptitia, and jure etiam Regio confirmata intra
corpus praeattacti dominij Ragotzkiani possidentibus, ac alterius etiam
conditionis hominibus, nisi professioni suae Evangelicae resenserint, ac
renunciaverint exterminatio and exclusio de Bonis iisdem, in eodem dominio
habitis, per inspectorem bonorum Rakotzkianorum identidem minitatur. Non
absimiliter in Comitatu Abavyvariensi provisor bonorum Regeczianorum in bonis
iisdem per certas suas literas Evangelici exercitij cultum interdixit, ac intra
quotuordecim dies Parochis Evangelicis migrationem e bonis iisdem sub amissione
bonorum and capitis intimavit, vel si ad modum privatorum secularium ibidem
remanere vellent, strictissimis Reversalibus ad nulla umquam munia
Ecclesiastica ibidem sub amissione pariter bonorum and capitis exercenda sese
adstrictos reddere desideravit, ac actu etiam templa in possessionibus Fony and
Bodokauyfalu una cum appertinentiis occupavit.

Pariter in ejusdem Comitatus Abavyvariensis oppido Sepssy dicto, ubi nullis
sub praetextibus templum a possessoribus Evangelicis occupari potuisset,
proventus decimales ex territorio ejusdem oppidi Parocho Evangelico provenire
soliti, ad intimationem inclytae Camerae Scepusiensis per Tricesimatorem
Sepssiensem sunt occupati, qui de facto etiam in sequestro tenentur.

Aeque in Comitatu Unghvariensi in oppido Nogymihali, pagisque Vinna and
Sztara: sicut and in Comitatu Saarossiensi, in possessionibus Tolczeck, Asguth
and Soovar, Evangelicorum templa, Parochiae and Scholae, cum universis
appertinentiis praeallegato Articulari modo actualem in usum and possessionem
Evangelicis relicta, per dominos Catholicos via facti sunt adempta.

Denique in Comitatu Thornensi, in possessione Somogy, medietas proventus, per
certam conventionem jampridem initam Parocho Evangelico cedens, pariter adempta
est.

Quae omnia contra benignissimam suae Majestatis Serenissimae mentem and
articularem resolutionem adversus supramemoratos Evangelicos, maxima optimorum
jurium suorum Articularium cum injuria and eversione actu ipso attentata
exstitissent, eadem uti firmissime crederent, cum reali and effectiva violenter
ademptorum restitutione, suique redintegratione, adhaec introductorum abusuum
sublatione clementissime remedenda, in paternum suae Majestatis Serenissimae
sinum humillime effuderunt.

Iidem praecitatorum Comitatuum superioris Regni Hungariae ac Oppidorum in
dominio Rakocziano existentium incolae professionis Evangelicae.

Par ratio est Comitatuum Articularium Szalodiensis, Vespriniensis, Jauriensis,
Comaroniensis, Bereghiensis, Szolnock, and Heves, Szatmariensis item ac Pesth,
ac Soldt unitorum.

Gravamina Universitatis Evangelicae Nobilium in Comitatibus Lyptoviensi,
Thurocziensi, Arvensi, Trenchiniensi, Zoliensi, and Honthensi existentium, pro
evidenti remonstratione eorum, in quibusnam iidem contra Articulos Sopronienses
in Negotio Religionis laesi and turbati essent: Quibus immediate subjunguntur
etiam humillima Postulata eorundem, aeque pro dictis Articulis conformitalium
Gravaminum suorum mitigatione, reductione, and complanatione.
ET siquidem Lyptoviensis, and Thurocziensis, Arvensis, Trenchiniensis and
Zoliensis Comitatuum Gravamina and querelae in omnibus fere punctis ac
difficultatibus conciderent, ac aequaliter procederent, brevitatis ergo hic
etiam conjunguntur. Et hi quidem Comitatus manifest and merito in eo se
injuriatos and turbatos querulantur, quod per illustriss. D. Comitem Georgium
Ardody, qua Commissarium, and reliquos penes se habitos, contra genuinum sensum
and tenorem dictorum articulorum Soproniensium Ministri, seu Praedicantes eorum
Evangelici, qui post occupationem in his Comitatibus universorum templorum vi
articuli 26. Soproniensis libero exercitio Religionis ad Residentias and Domos
privatas Nobilium translato existente, vocationem and munia sua taliter longo
tempore peragebant omnes (praeter duos inarticulariter denominatis locis
relictos) extra Comitatum and locum, ubi tum mansissent, sub quindena sunt
proscripti and relegati; vel si eorum aliquibus emigrare non placuisset,
talibus Reversales super simplici abdicatione Ministerii contra expressam in
Artic. 25. similium cessationem subscribendae propositae, nec secus tolerandos
stricte and sub incaptivatione eorundem demandatum esset.

Scholae non aliae quam triviales vel sicuti eadem Commissio explicaret,
aliquantulum legere and scribere docentes, ac eae quoque in locis saltem duobus
Articulariter, ut proemissum denominatus permissae: Caeterae omnes clausae and
interdictae, ac Rectores passim exturbati, cum interim Artic. 25. tam
Praedicantes, quam hos Officiis suis in integrum restituisset. Cultus and
exercitium Religionis in domibus and residentiis Nobilium, oratoriis item and
capellis, quales plurimae darentur in dictis Comitatibus per Ministros
Evangelicos peragendus stricte prohibitus, miraque sane circumscriptione ita
limitatus, ut siquis Nobilium in aedibus suis cultum Dei peragere velit, non
alium quam unum ex duobus illis relictis Ministris accersere, and eorum opera
uti praesumat, idque pro sua solum and famulitij sui necessitate.

Solutiones qualescunque (extra stolares duorum saltem in quovis Comitatu
assignatorum locorum) omnes Plebanis Catholicis exsolvendae decretae: Imo jam
passim ubique militari assistentia mediante per Plebanos ab eo tempore
extorquentur.

Villani, seu rustici, ab exercitio suae Religionis, Baptismatum, Copulae,
Introductionum, Sepulturae, ac Sacramentorum suo ritu percipiendorum usu,
frequentatione item Articulariter assignatorum locorum absolute arcentur, and
inhibentur: E contra vero ad Caeremonias sibi contrarias per vim and fortia
compelluntur.

Insuper in Comitatu Thurocziensi erunt templa in possessionibus Bella,
Zaturcza, and Pribacz, Evangelicorum sumptibus aedificata, and ante conditum
Articulum non reconciliata, non habito tamen respectu articularis exceptionis
sub initium Artic. 26. appositae, indiscriminatim omnia sunt occupata.
Campanarum item and sepulturae usus, nisi cum praescitu and exsolutione
Plebanorum permittitur.

In Comitatu Honthensi vero, qui juxta Artic. 26. Soproniensem Universa Templa
(tamquam quae tempore conditorum eorundem Articulorum prae manibus
Evangelicorum fuissent, ac vi illius Articuli de caetero etiam usui relinquenda
innueretur) libere and pacifice possidere debuissent illustrissimus D. Comes
Volffgangus Kohary ejusdem Comitatus supremus Comes ex delegatione (uti se
declaravit) illustrissimi D. Comitis praefati Georgij Erdodi, adjuncto sibi
vicecomite Comitatus, occupavit, excepto unico exili in contemptissimo pago
Drieno dicto, non pridem per Evangelicos aedificato. Ministris praeterea
Evangelicis omnibus serio praecepit, ut Parochiis ac locis, ubi hactenus
mansissent, actutum excedunt, nisi incaptivari velint. Nobilibus quoque
inhibitum, ipsos vel in privato quoque tolerare ullo modo audeant. Cum tamen
Comitatus iste nomine tenus in Articulo praescripto in eo tum actualiter habito
usu templorum adtunc possessorum, ulterius etiam confirmaretur, ac stabiliretur.

Humillima eaque Articularia praementionatorum Comitatuum Postulata haec sunt.
QUandoquidem sua Majestas Serenissima tam per Confirmationem dictorum 25. and
26. Artic. diaetae Soproniensis, in novissima diaeta Posoniensi Artic. 21.
1687. editam, quam etiam rursus in personali audientia Ablegatis praescriptorum
Comitatuum elargitam resolutionem, praedictos Artic. in omnibus punctis and
clausulis se observaturam, and per alios quoque serio observari facturam verbo
suo Regio resolvisset, juxta simplicissimum proinde and clarissimum eorundem
Articulorum sensum in sequentibus sese accommodandos, redintegrandos,
restituendos, and per expressam expeditionem, seu decretum, confirmandos
praefatorum Comitatuum Evangelici humillime implorant.

Ut juxta mentem 25 Artic. dictae diaetae Soproniensis omnes ipsorum Ministri,
seu Praedicantes, and Rectores, libere in medio sui remanere, ac professionis
suae exercitium, atque munia extra quamvis limitationem peragere valiant: Cum
hoc ipsum idem Articulus (tam Praedicantes, quam Scholarum Rectores, illos
etiam qui ante proscripti fuerunt, cassatis ipsorum Reversalibus priori
libertati and vocationi restituens) per expressum permitteret, ita ut siquidem
omnes tales Praedicantes ad duo loca excisa, and in Artic. 26. denominata
restringi and collocari non possint, relaxata and sublata juxta uberiorem
ejusdem 26. Artic. sensum and indultum, in oratoriis Arcensibus and
Residentialibus Dominorum, Magnatum and Nobilium exercendi Religionis exercitij
inhibitione, similes extra parochiales Praedicantes ibidem in privato
accommodari valebant.

Templa and Capellae non reconciliatae, perque Evangelicos aedificatae, ex
mente similiter dicti Artic. 26. pro exercendo cultu Religionis nostrae,
ubicunque in dictis Comitatibus reperirentur, nobis relinquantur, and
restituantur.

Similiter ex Constitutione and decreto toties fati Artic. 26. quatenus
praescriptorum Comitatuum Evangelici ab omni prorsus solutione (juxta expressa
Articuli verba, and aliorum ibidem confirmatorum) Parochis Catholicis
praestanda liberi maneant, and immunes, ac tan tum suos Ministros exsolvere
sint obligati.

Ultimate, ut omnibus sui in medio existentibus cujuscunque status and
conditionis hominibus Religionis suae exercitium maneat and sit liberum, non
exclusis etiam Rusticis juxta paragraphum Artic. 25. Omnibus and ubique, etc.
and aliorum ibidem confirmatorum; nec ullus ad contrarias caeremonias compelli
praesumatur. Generaliter vero quatenus in omnibus dictorum Articulorum
beneficiis and indultis conserventur, nec una pars alteram sub poena ibidem
apposita quoquomodo turbare expost audeat.

Comitatus porro Henthensis extra praemissa cum ceteris Comitatibus sibi
Communia Postulata peculiari, eoque Articulariter per expressam sui
denominationem eidem attributo jure, pro restitutione etiam occupatorum
templorum, in quorum videlicet actuali usu and dominio tempore conditi Artic.
fuisset, humillime instat.

Gravamen Oppidi Gyongyos.
QUerelatur idem oppidum in eo, quod dum juxta Artic. 26. Soproniensis Diaetae
expressam concessionem, ad verba: In aliis vero Comtatibus, veluti Szaladiensi,
Veszpriniensi, etc. and Heves (in quo oppidum hoc situm esset) siquidem de
praesenti, etc. Item, Templa demum, in quorum actuali possessione iidem
Augustanae and Helveticae confessioni addicti de facto sunt, etc. in actuali
possessione and dominio Templi, Parochiae and Scholae, suorom Helvetico
Evangelicorum, (ex quo in horum actuali etiam usu and possessione ante, sub,
and post Diaetam Soproniensem usque ad infrascriptum tempus pacifice
perstitissent) imperturbate relinqui debuissent, maximo regij and Articularis
hujus indulti, optimique juris sui cum praejudicio ex mandato and Commissione
Rev. D. Archiepiscopi Strigoniensis Georgij Szechenti, and illustrissimi D.
Comitis Georgij Erdody, per egregios Johannem Almassy Hevestiensis, and
Franciscum Schutter Pesthiensis Comitatuum Judices Nobilium, violenta
assumtorum armatorum plebeiorum hominum invasorum manu, primum Templo, perrupta
medio Zingari ejusdem fenestra, eodemque immisso, ac sic ab intus violenter
penetrato, adaperto, and potito, ex post Parochia and Schola, in nobilitatibus
alias fundis per Evangelicos propria pecunia comparatis, aedificatis, tandem
vero omnibus horum appartinentiis, undecim nimirum vineis, quinque molendinis,
uno macello, domo similiter una partim testamentaliter per Evangelicos
collatis, partim propriis eorundem pecuniis conquisitis, exindeque
resultantibus proventibus, omnino Evangelicis, die 21 Maij 4. proxime
praeterito 1688. via facti occupatis, privatum, Praedicante adhaec and Scholae
Rectore in exilium pulsis, libero Religionis exercitio, vel in privata etiam
domo Articulariter usuando, severissime inhibito, sepultura in locis
competentibus, and campanarum propriarum usu insimul interdictis: funeratione
vero demortuorum Evangelicorum (nisi Plebani Catholici eatenus, prout and
Baptismatum, Copulationum, and Sacramentorum Officio, ritu, and opera uti
vellent) ad disrepectuosa quadriviorum and compitorum campepestrium loca
amandata totali and integro actuali Articularis Ecclesiae Helvetio Evangelicae
beneficio esset orbatum: quare plenariam sui, praemissorumque occupatorum,
ablatorum, and prohibitorum omnium realem restitutionem and redintegrationem vi
praespecificati Articularis indulti, jure merito expeterent. Par ratio Oppidi
Jaszbrinij. Oppidi Comarom.

Non sine animi dolor conquererentur quoque cives and incolae, stipendiarij
item Milites Hungarici Confinij Comaromiensis Augustanae and Helveticae
Confessionis: Quod posteaquam vigore Articuli 26. Diaetae Soproniensis, ubi
idem Confinium perexpressum denominaretur tam liberam publicae Religionis
exercitij praxin, quam Templorum etiam ac Scholarum and Parochiarum pacificam
adepti fuissent, ac in iis imperturbate, and sine laesione Catholicae
Religionis perstitissent, utque dum Artic. 1683. ob fatales belli tumultus, and
insperatam Oppidi Conflagrationem Ministris eorundem Evangelicis una cum
civibus hinc inde dispersis tale liberum Religionis exercitium quodammodo
intermitti contigisset; jamnunc annis and fatis clementioribus
supervenientibus, ubi virtute praescripti Articuli 26. idem publicum Religionis
suae exercitium reassumere, and Ministros suos Ecclesiasticos reducere
voluissent, intervenientibus Excellentissimi D. Comitis a Hoffkircher, dicti
Confinii Commendantis, and loci Cleri contradictionibus id effectuare in
praesens usque nullatenus permissi, imo de die in dies gravioribus minis
absterriti totali Religionis suae exercitio inhibiti, privati sunt, pro uti
talem inhibitionem ulterius quoque praeattacti D.D. Catholici practicaturi
tribus abhinc mensibus circiter ad pulsum tympani per plateas Confinij factum,
etiam ad circumjacentia loca egressum Evangelicis pro peragenda devotione sua,
sub incaptivatione, and aliis gravibus poenis, severissime interminati sunt,
prohibitis etiam precibus in privatis alias aedibus peragi solitis. Hinc non
absimiliter pro Articulari sui, praemissorumque restitutione and
redintegratione supplicarent. His accederet,

Inferioris Hungariae Possessionis Hodos nuncupatae Praedicantem Evangelicum
Samuelem Riczkey dictum, non obstantibus Protectionalibus ex intimo Consilio
Bellico eidem Possessioni gratiose elargitis, binis vicibus, per homines
Celsiss. and Rever. D. Archiepiscopi Strigoniensis esse expoliatum and omni
supellectili domestica privatum, ultimum etiam in persona 22 praeteriti mensis
Martij captum, Posoniumque ad aedes Archiepiscopales in carceres deductum, ubi
dire and dure tractatur, and nonnisi sicco pane and squalida aqua emaceratur.

Similiter superioris Hungariae Possessionis Totthfalu Praedicantem Evangelicum
per Naghybaeniarensis Residentiae Patrem Jesuitam, Ravasz vocatum, captum,
vinctumque ad carceres Szatthmarienses deduci curatum, ubi etiamnum
detineretur, and miserrime tractaretur.

Diaetae Posoniensis, Ann. 1687. Articulus XXI. In negotio Religionis
renovantur Articuli 25 and 26 Ann. 1681. cum interjecta Declaratione.
LIcet quidem in Negotio Religionis Augustanae and Helvetiae Confessioni
addicti Articulis 25 and 26 novissimae Diaetae Soproniensis oppositam iisdem
per reclamationem suam abutentes ipso facto eorundem beneficij participes esse
desiissent: propter bonum nihilominus domesticae unionis and pacis, internamque
Regni tranquillitatem, cum sua Majestas Serenissimae ex gratia and clementia
sua praecitatos Articulos adhuc ratos fore benignissime resolvisset, eosdem
status quoque and ordines ad mentem Paternae resolutionis (Cleri and aliorum
secularium Catholicorum contradictione non obstante) pro renovatis and priori
firmitati restitutis censendos, acsi and in quantum hactenus ineffectuati, vel
vero per aliquos abusus ab una aut altera part medio tempore introductos,
violati fuissent, suae debitae executioni, and tempore eorundem conditorum
Articulorum, vel expost occupatorum, aut reoccupatorum impendendae
restaurationi, utprimum demandandos esse statuerunt.

THE GRIEVANCES Of the two Imperial and Free Cities of Upper Hungary, Cassovia,
and Epperies; wherein are Contained the Injuries done to all the Protestant
Citizens and Inhabitants of the three Ranks, as well in their Civil Liberties,
against the 25th, 26th, and 41st Articles of the Diet of Sopron, An. 1681.
together with their Demands.
But in other parts it is Ordered according to His Majesty's Gracious Resolution
that Places be appointed for the Building of Churches and Schools, and Erecting
Parishes for the Convenience of those of the Helvetian Confession, and of that
of Ausbourg.

That instead of the Churches, Schools, and Parishes taken from the
Protestants, there should be Assigned them by Commissioners appointed from His
Majesty, commodious and convenient Places, and that without any Restriction,
even in the Cities of upper Hungary, according to the literal and genuine sense
of the Clause of the said Article, which says, Furthermore in the Free and
Mountain Cities, as also in all the Cities of upper Hungary are Places to be
allowed for the Building of Churches and Schools, and Erecting Parishes.

Nevertheless in the beginning of January, in the year 1687. His Majesty's
High-Commissioners appointed with so much Clemency in upper Hungary, were so
far in their proceedings from satisfying either His Majesty's pious Resolution,
or the true and clear intent of the Article, that even in contempt of them all,
and in compliance with their own false Glosses, they did assign to the
Protestants inconvenient and undecent places without the said Cities, which
have no Suburbs, and consequently very remote in the Fields, to the evident
exterminating of the free Exercise of our Religion from the said Cities.

Wherefore we do constantly insist on the most Holy Resolution of His Majesty,
as it is declared in the expressed words of the Article before alleged, and by
virtue thereof, do humbly implore, that instead of the inconvenient appointed
Places such others (as shall be both commodious and free from all Civil Taxes
or Contributions, according to the intention of the 8th Article, An. 1647. and
the 12th, An. 1649. in the abovementioned Cities, and within the Walls of the
same, without any Ambiguity, since the before-cited 26th Article includes the
inward, not the outward parts of the Cities) be granted and assigned to us the
true and lawful Citizens, and in no wise deserving so unjust a Banishment from
the midst of the Cities.

Secondly, it is also undeniable, that in the 25th Article, immediately
foregoing, the Gracious Resolution of His most Sacred Majesty is declared in
these very words: To all and every one through the Kingdom (no Protestant
Inhabitant of whatsoever State and Condition, or in whatever part of the
Kingdom excepted) according to the 1st Article in the year 1608. published
before the Coronation, a free Exercise of their Religion in general is granted,
and also that none of the said Inhabitants shall any wise be disturbed for the
future in the free Exercise of their Religion, on the severe punishment that is
expressly set down in the 26th Article of the Diet of Sopron.

Notwithstanding which, when the said Protestants of Cassovia and Epperies
would have freely used and enjoyed their Right Established by His Majesty's
Warrant, and continued their way of Worship, as also the Instruction of their
Youth within the said Cities, and their Walls (as places provided by the
abovementioned Articles, and formerly used and allowed) they were not only not
admitted, but severely prohibited and hindered by the Magistrates and Clergy of
these Cities, nay sent away and Banished till this time, to the fore-specified
places in no wise convenient for them, as if they were Strangers and wholly
incapable of the Common Liberties of the Kingdom.

Wherefore in this Point also Relying on the Gracious Resolution of His most
Sacred Majesty, and the Articles he has been pleased to make with us, We do
most Humbly implore a lawful Restitution and firm Establishment of the free
exercise of our Religion in its former State, according to the said Article 1st
Anno 1608 (viz.) within the Walls of the said Cities. We also submissively beg,
that till we have a convenient opportunity of Building and Erecting new
Churches, Schools and Parishes (which by reason of our great Poverty, and the
vast Taxes and Contributions to the present War, we are not able now to
perform) it be graciously granted to us, that we may anew freely enjoy the said
exercise of Religion in certain private and convenient places, and have Schools
for the Instruction of Youth.

Thirdly, Though the indifferent and common life of Bells and Burials was every
where permitted, as well to the Protestants as Catholics by these express
words, of the 26th Article of the Diet of Sopron: The free use of Bells and
Burials is left to the Catholics of those places, as well as to those of the
Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausbourg.

Which nevertheless, the Catholic Magistracy and Clergy of Cassovia and
Epperies have fully denied, and do still deny the said free use of Bells and
Burials to the Protestant Inhabitants of the said Cities, forbidding them with
most severe Threats, to perform the usual Ceremonies of Burials, within the
Walls of the said Cities; notwithstanding the gracious resolution of His most
Sacred Majesty, made to the illustrious States of the Kingdom, in the Diet of
Sopron, December the 10th, Anno 1681.

So that we earnestly desire the common use of Bells and Burials for the
Protestants, as well within, as without the City Walls, free from any
molestation or disturbance, conformable to the Pious Grant of His most Sacred
Majesty.

Fourthly, It is evident also, that by Virtue of the general Clause inserted in
the end of the so often mentioned 26th Article in these words: Provided always,
That the Laws of the Kingdom confirmed by the Royal Charter be not hereby
prejudiced.

The standing Laws of the Kingdom concerning the Ecclesiastical Revenues of
those of the Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausbourg were left in force,
and consequently any Arbitrary proceedings forbidden, especially such as
against the instinct of Nature, tend to the enriching of some Persons, to the
Damage and Wrong of others.

Nevertheless, the Roman Catholic Magistrate and the Clergy of Cassovia and
Epperies, by their own Authority, and by Force have taken and appropriated to
themselves, all the pious Legacies and Gifts left by Will, through the pious
zeal of the Protestants, for the use of Protestant Churches and Schools, ( viz.
in Cassovia, four Houses standing within the Wall of the said City, one of
which the Magistrate has sold, and alienated to the illustrious Michael
Domeczki; a Garden and certain Plow Lands lying in the Territory of the same
City; as also a Vineyard formerly called Varghaszolo, lying in the Territory of
Tokai. And in Epperies certain Vineyards likewise lying in several Territories
of Upper Hungary, together with their Revenues) actually retaining the same for
their own use, and for the most part turning them into profane uses, against
the 11th and 14th Articles of the year 1647, to the great injury and damage of
the Protestants.

Wherefore in this Case also, the Protestants appealing to the aforesaid Laws,
and Constitution of the Kingdom, do lawfully require, that all the pious
Legacies and Church Lands (violently taken away and retained from them, who are
the right Owners) be restored together with their Revenues, according to that
Rule of Common Justice, Render to every one his own.

Fifthly, It is certain likewise, that for the paying of the Protestant
Ministers, and of the Catholic Curates, it was evidently enough provided, not
only by the often mentioned 26th Article in these words: Nevertheless, the
Catholics shall not be obliged to pay any thing to the Ministers of the
Protestants, nor the Protestants to the Curates of the Catholics.

But also by the 11th Article of the year 1647 in these words; Let no
Protestant be obliged to pay any thing to the Catholic Curates, nor the
Catholic to the Protestant Ministers.

Nay, in the following 12th Article of the said year 1647, are contained these
words: Concerning any use whatever of the Ministerial Functions; but where the
Protestants have no Parishes, let them pay the Ministers that they employ, as
the Catholics are to pay their Catholic Curates; and where hitherto the
Protestants did pay nothing to the Catholic Curates, they shall not be obliged
hereafter to pay any under any pretense whatsoever, nor the Catholics to the
Protestant Minsters.

Which words, together with these of the same 12th Article concerning the
Revenues of Schools; but in any place whatsoever, the Catholic Curates, and
the Protestant Ministers shall receive the Revenues of Schools, from their
respective Followers only. Establish this positive Law and Constitution, that
the Protestants pay the Protestants, and the Catholics the Catholics:
Notwithstanding this, the Protestants are forced maugre themselves, to pay the
Catholic Curates, whilst not only a Weekly allowance, together with other
perquisites, is constantly paid to the Catholic Curates by the Magistrate out
of the public Purse (wherein the Protestants put most, being three for one
Catholic;) but also, the Revenues of Schools are adjudged, and paid to the
same Catholic Curates, and with the greatest injustice denied to the
Protestant Ministers and Schoolmasters.

Therefore they demand with all Submission and Justice, that the Protestant
Ministers and Schoolmasters, be allowed out of the public Purse, a Salary
equal with that of the Catholic Curates, or that neither of the Parties be
paid out of that Fond, but each by their respective Followers, according to the
intention of the before mentioned Articles.

Sixthly, Every body knows that by Virtue of the 25th Article, not only a free
return and stay in the Kingdom is granted to the Banished Ministers and
Schoolmasters, but also a free exercise of their Religion and Profession, and
by Virtue of the following 26th Article it is Ordered, That amongst the
imperial and free Cities of Upper Hungary, Cassovia and Epperies shall be
appointed, and established places for the public and free exercise of the
Protestant Religion; and that hereafter, no Subject shall be disturbed in the
free exercise of his Religion, under the pain expressed in the 8th Article, of
the 6th Decree of Uladislaus. Nevertheless, the Magistrate of Epperies, on the
very Festival Day of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, in the Year 1688 last past,
dared deprive the Protestant Church of Epperies, established by the Articles of
their Ministers, and with great dishonor expel all the Protestant Ministers of
the three Nations, out of the said City and its Territory, without letting them
know any cause of so injust an usage, or showing them any Warrant of His most
Sacred Majesty for it; protending only an unheard of Title of Lord of the
Manor, (which cannot be admitted among Civilians, since they enjoy equaly with
the Magistrate the common civil Liberty, nor amongst Clergy Men, who enjoy a
special Liberty, nor can it in any wise be taken by Magistrate, whose Office is
but for a year) to the great diminishing of His most Sacred Majesty's Authority
and the Contempt of the before mentioned Articles.

Wherefore they humbly beg, that the innocent and unjustly Banished Protestant
Ministers of Epperies be restored, and may perform as before their
Ecclesiastical Duties, and that both the Protestant Ministers of Cassovia, and
those of Epperies, employed either in Preaching, or in Teaching Schools,
present or to come (being always presented by the right Patrons,) may live
quietly and safely in their own or hired dwelling places, which they have, or
shall have within the Walls of the said Cities.

Seventhly, No body that knows the Law will deny, but in the beginning of the
aforesaid 41st Article of the Diet of Sopron, where the Common Liberties and
Privileges of the imperial and free Cities are confirmed, and besides the there
mentioned Laws, and Articles of the Kingdom made in several places are renewed,
it is expressly ordained: That the same Laws and Articles be strictly observed,
both by the Chambers and the Officers of the Army, and by any other person
whatsoever, so that they (viz. the same imperial and free Cities) be no way
disturbed by any one, in their free right to choose a Civil Magistrate, nor in
any other Privilege.

Nevertheless, the modern Magistrate of the said Cities, against the
Prohibition contained in the 83th Article of the Illustrious Chamber of
Scepusium, in the year 1647, out of mere private hatred against our Religion;
was pleased to take upon him such a Power, as to degrade, and turn out of their
public Dignities, and Civil Employments all the Senators of Cassovia and
Epperies, and several other Protestant Officers well deserving, and qualified
for public Offices and Civil Dignities, against the evident Constitution of
the aforesaid Article, and of those that are cited in it; but especially of the
13th, before the Coronation in the year 1608, of the 44th in the year 1609, and
of the 12th in the year 1649, to the most evident prejudice of the Common
Liberties, and Civil Privileges, and to the considerable oppression of the
Protestant Citizens; and in the room of the said Senators and Protestant
Officers, the said Magistrate has put Catholic Citizens either less fit, or
wholly unacquainted with the Affairs of the said Cities, and more minding their
private concerns, to the damnifying and even undoing of the said Cities.
Wherefore we require with the deepest Humility,

First, That the free right of choosing the Civil Magistrate, and other Officers
(which hitherto has been so disturbed, and wholly taken away from the
Protestants, against the positive Laws of the Kingdom, made in the Illustrious
Chamber of Scepusium) belonging properly and only to the Sworn Citizens of the
same Cities, and as well to the Protestants as to the Catholics, be restored
and maintained in its former State, and in no wise any more disturbed by any
one, under the pain mentioned in the renewed and aforesaid Articles.

Secondly, That in order to maintain a civil mutual Union, and put out any
Fuel of Division and Hatred, a free Election be made of the same Magistrate,
and other Officers out of the well deserving, and well qualified Sworn
Citizens, without any difference of the Catholic and Protestant Religion; and
that the Employments, and any Civil Dignities whatsoever be indifferently, and
equally conferred and bestowed, so that the Catholics and Protestants promote
mutually one another to public, civil Honors, according to the intention of
the aforesaid 13th Article, of the year 1608 before the Coronation, and of the
44th of the year 1609.

Thirdly, That in order to observe a just equality of Turns, and procure the
public good of the Cities, it be graciously granted, that the Offices of Judge
and Tribune be by Turns, and promiscuously exercised for a year, according to
the intention of the aforesaid Articles, and of the 12th in the year 1649.

All the Protestant, Citizens, and Inhabitants of the three Nations, of the
Free and Imperial Cities, Cassovia and Epperies.

The Grievance of the Protestants of the Free and Imperial City of Carpona.
IT is not without a great deal of Grief, that all the Noblemen and Gentlemen,
all the Auxiliary Forces, and hired Soldiers of both sorts, and all the
Protestant Inhabitants, and Citizens of Carpona, think it their Duty to
Represent to Your most Sacred Majesty; that although according to Your most
Sacred Majesty's Resolution, inserted in the 26th Article of the Diet of
Sopron, Anno 1681. Among the places of the Kingdom, which were to be appointed
for the Building of new Churches and Schools, and Erecting Parishes for the
convenience of those of the Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausbourg; the
same City of Carpona is particularly named, and established to be one of the
places, where the free exercise of Religion should entirely and quietly be
enjoyed, as it may be seen in these words: In the Division before the Mountains
at Leva, Carpona and Tulekin.

Nevertheless, Your Majesty's High Commissioners appointed in the year 1688
last past in the Mountain Cities, being come to that of Carpona (whereas,
according to the intention of the aforesaid Article, and of Your Majesty's
Gracious Resolution, and Declaration contained in it, instead of the convenient
Churches and Schools and Parishes which were from the Protestants of the
Confession of Ausbourg, they should have appointed other convenient and fit
places, and left the Protestants in the quiet Possession of them, according to
the intention of the 19th Article in the year 1647,) did on the contrary turn
the Protestant Ministers and Schoolmasters out of their Offices, and with
severe Threats forbid both all the Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen, all the
Soldiers of the Garrison, as well as all the Inhabitants and Citizens, to
continue the Exercise of Religion (which had been enjoyed in the same place
from time out of Memory, and was confirmed by the Articles as we have already
said) till Your Majesty's further Resolution were known, to the great prejudice
of a Spiritual Exercise, which suffers no delay, and to the diminishing of the
Right granted to the Protestants by the Articles, and confirmed by Your
Majesty's Favor.

Therefore they do wholly Rely on the Articles, and Your Majesty's Grant, and
Humbly beg, that not only convenient and fit places, within the Walls of the
said City be appointed to them, for the Building of Churches and Schools, and
Erecting Parishes; but also, that they may have a Free Exercise of Religion,
together with the common and indifferent use of Bells and Burials, according to
the aforesaid 26th Article of Sopron, and as they had formerly.

The Grievances of the Imperial and Free Protestant Cities, Veterozolium,
Breznobania and Libethbania.
ALL the Protestants of the same Imperial and Free Cities, set forth their most
lamentable Case in respect of Religion, that whereas they should not be
hindered to enjoy at least in private the free Exercise of Religion granted by
the Articles of Sopron, to all and every where in the Kingdom (without
excepting any part of it, and less the fourth State, which comprehends all the
Imperial and Free Cities of the Kingdom, belonging properly to the Crown)
through His Imperial Majesty's Favor, according to the clear and evident
explication of the 1st Article made before the Coronation, in the year 1608.
and confirmed in the 25th Article of Sopron, but rather by virtue of the
following 26th Article of Sopron (which speaks in general of the Cities, and by
way of instance names only two of each sort; viz. of the Mountain Cities, and
of the Free Cities) His Majesty's High Commissioners appointed in the year
1688. should also have appointed them commodious and convenient places for the
building of new Churches and Schools, and erecting Parishes, yet they have
obtained nothing: On the contrary, the Ministers have been turned at and
expelled by the High Commissioners, and the Protestants have been most severely
forbidden by the same to exercise their Religion in private, or to go to any
Neighboring place where their Religion is Exercised Moreover against the
express grant of the 11th and 12th Article in the year 1647. maugre the
Protestants and by force, the said High Commissioners have assigned and
appropriated all the proper Revenues of Schools and Churches to the Catholic
Curates which they have brought in, and have very few Followers in the Cities
of Veterozolium, and Breznobania, and but one in Libethbania. In fine, the said
High Commissioners did by all means, and do still compel without distinction,
all the Protestant Inhabitants and Citizens, especially the Trades and
Handy-craft-men to Ceremonies contrary to their Religion; therefore the said
Protestants humbly beg the same Liberty of Religion as is granted in the
Articles, and enjoyed in other Cities, since these in no wise deserve a worse
case; and that there may be assigned them convenient places for the building of
new Churches, and Schools, and erecting Parishes.

The Grievances of the Free and Imperial Cities St. George, Bazinga, Tyrnaw,
Szakoliza, Kussegh, and Rust.
THese Free and Imperial Cities do also lament and set forth their desolate
Case, and great Unhappiness in respect of Religion; that (whereas according to
the genuine Sense of the Articles of Sopron, made in the behalf of Religion,
its free Exercise is granted to everyone, and every where in the Kingdom) they
should not be hindered to enjoy, at least in private the said free Exercise of
Religion; but by Virtue of the 26th Article of Sopron, which speaks in general
of the Cities, Places should have been appointed them for the Building of
Churches, and Schools, and Erecting Parishes, yet they have obtained none of
the premises; but on the contrary, have been forbidden to exercise any way
their Religion, their Ministers have been expelled, and forbidden to come any
more into the said Cities; it is prohibited under the forest punishment to
frequent the places where there is Exercise of Religion, to go thither, to have
Children Baptized, or to receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and to
send for Protestant Ministers to Sick and Dying Persons; in a word, the whole
Exercise of the Protestant Religion is forbidden, against the sense of the
aforesaid Articles, and the Protestants are compelled to Ceremonies contrary to
their Religion; therefore they humbly beg that they may enjoy the same Benefit
as is granted in the Articles, and have places appointed them for the Building
of Churches, and Schools, and Erecting Parishes, as well as the other Cities;
since that Privilege is equally granted to all; and therefore the case of some,
ought not to be worse than that of others.

The Grievances of the Free and Imperial Cities, Trenschin, and Modra.
THese two Free and Imperial Cities complain with a great deal of Sorrow, that
by Virtue of the 26th Article of Sopron, the Lords Commissioners did indeed
assign to them places for the Building of Churches and Schools, and erecting
Parishes, and grant them the free Exercise of their Religion; but with such
Limitation and Restraint as take away many things essentially requisite and
necessary for the said exercise of Religion, and are directly contrary to the
genuine intention of the Articles; as,

First, The Lords Commissioners did lessen the Number of the Protestant
Ministers, and forbid others to be put in their room after their Death.

Secondly, They did forbid all the Protestants (to whom a free Exercise of
Religion is granted, by Virtue of that General Clause of the 25th Article, to
every one, and every where in the Kingdom) to frequent the Neighboring
Churches, and perform in them any duty of Religion.

Thirdly, They did forbid the Ministers to Visit the Estrangers, were they
never so Sick.

Fourthly, They did Order that the Handy-craft-men, and common sort of People
should be compelled under severe punishment to Ceremonies contrary to their
way, viz. To walk with the Catholics in Procession, and carry processional
Trophies.

Fifthly, They did forbid the Protestant Ministers to go and Administer
Baptism, or perform other Ceremonies in the Neighboring Towns.

Sixthly, They did appoint that there should be no petty Schools, but such
where Children could Learn only to Read, and to Write.

The Grievances of the Counties of Upper Hungary, Semlin, Abavivar, Unghwar,
Saraz, Tornaw, etc. and of all the Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen living in
the Mountain Towns of the Principality of Tokai.
THe same Protestants are forced to Represent to Your Most Sacred Majesty, that
although in the following words of the 26th Article of Sopron, but in other
Counties, as in those of Salawar, Vesprim, Saraz, Moramoruss, Abavivar, Sellia,
Semlin, Ugoza, Bodrogh, Tornaw, Komarra, Barzod, Sachsag, Novigrad, Zolnock,
Hewecz, Pesth, Pelicz and Soldth united, Chege, Unghwar, and Zatmar, since the
Protestants are in possession of almost all the Churches there, the same
Churches are left for the use of the actual Possessors of them.

And in the following Clause of the said Article: Finally the Churches which
are actually possessed by those of the Helvetian Confession, and of that of
Ausbourg, shall be still for their use as before, together with the Parishes,
and Schools, and their Revenues, that they may live in peace, and quiet.

Your most Sacred Majesty tending the peace and general quiet of the Kingdom,
has been Graciously pleased to Ordain, that in the foregoing Counties, all the
Churches, Parishes, and Schools, together with their Revenues, should be left
for the use of the Protestants. Nevertheless, the Churches standing in the
Counties of Abavivar, Saraz, Semlin, Tornaw, and Unghwar, (which for the most
part have been built from the foundation, or repaired from the lowest ruin by
the Protestants) as also the Schools and Parishes, together with their Revenues
(left to them by the Protestants in their Wills, and never before possessed by
the Roman Catholics) have been taken by force from the Protestants, as well as
the Churches, Parishes, and Schools, standing in the Dominion of Rakocz, in
these Towns of the County of Semlin, Zantho, Thalia, Mod, Kerethur, Tarazal,
Liszka, Benny, Toleswa, Ughelly, Patak, Borssy, (which at the time of the
Articles of Sopron, and after, were possessed by the Protestants, and left to
the same by the said Articles) in several Towns of the Principality of Tokai,
and in Tokai it self; although the Church of Tokai was left, and expressly
confirmed by the Articles in the possession of the Protestants.

To this may be added, That against the evident sense of the 25th Article of
Sopron, the Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen of the aforesaid Cities of the
County of Semlin, have been, and are still forced to forbear exercising their
Religion in private; which Liberty they had enjoyed since the seizing of their
Churches, and was granted to them by the first Article made before the
Coronation, in the year 1608. and confirmed by the same 25th Article of the
Diet of Sopron.

Likewise the Ministers (called back from their Exile through Your most Sacred
Majesty's Favor, by Virtue of the aforesaid 25th Article of Sopron,) are
forced to oblige themselves under pain of death, and the forfeiture of all
their Goods, to go out of the same County, or by strict Deeds of reversion to
renounce for ever under the same Penalty, to perform any Ecclesiastical Duty in
the said County.

Moreover, although the 25th Article of Sopron evidently declares that none of
the Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausbourg shall be compelled to any
Ceremony contrary to his Religion; and the 26th, that the Catholics shall not
be obliged to pay any thing to the Ministers of the Protestants, nor the
Protestants to the Curates of the Catholics, according to the intent of the
11th Article, in the year 1647. yet they are forced even by Military Execution
to do both, and especially to pay the Catholic Curates.

Although by virtue of the often-mention'd 26th Article, the free use of Bells
and Burials is equally left to the Catholics, and to the Protestants,
nevertheless the Protestants are not suffered to bury their Dead in the usual
Burying-places, which is against Christianity it self, they are not permitted
neither to use the Bells though made through their care; nay the Noblemen and
Gentlemen of the aforesaid Dominion of Rakotz are threatened to be dispossessed
and exterminated out of their Estates, if they do not abjure and renounce the
Protestant Religion, which is a down right persecution of the Protestants. In
the like manner the Protestants of Abavivar are forbidden by the Purveyor of
that County to exercise their Religion; and the Ministers are commanded under
pain of Death, and the forfeiture of all their Goods to go out of it, or (if
they be willing to continue there as Secular private persons) by most strict
deeds of reversion to renounce for ever under the same penalty to perform any
Ecclesiastical Duty; consequently the Protestant Churches, together with all
their Appurtenances have been seized upon by the said Purveyor.

Likewise in a Town called Sepssy of the same County of Abavivar, where the
Church could under no pretense be taken from the Protestants, the Tithes of the
Territory of the said Town which used to belong to the Protestant Minister are
seized, and kept in Sequestration by the (...) of Sepssy, by virtue of an Order
of the Illustrious Chamber of Scepusium.

In the Towns of Nogymihali, Vinna, and Iztara, in the County of Unghwar, and
in the Towns of Tolzeck and Asguth, in the County of Saraz, the Churches,
Schools, and Parishes left by the Articles for the use of the Protestants, are
by force taken and kept from them by the Catholic Lords of those Manors.

Lastly, In the Town called Somogy in the County of Torna, a moiety of the
Revenue belonging to the Protestant Minister by a Convention made formerly is
taken from him.

All which having been attempted against Your Majesty's Gracious Resolution,
and the Articles made in the behalf of the Protestants, they present the same
to Your most Sacred Majesty's Consideration, with strong persuasion that it
will be Graciously Remedied; and that not only they shall be re-setled in the
possession of what is taken from 'em; but also that all the introduced abuses
shall be taken away.

The same Protestant Inhabitants of the aforesaid Counties of Upper Hungary,
and of the Towns standing in the Dominion of Rakoczia.

The same is done by the Counties of Salawar, Vesprim, Saraz, Moramoruss,
Novigrad, Zolnock, Hevecz, Pesth and Soldth, united, which are all comprehended
in the Articles.

The Grievances of all the Protestant Noblemen of the Counties of Liepze,
Thurocz, Arva, Trenschin; Zolnock, and Sachsag; wherein are contained the
Injuries and Troubles they have sustained upon the account of Religion, against
the Articles of Sopron; together with Humble Request for the Redressing of the
same.
SInce the Grievances and Complaints of the Counties of Liepze, Thurocz, Arva,
Trenschin, and Zolnock agree in all respects, for shortness sake they are put
together here; the same then justly complain that they have been injured and
disturbed, in that the Protestant Ministers (who performed the Duties of their
profession in the Noblemens places of Residence, where the free Exercise of
Religion was transferred, by Virtue of the 26th Article of Sopron, since the
seizing of the Protestant Churches in these Counties) have all been Banished
(except two, left in two places named in the Articles) within a fortnight, out
of the County and place where they lived; or if any desired to continue in it,
he was required to oblige himself by strict deed of Reversion never to perform
any Ecclesiastical Duty, and forbidden to remain on any other term, under pain
of Imprisonment.

No Schools are permitted but the Petty (or as the Commissioners term it, such
where Children learn only to Read and to Write) and but in two places mentioned
in the Articles; all the others are generally shut, and prohibited, and their
Masters turned out, although the 25th Article had restored both these, and the
Ministers in their respective Offices.

It is strictly forbidden that the Divine Service and Exercise of Religion be
performed by Protestant Ministers in the Houses and places of Residence of
Noblemen, or in the Oratories and Chapels belonging to them, but with this
admirable Limitation; That if any Nobleman will have the Divine Service done
in his House, he shall employ no other Minister than one of the two left in the
County, and that only for themselves, and their Family.

All the Payments whatsoever (except those which belong to the two Schools
appointed in each County) are adjudg'd to the Catholic Curates, and are
generally wrested by the same with the help of the Soldiers.

The Peasants are absolutely forbidden to Exercise their Religion in the use of
Baptism, Marriage, Confirmation, Burials, and of the Lord's Supper, as also to
frequent the places appointed by the Articles for the Divine Service, and are
compelled with all possible violence, to Ceremonies contrary to their way.

Moreover, in many Towns of the County of Turocz, as in Bella Zatureza and
Pribocz, there were Churches Built at the Charges of the Protestants, whose
Members had not reconciled themselves to the Church of Rome, before the Article
was made; yet without any regard to the Exception contained in the beginning of
the 26th Article, all those Churches have been seized upon, and the use of
Bells and Burials is granted no more to the Protestants, unless they ask and
pay the Catholic Curates for it.

In the County of Sachsag, the Protestants should freely and peaceably have
enjoyed all the Churches, which were in their Possession when the Article was
made, and were left for their use by the same Article; yet the Illustrious
Wolffgang Earl of Kohary, (Supreme Earl of the said County, by Deputation (as
he has declared) of the Illustrious George Earl of Erdedy,) with the assistance
of the Vicount of the same County, has seized the same Churches, except a very
small one, which stands in a most despicable Village called Drieno, and has not
been Built by the Protestants: Commanding withal all the Protestant Ministers
to go out of their respective Parishes, and places of abode under pain of
Emprisonment, and forbidding all Persons of quality to entertain them any way
even privately; although the Protestants of this County had been established, and
confirmed in the free use of all the Churches, which were in their Possession
when the Article was made.

The most Humble and Lawful Demands of the aforesaid Counties are these.
SInce His most Sacred Majesty both by the Confirmation of the 25th and 26th
Articles of the Diet of Sopron, made in 21st Article of the Diet of Presburg,
in the year 1687, and by the Resolution declared to the Deputies of the said
Counties in their Audience, has engaged his Royal Word, not only to observe the
aforesaid Articles in all their Points and Clauses, but also to cause the
others to observe the same; therefore the Protestants of the aforesaid Counties
Humbly beg, that according to the most simple and evident Sense of the same
Articles, they may be Redressed, Reestablished, Restored, and by an express
Decree confirmed in the following particulars.

That according to the intention of the the 25th Article of the Diet of Sopron,
all their Ministers and Rectors may live freely among them, and perform the
Duties of their Profession, without any Limitation, since the same Article
Grants thus much, restoring both the Ministers and Schoolmasters, even those
which were Banished, annulling their Deeds of Reversion.

That as many Churches and Chapels, (whose Members are not reconciled to the
Church of Rome, and have been Built by the Protestants,) as stand in the said
Counties be restored to us, to Exercise our Religion in them, according to the
intent of the aforesaid 26th Article.

That according to the intention of the so often mentioned 26th Article, the
Protestants of the said Counties, be discharged from paying any thing to the
Catholic Curats, and obliged only to entertain their own Ministers.

Lastly, That any Protestant of whatsoever State and Condition, not excluding
the Peasants (according to these words of the 25th Article, to every one and
every where,) may freely Exercise his Religion without being compelled to
contrary Ceremonies; and that neither of the Parties presume to disturb any
way, the other under the pain mentioned in the said Article.

Besides, the foregoing Demands wherein the County of Sachsag joins with the
other Counties, by a particular Right granted in the Articles, the same County
of Sachsag requires, that all the seized Churches be restored to the
Protestants, which were in their Possession when the Article was made.

The Grievance of the City of Gyongyos.
THis City complains, that whereas according to the express Grant of the 26th
Article, of the Diet of Sopron in these words: But in other Counties, viz. in
those of Salavar, Vesprim, etc. and Geves (in which this City stands) since the
Protetestants are actually in Possession of almost all the Churches there, etc.
Item, Finally the Churches, which are actually possessed by those of the
Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausbourg, shall be still for their use,
etc.

It should have been left in the actual Possession, and use of all the
Protestant Churches, Parishes and Schools which were quietly possessed by the
Protestants, before and after the Diet of Sopron to the Date underwritten; yet
to the great Contempt of His Imperial Majesty's, and of the Article's Grant,
and to the great prejudice of the Protestants Right, by Order and Commission of
the most Reverend Archbishop of Gran, and of the Right Honorable George Earl
of Erdody, not only the Churches, but also the Schools and Parishes with all
their Appurtenances (consisting in Eleven Vineyards, Five Mills, One Butcher's
Stall, and a House which had all been given by Protestants in their Wills, or
Purchased with the Protestants Money,) were seized by force on the 21st of May,
in the year 1688 last past, by the Honorable Jean Almassy of Heves, and
Francis Setuitter of Pesth, Judges of the same Counties; moreover the
Protestant Ministers and Schoolmasters were Banished, the Free Exercise of
Religion even in private Houses is forbidden, as well as the use of Bells and
Burials in proper places, the Protestants being strictly Commanded to Bury
their Dead in remote Highways and Commons, where all the Filth of the Towns is
carried: Therefore they lawfully Demand a full Restitution of all that has been
taken from them, and an exact Execution of the aforesaid Article.

The Grievance of the City of Moramoruss.
THe Protestant Citizens and Inhabitants, together with the Militia of
Moramoruss complain, that although by Virtue of the 26th Article of Sopron,
(wherein the same City of Moramoruss is expressly, named,) they had obtained the
liberty of exercising publicly their Religion, and of having Churches,
Parishes and Schools; and have quietly enjoyed the same without giving any
offense to the Catholics, until the fatal breaking out of the Wars in the year
1683, and the unexpected Burning of the Town, which occasioned an interruption
of the said Exercise of Religion, the Ministers and their Parishioners having
been forced to disperse themselves up and down; yet since the Troubles are
appeased, they desire in vain to reassume their public exercise of Religion,
and to call back their Ministers, being hindered from the same by the Earl of
Hoffkirchen Governor of this Territory, who every day growing severer, forbids
with greater Threats, the total Exercise of the Protestant Religion: Nay, three
Months ago the Roman Catholics did Proclaim with the Beat of Drums, that no
Protestant should presume to go out of the Territory of Moramoruss, to any
Neighboring, to perform the Duties of his Religion; nor Exercise it in his
private House under pain of Imprisonment, and of other severe Punishments.
Therefore they Humbly beg, That this their Grievance may be redressed, and they
re-established in the Privilege granted by the Article.

It may be added to the foregoing Grievances, that one Samuel Bizkey, a
Protestant Minister of a place of Lower Hungary called Hedes; notwithstanding
the Protection granted to him by the Council of War, has been Plundered twice
of all the means of Life, Clothes, Books and Furniture, by some Emissaries of
the Archbishop of Gran; and at last on the 22d of the last Month of March, was
taken and carried to Presburg, into the Prisons of the Archbishop, where he has
nothing allowed him, but dry Bread and dirty Water.

Likewise, the Protestant Minister of Tottfalu in Upper Hungary, has been taken
by a Jesuit called Father Ravasz, residing at Naghybania, and carried in
Fetters into the Prisons of Zatmar, where he is still detained and most
barbarously used.

The XXI. Article of the Diet of Presburg, in the year 1687, in the business of
Religion, the 25th and 26th Articles of the year 1681, are renewed with the
inserted Decleration.
ALthough they of the Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausbourg, by their
protesting against the 25th and 26th Articles, of the late Diet of Sopron, have
unworthily abused the same, and thereby forfeited ipso facto, the benefits
granted in them; nevertheless since His most Sacred Majesty tending the Union;
and the general quiet of the Kingdom, through his great Favor and Clemency,
has most Graciously resolved, that the said Articles shall yet be in force; the
States have Ordered, That the same shall be looked upon as renewed and
reinforced, (notwithstanding the opposition of the Catholic Clergy, and other
secular Persons,) and that as far as they have hitherto been infringed through
Abuses, introduced by the one, or the other party, they shall forthwith be put
in Execution.

To these Agrievances the Emperor returned a very Gracious Answer, and made
several Proposals tending to a Peace.

And First, He offered a General Pardon unto all, even to Tekeli himself,
provided he would personally appear to make his Submission.

Secondly, That every Person should be restored to his Lands, and Goods
confiscated again restored.

Thirdly, That free exercise of Religion should be allowed; but the manner how,
and the Regulation thereof should be determined at a General Diet, which was
judged of absolute necessity for the repose, and quiet of Hungary.

Fourthly, That all the vacant Offices, Governors and Balliages of that
Kingdom, should be indifferently conferred upon Hungarian Gentlemen, who were
capable by their Natural parts, and Abilities to Merit and Discharge such
Preferments.

And Lastly, That his Imperial Majesty would vacate the Office of Vice-King,
and return to the ancient constitution of a Palatine, whose Election should be
free according to the usage of former times.

The Plague which still Raged in Austria, and Hungary prevented the proceedings
of this Treaty, which might have taken effect some time before, How the Treaty
was broken off.
and answered all the Demands of the Malcontents; but now so much Blood had
been drawn in all Parts, and Corners of that unhappy Kingdom, that it was past
the Art of Man to stanch the Bleeding: And besides, Tekeli and his Malcontents
were so nearly adjoined, and engaged in secret Leagues, and Alliances with the
Turk, that it was almost impossible to destricate, and disentangle themselves
from the invitations they had made, and from the Assurances, and Pledges they
had given to the Turks. Howsoever, the Emperor not to leave any means
unattempted, until all was become desperate, dispatched Count Esterhasi into
Hungary in quality of his Plenipotentiary, to put those Overtures into
Execution which had been framed, and debated in the Emperor's Council. But
whilst these things were in agitation, they received another Impediment, by a
discovery made of a Correspondence, which several Principal Officers held with
the Maleconts; upon which Filek, and two other Counselors, and Mannagers of
the Revenue of Hungary were Arrested, and accused of having moved, and promoted
an Insurrection in diverse Counties.

Toward the end of this year, when the Armies were drawn into their Winter
quarters, new Treaties were set on foot. The Baron de Kaunitz the Emperor's
Resident at Constantinople labored to continue, Kaunitz Treats with the Grand
Seignior.
and renew the Truce; but the Grand Vizier would not agree thereunto on any
other Terms, than that it might be allowable for the Grand Seignior to afford
aid, and assistance to the Malcontents: But this was to cure a Soar with a
greater Evil, and what was inconsistent with Reason, to make a Peace, and yet
to continue a War.

When the Emperor believed all Accommodation with the Malcontents impossible,
at least far distant; Behold on a sudden, and much unexpected, the Counts
Tekeli, Tekeli and others offer Conditions.
Pestrozzi and Wessellino in despite of their Engagements to the Turks,
offered to make Terms by themselves; and to abandon their People and their
Cause, in case they assented not thereunto; The Conditions were to have all
their Churches restored, with their Goods and Estates, which had been
Confiscated: To which the Emperor readily assenting, there never appeared at
any time a greater probability and likelihood of an Agreement, than upon this
overture: But whereas to establish and confirm such an Accommodation, it was
necessary to convene a Diet, which by reason of the present Contagion could not
be done, a Cessation of Arms was in the mean time concluded: But whilst in
order thereunto a Conference was held at Tokai, Count Caprara unluckily marched
out of his Quarters with a considerable force toward that place; Is again
broken.
upon which the Malecontens were so Allarum'd, that they Sallied out of their
Winter quarters in great numbers, leaving the Treaty imperfect, and the
Cessation of Arms broken and violated.

ANNO 1681.
Notwithstanding the unlucky Accidents which had happened to hinder, and
disappoint the Progress of the aforesaid Treaties; Yet at the beginning of this
year new overtures were made to the Malcontents by the Bishop Sebestini: And
though some of the most considerable Persons of the Hungarian party, refused to
hearken to any Offers which the Emperor should make them; yet Tekeli, and
others, Tekeli and other chiefs send Deputies to Lintz.
formerly the most averse to all Accommodation, did now at least in a seeming
manner favor the Methods which tended toward Peace; and in order thereunto,
did not only dispatch Deputies as far as to Lintz, to Treat thereupon with the
Imperial Ministers; but likewise entertained a personal Conference with Count
Caprara, and agreed with him to continue a Truce until the result of a Diet
should be known, which was to convene in the Month of Febuary.

That which in all appearance was most probable to administer the greatest
difficulty, and cause of dispute, when a Diet should assemble, was the
restitution of the Churches, Schools, and other Foundations which the
Malcontents challenged as their own, and upon the Right, and Title of having
Erected, and Built them at their own charge and expense. They were also very
positive to have their ancient Government by a Palatine restored, and all the
German Garrisons withdrawn out of Hungary, at least, that the Officers placed
over the German Forces should be Hungarians, the better to keep the Soldiers
within some Terms of Moderation, and Good Behavior toward the People of the
Country.

The time appointed for the Diet to meet being come, the Emperor removed to
Newstadt, to be nearer to the place of Treaty. But it being the Fate of that
poor Kingdom to be unhappy, something or other still intervened to prevent and
disappoint the Endeavors of Peace; A Plot to seize Tekeli during the Truce.
for whilst some labored in that good Work, others made it their business to
impede and divert it. And so it was at present; for whilst Tekeli was
delighting himself at a House of Pleasure, a Plot was laid to surprise and take
him during the Truce; of which Tekeli having notice, How it was prevented.
he countermined the Plot by an Ambuscade; which being opportunely disposed in
the way where they were to pass, the Party which came to seize him was totally
defeated. This, and other Artifices of the like nature, fomented jealousies and
diffidences between the Parties, that nothing was acted clearly, and with a
free Spirit, but with such Caution and reserves, as easily presaged the little
hopes of an accommodation by way of Treaty. Howsoever, some Zealous Men, such
as Esterhasi, and Forgatz, who were passionate for the peace of their Country,
traveled from County to County, exhorting the People to lay aside all
Animosities, Esterhasi and Forgatz make offers of Peace.
and return again unto that Allegiance and Duty which they owed unto their
Prince; upon assurance that the Emperor would restore the State of Hungary to
the same Condition in which it was in the year 1662. and grant almost all the
other Propositions which the Malcontents did demand; provided that the States
of that Kingdom would declare the Archduke Joseph, Son to the Emperor, King of
Hungary.

To this Proposal the Malcontents were ready also to condescend; on Condition,
that at the same time the Kingdom were declared Elective, and some Acts
repealed, which in the year 1664 had made it Hereditary.

Notwithstanding this difficulty, and diverse others which were daily started,
displeasing to the Emperor, the Meeting of a Diet at Oedemburg was so warmly
pressed, that the Emperor's Commissioners, and fourteen Deputies from the
Malcontents Assembled in the Month of February, as was agreed, though Tekeli
refused to be there present, alleging that the late Treacherous Design against
his Person, was a sufficient and a just Excuse for his Absence. This, and some
Dispute about the place of Meeting (which the Imperialists desired might be at
Presburg) occasioned a Prorogation of the Diet until April next following. The
Diet prorogued until Apr^ll.
In the mean time the Malcontents held their Consultations in Transylvania,
concerning the Measures and Methods they were to take in the next Campaign; and
made use of the cessation of Arms, to fortify their Garrisons, and supply them
with Provisions.

The Clergy of Hungary finding in the Emperor a Spirit so inclined unto Peace,
that he was ready to condescend unto all the Demands of the Malcontents; and
with the rest, to grant and yield unto them all the Churches, of which they had
been deprived; they being touched with a sense of the mischief which might
accrue to themselves thereby, The Clergy endeavor to disturb the Diet.
sent their Deputies to Vienna before the Convention of the Diet, to represent
unto the Emperor the great prejudice, damage and scandal he would cause to the
Catholic Religion, by delivering up the Churches, which were already
Consecrated, and Hallowed to the Service of God, to be profaned by Impious and
Heretical Worships. This, and such like Speeches served to trouble and distract
the Mind of the good Emperor with a thousand new Scruples. Howsoever, being
desirous to appease the Troubles in Hungary, and not disappoint that August
Assembly, His Imperial Majesty (a full Month before the Convention) removed to
Newstadt, to be near, and on all Occasions to be assistant to the Diet; which,
notwithstanding the former Disputes to the contrary, was to be held at
Oedemburg. The Deputies jealous of the Emperors Guards.
But whereas the Emperor was attended with three Regiments for his Guard, the
Appearance seemed so extraordinary on such an Occasion, that the Malcontents
refused to send their Deputies, fearing to be over-awed in their Debates and
Votes by a Military power; unless the Archbishop of Strigonium, and other
German Lords were first delivered into their hands for Hostages, and Security
of fair and faithful Dealings;

But to remove this difficulty, the Emperor discharged his Regiments; and with
a Guard only of six hundred Hungarians, The Emperor enters into Oedemberg, and
holds the Diet.
made his Entry on the two and twentieth of May into Oedemburg, where he was
received between the double Files of Hungarian and German Soldiers, and
Conducted to the Lodgings prepared for him by the Commissioners and Deputies
there present

The Diet, over which Count Swartzemburg presided in the Name of the Emperor,
had sat several days before his Majesty's Arrival. And on the first day of the
Session, before they would enter upon any other Business, the Election of a
Palatine was proposed, and three Persons were Nominated thereunto, viz.
Esterhasi, Palfi, and Erdedi; and accordingly were offered to the Emperor to
make choice of the Person which he thought most worthy, A Palatine offered.
and agreeable to that high Employment, and Office of Trust. But whereas this
Prince was entirely in the hands, and possessed by Father Emeric, lately made
Archbishop of Vienna, and Abele the Secretary, he refused to determine the
Choice, until such time as he had consulted with these two Confidents thereupon.

By this Retardment, all other Matters moved slowly, though the Diet sat eight
hours every day. The least point Administered matter of Dispute, Affairs
obstructed.
and what at the first appearance seemed easy and of little importance, was
rendered difficult and intricate, by reason of the Spirit of Dissension and
Bitterness with which that whole Assembly was possessed. And moreover Father
Emeric excepting against every Person which the Diet proposed for Palatine,
gave a stop to all Proceedings, that the Assembly was upon dissolving; and
Prince Swartzemburg became so tired and wearied with the many unprofitable and
fruitless endeavors, that he delivered up his Commission to, Count Capeliers,
Superintendant of the Council of War, to preside in his Place.

And so restless were the Soldiers, and difficult to be restrained from
breaking out into Acts of Hostility, that during the Cessation of Arms, a Party
of the Malcontents fell upon a Regiment of the Imperialists and cut them in
pieces.

Howsoever the Diet still continued, and the Emperor at length, with the Advice
of his two Favorites, Count Esterhasi made Palatine.
pitched upon Count Esterhasi to bear the Office of Palatine in Hungary; to
whom having administered the Oath of Allegiance, and Fidelity, he returned back
again to Newstadt. The next day following, the Diet received a Letter Signed by
Count Tekeli, and six others, signifying their Resolutions to accept the
Pardon, and submit to the Emperor: Provided that they might have a free
exercise of their Religion granted, their Churches and Estates which were
confiscated, restored; and the Money which they had engaged to pay the Turk,
supplied, and paid for them by the Emperor. A new Proposition made by Tekeli.
And that for performance of the Articles, some means and expedients should be
found out for a satisfactory Security. This Letter was immediately dispatched
to the Emperor, who with his Council, considering thereupon, absolutely
rejected the new Article relating to the Turks, to whom it was resolved to make
no payments of Money: Of which answer Tekeli being informed, he dispatched a
Message immediately unto Count Caprara, giving him to understand, that he was
no longer able to contain his Soldiery within the Rules, and Laws of the Truce,
and so without farther delay seized upon two Passes between Cassovia and Tokai:
And to put Matters yet more backwards; the Deputies who represented the
Malcontents at the Diet, made a Petition to the Emperor, requesting him, that
he would be graciously pleased, to remove out of his Councils and Offices of
Trusts all such, as have had any hand, or been instrumental in promoting those
Troubles and Civil dissentions, which had now near the space of Twenty years
infested and oppressed that unhappy Kingdom: But to this Demand the Emperor
made no other answer, Than that he would consider it. By these motions and
steps in the Diet toward a Peace, the Turks conceived a Jealousy, that Tekeli
was disposed and inclined to an Accommodation with the Emperor: Pasha was
ordered to discourse and tamper with him, The Turks jealous of Tekeli.
and offer him the Principality of Transylvania after the Death of Apafi: And
entertaining also frequent Conferences with him and other Leaders of the
Malcontents, the Pasha so managed his Discourse with them, by declaring the
many advantages, they would receive by covering and shrouding themselves, under
protection of the Grand Seignior; Their offers to him.
that he prevailed upon them to make an offer of Eighty thousand Crowns, in
case the Grand Seignior would promise to assist them with a Puissant and Royal
Army. The Emperor upon notice of this private and perfidious Treaty with the
Turk, was highly incensed, and commanded that neither Tekeli, Tekeli forbid the
Diet.
nor any of those who were concerned in this Conference, should be admitted as
Members into the Diet: And giving it now for granted, that a War would ensue
with the Turk, the Marquis of Baden was ordered to Fortify Raab, and Count
Staremberg to finish the Fortifications of Vienna, from the Arsenal of which
place great quantities of Grenades, Bombs, Powder, with Arms, and heavy Cannon
were transported down the Danube, to supply that Important Fortress of Raab.

Notwithstanding all which, the Deputies continued to labor in the Diet, and
to examine the Aggrievances of the Malcontents; and the Palatine Esterhasi made
frequent Journies between Oedemburg, and Newstadt to render an Account of all
Passages, and Transactions to the Emperor: And that a conclusion might be put
to all matters in question; the Archbishop of Vienna went to the Diet, to agree
certain differences arisen between the Clergy and the Laity of Hungary,
touching the Title to some Lands and Demesnes, which was still depending in a
Law Suit between them. Acts made at the Diet.
After this Point was agreed, the whole Result of the Diet was drawn up in
Writing, and sent to Tekeli; the Substance whereof was this, That all the
Churches which the Protestants had Built at their own charge and expense should
be restored; with free License to Erect and Build more, in any part of the
Kidgdom, and therein to exercise their Religion, and publicly to Preach. That
a considerable Sum of Money should be paid to the Turks for once and no more,
but not by way of Tribute: Provided that the Truce made in the year 1664, be
again renewed for twenty years longer, under the same Articles and Conditions:
And farther, several expedients and means were agreed for raising Moneys for
payment of the Troops, and defraying the charges of the Kingdom, during these
times of trouble. To confirm all which Tekeli was desired to appear at the Diet
(notwithstanding the late Prohibition) and to concur with the other Deputies by
Signing these Articles: Tekeli called to the Diet.
And lest he should make the insecurity of his Person an excuse for his
Nonappearance, the Son of Count Esterhasi the Palatine, was offered for a
Hostage. Tekeli by the Secretary to the Palatine, who returned from him in the
Month of July, unto the Diet still Sitting at Oedemburg; with an answer to this
effect; That Tekeli would not be satisfied with less, than an entire
restitution of all the Churches: That one single Sum of what value soever would
not content the Turks, Tekeli's answer.
who required an Annual Tribute of 40.000 Rix Dollars, without which they
refused to restore to the Malcontents their Wives, and Children which they had
given in Hostage: And moreover, this Messenger gave them to understand, that
Tekeli absolutely refused to appear at the Diet, and that He, and his Party
were not satisfied with the Election of Esterhasi to be Palatine. This answer
was the cause of much Debate and Division in the Diet; and their Minds and
Councils were farther disturbed upon the News, that the Forces of the
Malcontents being joined with a considerable Body both of Turks and
Transilvanians, were become 15.000 strong; that the Pasha of Waradin kept so
close a Correspendence with the Malcontents, that it was more than probable,
that their interest and alliances were so firmly united, that neither Party was
at liberty to make Terms, or Articles of Peace without the Assent, or
Concurrence of the other. The truth of which soon appeared; for Tekeli not long
afterward marched near the Confines of Belgrade, Tekeli joins with the Turks.
where he joined with a Body of 20.000 Turks; and thereby gave evident
Demonstrations of his Resolution to maintain the War, and that his former
proposals, and steps toward Peace, were all false and feigned, with design to
Amuse the Minds of the Emperor and the Diet. The Turks had not as yet declared
a War, for their Forces and Troops from the remote parts of Asia were not in a
readiness, nor on their March; till which time the Emperor was to be amused
with Treaties, and the appearance of that great Body of Turks near Belgrade,
was with pretension only to restore Tekeli to the Possession of his Lands,
Houses, and Estate, of which he had been unjustly deprived by the Emperor, and
his Favorites.

The Emperor finding it now absolutely necessary to conclude an Accommodation
with the Malcontents, amongst whom new difficulties daily arose, returned in
Person from Newstadt to the Diet at Oedemburg, where the Malcontents thought
it reasonable, that the Tribute which they had engaged to pay unto the Turks,
should be charged and levied on the Estates of those, who had been the causes
of the Troubles, and Confusions in that Kingdom. This motion had so little
ground, and was so unlikely to succeed, that it put all things backwards; and
induced the Emperor to limit the Session of the Diet to the 16th of August,
hoping within that time to agree on all Points with such, who continued
constant in their Loyalty and Allegiance to him; and for particular
Aggrievances, they were to be composed by a Select Committee appointed for that
purpose. But all this while most of the Protestants refused to come to the
Diet, by reason that the Points about Religion were post-poned, by the
endeavors of the Archbishop of Strigonium, which they in the first place, and
before all other Matters desired to have decided.

This Point being laid aside, the Diet fell to debate on the Proposition sent
by Tekeli, relating to a Tribute demanded by the Turks; and as an expedient,
and by way of Equivalent for that, it was proposed to resign into the Hands of
the Turks three Counties, viz. Kalo, Zatmar and Liptpow; to which the Turks
seemed with some reason to claim a Title, in regard, that no longer than since
the year 1660, they had been disjoined from the Principality of Transylvania.
But an end was soon put to this Controversy; for both the Hungarians
themselves were unwilling to have a Peace purchased from the Turk at the price
of their Country, by dismembring three Counties from that Kingdom; at the
mentioning only of which the People were so enraged, that fearing lest the
Emperor should privately conclude some Article with the Turk in reference
thereunto, they would not be satisfied until he had permitted them to join one
of their Confidents with Caprara, the Emperor's Resident at Constantinople, who
might be privy to all the Treaties, and Negotiations with the Turk; nor would
the Turks accept thereof in satisfaction for renewing the Truce, but raised new
and greater Demands, as they found the Emperor inclinable to yield and
condescend: The Turks raise their Demands.
For now the Grand Vizier required to have Leopolstadt demolished, on pretense
that it had been Built, and Fortified contrary to the Articles of the late
Treaty: And declared likewise the Grand Seignior's resolution, to give aid and
assistance to the Malcontents, until such time, as he had put them into a
capacity of paying the Annual Tribute, for which they were engaged.

New difficulties were every day started at the Diet, so that the Emperor was
desirous to dissolve it, so soon as was possible; but yet he thought not fit to
do it abruptly, or to break it up in discontent; but that something might be
done in matters of Religion, The Emperor Grants several matters.
on which the Protestants most insisted: In order unto which it was agreed, to
grant them a hundred Churches, with Money to build others, in places most
convenient.

That all Cities and Towns, should enjoy a free exercise of their Religion: And
that all Hungarian Soldiers in the Frontier Garrisons should do the like.

That all Churches which since the year 1670, had been in the Possession of
either Party, should so remain.

That Lutherans and Calvinists might build Churches in any Town, or City where
they were wanting, and Lords and Gentlemen might build Chapels, or Oratories
in any of their Houses, or Castles.

That in case any Points of Difference should arise relating to Religion, or
the Matters preceding, they were not to be decided by the Sword, but by the
Sentence of the King of Hungary. And that all People of what Persuasion soever
might live amicably, no Person was to Revile the other on account of his or
their Religion, or to utter injurious or unhansome Terms thereof.

These particulars with some additional Regulations, being at last agreed in
the Diet, and signed by the Emperor; The next great work was, in what manner
the Malcontents might be restored to their Estates, and to their Goods which
had been confiscated: And how the German Troops, Aggrievances considered.
and stranger Soldiers might with safety and ease be removed out of their
Garrisons, and all parts of Hungary; which next to the business of Religion,
was the greatest concernment of the Diet. The next Aggrievance was the Chamber
of the Kingdom, which Office, contrary to the will and approbation of the
Deputies of the States, was executed by the Bishop of Newstadt, whom they
considered as the Chief Author, and Fomenter of all the Troubles of that
Kingdom: But herein, the Emperor was not willing as yet to gratify the Diet.
Nor could the Deputies agree amongst themselves of the manner, how to make
those things practicable, which they in the most erarnest manner desired: And
such were the Divisions amongst them, that what the Seculars agreed upon in the
Morning, was disturbed, and undone by the Clergy in the Afternoon; which the
Emperor well considering, and how Men of such different interests perplex all
Councils; was pleased to dismiss the Archbishop of Strigonium, and the Bishop
of Newstadt, as also the Count Capliers, a great stickler for the Rights of the
Church, from their attendance on the Diet; so that the Imperial Commissioners
were reduced to three Persons, namely the Prince of Swartzemburg, the Count of
Nostiz, and Oker the Chancellor. And farther, The Emperor satisfies the
Malcontents.
to satisfy the Malcontents in their pretensions, the Bishop of Newstadt, was
put by his Office of Vice President of the Chamber of Hungary, and the same was
conferred on Count Erdedi, a Person much more acceptable to the People. This
gracious Clemency and Compliance of the Emperor, was so satisfactory to the
Protestants, that they wholly submitted that point about the confiscated Goods
to the favor, and benign inclinations of his Imperial Majesty, who not to
abuse that confidence which his Subjects reposed in him, did freely, and of his
own accord, give order, that the Goods, and Estates of the Counts Serini,
Nadasti, and Frangipani, with those of several other Lords, that had been
confiscated for High Treason, should be restored again to their Children or
Heirs. And the States on the other side to demonstrate the Gratitude and Duty
which they professed unto their Prince, did in Testimony thereof, make a
Present unto the Empress of a Purse of Gold, containing 2000 Ducats, which her
Majesty graciously received; and bestowed the same toward Reparations of the
Catholic Churches, which by reason of the Wars, and other Troubles of the
Kingdom, were become ruinous and decayed: Which if the Protestants had
foreseen, it is probable, they would have employed the Money rather for
Reparation of their own Churches, than to those of their Adversaries. Thus the
chief Points of Difference being amicably concluded, and signed by the Emperor,
The Diet dissolved.
the Diet was dissolved the 29th of December 1681. after which the Emperor with
his Court returned to Vienna.

But these Treaties and Agreements were so imperfect and so little observed, by
reason of the Wars with the Turks, Parties and Factions breaking out every day,
and continual Skirmishes disannulling the Arcles concluded; nothing could be
built hereupon, nor the Agreement take the least effect, nor so much as
regarded, until the year 1689. when the Turks Suing for a Peace, the
Protestants made the following Address to His Imperial Majesty as follows,
The which I have inserted here for the sake of the Reader, and the easiness in
understanding this History.

Sacratissima Caesarea Regiaque Majestas Domine Domine Clementissime.
LIcet firmiter omnino supponeremus ab Anno jam integro and medio Articularem
medelam Gravaminum Religionis nostrae Evangelicae humillime supplicantibus, and
subinde before ac before tam injurias contra Articulos Sopronienses 25 and
26. Anno 1681. nobis illatas, quam etiam claras, and omni obscuritate carentes
eorundum Articulorum Concessiones pro basi and fundamento legitimae Instantiae
nostrae adducentibus nobis, Justiam Causae and Postulatorum nostrorum Majestati
Vestrae Serenissimae, ac passim omnibus Augustissimae Aulae suae Ministris
usque adeo innotuisse, ut ulteriori dictae instantiae nostrae recrudescentia
and commemoratione non nisi rem actam agere videamur.

Quia vero non raro id circumferri nunc etiam intelligimus, vel quod
Commissiones Regiae per Hungariam anno praeterito, ac ante institutae, nihil
contra dictamen praescriptorum Articulorum Soproniensium instituerint, vel quod
plura nos petamus, quam iidem Articuli nobis permitterent.

Pro utriusque proinde praemissae dubietatis sublatione, ac item clare satis
instantiae nostrae placidatione (vel eo magis, quod saepe saepius per
meritissimos Majestatis Vestrae Serenissimae Augustissimae Aulae Ministros
desuper assecurati fuerimus, quod, quae in praescriptis Articulis
Soproniensibus clara essent, circa ea nos citra quamvis difficultatem and
procrastinationem expeditos and comservatos iri:) Operae pretium existimavimus
nos facturos si membratim tam dictorum Articulorum formalem Contextum, ac in
iis radicatam, immediateque verbis Articulorum subnexam instantiam nostram,
quam praedictarum Commissionum Regiarum, vel and eorundem hominum, aliorumque
ingerentium, sub schemate praetextu effectuationis Articulorum praejudiciosas
and exquisitas interpretationes, ac desuper institutas decisiones, hic, seu in
Tabella quapiam e diametro sibi ad invicem opposuerimus, hacque ratione and
praescriptorum Articulorum per nonnullos factam Convulsionem, and articulariter
luculentae Instantiae nostrae aequitatem, simulac multiplices injurias, ad
oculum quasi, profundissima Homagialis fidelitalis cum subjectione
demonstraverimus. Et quidem

ARTICULUS XXV. Haec formalia habet.
ET quia propter bonum Pacis, tranquillitatemque Regni publicam in Negotio
Religionis quoque sua Majestas sese benign resolvere dignata esset: Ideo
eandem etiam Resolutionem Articulis Regni Status and Ordines inserun^

I. Ac imprimis quidem, cum liberum Religionis exercitium jam antea in Anno
1606. vigore Pacificationis Viennensis concessum, his motibus a part
nonnullorum interturbatum fuisset: Ideo confirmato hoc loci Articulo 1. dictae
Pacificationis, idem Exercitium omnibus and ubique per Regnum, (salvo tamen
Jure Dominorum Terrestrium) juxta Articulum primum Anno 1608. ante Coronationem
editum, liberum permittitur.

[Hinc ex his Articuli verbis legitime instamus, ut idem exercitium quod Annis
prioribus, seu sub iis motibus, a part nonnullorum turbatum fuisset, nec
aliter ante dictos motus, quam per Ministros Evangelicos, seu Praedicantes,
exercebatur, Omnibus and ubique per Regnum (quod ex vi praecitati Articuli 1.
Anno 1608. ante Coronationem editi, per expressum omnes etiam Liberas
Civitates, qua quartum Statum in se comprehenderet, adeoque ad Oppida and
Villas etiam evidentissime se extenderet) liberum permittatur.]

II. Ac Praedicantibus quoque and Scholarum Magistris, alias vel proscriptis,
vel propter certas Reversales munia suae professionis exercere non valentibus,
liber in in Regnum reditus, liberaque Religionis suae Professio and Exercitium,
cassatis eatenus etiam ipsorum Reversalibus, conceditur.

[Hinc quoque legitime lucidissimeque sequitur, Praedicantes, and Scholarum
Magistros ab exilio ad Professionis suae munia and exercitium restitutos,
libere in Regno, universis item Civitatibus, Oppidis, and Villis subsistere,
and Religionis suae professione Exercitium ac munia peragere posse: Neque
ulterius aliquas Reversales jam taliter Articulo tenus damnatas and cassatas ab
iis exigi convenire.]

III. Et nullus Regnicolarum in libero suae Religionis Exercitio a modo
impoposterum quoquomodo turbetur.

[Ista nullitas clarissime concludit, nec Ecclesiasticas, nec seculares
Personas, adeoque nec Nobilem, nec Civem, nec Rusticum in libero Religionis
suae exercitio turbandum. Id vero ut dicatur Exercitium Liberum caussas and
instrumenta, per quae exercetur, Ministros videlicet denecesse requiri, nemo
negabit.]

IV. Sed neque Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni addicti ad Caeremonias
Confessioni suae contrarias compellantur.

[Haec generalitas quoque confirmat priora, id est, nec Nobiles, nec Ignobiles,
nec Cives, nec Rusticos quoque compelli debere.

Processus, seu Conclusiones, Commissionum Regiarum Articulis Soproniensibus
omni ex part adversantes.
COntra membrum ex adverso positum Primum Excelsae Commissiones Regiae, vel per
se, vel per homines privatos in compluribus Liberis ac Regiis, Montanisque
Civitatibus, signante^ in Sancto Georgio, Bazinij, Tyrnaviae, Szakolizae,
Schemnizij, Veterozolij, Carponae, Libethbanyae, Breznobanyae, Bahabanyae,
Belobanyae, Vibanyae, Kuszeghini and Ruszt, quae alias essent Liber idemque
quartus status, tale liberum exercitium (quod nimirum consisteret in cultu
divino per verbi Dei praedicationem, Cantionum, Orationum, Baptismatum, sacrae
Eucharistiae, Copulae, Sepulturae, and aliarum pro ritu suo susceptarum
Ceremoniarum usum and administrationem, adeoque per Ministros Ecclesiasticos
fieri and exerceri assoleret) non admittendo, imo severe inhibendo: Patet ex
eo, dictas Commissiones in praescriptis locis taliter totale Exercitium contra
dictum Articulum sustulisse. Siquidem ubi haec talia non exercentur, id nec
exercitium dici posset. Non absimiliter Oppida, Villas, and Rusticos (vi
praejudiciosae illius in apertissimum exterminium Liberae Religionis
Evangelicae, ac etiam Evangelicorum tendentis adjectae and insertae Clausulae:
Salvo jure Dominorum Terrestrium) contra tenorem confirmationis allegati
Articuli 1. Ann. 1608. In omnibus Comitatibus libero Exercitio taliter privasse.

Contra II. Dictae Commissiones passim ubique per Regnum and Comitatus duobus
solum Praedicantibus in singulo Comitatu, ac uno vel altero in quibusdam
liberis Civitatibus permissis, reliquos omnes alibi intra quindenam, alibi
intra triduum, uti in Comitatibus Lyptoviensi, Arvensi, Thuroczensi, Howhensi,
Zoliensi, aliisque, extra Comitatum relegare praesumserunt: Vel si quibus in
Comitatu manner placeret, ab iis strictas Reversales super Ministerij
renuntiatione eo facto exigendas praeceperunt. Scholas etiam Triviales, solum
aliquantum legere and scribere instituentes permitti determinarunt. Qualiter
porro libera illa Religionis suae Prosessio and Exercitium Ministris nostris
per nonnullos servata sit, testantur tam scripta complurimorum extra Comitatus
relegatio, quam Ministrorum quoque Evangelicorum Epperiensium e Civitate, loco
alias Articulariter denominato, per Magistratum Catholicum praetexentem, hane
fuisse Majestatis Vestrae Serenissimae seriam voluntatem ac Mandatum,
licentiose sane intentata exturbatio, adeoque Praedicantium and Scholarum
Rectorum, etiam in Dominio Rakocziano superiorum Regni Hungariae partium,
misere alias degentium, aut sub amissione bonorum and capitis e Dominio eodem
migrandorum, aut severissimis Reversalibus sub eadem cautione ad nulla umquam
munia Ecclesiastica ibidem exercenda semet obstringendorum, per Officiales
ejusdem Dominij intimata violenta Compulsio: and magis quatuor Praedicantium
per Emin. Principem Cardinalem a Kollonich in Arce Ledniezensi facta
incarceratio, a quibus similiter praejudiciosae Reversales subscribendae in sui
eliberationem exiguntur.

Contra III. Isthoc est, super quo cum gemitibus conquerimur, nos tam per ipsas
Commissiones, quam privatas quasque personas, passim turbatos esse: Nec verba
sufficient exprimere, quot modis subinde turabati fuerimus, tam nos, quam
Ministri nostri, ac etiamnum turbantur, ac turbamur. Pro exemplo solum
brevitatis caussa (ne reiterare videamur praememoratos Comitatus, and plurima
Comitatus Zempliniensis in attac^o Dominio Rakocziano superioris Hungariae
existentia Oppida, horumque Ministros) praememorata Civitas Epperies in
superiore Hungaria, and in inferiore, praeter Posonium, Sopronium, Modram,
Cremniczium, Neozolium, omnes caeterae Civitates cum suis Evangelicis
Ministris, sicut etiam Praedicans Hodossiensis in Insula Czalokoz, qui omnibus
vitae mediis, vestitu, libris and supellectili per Secretarium D. D.
Archiepiscopi Strigoniensis, and milites penes se assumtos privatus est: quam
sortem alij quoque quamplurimi patiuntur, and aut speciali Dei providentia, aut
mulctarum pensione, vel vero medio Reversalium, eliberationem sui consequi
poterunt, in continuis vicissitudinibus miseram ac inopem vitam ducentes.

Contra IV. Commissiones Evangelicos in Civitate Trenctriniensi, and aliis
passim ad vexillorum Processionalium comparationem ac ipsas Processiones
cogendos, uti and in confinio Comaromiensi pronuntiarunt, adeoque and Rusticos
Evangelicos ubique ad frequentationem Templorum Catholicorum compellendos
jubent. Imo omnes liberas Civitates Exercitio Evangelico carentes ad Actus
Ministeriales ritui ipsarum contrarios adigere mandant.

ARTICULUS XXVI.
V. AD haec Templa quoque per Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni addictos
aedificata, and ritu Catholico necdum reconciliata, per certos Commissarios
eisdem assignanda.

[Hinc quoque legitime instamus Capellarum and Templorum non reconciliatorum,
quales Capellae darentur complures in Lyptoviensi, Thurazensi, and aliis
Comitatibus, nobis fiendam Cessionem and Assignationem.]

VI. In aliis vero locis juxta benignam suae Majestatis resolutionem loca pro
aedificandis Templis, Scholis, and Parochiis erigendis, pro commoditate
eorundem Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni addictorum per eosdem
Commissarios designanda decernuntur.

[In hoc etiam legitime and legaliter instamus pro locorum commodorum and
congruorum, and vel maxim Liberis and Regiis Civitatibus Cassoviensi, and
Epperiensi in superiore Hungaria, quibus contra hujus Articuli expressum
tenorem, in locis inconvenientibus, incommoda ac minus decentia designata
essent loca intra moenia Civitatum (innuentibus id memorati Articuli
subsequenter Puncto 9. allegandis clarissimis verbis,) ubi commoda and capacia
haberentur loca, adeoque etiam aliis omnibus simili jure gaudentibus
Civitatibus, gratiossime impertienda excisione.]

VII. In aliis vero Comitatibus, veluti in Szaladiensi, Weszprimiensi,
Jauriensi, Comaromiensi, Abavyvariensi, Saarossiensi, Zempliniensi, Ugocehensi,
Bereghiensi, Thornensi, Gomoriensi, Korsodiensi, Honthensi, Neogradiensi,
Szolnock and Herves, necnon Pesth, Pilis and Soldth unitis: Item Szabolczensi,
Ungh and Szathmariensi; Siquidem de praesenti essent in actuali usu omnium fere
Templorum ibidem habitorum, ideo eadem pro Actualibus eorundem Possessoribus
usuanda relicta sunt.

[Hic etiam legitime petimus, quod, siquidem tempore conditi Articuli in
enarratis Comitatibus Evangelici omnia fere Templa, quae jamnum iisdem majori
ex part contra sancitum violenter ademta essent, prae manibus habuissent, ac
expost Articulariter in Possessione eorum relinquendi decelarati essent, ita
eosdem imperturbatos debuisse ac debere relinqui.

VIII. Praeterea in Confiniis Regni, and quidem in Generalatu contra Canisam in
Szenegroth: In Generalatu Jauriensi, in Tihany, Vasony, Papa, Veszprim, Jaurini
and Comoarmij. In Generalatu Antemontano, Levae, Carponae and Fulekini. In
Generalatu superioris Hungariae in Putnok, Onod, Szendro, Thokay, Kalo and
Szathmar.

Vi concessionis istius Comaromij, Carponae, and Thokaini Confiniis sicut and
aliis determinatis, exercitium liberum una cum Templis ibidem habitis, and eo
tum possessis, relictum fuisse, evidentis est sequelae.]

IX. Ac tandem in liberis and montanis Civitatibus, utpote Trenchiniensi,
Modrensi, Cremniczensi and Novizoliensi, ac in superiore Hungaria, omnibus
itidem Civitatibus similiter loca pro aedificandis Templis, Scholis and
Parochiis assignanda conceduntur.

[Quid ex his verbis directius and clarius inferri potest, quam quod in liberis
Civitatibus, quales sunt Cassovia, Epperies, Leuschovia, Bartpha, Cibinium,
Kesmarkimera, Nagybanya, Posonium, Tyrnavia, Szakoliza, Bazinium, Modra, Sancti
Georgij, Kuszegh and Rust, and Montanis, quales itidem sunt Novizolium,
Veterozolium, Carpona, Schemniczium, Cremnizcium, Libethbanya, Bresznobanya,
Bakabanya, Belabanya, Uybanya, and aliae, (pro quarum modalitate praemissa
quapiam distinctione, and diversitate, proque exemplo ex utroque ordine tam
videlicet Montanarum binae, and Liberarum similiter binae recensentur,)
similiter loca commoda, and quidem citra aliquam locorum exterorum
restrictionem in ipsis Civitatibus, id est, in medio ipsarum Civitatum, juxta
genuinum and literalem sensum praeallegatorum verborum dicti Articuli, pro
aedificandis Templis Scholis and Parochiis assignanda venirent.]

X. Templa demum, in quorum actuali possessione iidem Augustanae and Helveticae
Confessioni addicti de facto sunt modo praevio, prae manibus eorundem una cum
Parochiis and Scholis, proventibusque eorundem, propter bonum Pacis, ut nimirum
quiet and pacifice vivant, relinquuntur usu Sepulturae and Campanarum pro
Catholicis ibidem degentibus aeque ac ipsis libero relicto.

[Hoc quoque membrum clarissime confirmare comperitur, praescriptum punctum 7.
and innuere id, quod in quorum Templorum possessione actuali protunc Evangelici
erant, ulterius etiam illis, una cum proventibus, parochiis and scholis
relinqui debere, usu insuper Campanarum and Sepulturae communi utrimque
manente.]

XI. Interea vero nec Catholici Ministris Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni
addictis, nec vero horum sequaces Plebanis Catholicis ad mentem Articuli 11 An.
1647. solvere obligentur.

[Clarissima sunt haec verba Articuli, and ex superabundanti elucidantur per
confirmationem 11 Artic. 1647. qui sic habet: Nec Evangelici Status Catholicis
Plebanis, and e converso Status Catholici Evangelicis Ministris ad ullas
solutiones pendendas sint obligati. Et per subsequentem Articulum 12. ejusdem
Ann. explicatius per haec verba: Ubi vero parochias non haberent Auditores
Evangelici, solutionem pendant suae Religionis Ministris, cujus videlicet
Ministerio, seu opera usi fuerint, sicut and Catholici Parochis Catholicis: Ubi
autem hactenus Auditores Evangelici non solvissent Plebanis Catholicis,
imposterum etiam ad nullas solutiones praestandas ullo sub praetextu cogantur
ad solvendum; prout nec Catholici Evangelicis. Ad haec, quoad Stolarum
proventus and pensiones, tenore expressarum allegati 12 Articuli 1647.
continentiarum: Stolarum autem Proventus, seu solutiones in quibusvis locis
Plebani Catholici and Ministri Evangelici a suae Religionis auditoribus
totaliter percipiant. Quorum Articulorum evidentissima constitutione ab omni
prorsus solutione Catholicis Plebanis fienda Evangelici liberantur and
eximuntur, huicque tamquam positivae legi firmiter inhaerere volumus.]

XII. Omnibus porro Magnatibus and Nobilibus in Regno degentibus in Arcibus and
solitis Residentiis suis, pro ritu cujusvis Professionis, Oratoria and Sacella
aedificare and donare liberum sit.

[Hac in part legalis est nostra instantia, ut in solitis Residentiis Nobilium
pro ritu cujusque professionis Oratoria and Sacella habere liceat, prouti post
factam Templorum occupationem id in usum and praxin in Compluribus Comitatibus
deductum fuerat.]

XIII. Posthac vero nullae Templorum, Scholarum and Parochiarum occupationes,
vel Exercitij turbationes ab utrimque, sub poena in Articulo 8. Uladislai
decreti 6. expressa, fiant.

Contra V. Nullo habito respectu praescriptae Articulariter decretoe locorum
non reconciliatorum nobis fiendae assignationis, eaedem Commissiones omnia
Templa and Capellas in Lyptoviensi; Arvensi, Thuroczensi, Zoliensi and
Honthensi Comitatibus occuparunt; licet quidem in Thuroczensi per Evangelicos
aedificata, and ritu Catholico non reconciliata in Pribocz, Bella and Zathuriza
fuerint. In Comitatu vero Lyptoviensi Capellae similiter per Evangelicos and
Dominos terrestres talium fundorum aedificatae in Kiraly, Lehota, Potornya and
Vicbicze, ac alibi reperirentur, ab harum tamen usuatione, ingressu and ibidem
peragendo cultu strictissime inhibiti, ac ad duo saltem loca, ubi Templa
aedificari permissa sunt aliquot mill hominum incapacia, imo propter
distantiam, incongrua, periculosa, and difficilia, relegati.

Contra VI. In Liberis and Regiis Civitatibus Partium Hungariae superiorum
alibi Commissio Regia, alibi vero Officiales Cameratici, imo privati quoque
homines, sicut Cassoviae, and potissimum Epperiessini plane extra deserta ac
desolata suburbia in locis long dissitis Campestribus, iisque Contumeliosis,
erigendis Templis, Parochiis and Scholis pro qualibet trium Nationum
Communitate incommoda and obscaena loca, (quo ab sacrum etiam finem sanctissimo
Deo dicanda Templa Christianis hominibus aedificare nefas ac piaculum omnino
esset) maximo Evangelicae Religionis cum despectu designarunt.

Contra VII. Commissiones Regiae tamen in Comitatibus plurimis, uti etiam
Honthensi, qui unus esset ex praescriptis enumeratis, omnia Templa mediante
Vicecomite illius Comitatus occupari, and Praedicantes amoveri fecerunt.
Pariter fecerunt in Abavyvariensi, Zempliniensi, Bereghiensi Comitatibus, in
Bonis, ut praememoratum, Universis Rakoczianis Officiales ejusdem Dominii, ac
in Oppido Gyongyos, quod ipsum potiorem partem Comitatus Heves constitueret,
nonnullae privatae personae Templum Helveticae Confessioni addictorum occupare,
Ministros removere, imo totale exercitium Religionis suae iisdem serio inhibere
praesumserunt: Nec absimiliter etiam in Oppido Jaszbreny and confinio Legrad
processum. Esto, quod hi recensiti Comitatus essent de numero illorum, qui
juxta Articulum in possessione omnium prae manibus habitorum Templorum relicti
sunt.

Contra VIII. Comaromij interim privati saltem homines Exercitium Evangelicum
totaliter inhibuerunt, prouti talem inhibitionem ulterius quoque practicaturi
proxime ad pulsum Tympani, non solum intra Confinium illud, sed etiam ad
circumjacentia loca egressum pro peragenda devotione sua Evangelicis sub
incaptivatione eorum, and aliis gravibus poenis severissime interminati sunt.
Similiter Carponae per Regiam Commissionem, and Thokaini per Deputatos, locis
licet Articularibus nomine tenus specificatis inhibitum exercitium, and Templa
occupata.

Contra IX. Commissiones Regiae, vel and Deputati homines ejusdem extra
Trenchinium, Modram, Cremniczium, and Novizolium, in reliquis inferiorum
partium Regni Civitatibus, nulla loca excidissent, quae siquidem omnes una
eademque libertatis praeragativa gauderent, Conditio etiam unius prae alterius
deterior esse non deberet. In superiori porro Hungaria qualianam loca excisa
forent, ac ubi contra sanam mentem evidentissimi hujus Paragraphi, in
Civitatibus, adeoque earum moeniis, non vero extra easdem excisionem locorum
fiendam apertissime declarantis, ad punctum 6. ubi commoda and convenientia,
obque sacrum finem Deo dicanda loca exscindenda innuerentur, isteque
Paragraphus eo se reflexive haberet, remonstratum.

Contra X. Commissiones vero, uti praemissa 7. difficultate attactum, in
nonnullis Comitatibus, qui omnino tempore conditi Articuli in actuali Templorum
possessione fuerunt, contra dictamen hujus Articuli Templa talia una cum
omnibus appertinentiis occuparunt, uti in Comitatu Honthensi and Oppido
Gyogyos. Praeterea in eodem Oppido Gyongyos nonnullae privatae personae omnes
proventus, and pia legata ab Evangelicis abstraxerunt, Sepulturas in locis
competentibus inhibuerunt, adeo ut complures in Cellariis demortuos suos longo
tempore asservare necessitati fuerint, ad funerationem despectuosam
quadriviorum and compotorum relegati existentes. Campanarum etiam liberum usum
fere ubique per Regnum eaedem Commissiones Evangelicis interdixerunt. His
similia aeque in Comitatu Zempliniensi, ac signanter in praementionati Dominij
Rakoczi any Oppidis, Thalia, Mad, Szantho, Kereszthur, Tarczel, Liszka, Bennye,
Tolezva, Patak, Vyhally, Borssy and Tokai, nominatis, Officiales ejusdem
Dominii patrarunt, quippe qui Universis dictorum oppidorum Templis (in quorum
actuali Dominio tam tempore conditi hujus Articuli, quam expost etiam fuissent,
de caeteroque prae possessione eorundem ad mentem Articuli imperturbate
relinqui debuissent.) cum eorundem proventibus per Evangelicos collatis,
Parochiis item ac Scholis violenter occupatis liberum Religionis eorundem
exercitium, vel in privata etiam domo usuandum severissimis sub minis
inhibuerunt, ac etiam Campanarum per eosdem Oppidanos Evangelicos fieri
curatarum, prout and Sepulturae communem usum plane non admittendum
interdixerunt; sic Epperiensis and Cassoviensis civitatum Evangelicis quoad
proventus Ecclesiasticos omnia pia legata per Magistratum loci and clerum sunt
via facti erepta; quibus insimul Campanarum and Sepulturae communis usus
absolutissime denegatur. Funerum porro intra moenia Civitatum cum solitis
cantibus and ceremoniis conveniens and publica deductio severa cum comminatione
cavetur and non admittitur.

Contra XI. Commissiones vero ubique in Comitatibus Plebanis Catholicis omnes
solutiones addixerunt. In Civitatibus autem, ut ex Fisco, seu Communi Civitatis
aerario (ad quem respectu pluralitatis and majoris numeri Evangelicorum
Catholici minimum quantum contribuerent) Plebanis solutio fiat, praescripserunt
Nos, ut nostratibus tam Ministris, quam Scholae docentibus, extraordinary ex
propriis prospiciamus, manifest tam contra praescriptos Articulos, quam etiam
mentem Sacrae Scripturae, laborantibus solum mercedem tribuentis; non
laborantibus vero nec manducare debere inventis, invitos cogendo. Officiales
identidem saepe allegati Dominij Ragocziani in superiori Hungaria, assumto
quoque brachio Militari, ad solutionem Plebanis Catholicis in eodem dominio
pendendam citra discrimen, Nobiles pariter and ignobiles incolas Evangelicos
omni conatu adigunt.

Contra XII. Commissiones vero in plerisque Comitatibus, signanter autem
Lyptoviensi, Thuroczensi, Zoliensi, Arvensi, and aliis (licet a tempore
occupatorum Templorum in usu and praxi talis exercitij in Residentiis
Nobilitaribus Articulariter permissi longo tempore praefuissent) abrogarunt,
and sub poena militaris invasionis residentiae similis nobilis, inhibuerunt.
Prouti expost in Comitatu Lyptoviensi Domini Plebani ibidem per milites
Likavienses aliquot talium Nobilium domos invadi and expilari fecissent. Et
proxime in Trenchimiensi Comitatu Nobiles familiae Nosdroviczky Praedicantem in
residentia sua pro administratione exercitij sui intertenentes similiter per
milites Regiminis Morssiani damnificati, and idem Minister ad carceres Arcis
Lednicze raptatus nunc quoque ibidem detinetur. In insula Czalokoz Nobiles
Hodossienses and circumjacentium locorum similiter a residentiali Religionis
suae cultu prohibiti sunt, and Ministri ibidem existentis eo tum omnes res
direptae sunt. Quam injuriam inferiorum quoque Hungariae partium Nobiles
Evangelici non sine lamentis querulantur.

Utinam Conclusio haec observaretur, and ad desumtionem a Contravenientibus
designatae poenae Articularis procederetur, pacificam omnino and imperturbatam
nostri in libero Evangelico Exercitio permansionem nobis polliceri possemus,
tollereturque formidine poenae omnis fomes discordiarum. Quod ut fiat
concordibus apprecamur votis and animis.

Ex quorum Articulorum Soproniensium, and per eos confirmatorum modalitate
praevia membratim facta Deductione, siquidem and eorum claritas, and huic
innixa Instantiaenostrae aequitas, econtra vero Excelsarum Commissionum,
aliorumque in effectuatione eorum admissi abusus and deformitates luce
meridiana elucescunt, palpabilesque redduntur. Majestatem Vestram Serenissimam
per pretiosissimam Christi mortem, and gloriosissimam Resurrectionem humillimis
exoramus precibus, ut cognitis jam tandem ac Regio cordi admissis legitimis
Postulatis nostris, eadem per quoscunque ulterius retardari non patiatur; quin
potius (siquidem ea post tam longum tempus una cum aliis tractatibus hic
eatenus istitutae Commissionis jam Majestatis Vestrae Serenissimae and intimo
Consilio reportata, imo certum Punctum dictorum Tractatuum, uti informamur, non
tamen nostrum, per D.D. intimos Consiliarios revolutum and examinatum esset,
verendum vero nobis veniret ne fors expost etiam aliud diversum, and huic
Instantiae nostrae inaestimabilem moram nectens, reassumatur, sicque nos eo
majori adhuc temporis cum protractione, and jam exhaustorum gravium sumtuum
dispendio, animi pendentes ulterius adhuc detineamur,) juxta Majestatis Vestrae
Serenissimoe ante jam de anticipando and eximendo puncto Religionis Celsissimo
Principi supremo Aulae Praefecto gratiosissime praebitum, ac nobis etiam per
suam Celsitudinem significatum, benignissimum Regium assensum, prae aliis hanc
animarum salutem tangentem Religionis instantiam per D.D. intimos Consiliarios
reassumendam, tractandam, and determinandam, quam propensissime ordinare and
committere, ac taliter cum numquam intermoritura Regalis sui Regiminis ad
normam gloriosorum Praedecessorum suorum fama, Nos in hac liberate Religiosa
stabilire, stabilitosque and expeditos primo quoque tempore ad Principales
nostros dimitti curare clementissime dignetur. Gratiam hanc Caesareo-Regiam
Deus ex altis Majestatis Vestrae Serenissimae omnigena felicitate retribuet,

Majestatis Vestrae Serenissimae.

Exhibita suae Majestati Serenissimae ad Capellam Arcensem prodeunti Vienna die
24 Mensis Aprilis Ann. 1689. Humillimi perpetuoque fideles subditi, Comitatuum,
Civitatum, Oppidorum and Confiniorum Partium Regni Hungariae Superiorum and
Inferiorum a part Evangelicorum in Negotio turbatae Religionis suae Ablegati
Nuncij.

Diaetae Posoniensis, Ann. 1687. Articulus XXI. In negotio Religionis
renovantur Articuli 25 and 26 Ann. 1681. cum interjecta Declaratione.
LIcet quidem in Negotio Religionis Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni
addicti Articulis 25 and 26 novissimae Diaetae Soproniensis oppositam iisdem
per reclamationem suam abutentes ipso facto eorundem beneficij participes esse
desiissent: propter bonum nihilominus domesticae unionis and pacis, internamque
Regni tranquillitatem, cum sua Majestas Sacratissima ex gratia and clementia
sua praecitatos Articulos adhuc ratos fore benignissime resolvisset, eosdem
Status quoque and Ordines ad mentem Paternae resolutionis (Cleri and aliorum
secularium Catholicorum contradictione non obstante) pro renovatis and priori
firmitati restitutis censendos, acsi and in quantum hactenus ineffectuati, vel
vero per aliquos abusus ab una aut altera part medio tempore introductos,
violati fuissent, suae debitae executioni, and tempore eorundem conditorum
Articulorum, vel expost occupatorum, aut reoccupatorum impendendae
restaurationi, utprimum demandandos esse statuerunt.

Pacifications Viennensis Ann. 1606. Articuli Primi Continentia haec est.
QUantum itaque ad Religionis Negotium attinet, non obstantibus prioribus pro
tempore Constitutionibus Publicis, sed neque Articulo postremo Anno 1604. (cum
is extra diaetam, and sine Regnicolarum assensu adjectus fuerit, and propterea
etiam tollitur) deliberatum est; Ut juxta Serenissimae Caesariae, Regiaeque
Majestatis priorem Resolutionem, ad quam se Regnicolae in sua Replicatione
referunt, nimirum: Quod omnes and singulos Status and Ordines intra ambitum
Regni Hungariae solum existentes, tam Magnates, Nobiles, quam liberas
Civitates, Oppida Privilegiata, immediate ad Coronam spectantia: Item in
Confiniis quoque Regni Hungariae Milites Hungaros in sua Religione and
Confessione nusquam and numquam turbabit, nec per alios turbari, aut impediri
sinet; Verum omnibus praedictis Statibus and Ordinibus Regni liber Religionis
ipsorum usus and exercitium permittetur, absque tamen praejudicio Catholicae
Romanae Religionis, and ut Clerus, Templa and Ecclesiae Catholicorum Romanorum
intacta and libera permaneant, atque ea quae hoc disturbiorum tempore utrimque
occupata fuere, rursum eisdem restituantur.

Anno 1608. Articuli Primi ante Coronationem editi de Ne Negotio Religionis
tenor talis est:
QUantum itaque ad Primum Constitutionis Viennensis Articulum attinet,
deliberatum est per Status and Ordines Inclyti Regni Hungariae, ut Religionis
Exercitium tam Baronibus, Magnatibus and Nobilibus, quam etiam Liberis
Civitatibus ac Universis Statibus and Ordinibus Regni, in suis and Fisci bonis,
item in Confiniis quoque Regni Hungariae Militibus Hungaris sua cuique Religio
and Confessio, nec non Oppidis and Villis eam sponte ac libere acceptare
volentibus, ubique liberam relinquatur, nec quisquam omnium in libero ejusdem
usu ac exercitio, quoquam impediatur. Quin imo ad praecavenda inter Status and
Ordines aliqua odia and dissensiones, ut quaelibet Religio suae Professionis
superiores seu superintendentes habeat, statutum est.

N. B.
Ut utposterior hic Articulus primus Ann. 1608. Ann 1618. Articulo 77.
renovatus, Ann. 1622. tempore Ferdinandi 11. Imperatoris Regio diplomati, per
Generales Regni Constitutiones, Condition 6 clariori sensu insertus, Ann.
1625. Artic. 22. Ann. 1630. Artic. 33. Ann. 1635. Artic. 29. identidem tam idem
Articulus, quam etiam praedeclarata Conditio sexta, suo vigori restituti, Ann.
1638. memorata Conditio 6. diplomatis Regij Ferdinandi 11. similiter diplomate
Regio Ferdinandi III. Imperatoris, aeque Condition 6ta per expressam de verbo
ad verbum confirmata, Ann. 1647. Artic. 5to novo diplomate Regio Pacificationis
cum Illustrissimo Principe Transylvianiae Domino Georgio Ragoczy conditae,
diversisque aliis subsequentibus, uti, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
Articulis, quod ad diversos casus, stabilitus, Ann. 1649. Artic. 10. and Ann.
1655. Artic. 18. qua praeattacta pacificatio Rakocziana, qua praespecificati
Articuli Anno 1647. pariter ratificati. Denique Anno 1659. moderni Imperatoris
Leopoldi Regio insimul diplomate, Publicis quoque Regni Constitutionibus
Articulo 1. indito, Condition similiter 6ta per omnia, ut in prioribus
Ferdinandorum II and III. Imperatorum diplomatibus, Verbo Regio ratihabitus
esset, his nihilominus non obstantibus, omnes praevij hi Articuli and
Conditiones diplomaticae omni sua firmitate privati sunt, Exercitio Religionis
Evangelicae contra omnes Sanctiones Articulares and publicas Regni
Constitutiones, sacra item Regia diplomata, in ipssisimo Exterminio jamnum
effective versante.

Most Sacred, Imperial, and Royal Majesty:
Most Gracious Sir,
ALthough we have already made it appear to Your most Sacred Majesty, and to
the Ministers of Your most Imperial Court, that many Injustices were done to us
in the Year 1681, against the clear and evident Grants of the 25th and 26th
Articles of Sopron, Humbly soliciting this full Year and a Half the
Observation of the same, and the Redressing of the Grievances of our
Evangelical Religion; yet, because it is daily Reported, that by Virtue of Your
Majesty's Commissions appointed last Year, and before through Hungary nothing
was Ordered, against the full intent of the said Articles, and that we desire
more than is granted in them: We thought it our Duty to justify both our
Complaints and our repeated Requests, (the reather because the Worthy Ministers
of Your Imperial Court have often assured us, that without any delay or
difficulty, we should be maintained in the clear Grants of the said Articles of
Sopron,) in order to which we shall set down here, as in a kind of Table, the
very words of the said Articles, together with our Requests, against the
Misintepretation of the said Articles, either by Your Majesty's Commissioners,
or by other Persons under pretense of fulfiling the same, and the Decisions
made thereupon, by that means we shall show Evidently that the said Articles
were Infringed to our great prejudice, and that our Requests are most Just.

The XXV ARTICLE runs thus:
AND because his Majesty intending the Peace and general Quiet of the Kingdom
was pleased also to come to a Gracious Resolution upon the business of
Religion, therefore the States of the Kingdom insert the said Resolution in the
Articles.

I. And Principally, whereas the free exercise of Religion (granted in the year
1606. by virtue of the Peace of Vienna) has been disturbed in part during these
Troubles; therefore (the first Article of the said Peace being hereby
confirmed) the same free exercise of Religion is granted to every Person, and
every where in the Kingdom; according to the first Article made before the
Coronation in the year 1608. Provided that the Privileges of Lords of Manors be
not hereby prejudiced.

Hereupon we require in the Article's own words, that the same free exercise of
Religion (as was disturbed in part during the Troubles, and before the Troubles
did include Evangelical Ministers or Preachers) be granted to every Person, and
every where in the Kingdom, not excepting the free Cities, Towns and Villages,
which make the fourth State, since they are expressly comprehended in the
aforesaid Article made before the Coronation in the Year 1608.

II. A free Return in the Kingdom, and a free exercise of Religion is granted
also to all the Ministers and Schoolmasters, that are either Banished or Kept
out of their Employments, by reason of certain Deeds of Reversion, the same
Deeds being hereby made void and of no effect.

From thence it follows evidently, that the Ministers and Schoolmasters are to
be restored from their Exile to their respective Professions, and may live
freely in any City, Town or Village of the Kingdom, performing the Duties of
their Religion and Profession, and that no more Deeds of Reversion can be
required from them, since such Deeds are condemned in the Article.

III. And no Hungarian Subject shall be disturbed any way hereafter in the free
Exercise of his Religion.

These words, no Hungarian Subject exclude undoubtedly any Exception; the
meaning plainly is, that no Ecclesiastical or Civil Person, no Nobleman, no
Citizen, nor Peasant ought to be disturbed in the free exercise of Religion,
and no Body will deny, but that an exercise of Religion can in no sense be
termed free, unless there be Ministers that officiate in it.

IV. None of the Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausburg, shall be
compelled to any ceremony contrary to his Religion.

The generality of these words, confirms the foregoing i. e. that no Nobleman,
nor Gentleman, no Citizen nor Peasant ought to be compelled.

Proceedings of the King's Commissioners contrary in every particular to the
Articles of Sopron.
AGainst the opposite first Article. The King's high Commissioners, or other
private Persons employed by them, have forbidden such a free exercise of
Religion, as could consist in the Service of God through Preaching, Singing,
Praying, Administering the Sacraments, blessing Marriages, making Burials, and
using other wonted Ceremonies, which were performed by Ecclesiastical
Ministers, in many free Royal Cities and Mountain Towns, namely in St. George,
Bazinium, Tyrnaw, Zakoliza, Schemnizium, Veterozolium, Carpen, Libeten,
Breznow, Bakaw, Bela, Vibania, Kusseghin and Rust; whereby it appears, That in
those places the said Commissioners have suppressed the whole exercise of
Religion against the opposite Article; for where there is no Liberty for the
above mentioned Acts of Religion, there can be no exercise of Religion at all.
They have likewise deprived the Inhabitants of all the Towns and Villages in
the Counties, of the free exercise of their Religion, by Virtue of that Clause
inserted for the destroying of our Religion, and of the Gospel too (provided
that the Privileges of the Lords of Manors be not hereby prejudiced) against
the Confirmation of the Article made in the Year 1608.

Against the II. The said Commissioners have Licensed but two Ministers in each
County, and but one or two in some Free Cities all over the Kingdom, Banishing
all the rest out of the Counties, some within a Fortnight and others within
Three days; as in the Counties of Lypeze, of Orowa, of Owar, of Sachsag, of
Zolnock and in others, or requiring strict Deeds of Reversion from the same, if
they would continue in the said Counties. They have also appointed, that there
should be no petty Schools, but such where Children could learn only to Read
and to Write. But what kind of Liberty it is, that has been granted to our
Ministers to profess their Religion; appears 1st, By the Recorded Banishment of
a great many of them out of the Counties. 2ly, By the Case of the Ministers in
Eperies, that have been turned out by a Roman Catholic Magistrate, under
pretense that it was Your Majesty's Pleasure and Command, although that Town be
particularly named in the Articles. 3ly, By the violence that the Official has
done to the Ministers and Schoolmasters, that lived but miserably in the
Dominion of Tokai in Upper Hungary, intimating to them under pain of Death, and
the Forfeiture of all their Goods, to go out of the said County, or by most
strict Deeds of Reversion, to renounce for ever under the same penalty to
perform any Ecclesiastical Duty in the said County. 4ly, By the Confinement of
several Ministers, who are kept Prisoners in the Fort of Ledniche, by Order of
his Eminence the Cardinal of Kolocza, and can obtain their Liberty on no other
Condition, but that of subscribing pernicious Deeds of Reversion.

Against the III. Here our Sighs interrupt our Complaints, nor can we find
words to express how variously and miserably our Ministers and we have been,
and are still disturbed every where, either by the said Commissioners, or by
other private Persons. As for instance in short, (not to repeat the
abovementioned Counties, and many Towns of the County of Semlyn, in the
aforesaid Dominion of Tokai, and their Ministers) the abovementioned City of
Epperies in Upper Hungary, and in the Lower all the Cities besides Presburg,
Sopron, Modra, Cremnicz and Neozolium, with their Evangelical Ministers. As
also the Minister of Hodossia in the Isle of Shut, who had all the means of
Life, Clothes, Books and Furniture taken from him by the Secretary of the
Archbishop of Gran, and by the Soldiers which he brought along with him, which
is the Fate of a great many others, that lead a most miserable Life in
perpetual Changes, owing their Liberty to a Special Providence of God, or
having obtained it after they had paid great Fines, or made pernicious Deeds of
Reversion.

Against the IV. The said Commissioners have Ordered, that the Evangelicks
should be made to bring their Processional Trophies, and to Walk in
Processions, that the Evangelick Peasant should every where be forced to
frequent Catholic Churches; and that in all the Free Cities where there is no
public exercise of our Religion, the Evangelick should be obliged to
Ministerial Offices contrary to their way.

Against the V. The said Commissioners having no regard to the Assignation
appointed in the opposite Article, have seized upon all the Churches and
Chapels in the Counties of Lypcze, of Arva, of Turocz, of Zolnock and of
Sachsag, although the Churches of Pribocz, Bella and Zathuriza, in the County
of Turocz have been Built by the Evangelick, who were never reconciled to the
Catholic Church; there are likewise Chapels in Kiratilehota, Potornia,
Vicbicz, etc. in the County of Lypcze, that were Built by the Evangelicks and
the Lords of those Manors; nevertheless, they are severely forbidden to make
any use of them, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, being sent to two very remote
inconvenient and dangerous places, where they have only liberty to Build such
Churches as cannot contain the Congregation by several Thousands.

The XXVI. ARTICLE.
V. MOreover the Churches (that have been Built by those of the Helvetian
Confession, and of that of Ausbourg, and whose Members are not yet reconciled
to the Catholic Church) shall be assigned to them by certain Commissioners.

Hereupon we require, that those Chapels and Churches be delivered and
assigned to us, whose Members are not yet reconciled to the Catholic Church,
of which sort many would be found in the Counties of Lypcze, of Owar, etc.

VI. It is ordered also, according to his Majesty's Gracious Resolution, that
in other places the same Commissioners, assign places to build Churches and
Schools, and erect Parishes for the convenience of those of the Helvetian
Confession, and of that of Ausbourg.

Hereupon we require, that instead of the inconvenient and undec^nt places,
which are assigned out of Cassovia and Esperies in Upper Hungary, others be
appointed within the Walls, as also in all the Free and Royal Cities, where
there is convenient and large espaces, since thus much is signified by the
words which will be set down lower Fig. 9.

VII. But in other Counties, as in those of Salawar, of Vesprim, of Saraz, of
Moramoruss, of Abavivar, of Sellia, of Semlyn, of Ugoza, of Bodrogh, of Tornaw,
of Komorra, of Barzod, of Sachsag, of Novigrad, of Zolnock, of Hewecz, of
Pesth, Pelicz and Soldth united, of Unghwar, of Chege and of Zatmar; since the
Evangelicks are actually in possession of almost all the Churches there, the
same Churches are left for the use of the actual possessors of them.

Hereupon we require, that the Evangelicks may recover and undisturbedly
possess all the Churches, which were possessed by them in the aforesaid
Counties when the Article was made, and which for the most part are now taken
from them against the said Article.

VIII. The same is granted in the Frontier Towns of the Kingdom, viz. to those
of Zentgrod in the division near Canisa; of Tyhany, Vasony, Papa, Vesprim, Raab
and Comorra, in the division of Raab; of Leva, Carpen and Tuletin, in the
division before the Mountains; and of Putnock, Onod, Zendro, Tokai, Calo and
Zatmar, in the division of Upper Hungary.

By virtue of this Grant, the Evangelicks that live in Maromaruss, Carpen,
Tokai, and in any other abovementioned Frontier Town, ought to enjoy the same
free exercise of Religion, and use the same Churches as they did in those Towns
when the Article was made.

IX. Furthermore, in all the free and Mountain Towns, as in Trenschinmodra,
Cremnicz, Novizolium, and in all the Cities of Upper Hungary, places shall be
assigned likewise for Churches, Schools and Parishes.

What more direct and clear can be concluded from these words, but that in the
free Cities, such as are Cassovia, Epperies, Leuschovia, Bartpha, Cibinium,
Kesmurkim, Nagybania, Presburg, Tyrnaw, Zakoliza, Bazinium, Modra, St. George
Kussegh, Rust, and in the Mountain Towns such as are Novizolium, Veterozolium,
Carpen, Schemninizium, Cremniczium, Libeten, Breznow, Baka, Bela, Vibania, etc.
(for the modifying of which, two of each sort, viz. of the free Cities, and of
the Mountain Towns, are brought as instances with a certain distinction, or
specification used before) convenient places for Churches, Parishes and
Schools, must be assigned not out of the Walls which were to restrain the
Article, but in the very middle of the Cities and Towns, according to the
genuine and literal meaning of the words of the aforesaid Article.

X. Finally, the Churches which are actually possessed by those of the
Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausburg shall be still for their use as
before, together with the Parishes and Schools and their Revenues, that they
may live in peace and quiet; but the same free use of Bells and Burials is left
to the Catholics in those parts as to them.

This confirms evidently the above written seventh Point, and signifies that
the Churches which the Evangelicks were actually possessed of, should remain
for their use, together with the Revenues, Parishes, and Schools; the Bells and
Burials remaining common for the use of both Parties.

XI. Nevertheless the Catholics shall not be obliged to pay any thing to the
Ministers of the Evangelicks, nor the Evangelicks to the Curates of the
Catholics, according to the meaning of the 11th Article Ann. 1647.

This cannot be clearer, nor better Commented upon than by the confirmed 11th
Article which runs thus: The Evangelicks shall not be obliged to pay any thing
to the Catholic Curates, nor the Catholics to the Evangelick Ministers: And
by the following 12th Article, yet more plainly in these words; But where the
Evangelicks have no Parishes, let them pay the Ministers that they employ, as
the Catholics are to pay their Catholic Curates; and where hitherto the
Evangelicks did pay nothing to the Catholic Curates, they shall not be obliged
hereafter to pay under any pretense whatsoever; Nor the Catholics to the
Evangelick Ministers. Add to this the words of the aforesaid 12th Article in
the year 1647, concerning the Revenues and Pensions of the Schools; But in any
place whatsoever the Catholic Curates, and the Evangelick Ministers shall
receive the Revenues of Schools, and Pensions from their respective followers;
by which most evident constitution of the Articles, the Evangelicks are freed
and discharged from paying any thing to the Catholic Curates; and to this
positive Law we desire to adhere.

XII. All the Peers and Noblemen that live in the Kingdom have Liberty to Build
and Endow Oratories, and Chapels according to their respective profession of
Religion in their usual places of Residence.

Hereupon we require, that Noblemen may have Oratories and Chapels according
to their respective professions of Religion in their usual dwelling places, as
the same was practiced in many Counties after the taking of our Churches.

XIII. Hereafter no Churches, Schools and Parishes shall be seized, nor
Exercise hindered on either side, under the pain expressed in the 8th Article
of the 6th Decree of Uladislaus.

Against the VI. No Convenient places for Churches, Parishes and Chapels have
been assigned in any free Royal Town of Upper Hungary, but here the
Commissioners, there the Officials of the Chamber, and elsewhere private
Persons, as in Cassovia and Epperies, have appointed places for Churches,
Parishes and Schools, which are at a great distance in the Fields, out of
Desert and Desolate, Suburbs; and which are for any Common use of the Three
Nations, which renders them so inconvenient and nasty, that to dedicate
Churches to the most Holy God in such places, were a most detestable Crime for
any sort of Christians.

Against the VII. In many Counties as also in that of Sachsag, (which is one of
the aforenam'd) the Kings Commissioners have caused all the Churches to be
taken from the Evangelicks, and their Ministers to be turned out by the Vicount
of that County; the Officials have done the like in the Counties of Abavivivar,
of Semlyn, of Ugoza, and in all the Towns of the Dominion of Tokai, as we have
already mentioned; and some private Persons have presumed to seize upon the
Church belonging to those of the Helvetian Confession, and of that of Ausbourg
in the Town of Gyongyos, (which Gyongyos makes the most considerable part of
the County of Hewecz) to put out their Ministers, and even forbid the
Evangelicks to exercise any way their Religion in that place. The like has been
done in the Town of Jaszbreny, and the Frontiers of Legrad, although the
abovementioned Counties be named in the Article, whereby the Evangelicks are
left in the Possession of all those Churches, which they had in the said
Counties when the Article was made.

Against the VIII. In the Town of Maromaruss, and in the places round about it,
private Men have forbidden the whole exercise of Religion, charging with Beat
of Drums all the Evangelicks, to go and exercise their Religion out of that
Frontier under pain of Imprisonment, and other severe Punishments. After the
same manner the King's Commissioners in Carpen, and the Deputies in Tokai have
forbidden the exercise of Religion, and seized upon the Churches, although both
these places be particularly named in the Articles.

Against the IX. The said Commissioners, or their Deputies have appointed
places for Churches, Schools and Parishes out of Trenschin, Modra, Cremnicz and
Novizolium, and none at all in the rest of the Towns of Lower Hungary; now why
should the Case of some be worse than that of others? since all have the same
Privilege of Liberty in Upper Hungary. They have likewise appointed some
places for Churches, Schools and Parishes not in, but out of the Cities,
against the true meaning of the opposite part of the Article, which most
evidently declares, that those places must be appointed within and not without
the Walls of the Cities, or else they could not be such as are appointed Fig.
6. i. e. convenient and fit to be consecrated for the publiek service of God.

Against the X. In many Counties, and particularly in that of Sachsag, and the
Town of Gyongyos, the King's Commissioners have taken such Churches together,
with their Appendages as were possessed by the Evangelicks, when the Article
was made, which we have hinted in the foregoing fifth Grievance. Moreover in
the aforesaid Town of Gyongyos, mny private Persons have taken all the
Ecclesiastical Revenues, and Pious Legacies from the Evangelicks, forbidding
them withal to Bury their Dead in the usual places, which has made many keep
Corpse in Cellars a long time, rather than Bury them in Carfax and Crossways as
they were appointed. The Commissioners have also deprived the Evangelicks of
the use of the Bells almost every where; the Officials have done the like in
the County of Semlin, and particularly in these Towns of the aforesaid Dominion
of Tokai, Thalia, Mod, Zantho, Kerethur, Tarezal Liszka, Benny, Tolezva, Patak,
Veyelly, Borzi and Tokai seizing upon all the Churches, Schools and Parishes,
(which at the time of and after the Treaty were possessed by the Evangelicks,
and left to the same by the said Article) together with the Revenues that have
been given to them by the Evangelicks, forbidding with most severe threatenings
the free exercise of our Religion even in private Houses, and hindering the
Evangelicks from the common use of Burials and Bells, though made at their own
care and charge. Likewise the Magistrates and Clergy Men of the Town of
Cassovia and Epperies, have taken by force all the pious Legacies left to our
Churches, and forbidden absolutely the common use of Bells and Burials,
Threatening with the most severe Punishments those that would make public
Burials within the Walls, with the usual Singing and decent Ceremonies.

Against the XI. Every where in the Counties, the Commissioners have adjudged
all the Payments to the Catholic Curates, and Ordered in the Cities that they
should be paid out of the common Purse, wherein the Chatholicks could
contribute but little, they being but few in number in comparison of the
Evangelicks; thus they have forced us maugre our selves, to be at extraordinary
Charges out of our own States, for the maintaining of our Ministers and
Schoolmasters, not only against the right intention of the aforesaid Articles,
but also against the plain Sense of the Holy Scripture, which allows a Salary
for such as Labor, and even nothing to Eat for such as Labor not: After the
like manner the Official of the abovementioned Dominion of Tokai in Upper
Hungary, do all their endeavors to make both Noble and Ignoble Evangelicks,
pay without distinction the Chatholick Curates.

Against the XII. In many Counties, viz. in that of Lypcz, of Turocz, of
Zolnock, of Arva, etc. the said Commissioners have suppressed and forbidden,
under pain of Military Execution the exercise of Religion, which is granted to
Noblemen in their places of Residence, and which they had enjoyed long since
the Churches were seized accordingly in the County of Lypcze, the Clergy Men
have caused some such Noblemen's Houses to be assaulted, and plundered by the
Garrison of Likavia, and in the County of Trenschin, the Noble Family of
Nosdrovisky which did keep a Minister, for the Exercise of Religion in its
place of Residence, has been much damnified also by the Soldiers of Mersia's
Regiment, and the Ministers put into the Prison of the Fort of Ledniche, where
he is kept to this day; likewise the Noblemen of Hodossia, of the places round
about in the Isle of Shut, have been deprived of the free exercise of Religion
in their places of Residence, and the Ministers that lived there then, have
been Plundered of all their Goods, which Injustice the Evangelick Noblemen of
Lower Hungary do also complain of.

Would to God that this Conclusion were observed, and the Punishment hinted in
the Article inflicted upon the Opposers thereof; then we might promise our
selves to enjoy quietly, and undisturbedly the free exercise of our Religion,
and then the fuel of Divisions would be extinguished, and taken away for fear
of being Punished, which, that it may be done is our Hearty Prayer and Desire.

Now having laid before Your Sacred Majesty the Articles of Sopron, and the
Abuses committed in the executing of them, it is as clear as the Sun, that we
require nothing but what is granted in them; We humbly beseech Your most Sacr'd
Majesty, through Christ's Precious Death and Glorious Resurrection, that having
known and laid up in Your Royal Heart our lawful Requests, Your Sacred Majesty
suffer no longer the same to be hindered by any Person whatsoever, but rather
(since after so long time they have been Reported before Your most Sacred
Majesty, and before Your Privy Council, together with some Treatises of the
appointed Commission; Nay, being informed that a certain Point of the said
Treatises (that does not concern us) has been examined by the Lords of the
Privy Council; it makes us fear, lest something else be taken into
consideration, whereby an Answer to our Requests may be occasioned, and we yet
longer detained here under the inconveniency of Doubt, of Delay, and of
continuance of the vast Charges we have already been at) according to Your most
Sacred Majesty's Gracious Consent (given to the most High Prince President of
the Court, and intimated to us by his Highness) to dispatch first the Business
of Religion, that Your Sacred Majesty be graciously pleased to appoint and
commit our Requests, which so narrowly concern the Salvation of our Souls, to
be considered again, and determined by the Lords of the Privy Council, so to
Establish us in the Liberty of Religion, to the Immortal Fame of Your Royal
Government, after the Example of Your Glorious Predecessors; that being
relieved We may speedily Return to our Principals, and God will recompense this
Imperial, Royal Favor with all sort of Happiness from above.

Delivered to His Sacred Majesty at Aix la Chapelle, upon his going to Vienna,
the 24th day of April, in the year 1689. Your most Sacred Majesty's most Humble
and Faithful Subjects, the Deputies of the Evangelicks in the Counties, Cities,
Towns and Frontiers of Upper and Lower Hungary, about the Business of their
distressed Religion.

The First Article of the Peace of Vienna in the Year 1606.
AS to the Business of Religion, notwithstanding the former public
Constitutions, and the last Article of the Year 1604, (which was made without
the Diet, and the consent of the Subjects, and therefore is annulled,) it is
granted, That (according to his Imperial Majesty's former Resolution, to which
the Subjects refer themselves in their replying) all and each State of the
Kingdom of Hungary, as well the Peers and Noblemen, as the free Cities, and the
Privileged Towns belonging immediately to the Crown, and all the Hungarian
Soldiers in the Frontiers, shall any where, and at any time profess and
exercise their Religion without any Disturbance, either from His most Sacr'd
Majesty, or from any Person whatsoever; a free exercise of Religion being
hereby granted to all the said States of the Kingdom. Provided always, That the
Roman Catholic Religion be not thereby prejudiced, That the Roman Catholic
Clergy, Churches and Chapels remain free and unmolested, and that what has
been taken from them in these Troubles be restored.

The First Article made before the Coronation in the Year 1608. concerning
Religion.
COncerning the first Article of the Treaty of Vienna, it is resolved by the
States and Orders of Hungary, that the Exercises of Religion shall be left
free, not only to the Noblemen, and to the Inhabitants of the free Cities, but
also to the Hungarian Soldiers in the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Hungary, and
to all the Farmers and Peasant that will freely accept the same; nor shall any
of 'em be disturbed in the free Exercise of Religion, but to prevent any effect
of hatr'd and dissension between Roman Catholics and Protestants, It is
Ordered, That each Party shall have a Superior, or Surperintendant of his own
Profession.

Although this last first Article of the Year 1608, was renewed in 77th Article
of the Year 1618, inserted in the General Constitutions of the Kingdom by Order
of the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, in the Year 1622, restored to his Force by
the 22d Article of the Year 1625, by the 33d Article of the Year 1630, and by
the 29th Article of the Year 1635, confirmed in the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13 and 14th Articles of the new Treaty of Peace made with George Ragoczy,
Prince of Transylvania in the Year 1648; Ratifyed both in the aforenamed
Articles of 1649, and in the 10th Article of the Year 1649, and in the 18th
Article of the Year 1655 made at Rakoczia; and lastly, confirmed again and
inserted in the Constitutions of the Kingdom, by Order of Leopold the present
Emperor, in the Year 1659; yet notwithstanding all these, the said Article
remains without Force, and the Exercise of the Protestant Religion is wholly
exterminated against the Articles, and the public Constitutions of the
Kingdom, as well as against the Sacred Imperial Letters Patent.

And yet all this contributed little toward a Peace, for the Results of this
Diet concerned none but the good and quiet Men, and such as were zealous for
the Settlement and Peace of their Country: Whilst Tekeli and others of that
Spirit, whose Minds were possessed with virulent Malice and Ambition, were
plotting and contriving the means to set up their own Authority, and give
themselves into the Hands of the Turks, rather than to the Power of their
Sovereign Prince, of whose natural Clemency tho they were well assured; yet
they suspected and feared his Councils, which being chiefly influenced and
directed by Jesuits, and the Spirit of the Clergy could never be reconciled in
any tolerable manner to the Protestant profession. Tekeli besieges Kalo.
Thus whilst things were Negotiating in the Diet Tekeli besieged Kalo, which
surrendr'd at discretion with little or no resistance; and Prince Apafi joining
with some Parties of the Malcontents laid Seige to Zatmar, with an Army
composed of Transilvanians, Moldavians, Turks and Malcontents of Hungary, all
which acted in four separate Bodies, being well provided with Cannon, and all
sorts of Ammunition and Provisions; so soon as Apafi had formed his Siege, he
put forth a Manifest or Declaration, which he caused to be privately stolen
into the Town, and there dispersed, signifying, that out of Christian piety,
and compassion to the miserable state of that Kingdom, Apafi's Declaration.
he had left his Country and Dwelling with no other intent, than only to cause
their Churches to be restored to them, with a free Liberty of Conscience and
Exercise of Religion; and that their Estates which had been confiscated for the
sake of their Religion, and defense of their Rights, and Privileges might be
again restored to them: To which he added many Solemn Protestations, that he
had no other end, nor intention than the welfare and happiness of the Kingdom.
Farther also he said, that he had a power sufficient for this Enterprise, being
well seconded by the Grand Seignior, and acted by his Commission, and that the
Succession to the Principality was promised unto his Son; to whom, besides the
Forces with him, he had left a Guard of 20.000 Men. Having made thus much known
to the Inhabitants of Zatmar, he vigorously proceeded in the Siege, Apafi
invests Zatmar.
having received a Recruit of 8000 Men from the Pasha of Buda, being a
Detachment from 40.000, which were Encamped before the place whereof he was
Governor: And tho with these Forces the Town of Zatmar was taken; yet Serini
who Commanded the place retiring into the Castle or Citadel, he so well
defended the same, that Apafi was forced to raise the Siege and march away;
burning several Towns, The Siege raised.
and taking a Thousand Prisoners in his Retreat. The raising of this Siege was
variously interpreted, and so ill taken by the Turks, that Complaints were made
thereof against Apafi at the Port. But it was no time now to make alterations,
or disturbances in Transylvania.

Toward the end of this year, the Emperor being desirous to Crown the Empress
at Oedembourg, sent a Convoy of 500 Hussars, 100 Heyduks, The Empress Crowned
Queen of Hungary.
and 500 Cuirassiers to fetch the Crown of St. Stephen from the Castle of
Presburg, where it is always lodged, which being brought thither the Empress
was Crowned Queen of Hungary with great Solemnity: And that this Ceremony might
be performed with the more order and security, a Cessation of Arms was agreed
with Tekeli for six Moths. And to make appear, how propitious this day of
Coronation was like to be, Count Caprara fell on the Rear of Apafi's Forces, as
they were retiring into their own Country, took all their Baggage, and entering
into Transylvania burned five Castles and diverse Villages; and thus ended the
Campaign of this year.

ANNO, 1682.
WIth this year the Scene of War began to open, Turks to declare their
Resolutions bent all their Forces against Hungary. Nor would the Malcontents
maintain the Truce made by Tekeli, or be restrained from committing many Acts
of Hostility. For tho the Cessation of Arms was again confirmed and renewed,
yet in despite of this Treaty, and contrary to the Faith given, The
Malcontents and Turks intercept the Corn and Soldiers Cloths belonging to the
Emperor's Army.
the Malcontents seized on all the Grane, which the Emperor had bought on the
Frontiers of Poland, as it was carrying to the several Stores and Granaries,
where it was to be lodged: And about the same time the Turks took many Carts
laden with Soldiers Coats, as they were carrying to the Imperial Army.
Howsoever, Tekeli pretended to keep and conserve the Faith and Promises which
he had given; and during that Vacation made a Journey to Buda with a Guard of
3000 Men, where he was received by the Pasha of that Place, Tekeli received at
Buda.
at the Head of his Janisaries, and conducted with great Magnificence and State
to the Palace; where the Pasha took off Tekeli's Cap, and placed on his Head
another after the Turkish fashion richly Embroidered, and beset with Precious
Stones and Herons Feathers, which some call a Diadem; and say, that with that
Ceremony he was by the Turks created King of Hungary. Howsoever it was so
carried, that the Emperor understood it not in that manner, or at least would
not so interpret it; for at the same time he received a Messenger from Tekeli,
who came to desire his Majesty's consent, that he might take the Widow of
Prince Ragotski to Wife; The Emperor assents to the Marriage of Tekeli with the
Princess Ragotski.
to which the Emperor readily assented, knowing that the Marriage would succeed
in case he refused, and so making a Virtue of necessity, he hoped by such a
Gracious condescension, to regain the Heart of Tekeli, unless it were become
obdurate beyond all possibility of being won, either by Generosity or
Compulsion. Having thus gained the Emperor's Assent, he speedily made a Journey
to Mongatz, where he consummated the Marriage with the Princess with great Joy
and Solemnity, and took Possession of all the Towns, and Castles belonging to
that Lady.

Their Marriage.
She was bred up by her Mother in the Roman Catholic Religion, but her Husband
converted her, and made her a Protestant. During the Life of her Mother she was
restrained from this Marriage, but after her Death, she became an admirer of
Tekeli's Bravery, Buda had put upon his Head, was no other than a Diadem after
the Custom and Fashion of the Turks. The Emperor, who was a Stranger to these
Matters, believing that some use might be made of this Alliance, whereby to
gain the Mind of Tekeli, employed Count Serini to his Sister the Princess, to
compass this Design; but so far was Serini from answering the expectations of
his Imperial Majesty, that he entered into the Combination and Conspiracy with
Tekeli himself.

July, Count Albert Caprara, Brother of General Caprara, who resided for the
Emperor at Constantinople, The Turks offer Conditions shameful for the Emperor.
advised, That at length he had been admitted unto Audience with the Grand
Vizier, who declared, That he would neither continue the Truce longer, nor yet
renew it, but on these following Conditions.

That Hungary should be restored unto the Condition, in which it was in the
year 1655.

That the Kingdom should pay the Annual Tribute of Fifty thousand Florins every
Year unto the Grand Seignior.

That the Fortifications of Leopolstadt, and Gratz should be demolished.

That Neutra, Schultz and Eckof, with the Island of Schultz near Presburg, and
the Fortress of Muran be delivered, and surrendered up into the Hands of Count
Tekeli.

That a General Pardon be given to the Malcontents, and that they be restored
to their Goods and Estates, and to all their Privileges and Immunities, in such
manner as if none of these Wars or Disturbances had happened. But these
Conditions were so hard, and shameful to be imposed on any but a conquered
People, that it was adjudged by the Emperor's Council, that an honorable War,
was much rather to be preferred, before such an Ignominious and Scandalous
Peace.

The time for the Cessation of Arms being expired, to which the Malcontents
had yielded only to gain time, whilst the Turks were preparing their
formidable Army, Successes of Tekeli at Zatmar.
Tekeli surpised the Castle of Zatmar, and put all the Garrison consisting of
Eighty Men, to the Sword; and turning afterward his Cannon on the City, it was
Surrendered to him at Discretion. Thence he Marched to Cassovia, and laid Siege
to it, Cassovia and Filek besieged and taken
and at the same time the Transilvanians and Moldavians joining with the Pasha
of Buda, laid Siege to Filek. Whilst Tekeli lay before Cassovia, he received a
Recruit of Fourteen thousand Men, which were supplied to him by his Wife the
Princess, out of those Troops which were levied in her own Country; and the
Pasha of Agria came with Four thousand Horse more to his assistance. The Town
was notwithstanding bravely defended for several days by Lieutenant Colonel
Lamb; but being out of hopes of all Succors it Surrendered at Discretion: Many
of the Garrison revolted to the Malcontents; but Four hundred of them
endeavoring to Retire, and having given no intimation of a Mine, which
afterward was Sprang with great loss and hurt of the Besiegers, they were all
put to the Sword: The Governor was made a Prisoner of War, and the Inhabitants
to save themselves from Pillage and Plunder, paid the Sum of 50.000 Crowns. The
Inhabitants of Esperies being affrighted at the misfortune of Cassovia,
Esperies yields.
Surrendered it self on Conditions without striking one Stroke; the German
Garrison being Two hundred in all, were permitted to March out with their
Baggage, and had a safe Conduct as far, as to the Frontiers of Poland, and from
thence License to March into Silesia, nor were the Priests and Roman Catholics
permitted to remain in the City. After which, Tekeli by advice of the Pasha of
Buda demolished the whole Town, And is demolished.
not being obliged to maintain a Garrison for it is defense. In the mean time
the Pasha of Waradin laid Siege to Filek, and took it in despite of Strazoldo,
who left the Villages of the Mountains, and marched with Three thousand Horse
and Four thousand Foot for its Relief; as also to the same end, Count Caprara
passed the River Waagh with Six thousand Men, whilst Count Staremberg defended
the Passage with Four or Five thousand Men, and the Palatine Esterhasi was
coming on the other side with Six thousand Men more; yet notwithstanding the
Art and Bravery of so many Generals, the Town was taken in their own Sight, as
if they had only come with design to be Spectators of the Success, and Victory
of their Enemies. The Hungarian Soldiers, who were in the Garrison took part
with the Turks; but the Germans were made Prisoners of War, and all the Women
and Children were carried away Captives, and the place it self was razed and
demolished. Leventz and Neutra followed the like Example, and Surrendered to
the Turks; of all which Acts of Hostility, when Complaints were made by the
Emperor to the Pasha of Buda, no other Answer was returned, Than that those
Actions were not to be esteemed as Breaches of the Truce, in regard they were
only made in pursuit of Thieves and Robbers who had Infested the Countries, and
took Refuge and Sanctuary in those Cities.

Tekeli made Incursions into the County of Seposo, where he Plundered and Burnt
Sobora and Saftzin, Towns belonging to Prince Lubomiski Great Marshal of
Poland; which was the Cause (as we shall afterward understand) why Six
thousand Polish Horse joined themselves to General Schultz, under the Command
and Conduct of that Prince

ANNO 1683.
Belgrade, the Emperor notwithstanding to leave nothing undone which might tend
to a Peace, Saponara sent to Belgrade.
dispatched Saponara to Belgrade, to Solicit once more for more easy
Conditions than what had been offered to Count Albert Caprara at
Constantinople: Belgrade, and after he had raised all the Militia and Power of
Asia, and been at a vast expense in the Preparations of War; should now
condescend, or remit these Demands which had formerly been required: Wherefore
as I say, The Emperor expecting no farther benefit from a Treaty, than only to
satisfy himself and the World, that he had done every thing in his Power, which
might produce a Peace; he provided for War, and in the first place employed
Count Martinitzion on an Embassy to the Pope, and other Princes of Italy to
obtain from them Aid, and Succors both of Men and Money.

The Emperor's Forces toward the end of the last year, Forces raised.
and at the beginning of this, consisted of 20.000 Men; to increase which,
Orders were given to all Colonels, and Officers fully to Complete their
Regiments, and Troops against the end of May. Commissions were also given out
to raise Six Regiments of Horse, and one of Foot, besides Four Regiments of
Croats: And the Regiment of Prince Charles of Loraine, Money raised.
And to raise Money for maintenance of these new Levies, and for the War, the
Hundredth Penny was laid on all Rents of Lands, and Revenue or Income from
Offices, by which it was supposed, that a vast Sum might be raised: And
moreover Four Millions were borrowed; for security of which a Mortgage was
given to Count Swartzemberg, and other Ministers upon the Demesnes of the
Duchy of Trinchin and Silesia. The Fortifications of Vienna were continued
with greater diligence, Vienna fortified.
and numbers of Men than formerly; and the Suburbs were ordered to be
demolished, and the Cellars to be filled up with Earth; tho the Inhabitants
being desirous to continue in their Dwellings, so long as was possible,
deferred to abandon their Houses, until such time as they were assured of the
certainty of a Siege intended.

The Emperor being by this time farther assured, that the Turks designed
nothing less than a Peace, having made all the Steps and Preparations necessary
toward a War, dispatched his Orders to Count Albert Caprara, to take his last
Audience of leave, Count Albet Caprara recalled.
and so depart from the Ottoman Court: But that License would not be granted to
him; it being the Custom of the Turks in all their Wars, to carry the Person of
the Ambassador of that Prince with them in their Camp, against whom they wage
War, with intention to make use of his Service, in case the Success of Affairs
should at any time incline them to a Treaty. The Baron of Kaunitz was sent to
the Elector of Bavaria, and Count Windisgratz to the Princes of the Circles of
Lower Saxony and Westphalia, moving them to enter into such Measures and
Councils with the Emperor, as might tend to the Conservation of Hungary,

Germany alla^m'd by the Turks.
All Christendom now Allarum'd by the vast preparations of the Turks, whose
Force appeared sufficient, not only to overspread Hungary, but to overrun all
Germany in one Summer; so that the Common safety seemed now to be in danger:
The Diet at Ratisbon was then Sitting, and Consulting for the Common Welfare
and Security, for which the Emperor was so much concerned, that he resolved
once to have been present there in Person; but that his Deputies who resided
for him, gave his Imperial Majesty such assurances of the zeal, and care the
Diet had for conservation of the Empire; that were his Majesty there in Person,
nothing could be more done than what was resolved, and then acting by that Diet.

Saponara privately Treats with Tekeli.
Saponara not being able to Prevail any thing upon the Vizier at Belgrade, was
Ordered to try what he could work upon Tekeli, to draw him off from the Turks.
In pursuance of which he went to Mongatz, where Tekeli lay Sick of a Fever, and
being his ancient Friend and Acquaintance, was some time during the
intermission of his Fits admitted into his Chamber, where in the Emperor's
Name, he offered to him a Sovereignity over all those Places of which he was
Master in the Upper Hungary, with several other Demesnes appertaining
thereunto, and to hold the same on the very Conditions which were given to
Boscai, who raised Arms against the Emperor in the year 1605. Besides which,
such Conferences passed, as are usual with Sick Men, who are commonly
relenting, and desirous of Gods Glory and the public Peace: But when Tekeli
grew better, and returned to his perfect state of Health, he then confessed
plainly, that his Circumstances were such, and his Union with the Turks so Knit
and Engaged, that it was impossible for him to separate, or destricate himself
from their Interest and Party. With which Answer Saponara being convinced, that
nothing was to be done on this side, returned to Vienna to give his Majesty new
assurances thereof. Wherefore now to proceed in the provisions for a War,
Alliances were to be cultivated; and in the first place, the Treaty with Poland
was rather to be renewes than begun, for (as we have before mentioned) the
Poles had pressed the Ratification thereof with much earnestness; but in regard
the Emperor was entertained constantly with hopes and a prospect of Peace, he
deferred the Conclusion thereof for the last Reserve, to help and conserve him,
after all other Negotiations proved vain and fruitless. Count Wallestain was
the Person appointed to perform, and complete this great Work; and accordingly
having received a Commission, and Instructions for so great a Management, he
made a Journey to Warsaw in Poland, Count Wallestain sent into Poland.
where he found the Diet then Sitting, but embroiled in a thousand
difficulties, and differences amongst themselves, (as is usual in all such
great Councils and Assemblies,) representing Aggrievances, and accusing great
Men. The business of the high Treasurer of that Kingdom was then in Agitation,
and his Accounts and Administration of that Office were under Examination; upon
which many of the Nobility were so intent, that when Count Wallestain arrived
with Instructions, and Plenary Power from the Emperor, to conclude a League
offensive and defensive with Poland; they opposed his admission to Audience,
until such time as they had composed their own intestine Differences, and
provided in the first place, for the safety of their own Kingdom: And so far
had some angry and turbulent Spirits pressed this Matter, that the Diet was in
danger of being Dissolved without any Conclusion, either in reference to their
own Affairs, or League with the Empire. But the King, and principal Nobility
joining their endeavors with those of Cardinal Pio, Nuntio of Pope Innocent
the 11th, His Negotiations there.
and of the Emperor's Ambassador, represented unto the Diet in General, the
necessity of a speedy Union against the Common Enemies; declaring the Turks and
Tartars, were ready on the very Confines to overrun all Poland, Hungary and
Germany: And because, that notwithstanding all that could be said, there were
still certain Spirits unsatisfied; it was the care of the King, and of the
others to deal with them in private, and conjure them to give no stop, but to
concur with them in this important Negotiation: Thus whole Nights were spent in
pacifying the Spirits of the Polish Nobility, who love to exert their
Authority, and to have Applications and Addresses made to them; and at length
they were so prevailed upon, that remitting the Affairs of the Grand Treasurer,
and of other Aggrievances to the consideration of the next Diet; they resolved
to Treat on no other for the present, than what related to the making such
Confederacies, as tended to the security and safety of the Kingdom. And in
regard the several Points, and Articles with Moscovy were intricate, and
required time to debate; it was agreed, without descending to other particulars
in that Treaty, to renew the Truce for three years longer, and during that time
to enter into a League Offensive and Defensive with the Emperor and King of
Poland, against the Common Enemy of Christendom. Thus with much Labor and
Assiduity, The League concluded between the Emperor and King of Poland.
the Providence of God assisting the Christian Councils, as he did afterward
their Arms; the League was concluded and signed on the 18th of April, being the
Day of the Festival of Christ's Resurrection; Vienna by an Express, who moving
with the Wings of Messengers, who carry such pleasing Tidings, arrived in a
very short time at the Emperor's Court, to the unexpressible Joy of the whole
Empire.

The Chief Heads of the Treaty were these.

First, That the League Offensive shall continue until such time, as that the
Emperor, and King of Poland shall make Peace with the Common Enemy, but that
the Defensive shall continue for ever.

Secondly, That this Alliance shall be sworn unto by Cardinal Pio in behalf of
the Emperor, and by Cardinal Charles Barberini at Rome, in the name and behalf
of the King of Poland.

Thirdly, That the Emperor shall Renounce, and quit claim to all Debts and Sums
of Money which were due to him from Poland, on occasion of the Succors, and
Assistances he gave unto that Kingdom, when it was Invaded by the Swedes: And
that the great Seal whereby the Emperor is empowered to nominate, and make
choice of a new King be Cancelled and Surrendered.

Fourthly, That no Peace be made with the Turks without the privity, consent,
and concurrence of both Parties; and that the Heirs and Successors of them be
equally obliged to maintain, and confirm the present League.

Fifthly, That this League be limited, and understood of a War against the Turk
only, and not against any other Prince or Potentate whatsoever.

Sixthly, That during this War, the Emperor be obliged to maintain 70.000 Men
in the Field; besides 20.000 in Garrison: And that the King of Poland shall
conduct an Army of 40.000 Men, and March at the Head of them in Person.

Seventhly, That the Emperor shall act with the gross of his Army in the Lower
Hungary against the Turk; and with another Army in the Upper Hungary,
consisting of Six thousand Germans, and as many Auxiliaries, whose business
shall chiefly be to subdue the Rebels, and recover the places which they have
taken: And that the King of Poland shall endeavor to recover Caminiec, and
other places unjustly usurped by the Turk in Podolia, Ucrania and Volhinia.

Eighthly, That the Emperor shall lend unto the King of Poland 300.000 Dollars,
and the payment thereof to be secured on the Tithes of that Kingdom, which the
Pope has lately granted to the King for carrying on this present War.

Ninethly, That in case other Christian Kings, or Princes shall desire to enter
into this Alliance, their admission thereinto shall be with the knowledge and
approbation of both Crowns; and that the Czars of Muscovy be particularly
induced to join in this Alliance.

On these Terms was this League concluded, so much the more to the comfort and
satisfaction of all Christendom, by how much it had been uncertain and doubtful
before; in regard the Divisions in the Diet it self were grown so high, that it
was believed no place could be allowed for the Debates of Foreign Matter, which
did not immediately concern their own differences; and that the resentment
which the King of Poland conceived against the Emperor, for not closing with
the Alliance formerly offered, and importunately urged, would have been
invincible obstacles against this Union, of which all the World despaired: But
God who directs all things to that end which he designs, had so tempered and
qualified the Animositis of the Poles one against the other, that to the Joy of
all Christendom, that necessary and happy Alliance was concluded.

The Grand Vizier (as we have said) Belgrade, where he attended the Asiatick
Troops, and with him Count Albert Caprara the Emperor's Resident, (whom he
reserved according to ancient Custom in the Camp, Count Capara licensed to
return to Vienna.
) for an instrument to move and forward Treaties, in case any sinister success
should befall the Ottoman Forces: But this Vizier fearing nothing less than ill
fortune, and reposing a confidence in his Arm of Flesh, which he thought
impossible to be subdued, did easily and with some scorn comply with the
instance which Count Albert Caprara made to him for License to return to his
Master at Vienna: And in order thereunto he was committed to the care, and
conduct of the Bei of Alba Regalis, who was then Marching with his Men toward
those parts. Howsoever, a stop was put to his departure for some few days, to
the end, that he might be Spectator of the magnificent reception of Count
Tekeli by the Vizier, which when he understood, he pressed his departure with
more earnestness, that his Eyes might not be offended with the scandalous sight
of a Rebel promoted to Honor and Grandeur, for Treason and Perfidiousness to
his Sovereign. He refuses to behold the Reception of Tekeli, and others.
And when he heard that he came accompanied with many of the Hungarian
Nobility, who were Roman Catholics, and particularly with the Count of
Homonai, to the great scandal of the Gospel, and the Christian Profession, he
was so transported with Disdain and Indignation, that he openly declared, in
case the Vizier delayed to grant him License to depart, only because he would
give him the Mortification to behold an Object so ungrateful to his Eyes, that
he would close them rather, or shut himself up in some Retirement, where he
might neither see or hear any of these Matters: Of which the Vizier having
notice he gave him free liberty to depart, and accordingly he set forward on
his Journey on the 12/2 of June, in company with the Bei of Alba Regalis, who
having attended Caprara as far at Moatz, he was thence recalled by the Vizier;
and the Bei of Albania appointed in his place, with a Guard of about a Hundred
Men, who continuing their Journeys from day to day, happily arrived at Buda on
the 20th. of June, not without great danger of falling into the hands of
Tartars, who not considering the Persons, or Offices of Ambassadors, nor yet
the Subjects of the Grand Seignior, whether Christians or Turks, put all to
Fire and Sword, which they could not carry with them, not regarding either Age
or Sex, but miserably destroyed all, wheresoever they could become Masters.

Though C. Albert Caprara was well treated at Buda, as to his own Person, yet he
was uneasy and impatient of his stay in that City, fearing lest the Barbarity
of the Turks, upon any ill Success, should vent their Rage and Revenge upon him
and his Attendants; but more sensibly was he affected with the daily sight of
poor Christians enslaved, and led before him in Chains; and with the news of
the Surrender of diverse Cities and Towns by Tekeli into the Possession of the
Turks, according to the Articles made between him and the Grand Seignior; and
which were so to remain, until a total Conquest was made of all Hungary, and
were afterward to be restored again to Tekeli with the absolute Sovereignty
and Dominion of that Kingdom. But how uneasy soever C. Caprara was in his
abode at Buda, Tartars and Free-booters, who had no respect to any thing but
themselves and their own Prey and Benefit; so he remained there until the
coming of the Vizier, and with him followed the Camp to the Siege of Vienna,
from whence he was permitted to depart, and attend his Imperial Majesty then at
Lintz, as we shall declare hereafter.

But before we proceed farther, let us look back to the Preparations, and
Forerunners made in the Winter to the bloody War, which was shortly to ensue.
Preparations for War.
The Turks in the Month of February, entered into the Isle of Serino in Croatia,
and committed great Disorders; in Buda vast stores were making of all sorts of
Ammunition and Provisions for War, with such Timber and Materials as were fit
and proper for making Bridges: And in the mean time, Tekeli's Forces besieged
or blocked up all the Emperor's Towns in the Upper Hungary: And yet for all
this, Tekeli sent to acquaint the Deputies of those Counties, which remained
firm and loyal to the Emperor, with the earnest Passion he conceived to
conserve the Peace of his Country, which he should certainly have done,
Tekeli's Protestations.
had his Imperial Majesty granted him any tolerable Conditions, and should
have given undoubted Testimonies to the World of his Loyalty and Obedience to
his Sovereign, against whom he took not up Arms out of any Animosity, but only
to free his Country from Tyranny and Oppression; and in this good Humor he
gave liberty unto 200 German Prisoners, and to Count Herberstein upon his
Parole, and protested unto the Emperor, that he had dispatched two of his
principal Ministers, namely Fagon and Sirmai, unto the Grand Seignior, to
continue and prolong the Truce, and gave the same Assurances to the Diet, which
he had convened at Cossovia. In the mean time, the Imperial Troops being ill
paid, daily deserted the Service, and revolted to the Malcontents, with whom
they hoped to improve and better their Condition.

Toward the end of this Month, the Turks, by a Detachment out of the Garrison
of Newhausel, made an attempt to pass over the Ice to the Isle of Schults,
under command of an Hungarian Renegade; but the Ice breaking, many of them were
drowned.

In the Month of March the Turks placed a Guard of 15000 Men to defend the
Bridge of Esseck, The Emperor's Camp.
from being burnt by the Christians: And the Emperor on his side caused his
Troops, which were quartered near the Rhine, to march toward Hungary, as also
the Regiment of Count Taaf then in Bohemia; and all the other Troops were
ordered to draw toward Presburg; and were near thereunto encamped in the Plain
of Kitzee by Count Rabata, that the Emperor might there make a Review of all
his Forces, designed that Year against the Turk.

On the 7th. of May, the Emperor entered into the Field, attended on the
Right Hand by the Duke of Bavaria, He takes a review of all his Army.
and on the Left by P. Charles of Loraine, and followed by a numerous train of
Nobles and principal Ministers: The Army was all ranged in Batalia, at the
front of which, was Count Staremberg, General of the Artillery, with 72 great
Pieces of Canon, and 15 Mortar pieces for throwing Bombs, all guarded by the
Gunners, and Attendants on the Train of Artillery. The main Body of the Army
was composed of 14 Regiments; namely, Staremberg, Mansfelt, Diepenthal, Baden,
Grana, Strasoldo, Souches, Heisser, Bech, Wallis, Schaffemberg, Newberg, Thime,
and Wirtemberg: The which Body was flanked on each side with a Regiment of
Cuirassiers, and 12 Regiments of Horse; namely, Rabata, Gondola, Halleweil,
Palsi, Dunevalt, Caprara, Montecuculi, Saxolunemburg, Taaff, Goz, Dupigny, and
Mercy, with 3 of Dragoons, Stirum, Castelli, and Herbeville, and 4 Companies of
Croats commanded by Riccardi; all of them well armed, and mounted, and most of
them select and veterane Soldiers: To these were adjoined a Body of Hungarians
and Hussars, being Horse and Foot, under the Command of Count Hesterhasi,
Palatine of that Kingdom, The number of the Forces.
to the number of about eight Thousand with 14 Pieces of Cannon; about a
Thousand whereof were armed with long Lances, the number of all which, as some
Authors report, amounted unto 70.740; tho as yet the Forces of Alsatia, with
those of the Circles of the Rhine, were not come up; but others perhaps with
more reason make this whole Force to consist of no more than forty three
Thousand Men in all, besides six Thousand Polish Horse, which the Emperor had
hired with his own Money, under the Command of Prince Lubomiski, to which were
adjoined great numbers of Gentlemen, and younger Brothers, who came to
adventure and make their Fortunes in this War.

After the Emperor had heard Mass, which was celebrated by the Archbishop of
Strigonium, and sang with Music, the Archbishop read with a loud Voice the
Bull of Indulgence, which the Pope had given unto all those who should fight
the Christian Battles against Turks and Infidels; after which, he gave his
Benediction to the Emperor, and the Nobility, and to all the Army, who received
it with much Humility, and Devotion on their Knees; which Ceremony being ended,
the Emperor took a View of the whole Army, greatly to his satisfaction: After
which he was conducted to a magnificent Tent, Duke of Loraine feasts the Court.
raised on the Banks of the Danube, where he was splendidly treated by the Duke
of Loraine, together with the Empress, the Arch-duchess, the Elector of
Bavaria, the Prince of Newbourg, (Coadjutor of the Grand Master of the Tutonick
Order) the Prince Lewis of Baden, and the Duke of Saxelawemburg. After which
magnificent Entertainment, the Emperor and the Court returned that Night unto
Presburg. Such being the force of the Emperor's Army; let us also take a View
of the formidable numbers of the Turks, which were sufficient, like Locusts, to
overspread the face of all Hungary. But first we shall observe the Motions of
the Emperor's Army, which being now in it is Vigor and Strength, and encouraged
with fifty Thousand Florins, which his Imperial Majesty was pleased as a
Donative to distribute amongst the Soldiers; it was agreed by the Generals of
the Army, for the Reputation of their Forces, that some Enterprise should be
undertaken, before the Grand Vizier, with the gross of his Army, was advanced
farther, which according to their Conjectures, was believed could not be in
less than in the time of two Months. The Places nominated for to be attacked,
were Gran and Newhausel; the first seemed the most easy in respect to the
weakness of the Fortifications; but Advices being come that the Turks were
forming a Camp of 40.000 Men near Buda, whereby the Imperialists might be cut
off from all Communication with Comorra; it was resolved to change the Design,
and to march toward Newhausel. June, some Battalions of the first Brigade
posted themselves near the Neker, about Cannon-shot distant from the Town; in
two or three days afterward the whole Army being come up, they too possessed
themselves of the Suburbs, and of a Palanca, which covered the Gate toward
Buda side, and lodged within a Hundred Paces of the Ditch; and on the 6th. and
7th. of this Month the whole Town was surrounded, Newhausel besieged.
and the Platforms raised to receive the Cannon for Batteries, and all things
put into a condition of a formal Siege. But whilst Matters were carrying on in
this posture, the Duke of Loraine received Orders from the Court at Vienna to
desist from that Enterprise, for that the Turks were far advanced into Stiria,
and the Grand Vizier, with a vast Power of the Ottoman Force, as far as Esseck:
Hereupon a Council of War being called, and the Orders communicated to them,
the Siege which was laid the 3d. of June, was raised on the 10th, and the Army
marched toward Raab and Comorra, to reinforce those Garrisons, and from thence
to observe the Motions of the Enemy. Many were the Reflections on the
Enterprise of Newhausel; it seeming strange, that so wise a Captain as the Duke
of Loraine, should commence so difficult an Enterprise at the beginning of a
most perilous War, in which it was hardly possible for him to succeed, there
being at the same time an Army of 40.000 Turks encamped under the Walls of
Buda, which was not many days March distant from Newhausel; and the Gross of
the Turkish Power, not inferior to the greatest of their Armies, (of which
Histories recount such prodigious numbers) were then marching under the command
of the Grand Vizier, between Esseck and Alba Regalis, or Stultwessemburg. But
we ought not to impute any thing to the ill Conduct of so great a General,
whose Successes having crowned all his Actions; nothing can seem Rash or void
of Council, where Fortune has always led him by the hand, and made him
Victorious, as we shall (God willing) make appear in the sequel of this History.

The Grand Seignior at Belgrade.
But before we proceed farther, we must add what before was omitted, that about
the beginning of April, the Grand Seignior being desirous to show himself in
his Army, began to move toward Belgrade, Soltana, (who would not leave his
Company) and with a splendid Court, on the 2d. of June. The grossest part of
the Army being by this time come to that place appointed for the general
Rendezvous, the Grand Vizier, was willing to give the Grand Seignior a Survey
of all his Forces, to let him see how he had employed his Treasure, and with
what hopes of being repaid with Kingdoms, and with Spoils of the richest
Dominions in Christendom: And so the Grand Seignior being placed in a high
Scaffold erected for that purpose, all the Soldiers in their several Ranks and
Degrees, according to their Countries and Nations, passed in their several
Orders before him. And in the first place, The Forces of Mesopotamia all on
Horseback, Numb. 13000 Those of Assyria and Babylon, as far as Balsora, 14000
Other Asiatick Troops, comprehending the Provinces Numbers of the Turkish Army.
Of Sias, Amasia, Maras, Bussia, etc. 30000 The Militia of Judea, Egypt, etc.
18000 The Militia of Caramania, 8000 Turks out of the parts of Greece, 16000
The Militia of Armenia, Capadocia, etc. 24000 The remaining Asiatick Troops
were from Georgia, and the conquered Countries thereabouts, all which were the
Forces out of Asia, and Horse, 28000 After these marched the Janisaries of
Europe, 12000 Next followed the Tartars, ill Armed and worse Clothed, 14000
Last of all marched the most flourishing part of the Turkish Army, consisting
of the Sons and Servants of Pashas; also of the richest Spahees, and other
young Men, all richly clothed and armed, 35000 Pioniers and others with
Shovels, Spades, etc. 12000 Gunners, and other Attendants on the Train of
Artillery, 13000 Attendants on the Wagons of Ammunition and Provision, 14000
Other Attendants on the Tents and Baggage, 13000 All which formidable Forces
amounted unto, 264000

According to a Calculation made by several Italian Writers; but as to my own
Opinion, I cannot believe that Asia could furnish half those numbers, and
therefore do rather follow the Computation of the Asiaticks, according to this
Account: Mustapha Pasha, Grand Vizier, 15000 Emir Pasha of Adana, 500 Husaein
Basha of Bolu, 330 Kara Mahomet Pasha of Diarbeker, 1500 Mustapha Pasha of
Silistria, 1080 Halil Pasha of Sivas, 530 Ahmet Pasha of Maras, 710 Husaein
Pasha of Aleppo, 950 Osman Pasha a Sangiac under him, 510 Husaein Pasha of
Damascus, 2300 Hassan Pasha of Armit, 500 Bei of Gran Cairo, 3000 Basha of
Tokai on the Borders of Persia, 340 Bekir Pasha, 500 27750

This Computation may very well agree with the Forces of the first Year's
Expedition out of Asia; to which being adjoined the several Chambers of
Janisaries, with all the European Forces both Horse and Foot, as also the
Tartars, Transilvanians, Moldavians and Valachians, with the Hungarian Rebels;
we may without Romance account the Ottoman Force to consist of a Hundred eighty
Thousand effective fighting Men, besides Miners, Pioniers, Sutlers, Gunners,
Attendants on the Train of Artillery, Attendants and Servants belonging to the
Tents, with a vast number of Rascals, and Rabble following the Camp, which may
very well be Calculated to amount unto at least 40.000 more: For the Turks
above any Nation in the World have their Camp pestered with the Encumbrances of
Baggage; so that if we consider this vast number of 220.000 Men, it will not
seem incredible what we find reported, that they spread the Country eight
Leagues in length.

The Report of this formidable, and as to human Appearance, invincible Army,
caused the Duke of Loraine to hasten with all speed possible the Fortifications
of Raab, which he designed to enlarge on some rising Grounds near to the Town,
and to defend them with the whole Body of the Army, or at least by the
Infantry, which having a Communication with the Garrison, might be able to
oppose that great force of the Enemy, and weary them out by a lingering Siege in
a Country, which was already become desolate, and without Forage for above
twenty Miles round.

But the Duke of Loraine having received Intelligence, The Grand Vizier at Alba
Regalis.
that the Grand Vizier on the 1st. of July was entered into Alba Regalis, and
certainly resolved to Besiege Vienna, and to stop at no other place on their
March thither; He then changed his Measures, and having reinforced Raab, with
the three Regiments of Baden, Grana and Souches, and given the command of the
Place to Colonel Wallis; and having also reinforced Comorra and other Places
with strong Garrisons, his whole Field-Army became reduced unto 24.000 Men
only: And fearing lest with so small a number, he should be surrounded by the
multitudes of the Enemy, he once resolved to encamp himself under the Cannon of
Vienna.

In the mean time Tekeli having made a Visit to the Grand Vizier in his Camp at
Alba Regalis, persuaded him to publish a Manifest, He publishes a Manifest.
signifying unto the People, That the Grand Seignior did take under his
Protection all the Hungarians, who should join themselves to the Male-contented
Party, and that he would maintain them in their Privileges, Liberties,
Estates, Laws, and Religion: And that such, who refused to accept this gracious
Offer, were to expect no Quarter, but to be punished with Fire and Sword. This
Manifest being divulged by Tekeli at his return from the Vizier to Cassovia, so
operated on many of the Hungarians, that the Towns of Papa, Tot and Vesprin
accepted of the same, and opened their Gate to Tekeli and his Party: And such
was the Consternation of all Hungary, that many other Counties and Towns,
declared to the Emperor's Commissioners, that they would open their Gates to
Tekeli at the first Summons, rather than expose themselves to Fire and Sword,
where was no hopes or expectations of Relief. This Declaration of the People,
giving the Emperor just cause to fear, lest Neutra and the Mountain Towns
should follow the same Example, Orders were given to Count Schultz, Governor
of Neutra, to demolish that Fortress, Neutra demolished.
and bring the gross Cannon, with all the Ammunition from thence; and the like
Command was given to the Officers of the Mountain Towns, where the Mines of
Silver were, it being impossible to relieve them, because Tekeli was Master of
all the Passes which led thither; which Orders were readily obeyed by the
Officers, Priests and Religious Men, who fled to the Camp of General Schultz on
the Banks of the River Waagh: Where Schultz having joined with the six Thousand
Polish Horse, under the Command of Prince Lubomiski, he had the fortune to meet
a Party of the Malcontents joined with some Tartars, and to give them a total
Defeat, killing and taking two Thousand of them, with several Colors, and all
their Baggage.

In the mean time, whilst the Duke of Loraine was in this dubious Condition,
not knowing what course was best to be taken, he resolved once to retire under
the Cannon of Vienna, and there to govern himself according to the Motion of
the Enemy; but the Turks came on so fast, their Van appearing on the Banks of
the River Raab, followed by the whole Body of their Army Marching in Batalia,
that there was no time for any thing but a Precipitous Flight; nothing was now
to be put to a hazard, for the least Defeat might cause the absolute loss of
Vienna, and open the Enemies way into the Hereditary Counties. In this
exigency, all the Foot was Transported over into the Island of Schultz, under
the Command of the Count de Zely; and all the Horse being about Nine thousand
five hundred in number, Marched away about Midnight, and pitched their Camp
near to Altembourg. The Infantry being in the Isle of Schultz, The Christian
Infantry in the Isle of Schultz.
Marched without danger of the Enemy, and were in the way either to Communicate
with Raab, or to give Succor to Vienna, according as they saw the Enemy bend
their Course, for they were in a Condition to move faster than the multitudes,
and gross Bodies of the Turks. In a few Days it appeared, that the Turks aimed
at the Capital City of Vienna, and to leave all the other Fortresses behind
them, as being places which would fall of themselves, and follow the Fate of
the Imperial Court. The News of all which being carried from the Duke of
Loraine by Count Caprara to the Emperor; and also, that the Baggage of the Duke
of Saxelawenburg, of Prince Lewis de Baden, and of the Counts Caprara, and
Montecuculi were all taken by the Turks, and their Convoy defeated; and that
the Horse in great disorder had abandoned the Infantry, and left them to shift
for themselves in the Isle of Schultz, and were Marching with great Disorder to
Vienna: No sooner was this Intelligence arrived, than the Tartars appeared at
the same time within two Leagues of the City, The great consternation at Vienna.
and set Fire to all the Villages round about, the Smoke of which ascending
upwards, gave visible demonstrations of the truth of these Reports, and put all
the Court and City into a distracted Consternation. The Emperor after the
coming of this News, made no delay to depart away with the Empress, the
Arch-Duchess, and all the Court for Lintz: There was now no time to spare; and
Fear added Wings as well to the Poor as to the Rich; the great Personages whose
Offices obliged them to an attendance on the Court, were to be excused from
remaining behind in Defense of the City, the Duty they owed their Master
disengaging them from showing their Bravery in the Face of the Enemy: And
indeed such were the Preparations of all sorts of People to hasten out of the
Town, as if none had intended to stay in Defense of it: The Emperor and Court
remove to Lintz.
The Court which at other times would have required at least fifteen Days
preparations for such a removal, was now consined to five or six Hours; so that
without a larger Description of this Affrightment, we may imagine and figure to
our selves, the Confusion there was in Vienna upon this Departure. Every Man
before he could leave his Home, had something or other to order and dispatch;
for which Reason the Emperor at Night had very few, or none to serve and attend
him; and what will be thought most strange in times hereafter, he had no Guard,
or Convoy to Defend his Person, through the many Perils and Hazards he was to
pass, it being necessary to leave all the Soldiery behind for Defense of the
City. We may then conceive with what Terror this sad and trembling Court did
travel, being continually allarum'd by reports of Tartars, who had Plundered
and Pillaged, and Burnt all the Parts round, the terrible Marks of which
appeared in the Night, and served by the Flames to direct them in their way:
And had not the Providence of God, carried that rude and barbarous Nation into
Parts more Remote, the Emperor and all his Court, with the Ladies, and Chief
Nobility had fallen as a Prey into their rapacious Hands: But God having
diverted so great a mischief and shame to all Christendom, the Imperial Court
arrived at Lintz, more terrified with the continual Allarums, then tired with
the Journey; the Attendants followed the Court so fast as they were able, as
did the Women, Citizens, and those who were not Men of the Sword; the ways were
filled with Coaches, Carts, Wagons and Horses, the present trembling condition
administered unto the flying Multitude, matter of discourse, so that as they
journied along their Talk was concerning the ill management of the public
Affairs, which were reduced to that unhappy State by the evil Councils of the
Jesuits, who had too great an Interest, and prevailing Power in the Cabinet of
the Emperor: Had it not been for them, said they, and for the Clergy, the
Protestants had not been divested of their Churches, nor deprived of their
Liberties and Properties, whereby they were provoked to take up Arms against
the Emperor: Nay, how often was the Imperial Clemency well inclined to grant
Pardon, and Terms of Peace to Tekeli, and his Malecontented Subjects; which
would have diverted this Storm from the Turks, which now pursues us, but that
the governing power of the Clergy still cherished, and fomented the
Differences, until they had brought them to this ultimate precipice of our
Destruction? Some there were, who being well disposed toward the French
Faction, blamed the Councils of the Emperor, for not accepting the Propositions
of France made for relief of the Empire: For tho such a remedy might be
dangerous, yet it could not be worse than the Disease, nor nothing so had as
the present impending Evil; it were better to put our selves into the Hands of
the French, than into the power of Turks and Infidels.

The Court continued not long at Lintz; for so soon as Intelligence came that
Vienna was Besieged, the Emperor removed to Passau, which is a City about 30 or
40 Miles farther into Germany; and was a Bishopric, which with Strasbourg was
once in the Hands of the Arch Duke Leopold William. Two days after the
departure of the Emperor from Vienna, the Confusion still continued day and
night, caused by Carts and Horses, employed to carry away the Goods and
Housholdstuff of those who as useless Persons were permitted to remove out of
the City.

At length, upon arrival of the Duke of Loraine the Confusion ceased, and the
Inhabitants and Soldiers affrightned before by the timorous multitude which
were fled, began to return again into their Wits, Good Orders and Rules
established.
and become capable to receive Orders, and solid Councils for the better
defense of their City, Estates and Lives. The Courage and good Conduct which
appeared in the Generals, operated the like effect in the Minds of the
Soldiery, who now with undaunted Resolution attended the approach of the Enemy,
who had in their March received a Repulse before the Fortress of Raab, which
gave no little encouragement to the Garrison. The same day that the Duke of
Loraine and Count Staremberg entered into Vienna, July, the Infantry which were
before passed over into the Island of Schultz, were come up to the rest of the
Army: The first thing ordered by these Commanders was, to repair the
Palisadoes, and finish some Works as well as could be possible in so short a
warning; and the Inhabitants of the Suburbs being retired within the Town, were
willingly employed with their own Hands, to set Fire to their own Dwellings, to
divest the Enemy of all Succor, or Shelter therein.

The Forces put into Vienna.
The same Night the Duke of Loraine caused all the Foot, excepting only eight
Batalions, which he reserved to defend his Camp, to enter into the Counterscarp
of the Town; and in two Nights after being the 14th and 15th, the Powder and
Bullet, which was expected from Lintz were brought in, and lodged in the
Arsenal of the City. After which the other eight Batalions were also brought
into the Town, which with those in the Counterscarp made Twelve thousand Men.
But for better understanding the State and Condition of the Garrison, The
number of the Forces brought into Vienna.
we have here set down the particulars of all the Forces therein, that those
worthy Persons, who have so signalized themselves by their Bravery in this
Famous Siege, may not be forgotten in future Ages.

Count Staremberg Governor.

Regiments of
Staremberg Commanded by Geo. Maurice of Ketlin. 2000 Men. Half of Keiserstin's
Regiment under Wolfargschenek, 1000 Mansfeld Commanded by C. Alex. Lesly, 2000
Souches by Charles Lewis Colonel of Souches, Son of the Famous General
Radwight, 2000 Schaffemberg, and Bercks two Regiments, 4000 Seven Companies of
Newbourg, 1200 Half of Heister's Regiment, under Baron Heister, 1000 The other
half of this Regiment was sent to Lintz, for Guard of the Emperor's Person.
Five Companies of Dimik, an ancient Commander, 0600 Dupignis Regiment of Horse,
0600 Three Companies of the Garrison belonging to the City, 1200

These Regiments when full amounted in all unto 15600 Men; but so many of them
had been Killed and wasted with Sickness, that scarce Ten thousand of them
entered into Vienna; to which being added the Trained-Bands of the City,
consisting of 2717, the whole Garrison might be well computed with Volontiers,
and Officers at near 13000 Men.

The Chief Officers were. Count Staremberg Governor, Count Daun, Lieutenant
Governor, Marquis Ferdinand Obizzi Major, John Count Serini Assistant to the
Count Daun; The Counts Souches and Schaffemberg Assistants to the Lieutenant
Governor and Major.

Volontiers were Count Trotmandorf, who had been a Colonel many years in
Flanders, Count Five-Kerk Captain of the Provincial Circle of Austria, the
Count of Salzbourg, who was Colonel of a Regiment of Croats, but being come to
Vienna to be Cured of a Dissentery, which he had got in the Army, and the Siege
happening before his perfect Recovery, he offered to serve in nature of a
Volontier. The Baron of Kilmensec Great Forester to the Emperor, defended the
Court-bastian for three days with eighty of his Foresters, who being excellent
Marks-Men, and used to their Guns, which they charged with an exact proportion
of Powder and Bullet, did great Execution upon the Turks, seldom missing their
Shot, and the Baron himself killed a Turk at 300 paces distant; who was
afterward known to have been one of the Turks principal Canoniers. The Count
Vignacourt a French Gentleman, formerly employed by his most Christian Majesty,
in quality of an Ambassador to Ferdinand the Third, Father of the present
Emperor, and to other Princes of Germany, was, an other of the Volontiers: As
were also the Count de St. Micaele a Venetian, Ernest Sigismund de Zeternz, of
an ancient Family in Silesia, Cornelius Rummingken, a Person of Sixty two years
of Age, and though much afflicted with the Gout, yet being an experienced
Soldier, his Councils were more available to the Governor than his Bodily
Services. And lastly, There was Sigismond de Reitoffar a Gentleman of Moravia,
who had formerly been a Major General, who showed himself at all times daring,
and active in the Execution of such Orders, as he received from Count
Staremberg the Governor.

This was all the Force which was lodged in Vienna, to defend it against that
Formidable Army, then ready to encompass it on all sides: But whom God will
save are always well protected, and then there never want Provisions nor
Councils, nor Courage in the Soldiery.

The Count of Kollonitz, who was Treasuerer of Hungary, did most seasonably
furnish the Bishop of Newstadt, The Bishop of Newstadt's Treasure.
with Five hundred thousand Florins for supply of the Garrison during the
Siege, with Three thousand Measures of Wine; which this Bishop, who was a
Knight of the Great Cross of Malta, and had been in the Siege of Candia, did
with good mannagement lay up in several Cellars in the Town, and distributed to
the Soldiers in time of the Siege; as also the Money, which was paid out with
such order, and on such occasions, as were requisite and necessary, to appease
all complaints which might arise for want thereof. But above all, care was
taken to establish a Council in the Town during the Siege: The Persons
thereunto nominated and appointed were,

The Council appointed for Government of Vienna.
Count de Capliers Counselor of State, and General of the Ordnance; Count de
Molard, Grand Marshal of Austria, Baron de Belchamp, Councellor of the
Emperor's Household, and the Chancellor Hoffman. The Governors under Count
Staremberg were the Counts of Thun and Serini; and after them Souches and
Schaffemberg, Baron de Beck, the Prince of Wirtemberg, and Baron Heister, who
were all Colonels of Regiments which served in Vienna.

July, the Duke of Loraine having given all the necessary Orders for
conservation of the City; the Turks began to descend by the Hill of St. Mark
with their Horses, The first appearance of the Turks.
Wagons and Camels laden with Baggage, ranging themselves in form of a
Crescent or Half Moon round the Town: Upon appearance whereof, and the News of
the near approach of the Great Vizier; the Duke of Loraine on the 15th at night
drew off all his Horse, and Dragoons to the other side of the Bridges, and
there Encamped: He had once entertained some Thoughts of conserving a part of
the Foot in his Camp; but considering the great Force of the Enemy ready to
surround the City, The Duke of Loraine puts all his Foot into Vienna.
the largeness of the Works which were to be maintained, the distance of the
Forces which were designed for its Relief, and the daily decay, and diminution
of Soldiers in a long Siege; were sufficient inducements to this Wise
Commander, to supply the City with all the Infantry without any reserve unto
himself. Howsoever, he had once some Thoughts of posting some of his Cavalry in
the Tabor, to keep a Communication with the Town; but upon a true survey
thereof, the Water was found to be Shallow in many places, and Fordable that
Man and Horse could March into it in Rank and File, so that the Water being of
no security to a Camp, the place was deserted: The Tabor.
The Tabor is an Island in the Danube, of about a Mile and half in length,
planted with Trees and Orchards, and full of Gardens, Fountains and Houses of
Pleasure.

The Tabor being judged no place for the Cavalry to Lodge in; the Duke of
Loraine passed the Danube, leaving the Bridges to be defended by the Dragoons
of General Schultz. By this time the Vanguard of the Turks were advanced, and
great numbers of Tents pitched round the City: And the Vizier with the Gross of
the Army was Marching to the Siege, having left the Pasha of Buda with Twelve
thousand Men to block up Raab, where he remained until such time as he was
Relieved by Apafi Prince of Transylvania, with some of Tekeli's Forces, and
then he proceeded to the Siege of Vienna. The Vizier in the Camp before Vienna.
On the 16th the Vizier entered the Camp, highly raised, and puffed up with
assurances of finding the Gates of Vienna opened unto him, or at least to run
over the Walls without much Opposition. His numerous Force gave him a
confidence of Success, and his natural Pride suggested to him an Impossibility
of being Overcome: The Country People nourished this Opinion in him by Reports,
that all the Christian Infantry were shut up in the Isle of Schultz; that there
was no force in the City, and the disorder and Confusion so great therein, that
upon the first Summons they would open their Gates: Nor was the Report ill
grounded; for at that time the whole Garrison of Vienna did not consist of
above Six hundred Men, of which the Vizier was well advised, and knew, that if
he made but some more than ordinary have with his Army, or detached a
formidable Body to appear in sight of the Town, before the Duke of Loraine had
Reinforced the Garrison, and put all things into a Posture of Defense, the
Gates might easily have been opened, and the City become the Prey and Reward of
the Ottoman Soldiers. But this was not the Vizier's business, his desire was to
gain and appropriate all the Riches unto himself, which was to be done only by
Articles and Conditions of Surrender drawn, and agreed in the time of a formal
Siege; and therefore he would neither hasten his Troops to take Possession of
the City, before it was Reinforced, nor yet encourage his Men to Enter the Town
by mere Force and Dint of Sword; which in the Opinion of the Soldiery, he might
have done if when he Stormed the Works, he had pushed forward his Men to the
utmost of their Mettle; so that here we may observe, that his accursed Avarice,
which had been the Ruin of so many Persons, was now the Cause of his own
Destruction.

The Vizier began to open his Trenches, about fifty Paces distant from the
Counterscarp in the Suburbs of St. Ulric, or the Garden of Madam Spina, where
the rising of the Walks by the obscurity of the Night, gave them an
advantageous ground for raising some Batteries; and in the Morning two Spahees
were commanded to throw a Writing in a Linen Bag into the Counterscarp, His
Summons to the City.
which they performed, running full speed with their Horses. The substance of
which was this.

These Presents are to make known unto you, the Generals, Governor, Soldiers
and Noble Citizens of the City of Vienna, That according to the Orders, we have
received from the most Happy, most Powerful, most Invincible and most Mighty
Emperor of the Universe, our Master, who is the true Image of God living on the
Earth, and who by the Grace and Favor of the Almighty, following the Example
of our Prophet Mahomet Mustapha, to whom be Glory and Honor, and Blessing, is
by a Multitude of Miracles become the Greatest Sovereign both of one, and the
other World, and the Supreme Emperor of all Kings and Princes; has sent hither
his Armies which are without number, to the intent that they shall take Vienna,
and there Establish the Worship of our True Religion. And whereas it is a
Principle of our Religion, above all things to Propagate the Musselmin Faith,
as is expesly Commanded by the Law of our Holy Prophet; We do instantly exhort
you, before we Unsheath our Terrible Cymiters to Embrace our Holy Religion, and
to suffer your selves to be instructed in the Mysteries thereof, by which you
will find Salvation to your Souls. And in case you will Surrender up the City,
whether you be Young or Old, Rich or Poor, We assure you, that you shall with
all security Live therein: And in case any of you shall desire to go forth, and
Live in any other place, he shall have Permission and License so to do, and
shall be convoy d forth with his Goods and Substance, with his Wife and
Children. And as to those who shall desire to remain behind, they may Live in
the Town in such manner as they did before. But in case you are obstinate, and
constrain us to take your City by Force, then will we spare no Person
whatsoever: And we Swear by the Creator of Heaven and Earth, who never had nor
never shall have an Equal, that we will put all to the Sword, as is Commanded
by our Holy Law, and will take your Goods and Estates, and carry away your
Wives, and Children into Captivity. Pardon is only for them, who obey the
Divine Ordinances.

Given at the Emperor's Camp before Vienna, the 8th of the Moon Regeb, and in
the Year of the Prophet's Transmigration, 1094.

To these Summons no other Answer was Returned, than by Cannon and a Vigorous
Defense, and by a Bloody Conflict in the Suburbs in which the Turks were
greatly worsted. The Courage of the Besieged, which was evidenced during all
the time of the Siege was most eminently Signalized at the beginning thereof;
when the Scotch Convent of Benedictin Friars, (which was a very stately
Edifice) took Fire, A Fire in Vienna.
and endangered the Arsenal, which was near adjoining thereunto, and where Two
thousand Barrels of Powder were lodged; but by the diligence of Young
Staremberg, and the Officers of the Artillery, the Powder was all carried to
some Remoter place: And it pleasing God by his Gracious Providence, to cause
the Wind to blow the Flames to other Quarters, the Arsenal was preserved and
all the Ammunition therein, though several great Edifices, and Palaces thereunto
adjoining were consumed before the Fire was extinguished. The Original of this
Fire was attributed to the Treachery of a Youth of 16 Years of Age habited in
Girls Clothing; whom the People in their Fury tearing to pieces, prevented the
Discovery of this Treacherous and Horrid Plot. The Turks all this while with
much Joy beheld the Flames ascending from the City, and plied their Cannon and
Bombs toward that part, which at first broke in the Air without other
Execution; and the better to prevent the accident by Fire, Count Staremberg
ordered the Roofs off all those Houses to be taken off which were covered with
Shingles, and apt to take Fire with the least Spark. This was a terrible
beginning of a Siege, and such as was sufficient totally to dismay the Spirits
of the Defendants, but that they were supported with more than ordinary Courage
inspired into them by the Providence of Heaven.

All this while the Cavalry maintained their Stations at the Foot of the
Bridges, to keep a Communication so long as was possible with the Town, and
hinder the Passage of the Turks into the Isles of Leopolstadt, the which Action
the Duke of Loraine committed to the Care and Conduct of General Schultz, and
Prince Lubomiski, whilst he with the greater part of the Army retired to
Langenzendorf: But the Turks, and Tartars with a very great number coming to
force the Pass, carrying the Foot on their Horses behind them, and Wading over
the Water, which was Foardable on all sides, were received with such a Welcome
as cost the Lives of most of those, who were the most forward to gain the Pass;
The Christians forced from the Bridges.
but the numbers of the Enemy increasing, the Christians found themselves not
able to sustain the shock, and therefore having burnt and destroyed all the
Houses thereabouts, they orderly retired to the Army, having broken the Bridges
to prevent the more hasty pursuit after them.

The Turks having by this time encompassed the whole City with their numerous
Camp, The Turks batter the City.
and Tents of diverse colors, advanced their Trenches within thirty Paces of
the Counterscarp, on the side of the Bastions of the Court and the Lobel, and
continually so plied that Quarter with their Cannons and Morters, that they
entirely ruined the Emperor's Palace, with the Houses and Churches thereunto
adjoining. Whilst Count Staremberg was busied in all places to give necessary
Orders, and provide against every Misfortune which might happen, Staremberg
wounded.
he was unluckily wounded by the Blow of a Brick upon his Head, which had been
carried by the stroke of a Cannon-shot, which confined him to his Chamber for
three Days, and the Count Daun, one of the Deputy Governors was sick at the
same time of a Fever: However the care of the Counts Serini, Souches and
Scaffenberg was such, that the Enemy gained no advantage by the absence of
those Governors.

Whilst Matters were thus acting in the City, C. Leslie sent to Krembs.
Count Leslie was sent to Krembs to convoy the Train of Artillery thither, and
attend the coming of the Auxiliary Troops of Bavaria, Saxony and Franconia, and
the Regiments which were marching from several other Places of the Empire; and
also to restrain the Incursions of the Tartars into Austria, who with much
Violence and Cruelty laid all Places, wheresoever they came, in Blood and
Ashes, tho many of them were cut to pieces in diverse Conflicts, there being a
Hundred and fifty of them killed by the Peasants, who were felling the Trees
about Vienna, to hinder and disturb the March of the Enemy. But why the Tartars
should destroy all the Villages and Provisions near to Vienna, whereby they
deprived the Turkish Army of all Provisions and Subsistence from parts near
unto their Camp, and caused their Horse to fetch Forage at twenty Miles
distance, no sound Reason can be given, unless it be, that those People having
always been used to Spoil and Destruction, have it not in their Power, and
nature to leave any thing unblasted, and not consumed in the Country of an
Enemy wheresoever they pass. Some Troops belonging to General Schultz had the
fortune at the same time to take a considerable Convoy of the Turks, consisting
of above three Hundred Wagons, killing on the place about six Hundred and
fifty, and taking two Hundred Prisoners.

The Turks had drawn two parallel Lines, one on the side of the Court-Bastion,
The Disposition of the Turkish Force.
and another on the Lobel-Bastion, with a Line of Communication between both;
and here they raised their Batteris of thirty Pieces of Cannon: And tho Vienna
was fortified with eleven Bastions, yet three of them only were attacked, so
that the whole Force of the Town was drawn that way for its Defense. The Grand
Vizier took his Station on the side of the Ravelin, and with him the Janisar-
Aga, or General of the Janisaries, named Kara Mustapha, and his Kahia or
Lieutenant, and also the Pasha of Romelia, who was killed with a Cannon-shot.
The Attack of the Court-Bastion on the Right Hand of the Vizier was committed
to Chusaein, Pasha of Damascus, who tho he was a stout Man, and a good Soldier,
yet he had been unfortunate, having formerly been beaten by Prince Ragotski in
Transylvania, by Count Souches, at Leventz (as we have at large described in
the former part of our History) and by the King of Poland at Coczim. The
Bastion of the Lobel on the Left Hand of the Vizier was committed to Achmet,
Pasha of Temeswaer, who died on the 3d. of September of a Dissentery; he had
formerly executed the Office of High Treasurer, and after his decease, Husaein
Pasha, who also had been Treasurer, was promoted to his Place. In describing
this Siege, it will not be necessary to recount all the particulars of the
Traverses, Mines, Countermines, and other minute Actions, provided (as we
intend) we do not omit any considerable Passage, or Feats of Arms, which were
most memorable through the whole course of this Siege.

Count Starembergh observing that the Turks worked continually in their Lines,
resolved to obstruct them by a vigorous Sally, The Besieged make a Sally.
for which the Besieged having now lost all their Fears, were very forward to
do: The Sally was managed by one Sampson Steimbach, a Captain in the Regiment
of Mansfeldt, and Count Guy of Staremberg, who signalized themselves with such
Valor and Success, that they killed many of the Miners, and brought in a
Prisoner alive, who discovered many Particulars then acting by the Enemy.

On the 23d. of July, the Turks taking the advantage of a strong Gale of Wind,
which blew toward the City, to throw diverse Bombs thereinto, one of which
beat down the Spanish Embassador's House, with little other damage to the Town.
The same day in the Afternoon the Turks sprang a Mine near the Lobel Bastion,
but it taking vent, reversed on themselves, damaging only a corner of the
Bastion, and over-turning some Palisadoes, which were repaired again in the
Night; howsoever the Turks took this opportunity to make a furious Assault upon
that Bastion, but were valiantly repulsed, with the loss of two Hundred Men
killed, and three taken Prisoners.

About the same time, a Messenger from the Duke of Loraine having swam four
times over the Water, A Messenger from the Duke of Loraine.
with his Letters in a Bladder hanging about his Neck, with much difficulty got
into the Town, which brought them the happy and encouraging News of being
speedily relieved; for that all the Troops of the Circles, and of the Emperor's
hereditary Countries, came daily to the general Rendezvous at Krembs; and that
the King of Poland with his Army was come as far as Olmutz. Nor were the Troops
of the Duke of Loraine idle all this time during the Siege, but making
Incursions and enterprizing some Design or other every Day, brought many
Prisoners into the Camp with their Horses and other Booty: But the joy of these
Successes were not a little damped by the News that the City of Presburg with
Timavia, Emdemburg, Prekalla, Leita and Haisentat, being dismayed by the
formidable Force of the Vizier, had submitted themselves to Tekeli, and to his
Protection. Howsoever considering Men reflected, that such Accidents as these
were to be expected, where a mighty Army predominated; and were as easily
reversed by the turn of a contrary Fortune, and that they would follow the Fate
and Success of Vienna.

The 25th. of this Month, the Duke of Loraine receiving Intelligence, that
Tekeli had formed an Army of 20.000 Malcontents, and eight Thousand Turks
under the Command of the Pashas of Waradin and Pest, and designed to Besiege
the Castle of Presburg; Debates about the Relief of Presbourg.
which being a Place of considerable Consequence, was a Matter of long Debate,
whether in that Conjuncture it was to be relieved in despite of all the
Difficulties and Obstacles which appeared to the contrary. For in the first
place it was alleged, that the Ways thither were rocky, woody, and enclosed,
that the Forces of the Enemy were much superior to theirs in number; and that
the Army ought not to be put into any hazard of being Defeated, at a time when
the Relief of Vienna was the main and ultimate Design. To these Arguments it
was urged, that in case the Castle of Presburg was surrendered to the Enemy, it
would facilitate a Communication between their two Armies, and hinder the
conjunction of the Polish Army with the Imperial, unless they took a large
compass about, which would both harrass the Men by a long March, and defer the
Relief of Vienna; the Extremities of which required nothing more than Have and
a speedy Succor. These last Reasons prevailed above the former, it being
esteemed of absolute necessity to conserve the Castle of Presbourg, the which
was wavering, and ready with the other Towns to accept and embrace the
Protection of Tekeli. In pursuance of this Resolution, The Duke of Loraine
secures Presbourg.
the Duke of Loraine passed the Danube with his Horse and Dragoons, namely, the
Regiments of Palsi, Caprara, Rabata, Gondola, Taff, Merci, Hallewiel,
Montecuculi, Veterani and Gots, which were all Horse, to the number of eight
Thousand; and of Dragoons, those of Stirum, Schultz and Herberviller, making in
all an Hundred thirty six Troops and Companies, besides the Poles under
Lubomiski, which made about two Thousand Men more. In the Night Prince Lewis of
Baden and the Baron of Merci, were Commanded in the Van to secure the narrow
Ways and Passages; and being come upon certain Hills, where they see round
about, they discovered the Enemies Fires and Lights below in the Plains, and
two Camps at some little distance one from the other; of which, Advice being
given to the General, Prince Lewis of Baden was ordered to Attack the Suburbs
of Presbourg, where some of the Malcontents were quartered; upon this
Surprise, the Malcontents flying into the Town, made way for the Imperialists
to enter without much Resistance: The City being in a sudden consternation,
upon sight of the Imperial Army at their Gates, surrendered upon Summons, as did
also the Castle; the Garrison whereof, whilst the Town was in Treaty, escaped
out to seek for Refuge in the Camp; but many of them were intercepted in their
Passage, and cut to pieces.

This happy success in sight of the Enemy was an evidence of their Weakness and
want of Courage, and animated the Christians to give them Battle: The Prince
Lewis of Baden with his Dragoons, was hereupon as ordered, drew up in the
Vineyards and Gardens adjoining to the Suburbs, and extended his whole Body to
the right and left, along the Danube to the foot of the Hill, the better to
secure C. Caprara, whilst he with his Horse descended down by the Vineyards,
and had drawn up in Batalia.

The Enemy made a show as if they intended to fight, and detached some Parties
to begin a Skirmish, but the Duke of Loraine would not Engage, until all his
Forces were drawn up; upon appearance whereof the Malcontents changed their
Minds, The Malcontents are put to (...).
and instead of advancing, the Imperialists perceived, by a great Dust rising
on one side and the other, that the Enemy retired: The advanced Parties of the
Enemy, which were to begin the Battle, finding themselves abandoned by the main
Body, turned their backs and fled; and were hardly pursued by the Imperialists
and Poles, with much loss and slaughter, until they came to a great Wood, with
a stream of Water running by it, where they made a Stand; but a detached party
of Poles, with some Squadrons of Germans, and some of the Regiment of Palsi
charged them with such Vigor and Bravery as put them to a Rout, so that they
killed about five or six Hundred of them, and took about twelve Hundred Wagons
of Baggage, and pursued them so hotly toward Tirnau, that many of them saved
themselves in the Woods, and others threw themselves into the Danube; the
Affrightment and Disorder was so great through the whole Army, that they
recovered not themselves until they had passed the Waagh.

Discontent between the Turks and Tekeli.
Tekeli having Intelligence of the March of the Imperialists, by the Party
which had been beaten the Evening before; he retired in the Nightime, with a
great Body of his own Horse and Foot, (leaving very few of his Men with the
Turks) and resolved to attend the Duke of Loraine's coming, and to fall upon
him; which occasioned that Quarrel and Misunderstanding between the
Malcontents and the Turks, that they separated each from other, and acted
apart, until they were reconciled, and again united by Mediation of the Vizier,
as appeared by certain Letters, which were intercepted.

But to return again to the Siege: In the mean time, whilst these things were
acting abroad, there was continual firing and shooting on both sides; and on
the 26th. the Turks designing to make a furious Assault, caused all their
warlike Music, such as Flutes, Cymbals, and brass Trumpets, which give a
shrill Sound, to play with their highest Notes, to encourage their Soldiers to
make the Onset; but just as they were beginning, the Besieged gave Fire to a
Mine, A Mine sprang by the Besieged.
which made many of the Turks to take capers and frisks in the Air, according
to the Measures of their Music. But the Turks not dismayed hereat, pressed hard
to gain that Ground which the Mine had laid open, but were valiantly repulsed
by those who had the Guard of that Place: Howsoever, the Matter was long in
dispute, until Count Serini, and St. Croix Lieutenant Colonel of Dupigni's
Regiment of Horse came in with some Granadiers to their Relief, and forced the
Assailants back again into their Trenches, leaving many of their Companions
dead upon the place, whose Heads the Christians afterward fixed upon Poles,
and exposed 'em to the View of the Turkish Camp. Howsoever, this Action was not
performed without some loss and hurt to the Besieged, for Count Guy of
Staremberg and Count Souches were wounded: George Misnier, General of the
Artillery, Several of the Christians killed.
had his Arm broken by a Shot, of which he died in a few days afterward, to
the great Sorrow of the whole City, which could not but miss a Person so
excellent in his Art, having been Ingenier at the Siege of Philipsbourg, in the
Troops of the Marquess of Baden: In this Action also were killed Baron Walter,
Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Wirtemberg, and William Schemnitz, a
Captain in the Regiment of Staremberg; as also Baron Dubski, who was shot
through both his Buttocks with a Musket Bullet; and the Governor, Staremberg
himself, was again wounded in the Hand with the stroke of a Stone, as he had
before been in the Head.

The Turks having this Day intercepted a Letter, which the Governor had sent
by an express Messenger to the Duke of Loraine, to give an account of the state
of the Town; the Vizier, that he might give notice thereof unto Staremberg, he
caused the same Paper to be fastened to an Arrow, and shot into the Town, with
an additional Letter from the Vizier, wrote in Latin to this Effect: That it
was to little purpose for the Besieged to write in Characters unto the Duke of
Loraine to render him an account of the ill Condition of their Town, A Letter
shot into the Town.
since the same is sufficiently known to the Besiegers, without any Key or
Explanation of the Cipher. Howsoever the Grand Vizier, out of compassion to the
Creatures of God, had already offered them his Mercy; but that being rejected
by the Besieged, he thought fit to let them know, that the time was now come,
in which they were to feel the rigor of the Divine Indignation, which would
cause them, though late, to repent of this their inflexible Obstinacy. This
Letter being read among the Officers, moved Laughter, rather than occasioned
Fear.

As the Besieged continued still in good heart within the Town, so the Duke of
Loraine's Camp received a double Encouragement from two happy Successes: The
first was, That the Bano, or Lord Lieutenant of Croatia, had conserved that
People in their Loyalty and Devotion toward the Emperor, and for Security
thereof, had made them to enter into a solemn Oath: But that of a greater
Importance, was, That General Dunewald had again defeated a Body of two or
three Thousand Tartars, A Body of Tartars defeated.
with the slaughter of about thirteen Hundred killed upon the place, and many
Prisoners taken, besides all their Baggage and Booty which they had plundered
in Hungary and Austria. Within the Town they were forming and contriving all
Ways and Instruments for their Defense; and amongst the rest, they had forged a
certain Weapon in manner of a Scyth of about six Foot in length besides the
Handle, which proved of excellent Use and Effect against the Scymeters, and
would cut off a Man at the middle without much difficulty, and some times take
off four or five Heads at a stroke.

The 28th. the Turks attempting to make themselves Masters of the Counterscarp,
on the side of the Court-Bastion and Lobel, sprang a Mine, A mine sprang by the
Turks.
which they had prepared on that Quarter; but it being not far enough advanced,
it reached not the Palisadoes, howsoever, about twenty Soldiers were killed,
besides several wounded.

The 29th* about five a Clock in the morning, the Besieged fired sixty Pieces
of Cannon upon the Enemy, which they modestly answered with one single Gun; but
in the Afternoon they stormed the Palisadoes with great fury, The Turks
repulsed.
but were repulsed with much loss; in which Action, the new-invented Scyths
were very serviceable, and did great execution on the Assailants, amongst which
Kara Mahomet Pasha of Mesopotamia was wounded in the Thigh, as also the Gebegee
Basha, who is chief of the Armourers, and the Vizier's Kahya or Deputy was
killed and buried at the entrance into his own Tent.

On the 30th. Count Staremberg fired a Mine, which as believed did great
execution on the Enemy, for that they employed the whole Day following in
repairing the Damage which that Mine had caused.

The 31st. the Turks advanced their Trenches so near to the Counterscarp, that
the two Parties could speak and discourse one with the other, and fight at Arms
end, and with the Stakes of the Palisadoes, which they had plucked up; but the
Defendants with their long iron Crooks, such as we use for pulling down Houses,
in the time of Fire, caught up the Bodies of Men, and drew them over the Walls,
and with one cut of their Scyths would Mow off three or four Heads at a stroke.

The Turks finding themselves greatly incommoded in their Trenches by the Bombs
and Grenades, which were shot from the Town, The Turks cover their Trenches.
contrived ways to cover them with Beams of Timber, over which they laid Sacks
of Earth, which kept off all Fireworks, Cannon and Musket Shot; and in many
places of the Trenches they made Pavements of Brick, which were so commodious
and secure, that the Grand Vizier, and many of the principal Officers and
Pashas lodged therein, with as much convenience as in their own Houses.

August 3d.
On the 3d. of August the Turks having raised their Trenches much higher than
the Counterscarp, began a Fight against the Defendants with Muskets and
Arrows, which they continued for a long time, and relieved their Men often,
with new Supplies, but were always bravely repulsed by the Christians. Toward
the Evening, the Turks endeavored to gain the Counterscarp of the Court
Ravelin by Assault; and with much Blood, after a vigorous Defense, they took
it: The Pasha of Damascus was killed in this Action.

The Turks, encouraged with this Success, 4th.
the next Day pursued their Fortune with redoubled Force, and attacked the
Counterscarp, at the Gate of the Lobel-Bulwark, with such fury, that with the
loss of four Hundred of their Men, they became Masters of it.

And then on the 5th. they threw into the Ditch of the Ravelin, 5th.
such quantity of Faggots and Sacks of Earth, as served to fill it up; but yet
the Turks possessed not long this spot of Ground, for that very Night they were
driven from that Post with great loss by the Valor of the Defendants, and
Diligence of the Governor, who was all that Night upon the Works, and took no
repose until four a Clock in the Morning.

On the 6th. about nine a Clock in the Morning, the Turks sprang a Mine, 6th.
which opened the Earth very much in the Counterscarp, toward the
Court-Bastion, and therewith began a terrible Fight, which continued for the
space of five Hours; during which time the Christians lost about a Hundred Men
killed and wounded, amongst which was Count Leslie, Lieutenant Colonel of the
Regiment of Mansfelt, C. Leslie the younger Slain.
and Brother of General Leslie, who at first being wounded in the Arm
maintained his Ground, not retiring so much as to be dressed, but still
continued the Fight, until being shot in the Breast with a Musket Bullet, he
died under the Walls of the City with much Glory; but notwithstanding all this
Valor of the Defendants, the Turks crowded on their Soldiers in such
multitudes with continual Supplies, that like a violent Torrent, The Turks gain
the Counterscarp.
not being to be withstood, they became Masters of the Ditch of the
Counterscarp of the Court Ravelin, at the cost of the Lives of six Hundred and
Seventy of their Men, and that Day in all were a Thousand Turks killed, and
about a Hundred and eighty Christians.

On the 7th. the Sentinel, 7th.
that was placed on the top of the Steeple of St. Stephens, gave notice, about
five a Clock in the morning, that he discovered a great Smoke arising on the
farther side of the Danube, which continued until eight that Morning, and
afterward vanished; the Governor rightly conjectured, that the Smoke was
caused by some Fight between the Christians and Turks: The truth of which was
the next day brought by a Rascian, (who was of that Province which produces
excellent Spies) and he related, That the Turks having detached a Party of
about Three thousand Horse, to make a Discovery of the State of the Duke of
Loraine's Camp, and see what numbers were come in from Saxony, Suabia and
Franconia. Upon advices of their March an Ambuscade was laid for them, into
which they unwarily falling, the greatest part of them were slain, and an Aga,
and Tekeli's Secretary, an Hungarian Count, were made Prisoners: A Party of
Turks defeated.
And also, That they had taken many of the Enemies Wagons laden with
Ammunition and Provisions, and that upon this Success, diverse of the
Malcontents had deserted their Party, and were gone unto the Emperor. The same
day the Turks Sprang a Mine on the side of the Lobel Bastion, which reversed on
themselves, with the same loss and hurt which they designed for the Christians.

8th.
On the 8th, the Christians thundered their Cannon from the Curtain of the
Carinthian Bulwark, which ruined some of the Works of the Besiegers, and
Dismounted their Cannon: Howsoever, the same Day the Turks Sprang a Mine, just
at the Point of the Court Bastion, by which twenty three Christians were
killed. But what in this matter is strange and worthy to be remembered, a
certain Gunner was tossed up into the Air by force of this Mine, and thrown
into the Ditch of the Town without any hurt, to the great wonder of all those
who were Spectators thereof. The Turks seconded the Mine with an Assault, and
began to remove the Earth under the Ravelin, and to cover the Galleries with
Beams and Earth, by which they descended into the great Ditch, without
receiving any damage either by Cannon or Granados; so that the Governor
judging it impossible to defend that Ravelin, A Sally from the Town.
caused the Cannon to be withdrawn from thence: Howsoever, the Counts of Daun,
and Souches (the Governor being Sick of a Dyssentery) made a Sally that Night
at the Head of Three hundred Men, and Charged the Enemy so Vigorously, that
they drove them out of their Galleries, and burnt all their Works.

9th.
On the 9th, the Turks fired a Mine on the side of the Ravelin, which killed
five Soldiers, and over-turned some Palisadoes; but a greater damage was
thereby done to the Turks, who by a reverse lost Thirty two of their own Men,
and the Palisadoes were again repaired in the Night.

10th.
On the 10th, a strong Party of Horse under the Command of the Count Sara^ their
Colonel, defeated Two thousand Malcontents b^^onging to B^diani, near
Fristenfelden, A (...) of Turks and Ma^^contents d^feated.
killed Four hundred and eighty upon the place, took above Three hundred
Prisoners, with five Colors. In like manner a Party of Germans belonging to
the Garrison of Raab, under Colonel Heisler, meeting with a Body of Turks and
Tekelites near Altemberg, which were Convoying Wagons laden with Ammunition
and Provisions to the Turkish Camp before Vienna, Charged them so furiously
that they totally Defeated them, and put them to Flight, and in the Pursuit
killed them with great Slaughter; an Hundred and eighty Wagons were taken; but
those which were laden with Powder, and Fire works were blown up, rather than
they should become a Prey to the Enemy, and be made use of against themselves.
The same Day the Turks Sprang a Mine at the Point of the Lobel Bastion, which
tossed three Christian Soldiers into the Air; and set them down again in the
same place upon their Legs without any hurt: But it proved of much greater
mischief to the Turks by its reverse upon themselves. All that Day many Cannon
shot were fired on both sides; and the Besieged threw many Bombs out of their
Morter-pieces into the Enemies Trenches, which did considerable Execution.

The Scholars of the University in Vienna, whose Motto might be Tam Marti quam
Mercurio, finding this no time for Books, applied their Minds to the War, for
preservation of their Lives, City and Christian Religion, against the Common
Enemy of the Faith: And forming themselves into a Body, The Scholars and
Merchants become Soldiers.
made two or three very good Companies. The Merchants also of the Society of
Netherlanders following their Example, raised a Company of Two hundred and
eighty Men, all Armed with Firelocks, which they maintained at their own cost
and charge; and being used in their Common exercises to shoot with Guns, they
became excellent Marks-men; and from the upper Rooms of the Emperor's Palace,
where they were commonly Quartered, they did good Service, annoying the Turks
greatly with their Shot; nor were the Scholars less expert than the Merchants,
for one of them having shot a Janisary dead with his Musket, he drew his Body
within the Palisadoes with one of the long Hooks, and cut off his Head, which
at the end of a Pike he carried through the City; and having ripped open his
Stomach, he found there six Ducats in Gold, which he had swallowed; supposing
that part to be the most secure, and the most private Purse, free from the
Robbery either of his Friends or Enemies: It seems, it was known afterward,
that this was the Common way of Concealment of Gold amongst the Turkish
Soldiers; which when the Imperialists discovered, they made it a common
practice to dive into the Entrails, of as many as they took: Examining their
Bowels like the ancient Augurs, who Inspected the inwards of Beasts, to make
their presages of good, or bad Fortune.

11th.
On the 11th, the Turks Sprang two Mines without any great effect; howsoever it
served them for a Signal to make an Assualt; but the Defendants making use of
their smaller Guns, or Fieldpieces planted on the Walls, charged with Chain
and Partridge shot, with Spars and pieces of old Iron, which together with
Hand-Granadoes made such a Slaughter amongst the Turks, as caused them to
Retire. Howsoever, Forty of the Defendants were killed and wounded.

12th.
The next day the Turks about Noon fired another Mine, which blew up one of the
Flankers of the Ravelin, with so much noise and thunder, as gave an Allarum to
the whole Town, and caused the Officers, who were than sat down at Table to
arise and leave their Dinner, to see what the matter was. The Turks were ready
hereupon to have made the Assault, but finding that the Breach was not wide
enough, they retired again within their Trenches.

13th.
Howsoever, still continuing their Works, they at length on this day blew up the
whole Ravelin; howsoever the quantity of Powder being very great, the Mine
reversed upon themselves with such Execution, as abated the Courage of the most
bold Assailants.

14th.
On the 14th, having sunk their Trenches nine Foot deep, they endeavored to
penetrate a Way into the Ditch, and about six a Clock in the Evening they
Sprang another Mine on the right Hand of the Ravelin, with as little success as
the Day before.

The Christian Camp increases.
In the mean time the Christian Camp daily increased to such numbers, as were
judged sufficient to give Battle to the Ottoman Army; but to make the Game
more secure, it was judged necessary to attend the coming of the King and Army
of Poland: To hasten which, diverse Messengers were sent, to desire his Majesty
to expediate and quicken his March, lest he should come too late for the Relief
of Vienna, whose Forces every Day diminishing by continual losses, could not
possibly hold out long, tho they were well assured, that the utmost Extremity
would be sustained, before the Defendants would yield to a Surrender. The
Polish King being sensible hereof, promised to hasten his March, so as to be at
Krembs on the 28th of the Month.

The 15th and 16th, the Turks continued to Batter, and to throw Bombs into the
Town, and Sprang several Mines, 15th. and 16th.
tho not with much Execution; and were in diverse Assaults vigorously repulsed.
Howsoever, all this was done at the expense of much Blood, and with the
diminution both of the numbers and strength of the Garrison, which by hourly
losses on the Breaches, on the Works, and by Sicknesses caused by the want of
good Diet, was much decayed, and the Defendants were reduced to that low
Condition, that they could not long sustain the violence of so forcible an
Enemy. And tho the Turkish Camp was not free from Diseases and Mortality, yet
they were less sensible of their losses by their numbers, and the daily
Recruits which they received. To make known the true state of the City to the
Duke of Loraine, some crafty and bold Men undertook to be the Messengers, A
Messenger sent to the Duke of Loraine.
some of which were intercepted, and others escaped; amongst the rest one
Francis Koltchizki alias Kotlenski, who was Interpreter to the Levant or
Eastern Company, being perfectly practiced in the Turkish Language, undertook
to carry unto the Duke of Loraine, not only Letters but also by word of Mouth,
to inform him of the true State and Condition of the Town. Accordingly
Kotlenski having disguised himself in the Turkish Habit, silently passed
through the Palisadoes, and entered into the Camp, where with much Confidence
he set up his Throat, and began to Sing with the highest Notes of the Turkish
Air; no Man suspected him in the least kind, and an Aga observing a Fellow pass
so merrily by his Tent, called him in, and for his good Humor entertained him
with Coffee. After which without any Examination he proceeded on his way, and
passed the Mountain of Kulemberg; and being descended down to the side of the
Danube, some of the Christian Soldiers Fired at him from an Island, but having
made it known to them by certain Signs, that he was a Messenger sent from
Vienna, he was kindly received, and conducted with expedition and safety to the
Duke of Loraine, to whom with great sincerity, he gave a true and exact
Relation of the State of Vienna; and delivered his Letters, one of which of the
4th of the Month, was from the Deputies of the Council of State; The Duke of
Loraine receives Letters from Vienna.
two of the 8th from the Counts de Staremberg and Capliers; and one of the 12th
from Capliers; all which gave an Account of the Siege, and of the advances of
the Enemy upon them, and the necessity of the place, with a List of those who
were killed and wounded, concluding with earnest desires for speedy Relief;
that Count Staremberg was very Sick, and weakened by a Dissentery, and that they
began to be in want of Grenades.

The Duke of Loraine was very careful to inform the Emperor, the King of
Poland, the Electour of Saxony, and all Persons concerned, of the Condition of
Vienna: And dispatched Count Caraffa to the King of Poland, praying him to
order the March of General Sinariski, who with some advanced Troops had been
six days in Silesia. And that Vienna might not in the mean time languish for
want of hopes, and information of the care which was taking to Succor and
Relieve them; the Duke of Loraine having commended the resolution of the
Messenger, Answers returned.
and promised him a Reward agreeable to the hazard of such an undertaking, so
soon as the City should be delivered from the Siege, he dispatched him away
with a full Answer to all Demands. Kotlenski returned with the same Confidence,
as before to the Turkish Camp; and privately stoal into the City through the
Palisadoes, where he was received with all the Joy, which distressed Men could
express to one, who brought them the comfortable hopes of a speedy Deliverance.
Many Questions (we may believe) were put to him by all sorts of People, and in
all places and Companies where he was; and in all of them he infused Heart and
Spirit, by the Relations he gave of the increase of the German Army, of the
Preparations which were making, and of the near approach of the King of Poland.
Kotlenski was not absent above four Days before he returned; and what
Intelligence he gave, was confirmed by the Letters he brought from the Duke of
Loraine to Count Staremberg, signifying that he had defeated Tekeli near
Presbourg; and taken a Convoy with all sorts of Ammunition, and Provision
designed for the Ottoman Camp, and that the King of Poland was upon his March
for Relief of the City. This News was entertained with a General Joy, certify'd
by Ringing of Bells, and Firing all the Cannon of the Town, and Vollies of
small shot upon the Enemy; and for a Signal to the Duke of Loraine that his
Letters were come to Hand, Three Rockets were fired from the top of St.
Stephen's Steeple.

The Turkish Camp in want of Forage.
The Tartars had destroyed all the Countries round, that the Turkish Horse were
almost Famished for want of Forage: Nor was there any to be procured within two
or three days Journey of the Camp; but the necessity was such, that the Vizier
detached a Party of ^our or five thousand Horse, to fetch in Provender from
Paris far Remote: And it is (...), That so great was their want, that they were
forced to strip the Trees of their Leaves, for the present nourishment and
sustenance of their Horses, for which they were beholding to their Friends the
Tartars.

On the 17th, the Turks raised a new Battery of three Pieces of Cannon, 17th.
against the Bastion Lobel, but they were soon dislodged: Howsoever, between
seven and eight a Clock in the Evening, the Turks fired a Mine under the Breach
of the Ravelin, intending to make an Assault, A Mine fired.
but it was too hot work, the resistance being great, they were droven back
into their Trenches.

On the 18th, 18th.
the Defendants consulted how to dispossess the Turks, of the Quarters they had
taken at the Foot of the Ravelin: But whilst they were considering thereof, the
Turks Sprang a Mine under the Ravelin, Another Mine sprung.
which carried away all the Front of it toward the side of the Town; and
immediately planted twelve Colors on the Ruins, with Resolution to make an
Assault: To prevent which Count Dupigni with Sixty Men made a Sally, but
pressing too forward into the Enemies Works, he was shot into the Belly with a
Musket Bullet, of which he died on the place, with Twenty four of his Soldiers
and eight wounded, and also the Marquis of Chauville was killed. The Governor
to relieve this small Party, appointed a Sally of Three hundred Men; which
having passed without the Works, perceived a formidable Body of Turks ready to
Attack them, at which being dismayed they refused to advance, and crouding back
at the Sally Port, where but one Man could enter abreast, they were in such
disorder that the Turks killed many of them, and had made a far greater
Slaughter, had not Count Schaffemberg with those few that were with him,
covered and defended the Retreat; in this Action the Turks lost Four hundred
Men, and the Defendants about Forty five.

On the 19th, the Defendants Sprang a Mine, 19th* and 20th. A Mine sprung by
the Defendants.
which totally over-threw all the Enemies Works on the side of the Ravelin, and
buried many Turks in the Ruins. The same day the Duke of Loraine received other
Letters from Vienna, written by Staremberg, and Capliers giving an Account of
the decaying State and Condition of the Town. To which Answers was made on the
20th, informing them, that the Auxiliary Troops were advancing toward Vienna;
and that the next day, he would take a view of the Coutry, for ordering the
March of the Army; that they should speedily be relieved, and in the mean time,
that they should be of good Courage.

The 21st, very early in the Morning the Turks plied all their Cannon very
hotly upon the Town, Other Mines Sprung.
and about eight a Clock, they set Fire to a a Mine under the Lobel Bastion,
but with little effect; and in the Evening about six a Clock they Sprang
another with like Success.

22th.
The next day the Defendants to make an agreeable return to the Turks for their
kindness the day before, Sprang a Mine under the Ruins of the Ravelin; which
threw so much Earth into the Traverses of the Enemy, as buried many of their
Laborers and others, who being sunk up to the very Shoulders in Earth, were
drawn out by their Companions: All the remainder of the day was spent in
Fighting, the Turks laboring to gain the Ravelin, and the Christians to defend
it. Toward the Evening, the Besieged threw diverse Earthen Pots filled with
Pitch, and Sulfur into the Ditches of the Court-Bastion, and of the Lobel, to
burn the Enemies Traverses; the Flame of which could not be extinguished, until
the Matter was totally consumed, and in the mean time it served the Christians
for a Light, to see the Enemy when they approached near the Palisadoes.

Whilst the Relief of Vienna was delayed, the Imperial Troops not to remain
Idle and without any Action, Colonel Huseler with Two thousand Horse, and
Schultz with as many more, A Party of the Turks defeated.
with several other Troops under other Captains, fell upon some Auxiliaries
coming to Reinforce the Camp before Vienna, and defeated them, and likewise a
Party of Turks endeavoring to pass the Danube were repulsed. At length Three
thousand five hundred of them having Ferried over the River in Boats, were
attacked by the Imperialists, and beaten back with the loss of Eight hundred
and seventy Men; and many of them endeavoring to save themselves escaped in
Boats, but others trusting to the Waters, and to Swim over, were drowned, to
the number as is supposed of Fourteen hundred Men, amongst which were two
Pashas, and the Son of the Tartar Han was there wounded. Next Morning were
brought in unto the Generals diverse Colors and Standards, with Turkish Drums
and Timbrels, and many Prisoners of Quality and Note. The Grand Vizier having
received this News, Ordered Tekeli to repair immediately to the Siege of Vienna
with all his Forces: But Tekeli having received Information of the great Army
which was almost in a readiness to March to the Relief of that place; Tekeli
refuses to come to the Turkish Camp.
and fearing lest upon ill Success, the Vizier should Reak part of his Revenge
upon him, he excused himself by pretense of the great urgency of Affairs which
required the utmost of his Force, and attendance in the Upper Hungary.

The Turks this day having carried on their Galleries to the very Foot of the
Ravelin, Assailed it with all their Fury, 23d.
and after a long Fight they possessed themselves of a third part of it, and
lodged therein: But the Christians who were Entrenched and Fortifyed behind the
Breach, kept still Possession of the other two thirds of that Work. It being
observed from the Town, that the Turks were very busy in removing Earth, the
Christians feared, as it was their common Discourse, that the Enemy was making
their way Underground into the Cellars of the Emperor's Palace: And tho the
Governor gave not much Credence to this Report, yet he Ordered the Yeomen of
the Guard, who were armed with Halberts, and left behind for preservation of
the Court, to set their Sentinels in the Cellars, and to relieve them from time
to time; and to be very Vigilant, and Attentive to hearken to the noise of
Workmen, laboring under Ground. The same day one Kimpler a very ingenious
Ingenier, working at a Counter-Mine under the Gate of the Castle, chanced to
open his Way into a large Vault encompassed with Walls; and therein he found a
round Box of Tin, which he at first took for some Urn, or Coffin of a Dead
Body; A Treasure found.
but having opened it, he was surprised with a Treasure of Gold and Silver, and
searching farther into it, he found a Parchment at the bottom with these words,
written in Old Characters.

Gaudebis
Si inveneris, Videbis, Jacebis,
Sed
Orabis, Pugnabis, Adificabis.
Non Hodie
Nec Cras, sed Quia.
Universus Equus.
Turris Erecta and Armata.
Diversa Ordinata Arma.
Subscribed
Rolland. Hung. Mog. posuit.
Or, Rowland Hunn an Inhabitant, or Citizen of Mentz, who was the Person that
had deposited it in that place. Some are of Opinion, That this Rowland had
buried this Case or Box, with a certain Spirit of Divination, as if he had
Prognosticated that this Treasure should be found during the Siege of Vienna:
And as if this Rowland Hunn should say to Kimpler, if it prove thy fortune to
find this Treasure, thou shall rejoice, behold it and say nothing; but give
Thanks and Pray to Almighty God, and Fight. Thou shall Build, but not to Day,
nor to Morrow, but hereafter; thou shall Erect Churches, when thy Country is
freed from it is Enemies, but not now while the Ottoman Horse encompass you, and
that the Towers are Armed, and a Formidable force Besiege you. This was the
Interpretation, which some passed on this Writing.

24th.
The 24th, the Turks Sprang another Mine, but with little effect, more than the
casting up of great quantities of Earth: But that which administered the highest
Comfort, and Joy imaginable to the Defendants, The Besieged comforted with
hopes of Relief.
was the entrance of a Messenger into the Town with the News of the great
preparations making, and assurance that the Town would be relieved in eight
hours time. The same day the Great Vizier detached a Party of Five hundred
Horse to pass the Danube, to Spoil and Burn some Villages on the other side;
but being encountered by Colonel Heisler, they were defeated, and many of them
in their Flight drowned in the River.

25th.
The 25th, the Christians made a Sally with such Resolution and Fury, that they
drove the Turks out of the Ditch, overthrew their Galleries and Gabions, spiked
six Pieces of their Cannon, and discharged one of their Mines of the Powder,
which was ready to be fired, which a German Miner had luckily discovered in the
Ditch.

26th.
The 26th, the Turks fired two Mines under the Ruins of the Ravelin, with
Resolution to make an Assault; but were still bravely repulsed by the
Defendants, one Cannon shot having carried away sive Turks Heads at once.

27th.
The Turks fired their Cannon and Mortar-pieces with continued Peals for some
hours; during which time in the Morning, Three hundred Musketeers, and Fifty
Horsemen of the Regiment of Dupigni, descended by certain Subterranean Vaults
into the Ditch of the Court Bastion, where they ruined the Traverses of the
Enemy in such manner, that they required three days time to be repaired; which
was of highest concernment to the Defendants, to whom nothing was so necessary
and important, as to put the Enemy backwards in the Approaches, and Pressures
they made upon them. In this Action one of the principal Officers of the Turks
was slain, as appeared by the Conflicts, that were made to regain his Body, for
which there was a Dispute that lasted a whole hour; the same day the Turks
fired two Mines, one on the left side of the Ravelin, and an other under the
Counterscarp which joins to the Court Bastion; and immediately mounted on the
Ruins, intending to possess themselves entirely of the Ravelin; but they were
repulsed by Count Scaffemberg with great Slaughter. At the close of the
Evening, Forty Rock^ were fired ^^om the top of St. Stephen s Steeple, to g^^e
notice u^^o ^he Duke of Loraine of the great distress of the City, and of the
daily advances the Enemy made upon them, and the hourly diminution of the
Garrison.

The nex day to confirm these Signals, 28th.
the Duke of Loraine received Letters from Staremberg and Capliers,
representing the sad and extreme misery of the City, which could not hold out
much longer, but must (if not speedily relieved) be yielded to the Besiegers:
Howsoever, they concluded with a Resolution to defend themselves to the last
drop of their Blood.

The 29th, the Turks fired the greatest Mine of any they had yet done, 29th.
but to so little purpose, that they durst not adventure to second it by an
Assault, as they had formerly done.

This day about three a Clock in the Afternoon, 30th.
a Mine of the Turks over-threw a great part of the right Flanker of the first
Retrenchment of the Ravelin, which was still defended by the Imperialists, tho
the outward Retrenchment was possessed by the Turks. The Christians lost only
two Men by this Mine, who were buried in the Earth; but the Turks pressing
forward, were repulsed with loss of twenty of their Men who were killed.

The Turks to conclude this Month, fired their Cannon and Mortars so
incessantly, 31th.
that it was believed a General Storm would follow: And having fired a Mine in
the Morning, they hoped to have become Masters of the Ravelin, now as it were
at its last gasp, and Assaulted it with such Fury, that it seemed ready to
yield: But the Christians fought with so great Resolution, that they killed
Sixty Janisaries upon the Ruins, and recovered all the third, and part of the
first Retrenchment. And tho the Defendants were well assured that they should
be Relieved in very few days; yet not knowing what Accidents might occur which
none could foresee, they with all diligence made another Retrenchment at the
Foot of the Court Bastion, and at other places. Toward the Evening it was
discovered, that the Turkish Miners were at work under the Ravelin; in which to
disturb them, it was agreed the next day to make a brisk Sally, and to burn the
Galleries by which they passed to the Mine.

The next Day being the first of the Month, Spet. 1st.
the Sally was accordingly performed by three Hundred Men, who descending into
the Ditch of the Court-Bastion, advanced as far as to the Galleries, intending
to burn and destroy them with Grenades and diverse sorts of Fireballs; but
the Works being deep, and the Janisaries pressing on them in great numbers, the
Defendants were forced to retire with the loss of about twenty Men, tho with
many more on the Enemy's side. Toward the Evening, the Fight was again renewed
by a fresh Assault of the Janisaries, purposing with full resolution to become
entire Masters of the Ravelin; but the Christians being spirited with the hopes
of speedy Succor, so valiantly opposed them, that at length they were forced
to retire with great Slaughter: Immediately after which, the Besieged made
another Sally with about four hundred and fifty Men, burnt their Galleries, and
ruined those Works, which they could not repair again in less than three Days.
In this Action the Citizens behaved themselves with much Bravey and Dexetity in
the execution of their Fireworks; and tho this Sally cost them Ninety Men, yet
it was attended with the death of above three Hundred Janisaries.

The Day before was remarkable for the Encounter of the Duke of Loraine and the
King of Poland; the first going to Olbrun to meet his Majesty: The Duke of
Loraine meets with the King of Poland.
So soon as they came in sight of each other, about the distance of twenty five
Spaces, the Duke descended from his Horse, as did also the King; and coming
near they embraced. The King in very affectionate Terms demanded after his
Health, and commended his Valor and Conduct, by which he had sustained so long
the force of such powerful Enemies. Then he presented to him his Son, Prince
Alexander, whom, he said, he had trained up betimes in War, to serve the
Emperor; and did not doubt but he would improve much more by the Guidance and
Example of so great a General. To which the Duke rerurned answer, That his
Majesty had not only amazed him with the heroic and generous Act of so long
and tedious a March, but had astonished him with the excess of his Favor and
obliging Expressions toward him: That next to the Service of the Emperor, he
desired to live, that he might perform something acceptable to his Majesty, and
to all his Relations: That as to the Forms and Rules of War, no Person alive
was so well versed in them as his Majesty, from whom all the Generals and
Captains of the World might without discredit not be ashamed to learn the
Lessons of Military Discipline: After which, the Generals of the Army, the
Nobility and Vice Chancellor of that Kingdom, came and paid their Respects to
the Duke of Loraine. And then, being mounted on Horseback, the King having the
Duke on the Right Hand, and the Prince on the Left; The order of their Supper.
they entered into Discourse concerning the State of the War, and continued the
same, until they came to the Camp, where, in the King's Tent, a sumptuous
Supper was prepared at a long Table; the King sat in the middle; on his
Right Hand the Duke was placed, and on his Left the Prince of Poland; after
which the King ordered all the Nobility, who came with the Duke of Loraine to
sit also. The Supper being ended, at which various Discourses passed, but most
relating to the present Enterprise; the Duke of Loraine returned to his own
Camp, much satisfied with the Courtesy and Resolution of the King, who
dispatched Messengers with all diligence to the General, who brought up the
Rear, to hasten the March of the Army, with all convenient speed. And the next
day the King dining with the Duke of Loraine at his Tent, resolved to meet the
Emperor at Krembs on the second of September, where the Interview was
appointed, and there it was where all things were to be concerted about the
Passage over the Danube, and Conjunction of the Armies. Whilst these things
were projecting, Count Sciamburg came from Nayburgh, bringing Advice, That the
Elector of Saxony, with his Forces, could not be at Krembs until the third or
fourth of this Month, upon which it was computed, that the Relief of Vienna
could not possibly be until the 12th.

Intelligence of all these Matters being carried to the Emperor, the Presence
of his Imperial Majesty was judged necessary at Krembs, where the place of
general Rendezvous was appointed, both to animate and inspirit the Army, and to
accommodate, compose and silence such Quarrels and Punctilio's as might arise
amongst so many Princes of different Countries, concerning Place and
Precedence; but the Emperor in his way thither, being taken ill of some
Indisposition in his Health, proceeded no farther than Lintz, where he remained
until he received the happy News of the Relief of Vienna, and the Confusion of
his Enemies.

In the mean time, a general Council of War being held at Edendorf, at which
the Elector of Saxony was present; the Duke of Loraine, by his Prudence, so
ordered and disposed Matters, that no Questions about Place or Precedence came
into competion. A meeting at Edendorf.
For so it was ordered, That at a long Table the King of Poland should sit in
the middle, on his Right Hand the Elector of Saxony, and next to him all the
Generals of the Empire; and on the Left, the general Officers of Poland:
Over Against the King, the Duke of Loraine took his Place, who was to be chief
Speaker at that Assembly, A Council of War held there.
in regard he was best able to render a true Account of the State of the War.
The Council being sat in this form, it was laid down as a general Rule, That
all Colonels, with the Concurrence of their General Officers, should give in
writing to the King of Poland a true State of their respective Regiments, and
of the Places where they were Quartered; and that from his Majesty they should
receive Rules and Instructions for their March to the Relief of Vienna. It was
farther agreed, after some debate, That the Conjunction of the Army, with the
Auxiliary Troops, should be on the 5th. of September in the Plains of Tuln:
That the Army of Poland should pass the Danube at the same place with the
Emperor's Army: That the Forces of Saxony should pass the River, by way of the
Bridge at Krembs: And that all the Bavarian Forces which lay encamped with some
German Troops, under the Command of Count Lesly, should March directly toward
Tuln, to join with the Imperial and Polish Forces.

The execution of these Designs was deferred until the 7th. when the King
toward the Evening began to pass the River, and was forthwith followed by the
Duke of Loraine at the Head of the Imperial Army; having first made a
Detachment of three Regiments, which were to join with three Thousand Poles to
cut off all Communication of the Turks and Malcontents, with the Vizier's
Camp. Colonel Heisler with his Regiment of six Hundred Horse was ordered to
take his March by the way of Clossen-neuburg, and to make Fires upon the Hills
of Kalemberg, to give notice unto the Besieged of their approaching Relief,
which was the Signal agreed between them. But before we come to this glorious
Achievement, let us see what was acting for Defense of the Town, and
Difficulties to which the Besieged were reduced.

Sept. 2.
In the Morning of this second day, the Point of the Court-Bastion was
overthrown, which gave the Turks occasion to carry their Galleries farther, to
the utter ruin of that Fort. Count Staremberg believing that the remaining part
of the Bastion could not be longer defended, gave Order to Huiternian, a
Captain of his Regiment, whose turn it was to mount the Guard that Night, to
abandon the Ravelin in case he found himself over-pressed by the Turks, and
under covert of the dark Night to make his Retreat. But this stout Captain
having taken this Post with fifty Men, so bravely defended the remains of the
tottering Fortress, that tho the Turks burnt the Palisadoes which were his
chief Fortification, yet he repulsed them by the Fire of his Muskets, with
loss of twenty of his Men, and remained on the place until the Morning, having
killed two Janisaries with his own Hands.

3d.
Next day the Governor finding it impossible to maintain that Post any longer,
gave order to the Guards to retire, and abandon it to the possession of the
Turks, who had little more to boast of, than the acquist of that Ravelin, after
an Attempt of six Weeks continuance made thereupon.

The fourth was a bloody day, 4th.
both to the Christians and to the Turks; for the latter had sprung a Mine
under the Court-Bulwark, which not only opened a Breach of seven Geometrical
Paces, but shook the whole City with the violent concussion of the Air. Five
thousand Turks, A bloody Fight.
immediately with Cemyters in their Hands, mounted the Breach, and sheltring
themselves under some Sacks of Wool, which they carried before them, they
mounted the Breach with their Cries, Allah, Allah, and planted four of their
Standards thereupon. But not withstanding all this Fury of the Turks, they were
repulsed with equal Bravery by the Christians. The Fight continued the whole
day, in which the Generals, Captains, and common Soldiers performed the Offices
and Parts of valiant and stout Defendants, who fearless of the Enemies Cannon,
small Shot, Bombs, Grenades and Mines, tho twenty of them were killed that day
by one Bomb, and thirty by the Mine, yet still they remained resolute not to
grant one Palm of Ground to the Enemy; but what they gained with the Lives of
thousands. The Christians lost in this day's Conflict one Hundred fifty four
common Soldiers, besides some Officers; but this Loss was recompensed with the
slaughter of twelve Hundred Turks, whose Bodies filled up the Ditch, amongst
which 'twas believed that diverse were Men of Quality, because their Corpse
were carried off with much diligence and hazard by those, who attended them at
their fall.

The Turks, enraged with these Repulses, 5th.
fired their Batteries incessantly against the Walls of the Town; and toward
the Evening a terrible Fight began in the Ditch, at the foot of the
Court-Bastion near the Breach, in which the Turks were beaten off with much
Bravery by the Defendants, who not only repaired the Breach, but retrenched
themselves so strongly, that the Turks durst attempt them no more on that side.
This day Arms were given into the Hands of four Hundred Inhabitants, who had
not as yet been engaged on the Walls, having been employed in other Services.

On the 6th. the Turks fired two Mines, 6th*
one of which was under the Lobel-Bastion, and being extremely deep, it
over-threw a great part of the Wall, opened a Breach of nine Paces wide, A Mine
fired.
and blew up twenty four of the Defendants. Howsoever, the Turks did not
immediately proceed to an Assault, because the Mines had thrown up such vast
quantities of Stones and Earth, as had almost filled up their Trenches, and
buried many of their Soldiers. Howsoever, having breathed and considered a
while, they advanced to an Assault with their usual Multitudes, which continued
for two Hours; till at length the Turks finding it impossible to prevail,
withdrew from the Breach, and fled with such fear, that not regarding the way
they took to avoid the Enemies Shot, many of them came within reach of the
Ravelin, called Molk; where they were so received by Cannon and Grenades,
filled with Nails and old Iron, Two thousand Turks killed.
and by small Shot from behind a Redoubt placed in the Ditch, that whole
Chambers of Janisaries were destroyed in the Fight, and greater numbers killed
than had been in any of the Assaults; the Loss having been computed at the
least two Thousand Men. With this Success, and with the daily hopes and
expectations of Relief, the Spirits of the Defendants were raised and exalted;
as the Courages of the Enemy, with the many Slaughters sustained in the Siege,
and apprehensions of the approach of a vast and formidable Army against them
began to abate and decline. And as a forerunner of the expected Succor,
Signals of the Succors coming.
five Rockets were discovered that Evening in the Air, from the Mountain of
Kalemberg, which was the Signal agreed upon in that case; and as a Token, that
they were so understood by the Town, five Rockets more from the top of St.
Stephen's Steeple were returned in answer. This day was the last that the Turks
made their fiercest Attacks, being well assured, that what was not then
obtained could not afterward be effected, but by a total defeat of the
Christian Forces; so that the Vizier did little more the day following being
the 7th, than continue their Batteries without hope of much execution; and
expecting every day to be Assaulted by an Army not much inferior to his own,
he drew out his Troops to take a review of them, and to see in what Condition
they were to encounter so formidable an Enemy. The Army being drawn out, every
Beglerbeg, Pasha or Sangiac gave in a List of the Men which remained under his
Command; the numbers of which being cast up into one total Sum, Account of the
Turk's Forces.
amounted unto One hundred sixty and eight thousand Men; which probably might
have been the full account of the whole Army, when they first surrounded the
Walls of Vienna: Afterward during the Siege, those which were slain or died by
Sickness were computed at Forty eight thousand five hundred and forty four,
What were killed at the Siege.
as appeared by a List found in the Grand Vizier's Tent after the Siege was
raised; so that then the Turkish Army was reduced unto One hundred and nineteen
thousand four hundred and fifty six fighting Men, besides Camel-drivers and
Attendants on the Camp; and with this vast Force the Turks shamefully turned
their Backs and Fled, as we shall shortly see in a few days following.

On the 8th, 8th.
there was an appearance of Smoke ascending from Mount Kalemberg, which gave an
undoubted assurance to the Besieged, of the approach of some advanced Troops
designed for their Relief: And with this joyful Spectacle the Defendants beheld
the Turks loading their Camels, and preparing to pack away with their Baggage.
Howsoever, they continued still to fire great quantities of Bombs, and
Grenades into the Town, and to dig their Mines; one of which they fired this
day under the Bastion of the Lobel: By which they blew up part of the Wall,
which as believed would be seconded by a General Assault; and accordingly
expected by the Defendants, who in fear thereof remained all day in Arms on
their Guard, and with them the Regiment of Horse commanded by Dupigni, all
serving on Foot, armed with their Helmets and Coats of Mail; but instead hereof
the Turks only made a small Attempt with about Three hundred Men, with which
they had the fortune to beat the Christians out of the Trenches of the
Palisadoes, which united the Communication between the Lobel and Town: But
Santa Croce, Lieutenant Colonel to Dupigni, with Fifty of his Regiment, armed
as aforesaid, coming in to their assistance, repulsed the Turks from those
Trenches, and again possessed themselves thereof: In which Action the
Lieutenant Colonel was wounded in the Leg, as was also one of his Captains
called Grove, and Sixteen of his Soldiers killed and wounded, besides Twenty
five Foot Soldiers belonging to other Regiments; but still good fortune so
favored them, that they met with a Mine of the Enemy furnished with Twenty
eight Barrils of Powder, which was ready to have been fired that Night, had
they discharged it, and filled the vacancy again with Earth.

The Turks having News of the near approach of Relief, 9th.
resolved to make their ultimate Effort on the Town, which they thought was now
reduced to the last Gasp and Extremity, and that they must carry it now or
never: Upon which accordingly they fired their Cannon, and Mortars double to
what they had done on other days: But this was but like a lightning (as they
say) before Death; for presently in the Afternoon the Turkish Camp began to
move, and their Cavalry to Ride from one side to another in a confused manner:
Their Servants and Attendants were taking down their Tents, and loading their
Camels with their Baggage; all which was in order to the removal of their Camp,
and pitching it in another place more commodious for Engagement, and Fighting
with the Enemy. Howsoever, those who were left behind to secure the Trenches,
and make good the Siege, still proceeded in their Subterranean Works, and this
day fired nine several Mines under the Curtain, which was between the Court and
Lobel Bastion, without much execution.

10th.
On the 10th, a Discovery was made of three other Mines, which the Enemy had
opened under the Curtain between the said Bastions; to defend which, all the
Cannon on that side were brought to that place, and behind them so many
Trenchments, Retrenchments and Palisadoes were made and erected, that it was
almost impossible for the Enemy to advance ten Paces, without meeting some
difficult Pass, or Fortification to overcome: And indeed the Turks had already
found by good experience, that one span of Earth had cost them the lives of a
Thousand Men to purchase it. Notwithstanding which the place was reduced to its
last extremity, and to a sensible want of all Provisions and Ammunition; and
nothing could keep up their Courage and Resolution, but the hourly expectation
of Relief, which they signified to the Duke of Loraine, by the continual firing
of Rockets and other Fireworks; giving him thereby to understand that the Town
was in it is last Agony, and the saving thereof, and of all their Lives depended
only on some few Moments of time.

11th.
On the 11th, the Turks plied their Cannon and Mortar-pieces, as violent as at
any time before, though the Fury of them continued not above three Hours; for the
noise of the approach of the Christian Army began to silence the Roaring of
Cannon, and turned their Thoughts from the offensive part, to a care of
providing for their own security. In the Afternoon appeared three several
Smoaks on the Mount of Kalemberg, which was the certain Signal of the
approaching Succor; at the sight of which, the Defendants full of Hopes and
Courage, prepared to make a Sally on the Enemy: The People full of Joy run to
the Ramparts which were least exposed to danger; the Women and others who were
Feeble and Sickly left their Beds, and betook themselves to the Tops of Houses,
to behold the pleasant Spectacle of their long desired deliverance; some of
which were still desponding with fear, and conceiving that the numerous Troops
of the Turks so Valiant, and so well Entrenched were almost invincible: Others
presaged some wonderful Slaughter to ensue; others of more sanguine and
cheerful Temperament, beheld the Turks as lost, and figured unto themselves
their shameful and ignominious Flight. In short, all People were full of
Prayers and Vows to his Divine Majesty, that he would be pleased at length to
Rescue, and deliver them from the many Dangers with which they were
encompassed: Their Prayers were heard, and toward five a Clock in the Evening,
some advanced Troops appeared on the Mountain near the Monastery and Castle of
St. Leopold, between whom and the Turks some Shot were exchanged; but Night
coming on, the darkness put an end unto a farther Engagement, which was
reserved for the day following.

This being the day appointed by Heaven for Relief of this expiring City, 12th.
which could not have held out twenty four Hours longer, the Imperial and
Polish Army with the Auxiliaries joined at the Foot of the Mountain of
Kalemberg, which before the Armies began to ascend, it was judged fit in the
first place to take a Survey of the Ground, and the several Posts therein. The
Marquis Parella, a Gentleman of illustrious Birth and clear Courage,
represented the Ground in an exact Map to the Generals, and offered with his
own Person and Followers to possess himself of the Castle Leopold, and the
Monastery, which were very advantageous Posts on this occasion. The Enterprise
seemed so hazardous to the Duke of Loraine, that he commended the generous
offer, which the Marquis had made, but judging it a more fit undertaking for
Soldiers of less note, he drew out a Party of Sixty Granadiers under the
command of a Lieutenant, to whom he committed this dangerous Service: The Duke
having also in Person by night taken a more exact Survey of the place, and
judging it to be of great importance, reinforced it with Three hundred Soldiers
more; after which he returned back to the King of Poland, to inform him of the
disposition of the Army. After which all the Forces were ranged in form of
Battle, and began to March over the Mountain of Kalemberg: The utmost part of
the right Wing was committed to the Conduct of the King of Poland.

The Numbers of the Christian Forces were as follow.
Imperial Horse in Twelve Regiments consisted of, 8200 Men Imperial Infantry in
Forty two Companies, 6400 Dragoons of the same in Forty Companies, 2400 Cravats
Nine hundred, Poles under Lubomiski, Fifteen hundred, 2400 In all 19000 Poles
Twelve thousand Horse and Two thousand Foot, Commanded by himself in person,
and under him by his Great General Jablonski, 14000 The Bavarians Commanded by
Baron de Gonfeld, were Three thousand Horse, and Seven thousand five hundred
Foot, in all 10500 Duke of Saxonies Forces Commanded by himself, were Two
thousand Horse and Dragoons, and Seven thousand Foot 9000 Franconia, Commanded
by Prince Valdeck, Horse Two thousand five hundred, and Foot Six thousand five
hundred, 9000 61500

To which being added the several Princes, Volontiers with their several
Attendants which followed them; this whole Army was computed to amount unto
Sixty five thousand Men, which were now Marching to Engage the Turkish Army,
which after after all their losses, had still remaining (as we said before)
119456 fighting Men; in this March over the Mountain of Kalemberg, Order of the
Christian Army.
the Prince of Saxelawemburg General of the Cavalry, with eight Regiments of
Horse, two of Dragoons, and one of Cravats belonging to the Emperor, with all
the Cavalry and Dragoons of Bavaria and Franconia, were placed on the Right
Wing, next to which Marched the King of Poland with his Army. The Infantry of
Bavaria and Franconia were drawn up in the third place or middle, Commanded by
Prince Waldeck; near unto whom all that day was the Elector of Bavaria, who
pretended to serve as a Volontier, it being his first expedition in the War.
All the Emperor's Foot, and that of Saxony commanded by Prince Herman of Baden,
were drawn up on the left Hand, and Marched directly along the Danube, and
toward the Monastery of St. Leopold. Next to these on the left Wing marched
Count Caprara with seven Regiments of the Emperor's Horse, to which the Poles,
under Lubomiski were joined, with all the Cavalry and Dragoons of Saxony,
commanded by the Elector himself in Person. In this Order the Army mounted the
Hill, with a slow pace, to attend the Motion of the Artillery, which tho
consisting of small Pieces; yet the Ways were so Rough and Rocky, that with
double Teams of Horses, they ascended slowly to the Top of the Hill. And now
both Armies with opening of the Morning began to take a view of each other: The
Turkish Camp opened.
The Stars were not with drawn from the Sky, when the Christians heard the
Alah, Alah sound from the Turkish Camp, which are the Lauds or Praises which
they sing to God in their Prayers. The Fires and Lights in their Camp
discovered the excellent symetry, and order in the disposition of their Tents
and Troops; which had been the most pleasing Spectacle in the World, had it not
been of Enemies and Infidels, who came to destroy the Christian Religion, and
the German Empire. From hence it was that the King of Poland, and the Duke of
Loraine taking a view of the Enemies Forces, did conceive that the orders in
which they were placed, did look as if they intended to dispute every Foot of
Ground between each Army; which they might have done with great advantage, in
case they had possessed themselves of the Woods in the Forest of Vienna, and of
Ambuscades, which according to the nature of the Ground might be pleaced to
hinder the descent from the Mountain. Wherefore the King desired of the Duke of
Loraine Two thousand German Foot to Flank his Horse at the entrance out of the
Wood, and to support them in the descent down the Craggy Hill, and accordingly
four Batalions were granted for that service.

Count Lesly, who was General of the Artillery, had received Orders to Raise a
Battery at the coming out the Wood, for better security of the Army in their
March over the Hill, which he almost effected with one nights work; but before
he had quite finished it, the Turks made a discovery of what was there doing,
and were put in mind thereby of what they themselves should have done to impede
the Enemies passage that way: But certain it is, they were so confident of
their invincible strength, that they thought it too mean for them to take the
advantage of Posts, or Situations against an Army, of which they conceived so
low an Esteem: But finding themselves at last deceived in those imaginations
and Councils, they detached early in the Morning some Forces to demolish the
Work, which Troops came very near, and posted themselves behind certain Trees
which were felled, and Planks, which served for Barricadoes against the Shot of
the Battery.

The Duke of Loraine observing from the Monastery of St. Leopol, the motion of
the Turks against the advanced Troops, Ordered several Batalions under Command
of the Duke of Croy to support them, which coming seasonably to their
Assistance caused the Imperialists to enlarge their Front in that Line, and
gave them Resolution to Attack the Enemy, who were drawn up behind certain
Banks, and charged them with so much Gallantry, that they forced them to retire
into their main Body. The Duke of Croy wounded.
In this Action the Duke of Croy being wounded in the Shoulder by a Musket
Shot, was carried out of the Fight, and his place of Command supplied by the
Count of Fountain.

The whole Body of the Turkish Army beginning now to move, the Duke of Loraine
gave Orders to his left Wing to advance, and to Prince Waldeck, and to Duke
Saxelawemberg to Sally out of the Woods, and fall upon the Enemies Front at the
Head of their Encampment. In the mean time the King of Poland was advanced as
far as to the Chapel of St. Leopold, where he heard Mass with great Devotion,
which was celebrated by Father Mark Aviano, a Capuchin and Confessor to the
King, which being finished, the Blessing was given to him and all his Army: And
then the King Cried with a loud Voice, Now we may March with entire assurance
that God will give us Victory; And then mounting on Horseback, he Road in
amongst the Ranks of his Army, and made this Speech to them as follows.

Generous Polish Cavaliers: It Is not only the Work of this Day to maintain the
Glory which your Ancestors have acquired, and your own Courage has Achieved
by passing to the Succor of the Invincible Bulwark of Christendom against the
Ottoman Troops: Nor is it our Aim only to Defend our own Country, which in case
Vienna were lost, would lie miserably exposed to the Invasion of those Enemies
against whom we Fight at present. But our chief design is, to defend the Cause
of God, and save the Western Empire which has done us the Honor to have
recourse unto our Arms; an Honor which our Ancestors never durst to hope for,
and which is reserved, as a Reward of your Valor: Whefore resolve to Conquer,
or to Dye nobly in this Cause, in which Martyrdom is held out for the Prize and
Recompense. Behold therefore your King, who Fights at the Head of your
Battalions: And be confident that the God of Hosts, whose Cause we are going to
maintain, will Fight on our side.

The Mountain of Kalemberg, and the Woods of the Forest of Vienna resounded by
this time with the Echoes from the Peals of Cannon, and Vollies of small Shot,
which called the Inhabitants of Vienna to the Tops of their Houses, and of the
Rampires to behold the long wished for Sight of their approaching deliverance:
Howsoever they were not so much taken up in seeing, and admiring, as to neglect
their Guards and Watches on their fortifications; but on the Contrary, they
plied all their Cannon, Small shot and Grenades, against the Enemy in their
Trenches, The Turk play with their Cannon on the Town.
with much profuseness, knowing that the time of their deliverance being come,
they might the more lavishly bestow their Ammunition on their Enemies: The like
quantities of Cannon, Fireworks, Bombs, etc. were returned from the Turks on
the Town, and in greater abundance than had been at any time since the
beginning of the Siege; and all the Mountains, Plains and Places round the City
were filled Fire, Smoke and Noise: In the mean time the King of Poland
continued his March down the Hills, as did the Regiments of Dragoons of Heisler
and of Saxony, which were posted on the left Wing, near the Chapel of St.
Leopold: The like Orders were given to all the Imperial Army to advance toward
the Enemy, who began now to shelter themselves under Rocks, and behind Trees,
and in rough places: The right Wing also moved at the same time, and all with
equal paces. The Turks give ground.
The Turks made some resistance as yet, but so faintly as was not able to
withstand the Fury of the Christians; and the several Shelters unto which they
began to have recourse, showed plainly their intentions to quit the Field. The
Devotions which the King of Poland used this Morning, retarded his March for
the space of a full hour, during which the whole Christian Army made a Halt
near to Neudorf, until the Poles were come up into the Line equal to the rest
of the Forces. The left Wing of the Imperialists without much resistance,
possessed themselves of the Post which the Turks possessed at Holstadt, and the
Prince Waldeck caused the Enemy on the other side to give way. The appearance
of the Poles on the Top and on the side of the Hill, looked very formidable to
the Turks. The King, who marched at the Head of his Army, detached several
Troops of his Hussars to Skirmish with the Front of the Enemy; but being
over-powred, were forced to Retire to a place where Prince Waldeck had very
seasonably caused some Batalions of Bavaria, and of the Regiment of Merci to
advance, which gave a stop to the pursuit which the Turks made after them. The
Poles charge the Turks.
The King upon this disorder of the Hussars caused the first Line of his Army
to advance, which charged the Turks with so much Fury, as caused the Gross of
their Body to Retire unto the Top of a Hill, where some of their Foot were
drawn up, and several Batteries of Cannon planted. And now all the Polish Army
moved, the Enemy opposing them in diverse scattered places, from whence they
fired Vollies of Muskets, with much damage to the Poles; but as yet they were
not broken, but still advancing gained Ground on the Enemy.

In the mean time the Duke of Loraine being far advanced with the left Wing
toward the Enemy; the Turks to avoid the Effort which was making on their
Right, drew themselves into Batalia before their Line of Circumvallation, and
fortified themselves with some Pieces of Cannon, as if they intended to have
made a strong resistance; but their Resolution continued not long before they
gave way, and abandoning that Post, opened a way to the Christians into their
Camp, without any opposition. Then it was, that the Duke of Loraine commanded
all the left Wing to Wheel about unto the Right, taking in the whole compass of
the Turkish Camp, without breaking their Ranks, or falling upon the Plunder of
the Enemies Baggage, or Tents which they had left Standing. The King of Poland,
The King of Poland enters the Turkish Camp.
and Prince Waldeck with their several Troops, entered the Turkish Camp about
seven a Clock in the Evening: And the Duke of Loraine about half an hour after
made himself Master of the Counterscarp, and Suburbs of the City; the
Janisaries who were lodged in those Quarters escaping by favor of the Night,
with much less Slaughter than if it had been Day; and indeed they behaved
themselves with much more Valor, than others of the Turkish Militia: The
Darkness put an end to the Battle, in which the Christians had gained a
complete and an undoubted Victory. And now the Duke of Loraine had leisure to
send to complement the King upon this fortunate Success, a great part of which
Glory, he attributed to the Valor and good Conduct of his Majesty and his
generous Cavaliers: The King returned an Answer on the other side, with like
obliging expressions, confessing, that tho every Nation and Battalion in the
Army did their parts; yet much of the Honor of the Success of this Day, was
due to the Bravery of the Germans, who were the first to enter into the Camp
and Trenches of the Enemy.

Thus were the Christians become Masters of the Turkish Camp, where they lodged
that Night in the same Form and Order, as the Turks had done the Night before,
with Fires and Lights in all the Tents; only it was a more grateful Spectacle
to the Besieged, which they could behold with more Comfort and Security, than
ever they had done the Nights before; for this was of Joy, and the others of
Terror.

In the Night the Turks passed the River at Sweker, The hasty Flight of the
Turks.
with so much Fear and Precipitation, that they not only left their whole Camp
standing, but even the Standard of the Empire, which is the Sacred Banner of
their Religion, with the three Horse Tails, which are the Ensigns of the
Vizier's Authority. Moreover, they abandoned to their Enemies all their Tents,
Baggage, Ammunition and Provisions, with all their Cannon and Artillery, being
One hundred and eighty Pieces; and so speedy were they in their Flight, that
before the next Day in the Evening, the Van of their Army had passed Raab.

Next day early in the Morning Count Staremberg attended with his Son, and
several of the principal Commanders of the City, went out to return Thanks to
his Benefactors for so great deliverance, and to Congratulate with them their
Fortunate Successes and Triumph, which would appear Glorious over all the
World: But the first thing which the Duke of Loraine did that Morning by break
of Day, was to Order all his Army to put themselves into a readiness to March,
whilst he consulted with the King of Poland, how, and in what manner they might
pursue the Enemy, and improve the Victory. But the King seemed so well
satisfied with the advantage already gained, and with the Prey and Booty of
which he was possessed, The Vizier's Tents fall to the let of the King of
Poland.
sitting Master in the Vizier's Tent, with all the Appurtenances and
Accommodations thereunto belonging, that he excused all farther Proceedings at
present; saying, That his Army was much Harassed, and required Repose, and not
in a Condition to pursue an Enemy, whom they beheld at a far distance advanced
in their way before them, by the Fires and Smoke whith ascended upwards; for as
the Turks fled they burnt all the Villages through which they passed. And now
in the Christian Camp, and in the City was time for Joy and Triumph. Count
Staremberg having paid his Respects, and made his Complements to the King of
Poland, and the Duke of Loraine, he conducted them into the City, with a
numerous attendance of Nobility and Gentry, who had served in the late Siege;
all the Forces were drawn up on both sides of the Streets, between which they
passed with loud Acclamations of Joy, unto the Church of the Augustine Friars,
where in the first place, as was most just, Te Deum was Sung, and Thanks
returned to God with Sincere Devotion: Thence they went to the House of the
Governor Count Staremberg, where he received the Applause and Praises of the
King of Poland, and the Duke of Loraine, which were due to his Conduct and
Valor; and the like Commendations were bestowed by them upon all the Officers
and Soldiers of the Garrison, who had every one signalized themselves during
this Siege, by some Action, or piece of Service or other which was Remarkable
and worthy of Observation: Afterward these welcome and long-desired Guests
were entertained with a sumptuous Feast at the Governor's House; The Jo^ at
Vienna.
after which, toward the Evening, with the like Joy and Festivity they
returned to their respective Quarters and Tents in the Camp. In the mean time,
the Besieged Inhabitants, who had long been pent up and enclosed within the
Walls of the City, were not only desirous to breath in a more open Air, but
were carried with a Curiosity to see the Approaches, which the Enemy had been
making on them, and how near they had entered to the Heart of the City, that it
may be doubtful, whether it was more pleasant to Men, lately delivered from the
extremity of a perishing Condition, to behold how near they were to the
devouring Enemy, and yet to escape; or to survey, with an amazed Curiosity, the
Tents, Batteries, Trenches and Approaches, which the Turks had formed against
them with wonderful Art and Industry.

The Face of all things was now changed, Want and Famine into Plenty, Fears and
Anguish into Joy, and War into Peace: In the Vizier's Tent, The Vizier's Tent
allotted to the King of Poland.
of which the King of Poland was possessed, the rich Vestments, Jewels, and
Money there found, were valued at a Million, and became the Prey and Booty
allotted to his Majesty, which no Man envied considering the generous and
heroic Action of that Prince, for whose Merit no Reward seemed too great:
Amongst other things in that Tent the Standard of Mahomet was found, which the
King sent to Pope Innocent the XI. by his Secretary Tulenti.

On the 14th. the Emperor, with the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony, entered into
the City of Vienna, The Emperor's Entrance into Vienna.
which he beheld with Eyes of Compassion and Tenderness; for seeing the
Desolation, which the Enemy had made, and considering the Slaughter of many of
his trusty Citizens and valiant Soldiers, he could not refrain from Tears of
Sorrow, mixed with Joy for the Deliverance and Safety of the superviving Party.
Being entered within the Gates, he went directly to the Cathedral of St.
Stephen's, not on Horseback, or on a Triumphal Chariot, but humbly and meekly
on Foot, carrying a Taper in his Hand, in a kind of penitential manner, went to
the great Altar to pay his Duty, and offer up his solemn Thanks to Almighty
God, according to his usual Devotion, for the wonderful and miraculous
Deliverance of that City. And having thus in the first place complied with his
Service toward God, he went in the next to visit the King of Poland, whom he
overtook at Sweket, a Village about a League distant from Vienna, as he was
proceeding on some farther Enterprise against the Enemy: Upon notice of the
Emperor's Approach, the King, whose Army marched in the Van, Interview between
the Emperor and King of Poland.
made a stop; and the German Army being in the Rear, the Emperor placed himself
at the head of them; and the Polish Army facing at the same time about, the
King appeared at the head of his; and so between the two Armies these two great
Princes, attended with a numerous Train of the chief Nobility and Gentry
belonging to each Court, met and embraced each other, and with very
affectionate Complements, and Expressions of Kindness and Friendship; having
entertained Discourse together for the space of near half an Hour, after second
Embraces, they departed. Never was there a more heroic and generous Action
performed in the World, than was this of the King of Poland, who, after a long
and tedious March, so valiantly exposed his own Person to Hazard, and his Army
in the face of an Enemy, which to human Appearance was Invincible; and all this
to bring Relief and Succor to an Ally, and to maintain the Bulwark of
Christendom against Infidels, and Enemies to the Christian Cause; it is such a
piece of Bravery as cannot be parallelled with all its Circumstances in any
History of past Ages; and therefore with much Reason and Justice were his
Praises celebrated over all the Christian World; and the Poets, and other
refined Wits in diverse Countries, and different Languages, exercised their
Pens in Panegyricks and Elogies, striving to out-vy and surpass each other in
the Excesses of Praise, which how Hyperbolical soever could never reach to the
imputation of Flattery. We shall repeat one, which was composed at Rome by
Guicciardin Procur. Genesis of the Celestines: ELOGIUM
JOANNI SOBIESCO
Dominatione Polonico, Lituanico,
Liberatione Austriaco, Pannonico,
Profligatione Ottomanico, Tracico,
Religione Christianissimo,
Pietate Cattolico,
Zelo, and obsequio Apostolico,
Inter Reges Proestantissimo,
Inter Duces Invictissimo,
Inter Imperatores, citra fabula^,
Solo nomine tremebundo,
Solo aspectu Hosts profliganti
CUI
Gloria Militaris Regnum peperit,
Clementia firmavit,
Meritum perennabit.
QUI
Raro Probitatis, and Religionis exemplo,
Propria deserens, Aliena defendens,
Docuit, quo pacto, sacra Foederum Jura
Incantur, Colantur, Perficiantur.
Ottomanicam Lunam, fulgentissimo Crucis Vexillo,
Aeternam Eclypsim Minitantem,
Adeo proprie, fortiterque e Christianorum sinibus eliminavit.
Ut unum, and idem fuerit;
VENISSE, VIDISSE, and VICISSE.
Inter, igitur, Christiani Orbis plausus,
Inter vindicatoe Religionis, and Imperii loetitiam,
Inter cruentatoe Lunoe extrema deliquia,
Agnoscant Proesentes, credant Posteri,
Non tantum nascenti Evangelio, quo promulgaretur,
Sed and jam promulgato, ne profligaretur;
Utrobique fuisse missum a DEO Hominem
CUI NOMEN ERAT JOANNES.
Del P. Maest. Guicciardini Procur. Gener. Dei Celestini in Roma.

Which Noble and Heroic Action would have remained on the Records of History
to all Posterity in honor of this King, had he not afterward sullied and
tarnished the Glory thereof, by condescending and stooping to Actions as low,
and mean, as this was Sublime, and only worthy of the Dignity of a Hero, as we
shall show in the following Year.

But to return again from whence we have digressed; the Emperor and King having
passed their Complements, Prince Alexander, Son of the King, whom his Father
presented with the Complement of having Enlisted himself early into the Service
of his Imperial Majesty. The young Prince, by order of his Father, had habited
himself in the German Fashion, and was admitted to Kiss the Emperor's Hand, as
were all the Persons of Quality belonging to the Army, and Court of Poland.

The King after having viewed the Riches taken in the Vizier's Tent, which he
assumed to himself as the Reward of his own Achievements: Out of Complement,
he sent to the Emperor to make tender of one half of the Booty, accompanying
the Message with the Tugh, or Horse-tayl on a Staff, with a brass Knob on the
top, which was one of the three Staves of Authority carried before the Vizier:
Such another kind of Present like this, being Mahomet's Standard, he sent to
the Pope; which being Gifts of no great Value, more than for the Curiosity of
them, he frankly and really offered; but as to half the Prey, it was generally
believed, that his Majesty was well informed beforehand, that the Emperor was
of too generous a Nature to accept thereof; and would not have been so prodigal
of his Offers, had he im^gined he should have been taken at his word.

But it is not here to be forgotten, that after the Bishop of Newdorf had sung
Te Deum before the Emperor, and performed the other Ceremonies, which lasted
for the space of four Hours; at the Conclusion of all, when the Emperor was
come out of the Church, the Archbishop of Vienna turned him about, and pointed
to the Spire of the Cathedral Steeple: Behold, Sir, said he, that Spar which
issues from the Spire, at the end of which is a Star within the Crescent or
Half Moon; and consider that that Monument was there fixed in the Year 1529,
when Soliman Besieged the City, and was so to remain by Compact with the
Citizens, conditionally, The Cross erected in place of the Half Moon.
That the Turks should not batter the Steeple with their Cannon: And now
whereas that Article was broken, by the continual Shootings, which the Enemy
had made against it at the last Siege, it is but reason that the Crescent
should be taken down; and in Memory of the present Deliverance, that a Cross
should be erected in the place thereof; for which the Emperor having given
present Orders, they were accordingly executed.

On the 10th. the Duke of Saxony returned home with his Troops, The Duke of
Saxony returns home.
which speedy departure so soon after the raising of the Siege, (which seemed
too short a time for Refreshment of his Soldiery) was interpreted for a Sign of
Discontent, perhaps to see the Poles Rewarded with the greatest Spoils, and the
Auxiliaries neglected, as if they had no Share or Merit in the Victory.

The Emperor finding his Palace much ruined and unfurnished at Vienna, staid
but few days there before he returned to Lintz, where he intended to remain
until the Repairs of Court and City were made, and the Walls and Trenches
cleared of the dead Bodies, which rendered the Air Unhealthful and Infectious:
During the time of his stay at Vienna, he took delight to visit the
Retrenchments and Fortifications, which the Defendants had made behind the
Walls and Bastions, to dispute every Foot and Inch of Ground, as occasion had
required: He also surveyed the Batteries, Trenches and Approaches of the Enemy,
and saw the Stores of Ammunition and Provisions which they had left behind
them, which served again to recruit and replenish the Arsenal at Vienna. The
List and Account whereof was as follows: Six Thousand five Hundred Tents,
four Thousand five Hundred Barrels of Powder, six Thousand weight of Lead,
20.000 Granado Shells, eight Thousand Hand-granadoes, 11.000 Shovels and
Pickaxes, one Thousand six Hundred weight of Match, two Thousand five Hundred
Fireballs, 52 Hundred weight of Pitch, eleven Hundred weight of Oil of
Petolium and of Tar, and five Hundred Thousand of Lincet-oyl, Ninety five
Hundred of Saltpeter, five Thousand one Hundred ^ieces of coarse Linen, two
Hundred Thousand Hair Sacks for carrying Earth and Sand, eighty one Hundred
weight of Bars of Iron and Horse-shooes, an Hundred Ladles for melting Pitch,
two Hundred weight of Pack-thread, and Thongs made of Camels Hides, and
Buffoloes Leather for binding, four Thousand Sheepskins, two Thousand
Halberts, four Hundred Scythes and Scycles, five Hundred and sixty Barrels of
Guns for use of the Janisaries, Fifty two Sacks of Cotton and Cotton-yarn, one
Thousand five Hundred Wool-sacks empty, two Thousand Plates of Iron for
covering Targets, an Hundred and twenty three Hundred weight of Greese and
Tallow, two Hundred thirty Powder-horns, two Thousand six Hundred Baggs for
Powder, four pair of Smith's Bellows for a Forge, twenty one Instruments, or
Engines for raising Carts when overturned, eight Thousand Carts for carrying
Ammunition and Provisions, all empty, one Thousand great Bombs, eighteen
Thousand Cannon-bullets, great and small, an Hundred and ten Pieces of Cannon
of all sorts, as Culverin, Demyculverin, demi and whole Cannon, Sakers, etc.
thirteen Mortar-pieces, mounted for shooting Bombs, six great Anvils, diverse
Sacks for use of the Ordnance, and many Ladders made of Cords. All which, as we
have said, were carried into Vienna, and laid up amongst the Stores of that
Arsenal.

After this Work was done, the next was to employ all the Laborers belonging
to the City, with the captivated Turks, whom they made to assist in filling up
the Trenches, Holes and Vaults which the Turks had made; some of which were so
deep, that they seemed rather to be Caves and Dens than Trenches for covert and
shelter for Besiegers: So that had not the Turks busied themselves in such
fruitless Labors, they might have compassed that in half the time, which was
not effected in the space of sixty two Days. Amongst these other Works, several
Vaults were found filled with dead Bodies, putrified and stinking, and all the
Country round for many Leagues were strowed with dead Carcasses; for Burying of
which, or Burning, or casting into the Danube, strict Orders were given, and
which with much diligence were executed, to prevent a Pestilence, the
Putrefaction of which began already to infect the Air. Amongst the dead, the
Bodies of many Women and Children were found, who had been made Slaves and
Captives by the Turks, and Massacred by them, either out of Revenge, or because
they were an Encumbrance to them in their Flight; but to these Bodies some
Respect was shown, being carried to Cimeteries, and there interred after the
Rites of the Christian Burial, with Crosses erected over their Graves.
Howsoever some Turks, who were Men of more tender Bowels than the others (for
we must not figure them all to be of the like fierce and cruel Disposition) did
quit the Possession of their Slaves with more gentleness, and set them at
liberty with their Lives, of which most were Women and Children, the which the
Germans and Poles took up and brought them back again to Vienna.

By this time, that the Trenches were filled without the City, and the Walls
and some Houses repaired, the News of the happy Deliverance of Vienna had
spread it self over all the Countries, from whence Provisions of all sorts
came, and Boats laden with Corn, Wine, Fruits and Herbs arrived daily in, to
supply the Wants of the City; the Face of which was totally changed, from
Famine to Plenty, from War to Peace, and from Terror and dismal Apprehensions
to Joy, Triumph and Festivals.

The Spirits of the Imperialists and Poles being highly raised by these
Successes, some Parties pursued the Turks, who were as much dejected as the
others were elevated; and tho they hastened in a precipitous Flight,
apprehending an Enemy just at their backs; yet many of them in the Arrear,
appointed to conduct twelve Pieces of Cannon, and some Baggage were over-taken
in the Pursuit, and brought back to Vienna, where these Captives, with their
other Brethren, were ordered to work in Chains for filling the Trenches, which
they had before opened, and repair of the Walls and Bastions, which they had
battered down with their Cannon, and blown up with their Mines.

The Grand Vizier hastening his March, or rather his Flight, for (as we said
before) he actually Ran away and shamefully turned his Back with near 120.000
Fighting Men; meditating (as we may believe) of the Disgrace, The Grand Vizier
complaining to the Grand Seignior against the Pasha of Buda.
Ruin and evil consequences of this Misfortune, sought and endeavored to clear
his ill Conduct, and want of Courage by casting it upon others, as is common to
the Nature of Mankind. Accordingly he dispatched away a Letter to the Grand
Seignior, giving him an account of the unfortunate Success before Vienna,
caused by the Cowardice, or Treachery of several great Officers and Generals of
his Army: Particularly he named the Vizier of Buda, to whom having given
command to Charge the Enemy with a Body of Twelve thousand Men, as they
descended the Hill of Kalemberg; he, and his Soldiers instead of obeying these
Orders, shamefully turned their Backs and put themselves unto Flight; which
when the rest of the Army saw, they were struck with a common Consternation and
Fear, suggested to them to secure their safety by following the Example of
their Fellow Soldiers: So the whole misfortune of the Day was attributed to the
ill Conduct, and Cowardice of the Vizier of Buda, which was sent to the Grand
Seignior, then residing at Belgrade, and in hourly expectation of better News.

The Vizier of Buda, who had received Information by several Hands of the
Discourses with which the Grand Vizier entertained all the Officers concerning
him, laying to his Charge the Loss and Ruin which had happened; thought fit to
disculpate, and clear himself by a more faithful Relation of Matters in a
Letter to the Grand Seignior; The Vizer of Buda writes to the Grand Seignior.
wherein he set forth, That by the unskilfullness of the Grand Vizier, and his
want of Resolution in Military Affairs, this important matter had miscarried:
For had he fortified the Forest of Vienna, and erected some few Redoubts on the
descent of the Hill of Kalemberg, the City by all the Force of the World, could
never have been Relieved: Or had the Vizier spent that time, which he employed
in sinking Vaults and Caves for shelter, in bold Storms and Attempts, tho with
loss of half the Army, the importance of the place, and the consequences of the
Success, would have largely paid for the effusion of Blood; but using
unnecessary cautions of Mines, and formal Approaches, by which he hoped to have
constrained the City to Surrender upon Articles, and hereby assumed to himself
the Riches and Plunder of the place, which taken in Heat of Blood, and by Dint
of Sword, would have become the Prey and Booty of the Soldiery; he gave
occasion to such delays, as served the Christian Army, and turned to the Ruin
and Miscarriage of this whole Enterprise.

The Grand Vizier Strangles the Vizier of Buda and other Pashas.
The Grand Vizier being weary of such Complaints as these, resolved to Sacrifice
the Life of the Pasha of Buda to his own Folly and Destiny; commanding him to
be Strangled, together with the Pashas of Essek and Possega, and the Aga of the
Janisaries, great Friends and Confidents of the Vizier of Buda, and the best
and most experienced Officers of the whole Army, with above Fifty Officers and
Soldiers more, whom he accused of Cowardice; but this Execution of Justice (as
they call it) could not secure his own Life, but rather furnished his Enemies
at Court, such as the Kuzlir Aga and others, with instances wherewith to
aggravate his Crimes to the Grand Seignior; and indeed there now offered a
surprising occasion to wreak their Malice on the Vizier, since it is almost
impossible, for a Man to be unfortunate and yet to be esteemed Innocent. Nor did
the Vizier escape clear, with the remainder of his shattered Army to Buda; for
being Attacked in the Rear by the Garrison of Raab, he lost Six hundred Men
more: Howsoever, he proceeded in his March, and Reinforced the Garrisons of
Newhausel and Strigonium. The Death of these Pashas, by which the Vizier hoped
to have saved his own Life, raised such Mutiny amongst the Turks, Mutiny in the
Turkish Army.
as caused a greater Fluctuation of Rage in the Minds of the Soldiery, than
they had lately endured of Fear from the Enemy; between which two Passions,
there was nothing but Confusion, Discontent and Discouragement in the whole
Army: For the Pasha of Buda was popular, and well beloved by the Soldiery, and
esteemed the most Martial Man in the whole Camp: And the Aga or General of the
Janisaries was so well affected by that Militia, that they highly resented his
Death; for at no time, (much less in this) can they endure to have their
General punished or cut off, unless it be by themselves, and in their own
Mutinies.

In this confusion were the Turks, when the Chief Captains of the Christian
Army considered, A Council of War.
that the present Relief of Vienna would be of little benefit to the Christian
Empire, unless the Victory were pursued, and improved by succeeding
Enterprises: All the Princes and Commanders agreed hereunto, (except the
Elector of Saxony, who as we have said before returned home) and wisely judged,
that the Turks having made a Retreat with a Body of near 120.000 Men, entire
and whole, they might reasonably be expected the next year to return again unto
the Siege, unless advantage were taken of their present Consternation, to break
and confound them beyond a possibility of Recovery: At this Council, it was
proposed to Besiege Newhausel or Gran, and for enlargement of Winter Quarters,
and Annoyance of Buda and Gran, that Pest and Barcan should be taken: In fine,
after some debate it was concluded, That nothing could be resolved at present
concerning the manner of Proceedings, for that the Actions of War, were to be
regulated according to the Motions of the Enemy; but that something was to be
undertaken speedily, whilst the Iron was hot, and the Spirits of the Turks
cold, and still under their late Consternation: The King of Poland being of the
same Mind, Commanded his Troops to advance toward Presbourg, which on the 18th
Encamped near Ficken, together with the Imperial Forces, and came thither on
the 19th where they were forced to continue until the 25th for want of a
Bridge, which could not be finished until that time.

Tekeli sends a Letter to the King of Poland.
Whilst the Bridge was framing, and the Army detained on the Banks of the River;
a Messenger from Tekeli brought a Letter to the King of Poland, containing
certain Proposals in order to an Accommodation. The King having received a
Character of Tekeli to be a Man of Intrigue, and False, and who had frequently
made Offers of Peace, but never obser^ed any; admitted his Messenger to
Audience in a manner of Coldness and Jealousy, and yet with respect due to the
Person from whom he was sent: But before he would receive the Letter, he asked,
Whether it was Dated before, or since the Raising of the Siege of Vienna: To
which the Messenger making answer, That it was Wrote two days before that
Success: The King thereupon Replied with an angry Frown, Go said he, and return
the Letter to your Master again, and tell him, That he should correct and amend
the Style, and change the Substance and Sense thereof, according to the
alteration of Times and Affairs.

Such is the force of Success and Prosperity of a Prince, that so soon as the
News of the Relief of Vienna was divulged in the Upper Hungary, many Counties
declared for the Emperor; Some Cities Revolt.
and the Fortresses of Papa and Totis, were the first to give Examples of
Obedience and Duty to other Cities. News also came at the same time, that the
Count of Budiani, who upon the formidable appearance of the Turks, Budiani
changes his side.
had deserted the Post he maintained on the Passage over the Raab, and had
taken Party with the Malcontents, and joined with a Body of Turks and
Hungarians, and had Fought against the Imperial Troops, and Burnt and Plundered
several Villages on the Frontiers of Stiria; Had now with the turn of Fortune,
changed his side and interest; and having Surprised, and Cut in pieces those
very Turks with whom he was Associated, had united his Forces with those of
Count Aspremont, and therewith troubled and infested the Turks in their Retreat.

The Bridge over the Danube being finished, the Poles were the first to March
over it into the Isle of Schultz; and were followed by the Imperial Army: But
the Troops of Bavaria and Franconia, remained still Encamped near Vienna, for
want of Orders to advance farther; but Letters were sent to the Princes of that
Circle, to continue the Aid of their Forces for some farther design; and a
Messenger was dispatched to the Elector of Bavaria, who by Reason of some
indispotion of Health, was advised by his Physicians to go to Brin, for benefit
of the Air, which was esteemed more wholesome than that of Vienna.

But the year being now far advanced toward the end of September; to stay for
such Orders, and the March of these Auxiliaries, the Season would be too far
spent, to undertake any Action of great moment; wherefore the King of Poland,
and the Duke of Loraine resolved to advance with their Army to Comorra without
the Reinforcement of the Allies. Being come to a place called Wismar, within an
hours March of Comorra, Advices were brought, that Tekeli had dispeeded a
Detachment from his Camp before Levents to Bergstadt, that the Vizier was at
Buda, from whence he had Reinforced the Garrison of Newhausel with Four
thousand Men; but that in the Turkish Army were such Discontents caused by the
late ill Successes, and by the Cutting off of the Pasha of Buda, and other
great Men well affected by the Soldiery, that there was nothing but Mutiny and
Confusion in the Camp. Upon this Intelligence, it was resolved at a Council of
War to attempt Gran, Resolved to Besiege Gran.
and which to make the more Feasible, it was concluded necessary in the first
place, to take the Fortress of Barcan, which is a Palanca opposite to that
City, and covers the Foot of the Bridge over the Danube, which makes a
Communication between the two places. By this time Four thousand Swedish
Infantry and One thousand Horse, with some other Auxiliaries (which by reason
of the distance of the places, from whence they came, could not Arrive in time
to partake in the Honor of relieving Vienna,) were all sent with what
expedition was possible down the Danube to Reinforce the Army, which was
thereby become more numerous and flourishing, than before the Fight at Vienna.

The first to pass that Arm of the Danube, which is called the Waag, was the
King of Poland with his Army; which was the work of the 4th and 5th of October.
the Imperial Cavalry followed, The Christians pas^ the River.
but the Foot could not pass the same day: The 6th they Marched to Mose, two
Leagues distant from Comorra, where Count Staremberg had Orders to March the
Foot; and on the 7th to join the Army, which would stay and attend them at that
place. But the King of Poland impatient of delay, contrary to expectation
immediately mounted on Horseback, and sent to advise the Duke of Loraine that
he was Marching toward Barcan. The Poles advance before the Imperialists.
The Duke being surprised at this sudden Resolution, returned Count Dunewald
to his Majesty, to represent unto him the necessity of taking the Foot with
them, and the danger of dividing the Army, in a place so near to the Enemies
Quarters, being between the Turks on the one side, and the Malcontents on the
other. But the King being already mounted on Horseback, when Dunewaldt came to
him, he answered, That he knew no Reason which might cause him to defer his
Proceedings, having certain Intelligence, that the Detachment of the Turks near
Barcan was very inconsiderable, and desired that no time should be omitted in
following with the rest of the Army. The Duke leaving only a Regiment of
Cravats to support the Infantry, Marched away with all the Horse to attend the
Poles: The King being come within an hour's March of Barcan, understood from
the advanced Troops of his Vanguard, that they were in sight of some Squadrons
of the Enemy; which they having orders to Charge, the Turks gave ground, but
being supported by a greater Body, the Van was forced to Retreat; to Succor
and Support which, other Troops were commanded to Charge the Enemy; and at
length, the King in Person with all his Cavalry was engaged. The Turks, who
until now had concealed Seven or eight thousand Men under covert of a Hill,
began to appear, and Sallying forth, The Poles put to Flight.
Charged the Poles both in the Front and Rear with such Bravery, as that they
killed Two hundred of them, with the Palatine of Pomerania, and put the rest
unto Flight, taking several of their Colors, Kettle-drums and some Baggage.
Count Dunewaldt, who had Marched with the King of Poland, observing the
Skirmish of the first Troops, sent to advise the Duke of Loraine, that the
Poles were Engaged with the Turks; upon which News he hastened his March with
all the diligence that was possible; and having passed certain narrow Ways and
Bushes, he espied at the opening of the Plain, the Turks in hot pursuit of the
Poles: At the sight whereof, he immediately took care to draw up his advanced
Troops into Battalia, and gave order to Prince Lewis of Baden to do the like
with those Marching in the Rear. The appearance of the German Regiments, which
stood firm and entire before the face of the Turks, caused them to desist from
their pursuit, and to return under Barcan. The Duke of Loraine thought not fit
to follow them that Day, but rather to Rally and Fortify the Poles, and to
enquire after the King, who was said to be lost; but at-length his Majesty
appearing and found in safety, it alleviated something of the ill Success of
that Day; which by that time that the Story was told, and Matters related in
what manner things had passed, it grew toward Night, when it was thought fit
to Encamp until the Morning.

All that Night there was great disturbance in the Polish Camp; the loss
sustained by the Slaughter of so many of their Friends and Comrades, was such a
Grief and Discouargement to them, that they were desirous that Night to yield
the Quarter on the right Wing, which was nearest to Barcan, unto the Germans,
who had formerly challenged that place as their due: And toward Morning the
principal Officers insinuated unto the King the many Circumstances, which
presented to render the Success difficult, alleging that their Army was
Galled, and soar of their Wounds and much Discouraged, and the Enemy flushed
with Yesterday's Fortune, and more numerous than was believed. The King of
Poland unwilling to adventure another Engagement.
The news of this Discontent and Wavering in the Polish Camp being brought to
the Duke of Loraine, he immediately went to the King to keep him steady to the
former Resolutions and Measures; and so well managed his Discourse with him,
producing many Reasons why the Enemy could not be very strong, and arguing the
Probability and almost Certainty of Victory; that in fine he prevailed upon the
King, his Senators, and chief Officers to make Trial of next Day's Engagement.

The Duke of Loraine having taken a full Survey of the Ground, and of the
Situation of Barcan, gave a description thereof uno the King; and offered the
Honor of the right Wing unto the Poles, for which they had formerly contended;
but being much taken off of their Mettle, they desired to change their Station,
and mix some of their Troops with those of the Imperialists.

An hour before Day the Duke of Loraine caused to sound to Horse, and with the
dawning of the Morning the whole Imperial Army was drawn into Battalia,
consisting of Horse and Foot, to the number of Sixteen thousand two hundred
Men, besides the King of Poland's Army, and the Fifteen hundred Polanders under
the Command of Lubomiski. Prince Lewis of Baden Commanded the right Wing, and
under him Count de Gondola, and the Baron of Mercy. Count Dunewaldt Commanded
the left, and under him the Counts of Palsi and Taaff; The Orders of the
Christian Army.
and the main Body of Infantry was conducted by Count Staremberg, the Duke of
Croy and Count Serini. The Poles being expected in their Station, seemed still
tardy and backward to draw out, by Reason that the King had in the Night
received Intelligence, that the Enemy was greatly recruited by a strong Body,
Commanded by Hasly Pasha of Aleppo, and the Pashas of Silistria and Grand
Cairo; and that it was much to be doubted, The Poles deliberate again about
fighting.
whether the whole Turkish Army were not joined with them. But the Duke of
Loraine opposing unto these Doubts undeniable Reasons, why it was not possible
for the Gross of the Turkish Army to be joined with these Forces before Barcan;
and yet on supposition, that they were yet considering the advantageous Ground
on which the Army was drawn up, they needed not fear the whole Ottoman Force;
of all which he made such clear Demonstrations, that the King was again
confirmed in his former Resolutions, and so with a Party of his Hussars, and of
his Infantry, and of the Flower of his Cavalry, he posted himself on the right
Wing, between the Imperial Cavalry and the Dragoons: And the great General
Jabloniski, with some of the Hussars Foot and Cavalry marching on the left
Wing, between the German Horse and Dragoons, and the rest of the Polish Army
made a third Line. In this order they marched about half an hour, when about
nine a Clock they discovered the Enemy drawn up in Battalia upon the Plain,
marching very slowly, and in such manner, as that their Force seemed equal to
that of the Christians: The Armies being come very near, the Turks of the right
Wing charged the left of the Christians with much fierceness, as if they had
had a particular spite, and aimed chiefly at the Poles: The Fight begun.
And at the same time, the Turks who were on the rising of a Hill advanced, as
if they intended to Charge the main Body of the Christians. But being within
half Musket shot of them, they on a sudden Wheeled about, and fell upon the
left Wing; which when the Duke of Loraine observed, he crossed the Line of the
Cavalry on the left Wing; and with all the party of the first Line which had
not been engaged, he in Person charged the Enemy in the Flank with so much
Courage and Bravery, as put them to a General Rout, and into that Confusion,
The Turks routed.
that they were never more able again to Rally: Dunewaldt was Commanded to
Pursue them, and with the Poles of the left Wing entered pell-mel with them at
the very Gates of Barcan, at which place many of them were killed, and perished
in the Marshes of Gran.

And pursued.
Whilst Dunewaldt pursued the flying Enemy, the whole Army advanced in Battalia
toward Barcan; and in the way thither it was resolved by all Parties to
Assault the place in this heat of Action, whilst the Enemy was Affrighted and
in Disorder; the King accordingly drew out some Troops of his Cosacks, and the
Duke of Loraine five Battalions of Staremberg, Grana and Baden, which were
appointed for that Service: Which Detachment was no sooner ordered, than
Information came, that the Bridge over the Danube by the Crowds, and Multitudes
of the Turks pressing over it was broken; and that Barcan it self was so filled
up with People, that they had scarce room to stir, and were ready to trample
one another Under-foot. Prince Lewis of Baden with these Forces, and three
Regiments of Dragoons, and three Pieces of Cannon assaulted the Fort, and took
it by main force. Barcan taken.
The Slaughter which was there made by Fire and Sword was very Cruel and
Bloody: But most, to avoid the Fury of the Enemy, threw themselves headlong
into the Danube; some endeavored to save themselves by Swimming, others by
their Horses, hanging on their Mains and Tails; others on Planks and Boards of
the broken Bridge; in which Passage tho many saved themselves, yet the greatest
part perished in the Waters; as appeared by the Bodies of Men and Horses,
together with their Garments, which covered the Surface of the River, in places
where the Current ran not so rapid on the Sides and Banks, as in the middle of
the Water. In fine, of these great numbers in Barcan none escaped, unless Seven
or Eight hundred Men, who having betaken themselves to a Redoubt belonging to
that Fortress, obtained Quarter for their Lives on Condition of quiet
Surrender. In this Action the Turks lost their best Captains, and the Bravest
of their Soldiery, and so fatal was this Fight to them, that they never
recovered their Courage and Spirits again, but suffered themselves for several
years afterward to be beaten, and baffled by their Enemes: After which we
shall find them still decaying and giving Ground; and at length falling into
Discords and Civil Dissentions, the Ottoman Empire had nearly expired, had not
the Christians falling into Wars amongst themselves, (which have always proved
advantageous to the Turks,) given new Life and growth again unto that People.

This Victory obtained, the King of Poland with his General and Senators,
justly applauded the Wisdom and Conduct of the Duke of Loraine, and Valor of
the German Troops, to whom he acknowledged the whole Success of that day was to
be attributed: In the Quarters of the King Te Deum being sang, and Thanks
returned to Almighty God for so signal a Blessing; the Duke of Loraine took a
Survey of the Fort of Barcan, to see in what manner it was possible to be put
in a condition to offend Gran, which was Situate on the other side of the
Water, just in opposition to it: But such was the Fury of the Soldiers, that
they burnt almost all the Palisadoes, and set fire to part of the Town; and so
ravenous were they after the Plunder of the Place, that the Germans and Poles
had fallen into Civil Wars amongst themselves, had not Count Staremberg put an
end to the Scuffle, by commanding the Germans to withdraw; and leaving the
Poles Masters of the Place, they made all the Spoil they were able, in revenge
of the Loss they had suffered the day before. Nothing could come more
seasonable, nor more advantageous to the Christian Arms than this Victory; for
besides the Loss (as we have said) of the best of their Men, there remained not
above two or three Thousand alive of all that Army, which consisted of Fourteen
thousand of their best Horse, and Twelve hundred Janisaries, commanded by the
new Pasha of Buda, Haly, Pasha of Aleppo, and six other Pashas. Twelve hundred
or One thousand Prisoners were taken, and amongst them the Pashas of Aleppo and
Silistria, with several other Agas. The Consequences of which Victory were very
happy to the Christians; for besides, that it administered new Courage to the
drooping Spirits of the Poles, it totally dismayed the Malcontents, and
produced such Disorder in the Turkish Army, that the Great Vizier, Mutiny
against the Great Vizier.
with all the Authority with which he was clothed, was not able to contain them
within any bounds or limits of Duty; but rather fearing to be Murdered by them
than hoping to Appease them, was forced to abscond himself from their Rage in
obscure Retirement. By this Overthrow the Grand Vizier lost all the remainer of
his Baggage, which had been saved at the Battle of Vienna, with Twelve Pieces
of Cannon, which had been advanced some Hours on the way before the Siege was
raised, and was employed by the new Vizier of Buda for the Service of this Camp.

The Duke of Loraine pursuing the course of his good Fortune, was desirous to
conclude this Campaign with the taking of Gran, which was the glorious period
to which the Emperor directed him, if possible, to advance his Affairs. The
Siege of Gran intended.
In order hereunto the Duke of Loraine taking first (according to his usual
Methods) a judicious Survey of the situation of the Place, and the way
thereunto; observed, that in the middle of the River, something below Gran,
there was an Island, in which was not only good Forage for the Horse, but also
an ancient Intrenchment, which, with some little Labor, might be made useful
and defensive against the Cannon of the Town: And from the farther side of that
Island, with the help of a few Boats, the whole Army might find an easy
Passage. The King of Poland approving this Design, Boats were ordered down from
Comorra, for framing the Bridge: But whilst this was doing, the late Successes
which had brought great Reputation to the Emperor's Affairs, had moved Tekeli
to send the Count de Humanay in Behalf of the Malcontents, to offer Terms of
Peace and Pacification. The Duke of Loraine, who had been long versed in the
Practices of Tekeli and his Associates, was of opinion, Tekeli sends Deputies
to the Duke of Loraine.
That the Malcontents were not as yet reduced to such Terms, as might render
them fit and disposed for a Treaty: Howsoever, at the desire of the King of
Poland, being admitted to Audience, they proposed a Cessation of Arms, and an
assignment for Winter Quarters: To which the Duke of Loraine replied, That such
Concessions at present were not agreeable to the Interest and Dignity of the
Emperor, and took from hence occasion to make some Discourse of the Laws and
Constitutions of their Kingdom, and to reproach them for their Rebellion, and
want of Faith toward their Sovereign. In short, he told them, That if they
would hope to taste of the Emperor's Clemency, they must without any previous
Conditions lay down their Arms, and renounce all Alliance with the Turk, which
was the first Preliminary or Step to a Treaty. With this answer the Deputies
being retired, in a few days afterward, Several Towns and Counties Submit.
not only Papa and Totis (as we said before) submitted, but Wespring and
Levents received German Garrisons; and the Counties of Trinschin, Tirnaw,
Nitria and Levents declared against the Cause and Interest of the Malcontents,
and received the Garrisons into their Castles and Fortresses, which were sent
thither by order of Count Caraffa to take Possession thereof.

The Bridges being finished by the 16th of this Month of October, and the
Bavarian Troops come up to join with the Army; the Duke of Loraine desired the
King of Poland, according to his Place of Precedence, to lead the way with his
Troops; but the King made some difficulty thereof, The King of Poland proposes
enquiries concerning the State of Gran.
alleging, That a Survey ought first to be taken of the situation of the
Place, and Enquiries made how well it was provided with Men and Ammunition, and
how far the Vizier, with his Forces, was retired from affording it Relief, or
disturbing the Siege. Accordingly Two thousand Horse being appointed to take a
View of the Country, they passed the Bridges without opposition or disturbance,
and so dismayed the Turks, that they deserted Thomas-burg, a Palanca not far
from Gran, and set it on Fire, but was soon quenched, and Possession taken by
the Imperialists. Upon the appearance of a Party on this side of the River, two
Hungarians of Totis brought Intelligence, that the Vizier was marched with his
Army toward Esseck, having left a small Force encamped near unto Buda. This
News hastened the Passage of the Christian Army over the River, (though the Poles
remained in their Camp, and moved not as yet) and gave Encouragement to the
Generals to hope, that the Siege would not be of long Continuance, or of much
loss of Time, or Men. The Horse and Foot marched apace over the Bridges into
the Island, and so by a short cut, crossed over another Bridge to the Banks of
the Danube, something above Cannot-shot below Gran. In the mean time, the Duke
of Loraine, with the Chief Officers of both Armies, took a particular Survey of
the Town, and of the Ground and Country thereabouts.

Gran is situate about six Hungarian, or thirty English Miles below Comorra; it
was anciently called Strigonium, but now by the Hungarians it is named Gran;
from the River Gran, which comes out of the Upper Hungary, and empties it self
in the Danube, just over against the City. Under the Name of Strigonium, four
Cities are comprehended, together with the Castle which is situate on the pitch
of a high Rock hanging over the Danube, The Description of Gran.
and over-tops the Cathedral Church, where Stephen the first, King of Hungary,
a holy and devout Prince, lies interred. In the Year 1543, this City was first
brought under the Turkish Dominion, by Solomon the Magnificent. In the Year
1594 it was Besieged by Mathias, Arch Duke of Austria, but was not taken until
the following Year by Count Mansfield, who in a bloody Fight totally defeated
the Ottoman Force. The Turks esteeming this Place of necessary Importance to
the Conquest of Hungary, returned before it in the Year 1604; but finding a
vigorous Resistance, were forced to raise the Siege after Twenty three Days
continuance. Howsoever, in the Year 1605, investing the Place with a more
formidable Power, it yielded it self into the Hands of the Turks, who have
since that time remained Masters thereof until this happy Year 1683.

The Imperial Army continuing its Passage over the Bridges, the Two thousand
Men of the advanced Troops took their Post on the 21st and 22d at Night, not
doubting but that the King of Poland would follow with his Army in the Rear,
The King of Poland declines the Siege.
as was before resolved; but, contrary to all expectation, the Duke of Loraine
received Advice, that the King, by persuasion of his Senators, had changed his
Mind, and designed not to pass the River, letting him know, that he should
continue his Camp for three or four Days longer; but after that he should be
constrained to March away. This alteration in the King of Poland's Counsels,
was strangely surprising to the Duke of Loraine; for tho he doubted not but in
a short time to become Master of the Place with the Imperial Forces only,
without the Assistance of the Poles; yet considering that the News of the
Separation of the two Armies, might encourage the Grand Vizier with his Army
(which as yet was not far distant) to return to the Relief of the Town, and the
Besieged to a more vigorous Defense; and that the Malcontents might be induced
to Post themselves on the Danube, to intercept and interrupt all Communication
between Comorra and the Camp: Which Matters were of such high Importance, that
the Duke of Loraine thought not fit to form the Siege, until such time as he
had first fixed the King in his former Resolutions; unto which he sent the
Counts of Staremberg and Rabata, to press him with all the earnestness
imaginable, giving him to understand how difficult it was for the Imperial Army
to retire from an Enterprise, to which all the Methods and Forms were already
laid and prepared; and of which the Design appeared so promising, that in a few
Days they might with good reason expect a happy Success and Event thereof.
Moreover the Emperor had given his Orders for investing Gran, and was already
in expectation to hear that the Siege was laid, esteeming it of high Advantage
to the Reputation of his Affairs, He is persuaded to it by the Duke of Loraine.
to have the Campaign concluded with the success of so glorious an Action: Yet
whatsoever was or could be said by these Officers did not prevail on the King,
until the Duke of Loraine himself went in Person, to represent the great
Inconveniences, and even Subversion of the late happy Successes, which would be
the necessary Consequences at this time of the Separation of the two Armies. In
fine, he so managed his Discourse with those Reasons, and in such obliging
Terms, that the King concurred with him, desiring him to hasten the execution
of this Enterprise, in which there was no time to be lost, considering how near
the Winter-season was approached.

The Siege being now in good earnest resolved, the Polish Army passed the
Bridges with all the Artillery, Ammunition and Baggage; and the Duke of Loraine
with the chief Officers taking a second Survey of the Town, and the Ground
round about it; the Approaches were ordered to be made, and the Army began to
take their several Quarters, as directed by the General Officers. The Foot were
encamped on the tops of some rising Hills; The Disposition of the Christian
Army in the Camp before Gran.
the Croats and Dragoons, with a Party of Horse on the side of the Danube. The
Bavarians were posted on the River above the Town, at the foot of the Bridge
which passes over to Barcan, where a Battery was raised: The rest of the
Infantry was divided into two other Squadrons toward St. Thomas's Mount, where
other Batteries were raised, all things proceeding with such expedition, as the
Season of the Year, and other Circumstances of the Army required. The Lines
being drawn, which extended three Miles in compass, the Cannon, of which ten
Pieces being twenty four Pounders, and eight Mortars were by force of Men drawn
up and planted on the Top of the Hills of Marinberg, and Thomasberg, and on the
25th by break of Day in the Morning, they began to play upon the Town, and much
Battered the Castle on that side of the Gate, which looks toward Buda, and all
that Day Bombs were thrown, whilst the Imperialists in despite of the Enemies
Fire advanced to the very Ditch, Their Approaches.
and there lodged near to the Quarters of the Bavarian Troops. On the other
side, which looks toward Barcan, about five a Clock in the Afternoon the
Imperialists stormed the Lower Town, and without much resistance made
themselves Masters of it, with the loss of the Major of Staremberg's Regiment,
and seven Soldiers. The Inhabitants retired into the Castle, from whence they
fired incessantly both small and great Shot: Howsoever, that very Night the
Christians gained the Foot of the Hill, on which the Castle is Built, and began
to undermine the Place, there being a wide Breach already opened in the Wall of
the Castle, so that every thing seemed in the readiness for an Assault; but
before things were put upon that Extremity, the Duke of Loraine thought fit
with the consent of the King of Poland, to send a Summons to the Castle in his
Majesty's name, which was done by a Turkish Prisoner, offering them Conditions
of safety for their Goods and Lives, provided that a Surrender were made that
very Evening: But the Defendants desiring until next Day to give their Answer
it was denied them, and Attacks were made and the Ditch passed, and two
Lodgments made on the side of the Hill, and another Mine began; of which the
Defendants being sensible, and fearing to be taken by force of Arms, The
Besieged accept Conditions.
they returned an Answer by Eleven a Clock that Night, how that they accepted
the Conditions.

In the Morning early, being the 27th, Hostages were exchanged for securing the
performance of the Conditions, which were these.

First, That all the Cannon, Ammunition, Provisions, and all offensive Arms,
(excepting those hereafter excepted) should remain in the Castle.

Secondly, That those of the Garrison might carry with them, as much Bread,
Flesh and other Victuals, as would serve them for two Days Provision.

Thirdly, That the Duke of Loraine should provide them with Carts, for carrying
their Baggage to the Water side.

Fourthly, That Boats should be granted them for carrying away their Persons
and Goods, and that in case they could not be cleared away at one time, that
then they might have Liberty to fetch them off at twice: And that in case the
Boatmen were not sufficient to carry away all the Goods, that the Proprietors
might have Liberty to perform the same.

Fifthly, That so soon as these Capitulations were Signed, that the Garrison
shall immediately quit the place, and resign it into the Hands of the
Christians, who were to take entire Possession thereof; and that the Carts and
Boats being in a readiness, they should without delay lade their Goods and
Household Stuff.

Sixthly, That the Prisoners taken during the Siege, be forthwith released and
set at Liberty.

Seventhly, That the Defendants shall have Liberty to March away with their
Wives, Children and small Arms, and also with their Horses, Camels, and other
Beasts of Burden. In fine, That these Articles be kept, and observed inviolably
on both sides.

On the 28th of this Month of October, all the Garrison, being in number about
Three thousand five hundred Soldiers, marched out of the Castle between the
Regiments of Grana and Loraine drawn up in double Files; but before they would
suffer them to depart, a search was made after the Mines, which the Turks
discovering to them, they were discharged of their Powder: The Castle
Surrendr'd.
The Garrison marched forth without any Order, but mixed together with their
Wives, Children and Families: Those who designed for Buda, were embarked on
Boats provided for that purpose; and such as were willing to go unto other
Parts by Land, which were about Eight hundred Persons, were conveyed by Colonel
Heisler with One thousand six hundred Horse.

After all the Matters were past, and the Christians in possession of the
Fortress, the late Governor thereof called Beker Pasha, and Oslan Pasha his
Deputy, the Commander in chief of the Janisaries, the Sagargibashee and
Samsongibashee, who are Major Generals of the Janisaries, with many other Agaes
and others, who had escaped out of the Battle of Barcan, desired greatly to
salute the Duke of Loraine; who willingly admitted them to his Presence, and
treated them with much Humanity: In their Discourses with the Duke they told
him, That the defeat which the Turks had received before Barcan, was seen from
the Top of the Castle of Gran, by the Garrison and Inhabitants therein; which
sad Spectacle made such impressions of fear in their Minds, that they had no
power or life remaining to resist the Vigor, and speedy proceedings which the
Christians showed in the Prosecution of this Siege: The Arms and Ammunition
found in this Fortress, were Sixty Pieces of Cannon, besides Twenty two
belonging to the City below the Castle, Six thousand Barrels of Powder, Three
Mortars, Match, Bullets, Grenades, Bombs in great quantities, as also Flour,
Barley, Salted Flesh, Rice and all sorts of Provisions sufficient to sustain
that Fortress in a Siege for many Months.

Thus was this City reduced in a far shorter time, and with much less loss than
was expected by the King of Poland and his Senators; for which Te Deum was
Sung, and Thanks rendered to God Almighty in the Cathedral Church of that
Archbishopric, Thanks returned to God.
after it had remained a Mohammedan Mosch, in possession of the Turks for above
One hundred and forty years: The Command of the place with a Garrison of Two
thousand Men, was committed to the charge of one Carlovitz, Sergeant Major to
the Regiment of Staremberg.

The Elector of Bavaria, who for the sake of his Health, remained at Brin to
take the Air by the prescription of his Physicians, hearing of the Siege of
Gran, hastened thither to partake in the Triumphs of it: And coming into the
Camp on the 26th of October, early in the Morning with a part of his own
Cavalry, which was not employed in the Siege; he had the good fortune within
the space of Twenty four hours, to behold the form and manner of the Siege, a
Treaty offered and the place Surrendered. Soon after which the Imperialists
making their Incursions into the Country, took two Castles, one called Scombeck
Situate between Gran and Buda, wherein were Four hundred Turks, and four Pieces
of Cannon with much Provisions: And also another Castle called Sordeck, lying
toward Alba, wherein were six Pieces of Cannon mounted, with abundance of
Ammunition and Provisions of all sorts. The news of these happy successes were
posted to the Emperor by the Count of Auspurg, to the great Joy and Triumph of
the Imperial Court.

In this manner the Campaign being gloriously concluded to the great Reputation
of the Emperor's Affairs, and to the Disgrace and Discouragement of the Turks;
The next care and incumbence of the Generals was to provide Winter Quarters for
the refreshment and welfare of the Army, The Christian Army drawn into
Winter Quarters.
which had been much harassed by the Fatigues of many and great Actions. The
Elector of Bavaria desirous in like manner to provide for his own Troops,
hastened their march out of Hungary, together with the Marquis of Dorlach, who
with Three thousand Men which he had conducted out of Suabia, accompanied the
Elector, having remained but one day in conjunction with the Imperialists. To
regulate and assign the Quarters of the two remaining Armies, Commissaries were
appointed: And tho according to the Articles of Treaty, the Emperor was not
obliged to allow Winter Quarters to the Army of Poland, intending to reserve
all the upper parts of Hungary for the accommodation of his own; yet in regard
Conditions were not too strictly to be insisted on, with persons unto whom
great acknowledgments are due, Quarters were assigned unto the Poles on the
other side of the Tibiscus, in Parts near adjoining unto Transylvania, which
were the Quarters that the King declared he had desired, from the time he first
entered with his Forces into Hungary. Howsoever, when his Majesty was on the
place, the Prince of Transylvania paid unto him a Sum of Money on Condition,
that his Army should be removed from thence, after payment of which they
marched into the three Counties of Esperies, Cachan and Tokay, which were
appointed to receive them, five of the Imperial Regiments being dislodged from
thence.

But as the German and Polish Armies were marching toward their Quarters, on
the Banks of the River Gran in sight of Leventz; Leventz taken.
they sent their Summons requiring the Governor to Surrender the place into
their Hands, which in few hours time was yielded, and the Garrison permitted to
march out. In the place were twelve Pieces of Cannon well mounted, and
Provisions and Ammunition in great quantities.

The Croats found the like good fortune, having in their march taken the Castle
of Raboniz, about six English Miles distant from Kanisia, and the Town of
Probenz, Situate on the River Drove; as also the Castle of Esseghet, Esseghet,
Provens, and other places taken.
and the City and Castle of Brevenitz, which was so near to Kanisia, that it
seemed already blocked up, if not almost besieged: And here these generous
Soldiers thought fit to fix their Winter Quarters, which they had conquered and
won, as if they had scorned to abide in any place which was not opened to them
by their own Swords.

The Duke of Lorain being at Sequi, about an hours march from Leventz, and
busied in assigning Quarters for Twenty seven Regiments, The Forces of Lituania
with the Duke of Loraine.
was visited by the General of Lituania, accompanied with the principal
Officers, who gave him to understand, that they were come with an Army of Ten
thousand Men, which were Quartered in the Neighboring Towns and Villages, and
that they were marching to join with the other Troops of his Majesty of Poland,
and to follow his Orders and Instructions. The Duke after having courteously
received them, prescribed them the Roads which they were to take, and delivered
into the Hands of the General a Letter for the King, persuading him to employ
that Army which was fresh, and not harrassed with the Fatigues of War, upon
some Enterprise, it seeming somewhat absurd, and perhaps of ill report in War,
for so considerable a Body of Soldiers, to take a long march out of Lituania
into Hungary, and to perform nothing, but to return again. To this Letter the
King made no other Reply, Than that for maintenance of his Winter Quarters, he
should have occasion of those Troops.

The King of Poland in his march toward Cackaw, (which with Esperies and
Tokai, were appointed for the Quarters of his Troops) passing near to the City
of Setzin, sent his Son Prince Alexander with Summons to Surrender, which being
refused, the Poles made an Attack in two places, with which the Defendants
being affrighted, offered to Capitulate, and in that Amazement before the
Articles were agreed, Setzin taken by the Poles.
they opened their Gates and let in the Enemy, who being obliged by no Terms,
made a miserable slaughter of the poor Inhabitants, of which there were Two
thousand Turks, besides Twelve hundred Janisaries and Spahees; and on the Walls
were twenty Pieces of Cannon mounted. A Garrison of Germans being put into the
Town, the King continued his march toward the Quarters designed for his
Troops, where having refreshed himself for some few Days, he passed on toward
Cracovia, The King of Poland and his Army return home.
attended only with the Servants and Officers of his Court: And not long
afterward was followed by his whole Army into Poland; where we will leave them
to their own Fortune, which seemed favorable to them abroad, whilst they were
directed by the auspicious Conduct of the Duke of Loraine, and other the
greatest Captains in the World. But looking on them in their own Country, as we
shall hereafter do, we shall find their Successes much different from their
late Triumphs and Glories: For being left to themselves, and inspired with
French Councils and Interests, we shall hear of no great Achievements
afterward gained upon the Turks, nor attemps made to recover Kaminiec, the
Bulwark and Fortress of their Kingdom on that side: Of which the Turks being
sensible, made but weak Preparations against them, leaving them to the Tartars,
who (as things were then governed) proved a sufficient match for their
Neighbors the Poles. Notwithstanding this separation, and that the Polanders
were withdrawn into their own Country; Several Castles belonging to the
Malcontents submit.
yet the Reputation of the Emperor was highly exalted, and his name terrible to
his Enemies, so that every small Castle and Fortress Surrendered upon the first
Summons; as the Castles of Jasem, Zalabstat, Sumstam and Seramz, with other
places all belonging to the Malcontents, of which diverse Persons of Quality
returned to their Duty and Allegiance, and particularly the Count of Zabbor,
the Commander in Chief under Tekeli, who by the Count Esterhasi, being
introduced to the Presence of his Imperial Majesty, he was with his usual
Clemency received, and a gracious Pardon granted to him.

These Triumphs in Christendom increased the Troubles, Discontents and
Commotions in Turkey, which are always attended with Tragedies and Destruction
of their Chief Ministers and Rulers. We shall begin with the fate of Kara
Mustapha the Grand Vizier, the Chief Author and Cause of all the Evils which
are past, and those which for many years following are to ensue. We have in the
beginning of this History, made mention how that the Valide Soltana which is
the Queen Mother, the Kuzlir-Aga, who is the black Eunuch of the Women, and the
Embrahore, who is Master of the Horse to the Grand Seignior, were all mortal
Enemies to this Vizier, and attended only an opportunity to destroy him, which
was now very practicable, under the present Circumstances of Affairs,
especially having the Widow of the Pasha of Buda, whom the Vizer had lately put
to Death, and who was Sister to the Grand Seignior, to join with them in their
methods of Revenge. The Grand Vizier being sensible of his Danger from these
Enemies, and from the ill success of Affairs, which usually prove fatal to the
Generals or Commanders in Chief, marched away toward Belgrade with a great
part of his Army, esteeming it a Matter of higher Consequence to his own
safety, to purge himself from blame in the Opinion of his Master, than to
return back to the Relief of Gran, being already advanced as far on his way to
Belgrade as the Bridge of Esseck, where he received the first intelligence of
the Defeat, of the several Pashas before Barcan, and the Siege of Strigonium.
These misfortunes hastened his proceedings to Belgrade, The Grand Vizier excuses
his Misfortunes before the Grand Seignior.
where being admitted to the presence of the Sultan; he described the admirable
order of the Siege before Vienna, and how near he was to have been Master
thereof, and even of all Austria, and the Emperor's Hereditary Countries, as
Appendages thereunto belonging, had not these fair hopes been defeated by the
Cowardice, and ill Conduct of the Pasha of Buda, and several other Officers
whom he had justly punished with Death for their Treachery, and want of
Courage. He also laid much blame upon Tekeli, and on the Princes of
Transylvania, Moldavia and Valachia, for not performing their Duty, either out
of Treachery or Fear, or some secret Correspondences or Reserves for the
Christian Interest, In fine, he so well managed his Discourse, and justified
all his Actions with such Colors and appearances of Truth, that the Grand
Seignior who was naturally constant to his Ministers, and particularly
favorable to this Vizier, And is acquitted.
who had often feasted and treated him with Presents, and brought great Sums
into his Treasury (no matter by what means) did accept of the Excuses he had
made as justifiable, and acquitted him of all the Crimes of Misgovenrment which
were laid to his Charge; and having received him to Pardon, and Grace, the
Sultan bestowed the usual Presents on him in such Cases given, and bid him do
better the next year, and so returned to Adrianople, leaving the Grand Vizier
at Belgrade; but notwithstanding this new Re-establishment in the favor of his
Master, and though as some say, in Confirmation thereof, he obtained a Writing
under the Hand of his Master, Promising and Engaging never to take off his Head
upon any Instances and Addresses that could be made him: yet his Enemies were
busy in Contrivances to take him off; amongst which the most irreconcilable of
any was a Woman, the Grand Seignior's Sister, Widow of the late Pasha of Buda,
who perceiving that her Letters were not prevalent enough to obtain her desired
Revenge; she undertook a Journey from Buda to Adrianople in Disguise, not being
known on the way, until she discovered herself at her Arrival at the Court;
where being come, The Queen Mother Dead.
she was entertained at the Entry into the Seraglio with the unhappy News of
the Death of the Valide or Queen Mother, a Person much lamented by all, for her
Piety and good Works, but especially at that time by this Sultana, who hoped to
have used her as the chief Instrument of her Revenge: Howsoever, she was not a
little comforted by the Kuzlir-Aga, or chief Eunuch of the Women, when he told
her, that the Valide upon her Deathbed, had charged him to tell her Son the
Sultan, that his Affairs could never prosper, so long as they were in the Hands
and Mannagement of so vile, and unfortunate a Person as this present Vizier.
But whilst they and others of the same Faction, were meditating of these
Matters* Tekeli* who had heard of the Complaints made against him by the
Vizier, and that he was in part charged with the miscarriage of the late
Successes; fearing his own safety, Tekeli comes to the Grand Seignior.
came and boldly presented himself at the Feet of the Grand Seignior, and in
discharge of himself, solely laid all the blame upon the Vizier, which he
confirmed by so many particular Instances, and by such Reasons, that the Grand
Seignior assented to all his Allegations: But howsoever, not thinking it
seasonable at present to stir greater Commotions by change of Officers, (to
which he was never much inclined) he favorably dismissed Tekeli with new
assurances of his Protection, and of sending him very considerable Forces, and
Recruits against the next Spring.

This Address of Tekeli had a little prepared the Grand Seignior's Mind to
receive different Impressions, than what he had hitherto conceived against his
Grand Vizier; which were soon afterward ripened by new Commotions raised by
the industry of the Faction amongst the Janisaries, The Janisaries demand the
Head of the Vizier.
who Tumultuously assembling ran to the Grand Seignior, and crying out, that
the Vizier had Treacherously forsaken their Companions, and suffered them
miserably to Perish in their Trenches before Vienna, and had Unjustly and
without any Reason put their Aga or General to Death; for which Crimes, and
many other Miscarriages they demanded the Head of the Vizier. The Sultan (to
whom nothing was so terrible as the Toleration of the Janisaries) entertained
them with fair Words and Promises, and by distributing Money amongst them, for
that time dispersed this Tumultuous Meeting. But fearing the return again of
the Rabble and this unruly Soldiery, a Divan or Council was called, at which
the Mufti and all the Viziers of the Bench, with other Grandees of the Court
were present: After a mature Consideration of the State of Affairs in the
Empire, it was concluded of absolute necessity for appeasing the Minds of the
Soldiery, that the Grand Vizier should Dye, His Death resolved.
who had been the Cause and Author of all the late Misfortunes. Nothing could
be more grievous to the Grand Seignior than this advice; but being again
terrified with the Threats of next days Commotions, the Imperial Command was
signed for the Vizier's Death, and the Execution thereof committed to the care
of the Chiaous Bashee, or Chief of the Pursuivants, and to the
Kapigeelar-Kajasee, who is Master of the Ceremonies; which two Officers, with
some few Servants were dispatched away Post to Belgrade. These Ministers of
Death being near to the City, sent privately a Messenger to inform the Aga,
Janisaries of their Business, requring him in the Name of the Grand Seignior to
be aiding and assisting to them in this Work, that it might be performed with
all the quiet, peace and silence imaginable. All things being disposed by the
Aga accordingly, both he and the two Executioners went directly to the Vizier's
Apartment, who, so soon as he had cast his Eyes on these new-come Guests, tho
they were really his Friends, and had been his familiar Confidents formerly,
yet he suspected much the Import of their Message; but being nothing surprised
at what he had some time expected, he cheerfully gave them the usual Salams or
Salutations, demanding of them their Business, which brought them to Belgrade:
To which the Janisar-Aga made answer, That the Sultan demanded the Seal from
him. To which the Vizier replied, Most willingly; and putting his Hand into his
Bosom, he took the Seal out, and resigned it. What more, said he, is it that
you require? The Standard, said the Aga; which was immediately produced and
delivered. At last they produced the Command for his Head, which he having
read, he said, Oh Deceitful World! After my Death the Grand Seignior will
remember me, and the whole Empire too late lament my Fall. He then after their
usual manner washed, kneeled down and prayed, and yielded his Head to the fatal
Cord: The Vizier's Death.
Being dead, the Executioner cut off his Head, and the Skin being flead off, it
was stuffed with Straw, and put into a Bag, and carried away in post to the
Grand Seignior, and laid before the Gate of the Divan, on the 7th day of
January, 1683/4.

ANNO, 1684.
IT is very seldom that a Grand Vizier falls into Disgrace, or is put to Death
alone, but all his familiar Friends, Confidents and Creatures, incur the same
Fate, and either attend him to the next World, or are banished into remote
Parts; The Mutability of the Turkish Court.
and sometimes the whole Set of Officers and Ministers of State are changed
with him. This Man had a corrupted Court, and was served by Instruments of the
same Humor and Temperament like himself, and which were either naturally
ill-inclined, or made so by his Example. With him died the Tefterdar or Lord
Treasurer, and several other Engines of his Rapine and Violence. The Estates of
these Malefactors were seized and converted to the Grand Seignior's Coffers,
which were esteemed in all to amount unto 14 Millions of Dollars: to which Sum,
and a far greater, it was believed, that Estate only of the Vizier would have
amounted unto; but it is most certain he had disbursed vast Sums of Money in
this Expedition out of his own Treasure, hoping to have had a return tenfold
out of the Estates and Spoils of the Christians, instead whereof his own Riches
became a Prey to his Enemies; all the Money (which as some Report) amounted to
above two Millions found in his Tent, were all his own, and as they had been
Acquisitions obtained by Force and Rapine, so they became the Booty and Spoil
of the King of Poland, passing from the possession of one Covetous Man into the
Coffers of another. The sublime Office of Great Vizier being now vacant, the
difficulty of the present Affairs required to have it supplied with a Person of
Valor, Wisdom and Experience; this Office, for which many Candidates pretended
in former times, did now appear so weighty and full of Thorns, that the most
ambitious amongst the Turks were willing to decline it, or at least not seem to
seek or affect it. The Selictar Aga, or Sword Bearer to the Grand Seignior,
called Soliman Aga, Soliman Aga.
an accomplished Person in Mind and Body, a Man of good Sense, being always in
the Eyes of his Master, and a Favorite, was pitched upon, as the most fit and
proper of any for this Employment: But he excused himself to the Sultan with
this Complement, That tho nothing in this World could be more desirable to him
than this Office, yet since the execution thereof must necessarily carry him
from the adorable Presence of his Master, under the Shadow whereof he desired
always to live, he could not withdraw himself from thence without much
Reluctance and Discomfort, and therefore desired that the Seals might be
conferred on some other Person, more worthy than himself. The Grand Seignior
judging, that these Expressions proceeded from a Heart truly devoted to him,
accepted of the Excuse, and resoved to constitute Ibrahim Pasha, then Caimacam
with him at Adrianople, commonly known by the Name of Kara Kaia, Kara Kaia made
Vizier.
in the Vizier's Office: He had formerly been Kaia, or Steward to Kuprioglee;
and after his Death was made Embrahose, or Master of the Horse: He was
afflicted with a Distemper called a Serpentine or Cancer, which some Years
since was caused by an Erysipelas; some said it was a politic Disease to
excuse himself from going to the War. He was a close politic Man, and become
very weary and cautious by the Dangers and evil Fate of his Predecessors: As
one means to secure his Condition, he frequently called and assembled all the
Officers of the Divan, and with them consulted all of the Methods in what
manner the declining Condition of the Empire might be recovered; concerning
which, speaking his own Sense, he often declared, That the Errors of the late
Vizier were to be retrieved, and a quite different Course to be steered; for
whereas he had contrary to the public Faith broken the Truce with the
Christians, without just Reasons, before the time was expired, for which the
Mussulmen had tasted the Displeasure of the Divine Vengeance: They were now to
appease the Anger of God, The Vizier proposes Peace.
by renewing the same Truce, which had been injuriously violated with the
Emperor, and observing it for the future, with such Faith as becomes the common
Honesty of Mankind. Disliked by the Grand Seignior.
But this Proposal was in no manner agreeable to the Mind of the Grand
Seignior; for tho he was naturally a gentle and a peaceable Prince, and
disliked this War at the beginning: Yet like an unlucky Gamester, he was
unwilling to give over with an ill Hand, hoping that the Wheel of Fortune might
once again turn in his Favor: He had also promised Tekeli considerable Aid and
Assistance against the next Campaign, and was unwilling to forfeit his Promise
and Reputation with him.

The Vizier finding a Disposition in the Grand Seignior to continue the War,
desired to be released from his Office, which the weakness of his Body rendered
him incapable to discharge; to which the Sultan replied, That he was one of
those, who had opened the Gate, by which much Dishonor and Mischief was entered
into the Empire, and now would withdraw his Neck out of the Collar; but if he
did not shut the Gate again, he would hang him in all his Divan Robes.

The Turks indeed were then very low, and reduced to such distress for want of
Soldiers, that from Selibrea, which is about thirty Miles from Constantinople,
in all the Country of Romania, (except the Seacoast) all that were capable of
bearing Arms were sent to the War; but being raw Country People, proved of
little Force against a Veterane Army.

The Vizier finding himself disappointed in this Contrivance, and sensible of
the present Disadvantages, proposed that the War should be managed on the
defensive part, rather than to adventure the whole Concernment of the Empire on
the Hazards and Chances of War, A defensive War intended.
which seemed to be governed by some evil Influences of the Stars, which at
that time were not very propitious to the Ottoman Cause. This Council being
generally well approved, it produced two Resolutions, one was to divert the
intended Design of the Grand Seignior's going in Person to the War; for in that
Case nothing could become the awful presence and appearance of the Sultan, but
Fire and Slaughter, and direful Vengeance wheresoever his terrible Sword was
drawn; it being agreeable to the Opinion which the Turks fancy and conceive of
their Emperor, That he is Omnipotent, and that in one Hand he carries all the
Riches and Honors of the World, and in the other Victory, and all sorts of
Delights for ever. But to draw this Case a little nearer to the Person of the
Vizier himself; it was farther resolved, That in case a defensive War were to
be managed, it were neither consistent with the Reputation of the Grand Vizier,
who was the Sultan's Deputy and Representative; but more becoming a Sardar,
with Title of Seraskier, or General to wage a War, in which the chief Art is to
decline a Battle and all Engagements. Thus had this old and politic Vizier
obtained his Point by sitting at Home, and seeing others play the Game, which
he could approve or disapprove without danger, according to the Successes: The
Person appointed to be Seraskier, A Seraskie^ appointed.
or General, was Kara Oglou Chiamacam of Constantinople, who had formerly been
Captain Pasha, or Admiral of the Seas.

The Grand Vizier remaining at home, had time to consider and reflect, That the
cause of the general Toleration of almost all Christendom against them, did
proceed from the Neglect, Contempt and ill Usage which the late Vizier had put
upon all the public Representatives of Christian Princes, some Instances of
which we have given at the beginning of this History: To redress which, it was
thought fit to cajole and soften a little the Foreign Ministers from Christian
Princes, whom the late Vizier had so contemptuously used, and treated with
Disgrace, as had raised all Christendom about their Ears; and so with much
Complement the Ambassadors of England and France were invited to Adrianople by
the Vizier, to sit with him upon the Soffraw, The Soffraw granted to the
Christian Ministers.
according to the usual Custom and Privilege of Ambassadors, which the Pride
of the late Vizier would not allow them. The Lord Chandos, then Ambassador from
his Majesty of Great Britain to the Ottoman Port, being at that time Sick,
excused his going, and perhaps also was desirous to spare the Money of the Turkey
Company, and not lavish it out in an empty and fruitless Journey: But the
French Ambassador, Monsieur de Guilleragues, for the Glory (as he thought) of
his Master, made splendid Preparations at the Cost of the Merchants, to enter
Adrianople; where, being arrived, he was in a short time received to Audience
on the Soffraw, which Privilege has been restored to all other Ambassadors
since that time.

That which hastened this Favor and Indulgence to Foreign Ministers, was the
apprehension of a War just then breaking out with the Venetians; for the Doge
of Venice being newly dead, and his Place supplied by Seignior Marco Antonio
Gustiniani, the Senate sent Orders to their Secretary at the Ottoman Port, The
Venetians declare War against the Turks.
called Seignior Capello, to declare War against the Turk, and their League and
Alliance with the Emperor and Poland; and having so done, to make his Escape in
the best manner he was able. Seignior Capello having complied with these
Instructions, conveyed himself away in the Habit of a Seaman, upon a French Man
of War called the Faithful, which was come to Constantinople for Convoy to some
other Ships.

The Moscovites, who had for a long time played fast and loose (as we have
formerly mentioned) in their Treaties of Peace with the Turks, became now more
fixed and resolved on a War, being animated thereto by the strong Alliance and
Confederacies made against them, and the cross Fortune of the Turks, which
seemed every day to decline. This Union and strong Combination, The Moscovites
inclinable to enter into the League.
as it made the Turks tremble, so the Sense thereof softened their Minds, and
rendered them much more pliable and gentle to those Christian Ambassadors, who
remained in Peace and Amity with them; and gave just occasion to the English,
and others trading in their Dominions, to applaud and own the Justice,
Moderation, and easy Access of the Turks, much different from that, which they
practiced in the time of their Prosperity, so that tho our English Merchants,
in all their Letters, complained of the badness of Trade, and ill Markets, yet
they praised and commended the present Security in which they lived, and the
readiness of the Turkish Mininisters to afford them redress upon all Complaints.

The Treaty of Confederacy and Alliance being vigorously carried on at Vienna,
by Seignior Contarini, the Venetian Ambassador to his Imperial Majesty, by and
with the Consent and assistance of the Pope's Nuncio, these following Articles
were agreed between the Emperor, the King of Poland, and the Republic of
Venice, and afterward Sworn unto at Rome, at the Feet of the Pope, by Cardinal
Pio in Behalf of the Emperor, by Cardinal Barbarini in the Name of the King of
Poland, and by Cardinal Ottoboni for the Venetians.

The Articles are these.
Poland, and Republic of Venice; the which shall continue until the end of
this War, and to be defensive for ever.

The Protector and Guarantie, whereof Innocent the XI. and his Successors; and
the Apostolical See shall ever be Moderator to judge and determine which of
these Parties falls from his Faith, and fails in a due Performance.

That during the time that this League

That his Imperial Majesty shall enter into Hungary, Bohemia, and Archduke of
Austria; as does also the King, as King of Poland and Great Duke of Lituania,
binding these their Dominions and Inheritances; as does also the Republic of
Venice, bind and oblige their Dominions and Territories to the performance of
these Covenants.

By this League is understood only a War Turks, and against no other Prince or
Potentate whatsoever.

The Emperor for his part, and the King Poland for his, do promise to wage War
against the Turks with very powerful Armies by Land: and the Venetians with a
powerful Fleet at Sea, and with their Troops in Dalmatia to the utmost of their
Force, until a Peace be concluded.

That in case either of these Parties be

That this War be carried on by way of Hungary, the King of Poland to recover
Kaminiec, Podolia and Ukrania; and the Venetians the several Towns, Fortresses
and Islands which they have lost.

That so soon as these Articles are signed,

That all Christian Princes be invited to Moscovy.

That this League shall not be understood Poland.

Thus did the Senate of Venice, after Mature Deliberation, (for that Republic
did never act rashly) enter into the Confederacy with the aforesaid Allies
against the Turks.

The many Insults and Avanias with which the Grand Vizier, and others did daily
oppress them (of which at the beginning of this History we have given some
Instances) and the difficult Circumstances they lay under by these hard
Taskmasters, The Reasons which the Venetians had to make a War.
who were continually drawing, and forcing Money from them upon false pretenses,
without which they always threatened War, were just Grounds and Reasons for
breaking that Peace, which was concluded with them after the loss of Candia in
the year 1668. This happy League was farther improved by Applications to the
Czars of Moscovy, who had not long before signified unto the Court of Poland,
their inclinations to enter into this Alliance; to forward which the Baron of
Zerowski was dispatched into Moscovy, and in his way thither, by Poland to take
Blumferg with him, being both Commissionated to Solicit the Czars for their
Assistance and Union with the other Confederates. The like Addresses were made
to the Princes of Italy, who being encouraged, and warmed by the late
prosperous Successes, were ready to contribute all the Force and Aid within
their Power. The City of Rome moved by the Exhortations, and Examples of the
Pope, did cheerfully Concur, and the Cardinals, Princes and Prelates did all
Contribute immense Sums for carrying on this Holy War: And the Pope did not
only Issue forth liberally Moneys out of his own Coffers, but sent Forces which
were raised in his own Dominions and Territories, to join with the Imperial
Army in Hungary: Aids from Italy.
Thus did all things, according to the usual course of Nature, Concur toward
the Prosperity of the Christian Affairs; for Mankind naturally sides with the
uppermost and strongest side, and are ready to depress, and beat down the weak
and dejected Party.

Nor did the Emperor only endeavor to fortify, and strengthen his side by
united Interests and Alliances; but to weaken his Enemies, by withdrawing from
them the Malcontents, who were their Associates, and the first Incentives to
this war: The Successes of the Emperor had damped the Spirits of the
Malcontents in such manner, that they began now to believe the Turks were
vincible, and that they had put their Trust in a feeble Arm of Flesh, which
could not Defend them, and engaged their Interest with a party, from which they
could promise themselves no Security or Redress: Wherefore, Some of the
Malcontents fall off to the Emperor.
seriously laying aside their former ill Principles, many of the Counties and
Cities began to Capitulate, and desire to have their Aggrievances redressed,
upon which they promised to submit unto the Emperor's Pleasure, and return to
their Obedience: But this good Humor being not general amongst all the
Malcontents, but confined to some few Cities and Counties, no Capitulations or
Articles were Signed or Concluded, so that notwithstanding their good
Intentions, the Imperialists made Havoc of them in all Places; and the Turks
hearing of their Inclinations to return again to their Obedience to the
Emperor, and of the Steps they had made toward it, Their ill Condition.
Treated them in all Places like Enemies, with Fire and Sword; so that
miserable was the State of this poor People, who were become Obnoxious to both
Parties; they had been the Original causes of the Mischief, and were likely to
Perish in it.

But the Clemency of the Emperor Commiserating their unhappy Condition,
Published an Act of General Pardon to all the People of Hungary, who had been
mislead, A General Pardon.
and debauched from their Duty and Allegiance to their lawful Sovereign, Dated
at Lintz in the Month of January 1684; whereby a Door was opened to a Treaty,
and Pardon offered to all such who were desirous to return to the Protection of
his Imperial Majesty, and to renounce their dependence on the Turks: This Edict
was affixed in all public Places, as Church-doors, and the Market Crosses, and
dispersed in all the Frontier Garrisons, being Written in the Latin and the
Hungarian Tongues, that none might pretend ignorance thereof. The direction was
in this manner:

To all the States and Orders, as well Prelates, Barons, Nobles, as to all Free
and Royal Cities, Counties and People, and to all Persons whatsoever (none
excepted) within the Kingdom of Hungary.

In the first place, The sad and deplorable Condition of that Kingdom being
bewailed, caused by civil and intestine Discords, which evil and perverse
Spirits had raised, and by their evil Persuasions had deluded many Thousands of
poor Innocent Men, to Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes to their Lust and
Revenge, and even to join and unite themselves with the Turks, who were the
ancient and irreconcilable Enemies to the Kingdom of Hungary, and the Christian
Religion. And though His Imperial Majesty having been thus highly provoked by the
Rebellions and Outrages of the People, and by the Power of his Victorious Arms
might justly exempt, and reject them from all Pardon: Yet his gracious Clemency
prevailing, he does once again offer his Mercy, to as many as before the end of
February next ensuing, shall renounce and abandon the interest and party of the
Malcontents, and union with the Turks, and repair to Presburg, where
Commissioners shall be appointed to receive them, and to deliver out Pardons to
them, taking a new Oath of Allegiance to their King, with assurances to remain
for ever as good Subjects, in perfect Loyalty and Obedience to his Majesty,
which being performed, such as are of the Nobility shall be restored to their
Honors, Dignities and Estates: And in case any such have formerly enjoyed
Honors, and Places of Trust, their Case shall be considered by the
Commissioners, who are to make Report thereof unto the Emperor, who will be
ready in such Cases so to Act, as shall be most suitable to the Royal Service.
Such Soldiers as having been seduced by their Commanders to leave and
relinquish the Imperial Army, shall return again to their Duty, and to their
Colors, shall have the same Post allotted to them as formerly, and shall be
received again into the Garrisons, or Regiments respectively. All Counties and
Cities, who by their Deputies shall appear before the Commissioners, in order
to such Reconciliation, shall have safe Pasports to go, and return with all
security. As to matters of Religion, the Worship of God, and Restitution of
Churches, all the particulars agreed unto, and promised at the last General
Diet held at Edemburg, shall be performed and inviolably maintained. As to the
Statute made in the year 1655. concerning the Coronation of the King of
Hungary, on which various Glosses and Interpretations have been put, which have
caused great disorders and disturbances; the same shall be referred to the next
Convention of the States to consider thereof, and Decrees therein, what shall
be most agreeable to the Fundamental Constitutions of the Nation. So that a
true, and impartial Interpretation being put on all things as well in
Religious, as in Temporal Matters, a good and lasting Peace, and right
understanding may pass between the King and his People. And as to those, who
shall not take hold of this Golden Scepter now held forth unto them with this
opportunity, and within the time limited: It is declared, That they are
excluded from Mercy, and are guilty of all the Miseries, which shall fall upon
themselves and their Country; and shall be Prosecuted as Rebels, Outlawed and
Felonious Persons, and such as are never more to be received into Grace, or
Pardon.

To put this Commission into Execution were appointed the Duke of Loraine, the
Count Kinski Chancellor of Bohemia, the Baron of Abele, and Count Vinceslat of
Altheim, who were to open the same at Presburg, on the 15th day of February.
But in regard nothing was declared explicitly in this Decree, touching Liberty
of Conscience, the Exercise of the Protestant Religion, and the Conservation of
Privileges, it seemed so short and narrow, and incomprehensive of the Cause,
for which the Malcontents had so long contended, that very few thought it
worthy the acceptance: Howsoever some there were, who being convinced by the
Success of the Emperor, that they had engolfed themselves in a desperate
Interest, embraced the offers of the Imperial Pardon, such were the Baron of
Baragotzi, who abandoning Tekeli's party, Several revolt from Tekeli.
Fled with Three hundred Hussars into his Castle of Zakwar. The Count Humanai,
and some other Hungarian Lords followed his Example, and fortified themselves
in the Castle of Angwar: The Barons Ladislaus, Francis Baragotzi, Schienissi,
Clebai and Malkai, intending a like Revolt were seized, and by Order of Tekeli
were put to Death.

With all these Misfortunes the Spirit of Tekeli being nothing abated, but
rather raised with Rage and Despair; he Issued out a Proclamation of his own,
Tekeli puts forth an Act of Pardon.
in Imitation of that of the Emperor's, in which with an Imperial Style, he
declared Pardon to all such as should within a time limited, return to the
defense of the Malecontented party, of which he had owned himself the Head and
Protector: And for their better Encouragement he laid out a Project of
constituting a Republic, by which all the Nobility, and many of the Commonalty
should come to bear a share in the Government: And to punish those who had
Revolted from him, he marched with a Body of 10.000 Men of his own, and a
considerable force of the Turks under the Command of the Pashas of Buda, and
Agria to Besiege Count Baragotski in his Castle of Zakwar, of which Count
Rabata having advice, he presently marched with all his Forces against them,
which Tekeli fearing, declined an Engagement, in a Season when the Winter was
scarce past; but on a sudden, turning his design on the Castle of Angwar,
which was defended by the Count of Humanai, Count Humanai put to Death
he took it by force in three Days time, and carried away the Count himself to
Cassovia, where he cut off his Head.

To revenge these Insults, the Lituanians, whom the King of Poland had left
behind him in their Winter Quarters, made frequent Incursions upon the
Countries of the Malcontents, especially into the County of Sepusa, burning
their Villages, and carrying away their Cattle. But this Militia remained not
long in those parts, before they were recalled by the King of Poland out of
Hungary, either because he was informed that his Soldiers deserted daily, or
else out of some pique, or discontent of being refused to be Mediator, The
King of Poland recalls his Forces.
and Guaranty for the Peace with the Malcontents, for which Reason he
declared, That he would not concern himself in a War against Tekeli and his
Accomplices, but against the Turks only, to which the Articles of Alliance did
oblige him, and to no other.

The Spring being now advanced, and Tekeli at Cassovia, he Wrote a Letter from
thence to the Pope, Dated the 12th of April, wherein he represented; That ever
since the last year he was very desirous to put an end to the Troubles of
Hungary, Tekeli Writes to the Pope.
upon those Terms and Conditions, which were agreed with the Baron Saponara.
And being not able to obtain from the Emperor a Grant to constitute the King of
Poland Guaranty of this Treaty, he was forced to take new Measures, and to
support Himself and his Interest under Protection of the Turks, which his
Enemies interpreted to be a Renuntiation of his Christianity. But he sacredly
protested to his Holiness, that he took up Arms for no other Reason and Cause,
than the Defense of his Country, and to conserve himself from entire Ruin,
having had the experience of many years, that the Emperor was in no State or
Condition to defend him. That He and his Party did not deserve the Odious Name
of Rebels, considering that the Arms they took up were in Defense only of the
Liberties, and Privileges granted unto them by the ancient Kings of Hungary,
and particularly by King Andrew the II. whose Letters are conserved amongst the
Archives of the Vatican; which if his Holiness would be pleased to inspect and
examine, he would easily find, that those Articles have been so far from being
performed, that they have been wholly laid aside, and violated in every
particular. That as to his own Person, he has been despoyled of his Estate,
and made an Exile in the very tender years of Youth, with others of the
Hungarian Nobility, who could never obtain redress upon their complaints, but
instead thereof received Sentence of Death by corrupt and partial Judges,
without any regard to the formalities prescribed by Law. And though in this Cause
not only Protestants, but great numbers of Catholics were concerned, amongst
which George Lippa Archbishop of Gran was one, a Person very Zealous for
Restoration of those Liberties, which the Emperor had Sworn to maintain, when
in the year 1655 he had received the Crown of Hungary at Presburg; yet nothing
could avail toward moderating the violent Proceedings of that Council, by
which the Emperor was governed; so that having no other remedy, they were
enforced as their last Refuge, to have recourse unto their Arms, not with
design to act against the Catholic Religion, or to the prejudice thereof,
either in Hungary or elsewhere, but only to maintain those Liberties which were
established by Law, and confirmed by several Diets. In fine, He beseeched his
Holiness to Judge of his Intentions by this Declaration, rather than by the
Sinister Reports of his Enemies, to whom he wished a long Life, and a happy
Pontificate.

The Pope having received this Letter assembled a Congregation of the Cardinals
at which the Ministers of the Emperor, and the King of Poland were present, to
deliberate, and consider what Answer was fitting to be returned thereunto.

The Season of the year being now far advanced, both sides prepared for War.
The Seraskier, called Kara Ibrahim. The Seraskier comes to Belgrade
having taken his Farewell of the Grand Seignior and Great Vizier, departed from
Adrianople in the Month of May, and arrived at Belgrade where he found a Body
of 60.000 Men, of which he sent one half to the Army designed for Poland, with
which Recruit they became a Hundred thousand strong, and lay Encamped near the
City of Nicopolis: With the remainder the Seraskier marched to Buda, where he
joined with 20.000 more, and expected the Auxiliary Troops of Asia; which
amounted unto 30.000 effective Men; The Turkish Army.
so that the whole Force this year of the Ottaman Army in Hungary only,
amounted unto 80.000 Men, besides 15.000 which were appointed for the Guard of
the Bridge of Eseck.

Nor were the Preparations less considerable at Vienna, tho a diversion was
much feared of the Imperial Forces, by the Jealousies which the Arms of France
gave in Flanders and upon the Rhine, and the Pretentions which the French
Ministers were daily making at Ratisbon, Fears from France.
and in other Courts of the Empire, by which there was some appearance, as if a
Check would be given to the smooth and prosperous proceedings of the Imperial
Forces in Hungary. This surmise was cherished by those, who were desirous to
clap up a Peace with the Turk, alleging that it was impossible to carry on a
War in Hungary, and at the same time resist the formidable Force of France in
Alsatia, and on the Confines, and perhaps in the very Heart of the Empire. But
God, who by his Divine Providence Governs all things, was pleased out of his
Compassion to Christendom to incline the Heart of that King to be Christian,
and to accord a Truce with the Empire for some years, that so he might take off
the Scandal of being a Friend to the Turks, That King makes a Truce with the
Emperor.
and of interrupting the Progress of the Christian Arms against the Common
Enemy to the Faith of Christ. In fine, The dread of a French War being
vanished, the whole Gross of the Imperial Army came to refund it self upon the
Turks, and was in number and quality as follows.

The Infantry were in all Twenty seven Regiments, 55080 The Cavalry all armed
with Back and Breast, 12800 Dragoons, 5600 Polanders hired and paid by the
Emperor, 4000 Croats who were Horse, 3200 One Regiment in Vienna, 1200 Twenty
Independent Companies in Rab, Gran and Comorra, 3000 In all 84880 Besides the
Confederate Army under the Duke of Bavaria, which made about 20.000 Men, so
that the whole Christian Army this year composed a Body, In all 104880 Men
But how numerous soever this Army seemed to be, yet after the Garrisons were
out of it supplied, and Forces sent into Alsatia, and to the Rhine; and
considerable Detachments into Croatia and Stiria, and Parts of the Upper
Hungary, the main Body remaining with the Duke of Loraine, did not amount to
above Forty thousand Men, with which he designed the Siege of Buda. The Siege
of Buda intended.
This was an Enterprise becoming the Valor of so great a Captain, for the Town
was Defended by a Garrison of Forty six Chambers of Janisaries, each consisting
of One hundred and fifty Men, besides Spahees and the Militia of Rascia, which
in all composed a Body of Twelve thousand effective Men. The City of Buda it
self is raised on a Hill, and is naturally very strong; under it there is
another Town Built by the Turks, which is called the Lower Buda. But before
Approaches could be made hereunto, it was judged necessary to secure the
Navigation down the Danube, for carrying the heavy Cannon, and Provisions
necessary for maintenance of the Siege, which could not be done but by taking
the strong City of Vicegrade with the Castle, which so far commanded the River,
that no Boats, or Vessels could pass down the Current without being infested by
the Cannon of the Place. For Vicegrade is Situated on a Rock on the side of the
Danube between Gran and Buda, Vicegrade.
but much nearer to the latter, and is fortified by a Castle erected upon a
small Hill. This place has been so considerable in former times, that it was
the Residence of the Hungarian Kings, of which there remain great Ruins to this
day of sumptuous and magnificent Palaces. The Crown of the Kings of Hungary was
anciently conserved in this place; but as the Turks advanced in their
Conquests, for better security it was removed to Presburg. This Crown is of a
different Figure from that which other Princes use; for it is very low, with a
Cross on the Top, encompassed with four Leaves, of which one is larger than the
other three. The Crown of Hungary.
This Crown is held in great estimation by the Hungarians, being, as they say,
brought down from Heaven by an Angel, and planted on the Head of their King St.
Stephen. It being necessary (as we have said) to take this place to make the
way clear, and open unto Buda, the Duke of Loraine caused a Body of Horse to
pass the Bridge of Gran; and because the Country was full of Woods and
Enclosures, all the Baggage and Encumbrances of the Camp were left under the
Cannon of Gran, with a Guard of four Regiments of Foot, and a Detachment of Six
hundred Horse, besides four Battalions of Count Kaiserstein, Commanded by
General Hailewell; Hailewell.
with the rest of the Army the Duke of Loraine marched away, and having pitched
his Camp about an hour's distance, or three English Miles from Vicegrade, he
with some other Officers took a view of the place: And on the 16th day of June
by break of day in the Morning, Vicegrade battered.
he raised his Camp, and by nine a Clock the same Morning the Foot and Dragoons
had taken their Post upon a Hill, where they brought up some Mortar-pieces and
Cannon, and began to Batter the Town: But it being considered, that this would
be a long work, an Assault was resolved, as the shortest and most expedite
course to put an end to this Action. Count Ernest of Staremberg disposed and
directed in what manner the Attack should be made; and the Duke of Newburg
commanded during the time of it is Execution. The Cavalier Rosne in despite of
the Enemies Fire broak in at the first Gate, and being come to the second, the
Baron of Asti with his Granadiers threw himself over the Walls into the City,
And is stormed and takes.
by which time Rosne having broak in at the second Gate, the Defendants began
to give ground, and retreat into the Castle, but so precipitous was their
Flight, that before they could crowd into the Gate, many of them were cut off,
and killed by the Enemy; after which the City was Sacked, and delivered up for
a Prey into the Hands of the Soldiery. The next day by three a Clock in the
Morning, the Duke of Loraine took a view of the Castle, and designed to raise
diverse Batteries against it, for that the Bombs by Reason of the Figure of the
Castle which was long and narrow, could not easily take place: But whilst these
Batteries were raising, the Duke sent a Herald with a menacing Summons, that in
case they should refuse to Surrender, he would deliver them up into the
merciless Fury of the Soldiers. The Turks being astonished at the Resolution
and Bravery of the Christians, were affrighted into a Treaty; and Hostages
being given on both sides, it was agreed, That the Besieged should have Liberty
to March out with their Arms, Bag and Baggage, Wives and Children, leaving
behind them all the Artillery and Ammunition belonging to the Place. The Cas^l^
is also surrendered.
The Soldiers were no more than Six hundred in all, who were transported in
Boats into the Island of St. Andrew's, to pass from thence to Walt: In the
Castle were only six Pieces of Cannon, (on four of which were the Arms of the
Emperor Rodolfus;) the Provisions and Ammunition also was very small and
inconsiderable, which might be the true Cause of this sudden Surrender; for
otherwise the Castle was very capable of making a longer Defense.

As things were passing in this manner before Vice grade, News was brought to
the Duke of Loraine, The Turks fall on the Baggage before Gran.
that the Turks had made an attempt on the Baggage which lay under Command of
the Guns at Gran, and that the Regiment of Rabata had been worsted; upon which
News the Duke of Neuburg with his Horse took the Allarum, and hastened to their
Assistance, and was followed also by the Duke of Loraine; but in their way
thither, they received Letters, that the Dispute was already decided in favor
of the Christians; for tho they lost Eighty Men, which were killed, together
with Major General Hailewell, who was run through the Body in two places with a
Lance, and Baron de Kery, with a Lieutenant of the Regiment of Taff; yet the
Turks having at length been beaten out of the Field in disorder, and with a
loss of One hundred and twelve Men which lay dead in the Field, Are put to
flight.
the Victory clearly appeared in favor of the Christians: Count Rabata, Nephew
to the General of that Name, was taken Prisoner, but was afterward rescued by
two Horsemen. whom he well Rewarded for that great Service.

The Death of Major General Hailewell, a Soldier of long Experience and
undaunted Courage, being lamented with such Grief and Sorrow as Soldiers
usually express in the time of War for each other; The Duke of Loraine supplied
Vice-grade with a Garrison of Five hundred Men out of the Regiment of the Duke
of Neuburg, the Command whereof was given to the Baron d Ambouche, Sergeant
Major of that Regiment: The Duke of Loraine having refreshed his Army for some
short time near unto Gran until the Troops were come from Vice-grade, he raised
his Camp on the 20th of June, and traversed the Danube over the Bridge at
Strigonium, and by next Day in the Evening the whole Army, Cannon, Baggage, and
every thing being passed over, they continued their March toward Pest, where
the Recruits of the Silesian Forces were expected: The March thither was
difficult through Woods and narrow Places, so that on the 27th they encamped
near Witzen, in sight of Fifteen thousand Turks, under the Command of ten
Pashaes, and Eight thousand Tartars, with their Officers, A Fight near Witzen.
who were drawn up in Battalia on the side of a Hill; the Access unto which was
very difficult over Rocks and Bushes, and broaken Ways: On their right Wing
they had the Danube, and on the left a Bog or Morasse; the Imperialists
immediately upon this appearance, put themselves into a Posture of Battle, with
as much speed as the difficulty of the Place would permit, having their right
Wing toward the Danube, and their left toward the Mountain, extending very
largely their Front, they marched close and slow to pass the rough and broaken
Ways, which tho the Turks defended with four Pieces of Cannon, yet Prince Lewis
of Baden forced through, as did also Count Staremberg, and gained the Pass,
bringing some Pieces of Cannon to make good their Post. The Turks began now to
move, and to charge the Regiment of Taff, which was in the middle of the Line,
with their usual Cries of Ala, Ala: The Duke of Loraine who was in that part of
the Army, which was the middle, so as to be more ready to relieve those Troops,
which he perceived most in distress, had his Horse killed under him by a
Pistol-shot, as had also two other Cavaliers, who road near his Person; but
they being again remounted, the Christian Troops moved with a regular Order,
keeping themselves close and firm like a mighty Wall: The Turks charged them
three times, endeavoring to break into their Body; but being every time
repulsed with some loss, they began to give way and to retreat; but Rallying
again, they made another Charge; but failing in the Attempt, and not able to
break into the Enemies Ranks, the Christians pressed them so hard, and put them
into such Disorder, The Turk are defeated.
that they fled and trampled one upon the other, leaving their Cannon, and the
Janisaries which guarded them, to shift for themselves, who being surrounded
with several Regiments, were all cut to pieces.

In this Battle about Six or Seven hundred Janisaries were killed, great
numbers endeavoring to swim over to the other side were drowned in the Danube,
and about Three hundred Prisoners were taken: The Turkish Cavalry for the most
part saved themselves in Pest, by the swiftness of their Horses, which tho not
so strong in Battle as the German, yet more nimble and useful in Flight. There
were no more than six Pieces of Cannon taken, without other Spoil either of
Tents or Baggage; for this Force being only a Detachment sent from Buda to give
some Interruption, and stop to the Progress of the Enemy, they carried no
Encumbrances with them, which commonly cause Camps to move slowly.

The Garrison of the Fortress of Witzem, beholding from the top of the Castle
the Success of this Fight, were put into such Consternation, that upon Summons
from Count Schaffemberg, they surrendered without Terms or Conditions, but at
Discretion; all the Persons therein, to the number of Fifteen Hundred, were
made Captives, and put into the Emperor's Galleys, which row on the Danube, for
the Service of the Army. The Duke of Loraine having in this manner secured the
Passes, which obstructed the Navigation of the Danube, he caused the whole Army
to march toward Pest, and upon the 30th of June, he encamped about three
English Miles distant from that City; over which, in the Evening about Sunset,
appeared a great Fire and Smoke, which was judged to arise from the Town, Pest
set on Fire by the Turks.
and that the Turks themselves intended to Burn it to the ground: By break of
Day in the Morning, the Duke mounting on Horseback at the head of his Cavalry,
(ordering the Foot to follow him at leisure) he approached near the Walls, and
gave orders to a Detachment of Dragoons to make discovery of the State and
Condition of the place, which was soon found to have been set on Fire and
abandoned by the Turks, only a few remained, who had not time with the rest to
pack up their Baggage and be gone; these endeavoring to make some little
Opposition were killed, and three Colors taken; those who escaped fled over
the Bridge, and broak off Fifty of the Boats to prevent the Pursuit of the
Enemy, which floating down the Current, were taken up by the Christians. The
Duke of Loraine being come to Pest, caused the Fire to be extinguished, which
had as yet Burnt but one third part of the Town, all the Stores of Ammunition
and Provision being saved: The Works and Fortifications were ordered to be
repaired, and Cannon to be mounted on the Walls; but the Place proved too hot
for them, being so much incommoded by incessant shooting from Buda, that there
was no abiding for them there; for Pest lies in a beautiful Plain, and gives
Denomination to the Country round about, which is called, Comitatus
Pesthiensis: From Buda it has a sumptuous Prospect, by the appearance of the
Towers on the old Walls, and Spires of the Moschs, but is so over-topt by Buda,
that all the Cannon there can shoot into it; so that the Imperial Army quitted
the Place, until it should fall into their Hands, and follow the Fate of Buda,
as an Appendage or Dependence thereof.

The Troops being withdrawn from Pest, they marched back to Witzen, where two
Bridges of Boats were making to pass the River at the Island of St. Andrew's,
where the River divides it self in two Branches, The Christian Army repasses
the Danube.
and makes the Ferry over much more short and easy. The Passage over the first
Branch or Arm was not very difficult; but that on the farther side of the
Island was much more hazardous, by reason that the Stream was broader and more
rapid; and the Turks with 20.000 Men encamped within three Miles from the Banks
of the River; but nothing seemed now too hard or dangerous to a victorious
Army, and an invincible Captain; for whilst the Bridge was finishing with
incredible Expedition, some Soldiers for Spies swam over to the other side,
where having observed, July
that the Turks lay with much Security within their Camp, and without any
motion; (which was a strange thing, considering that they might easily have
defended the River, and made the Passage over impossible) Five thousand Foot,
with some Pieces of Cannon were ferried over in Boats, where being landed
without any disturbance, they entrenched themselves, and raised a Battery, from
whence they could shoot into the Enemies Camp, and secure the Passage of the
Water for the rest of the Army. On the 10th of this Month, the Bridge being
finished, the whole Army passed over the same Day, and joined themselves with
the other Body already on that side.

The Seraskier being informed, that only a part of the Army was got over, he
advanced against them with all his Horse, and eight Hundred Janisaries, The
Seraskier Assaults the Christians.
and two small Fieldpieces; with him were the Pasha of Buda, and thirteen
other Pashas, leaving the rest of the Janisaries, and all other his Foot, with
the Cannon about the distance of an Hour's March: The Attack which the Turks
made was so sudden, that the Christians had scarce time to put their Forces
into order of Battle; but howsoever such was the readiness of this Army, and
the good Discipline of it, that every Regiment and Troop at the first sound of
an Allarum took their Places without the least Confusion. The Duke of Loraine,
at the head of his Cavalry, undertook to lead the Van, and therewith sustained
the first shock of the Enemy with Carbine-shot only, standing so firm and
resolute, that no breach could be made into their Ranks; in which time, the
rest of the Army had opportunity to put themselves into posture of Battle,
which, upon their Motion, appeared so formidable, that the Turks began to make
a disorderly Retreat, He is repulsed and f^ies.
and to fly as fast as their Horses could carry them, until they came to the
Place where the Janisaries and Cannon remained: Howsoever, being closely
pursued by the Polish Horse, many of them came short home, and several Colors
were taken; nor was this Action without some loss to the Christians, and
particularly of some Persons of Note and Quality, as namely, The Count de
Velheim, Bernardino Scotti, a Gentleman of Milan, with some other Volunteers of
Heroic Courage, who pressing too forward to signalize their Valor, ended
their days with much Honor and Glory. The next day being the 11th, July
the whole Christian Army advanced toward Buda, between which, and a Party of
the Turks there happened a Skirmish, to the disadvantage of the latter; with
which, and with a constant Train of other ill Successes, the Turkish Army being
cowarded and dismayed, withdrew themselves out of the open Plains, to seek
shelter under Hills and Mountains, and lodged themselves near St. Gerard's
Mount; whilst Major General Staremberg, advancing near the City, began to
prepare Matters necessary toward a Siege.

The 13th the Turks set fire to the lower Town of Buda, and retired into the
upper, which was situate on a Hill, and defended by a strong Castle. The
Fortifications hereof were not very regular, but made of old Towers without
Bastions; but the Garrison consisting of Eight thousand Men, was the best of
its Strength, Commanded by five Pashaes, and well supplied with all sorts of
Ammunition and Provision; the Governor was the Vizier of Buda, and under him,
as his Deputy Governor, was Shitan Ibrahim, of whom we shall hereafter have
occasion to give a more particular Character.

The 14th a small Attack was given, and designed purposely as a good Omen to
the Soldiery, who still retained in their Memories, that the same Day of the
Year past, the Turks had formed their Siege before Vienna; The Siege of Buda
formed.
and this very Day the Duke of Loraine had brought his heavy Cannon to the
places of Battery, and had now perfected a formal Siege against the capital
City of Hungary: The next day the Cannon beginning to play, they made
themselves Masters of the Ditch, and of St. Gerard's Mount, which Commands the
Town, and thereon a Battery was raised. The Seraskier finding that his Army was
dismayed, and neither for their Courage, nor Numbers, a competent Match for
their victorious Enemy, retired three Leagues distant from Buda, intending
often to trouble and infest the Besiegers with continual Alarums.

Whilst these things were thus acting, the Duke of Loraine received Advice,
that the Pasha of Maroz, who was appointed to guard the Bridge of Esseck, was
advanced with Two thousand Five hundred Men to Vitrovitz, The Pasha of Maroz
overthrown
a Place about a League distant from the Camp, expecting Four hundred Men more
under Command of the Bei of Gradisca, with design to force their way into Buda:
To prevent which, the Duke detached Four thousand Croats under the Command of
Count Transmandorf to march against them, and ordered the German Forces to
stand all Night to their Arms to avoid a Surprise. Transmandorf marched until
seven a Clock in the Morning always a-trot; and having about that time met the
Pasha of Marotz, he immediately engaged with him, and charged him so furiously,
that after some small Resistance, the Turks fled; of whom about a Hundred were
killed in the Pursuit, and several Prisoners taken. After which Success,
Transmandorf returning back to the Camp, fortunately Encountered the Governor
of Gradisca with his Four Hundred Men, who, going to join with the Pasha of
Marotz, (of whose ill Success he had as yet received no Intelligence) was
engaged and defeated by him upon the first Charge or Onset, and had all been
cut in pieces, had they not been favored by the shelter and thickness of some
neighboring Woods. On this Occasion the Croats took fourteen Colors, with
several of their Cymbals and Trumpets, and twenty Prisoners: They lost only
fourteen of their Men, and had the Pillage of the Camp, with great store of
good Provisions, with which they feasted themselves, and nourished their Horses.

And now let us leave the Duke of Loraine for a while before this City,
employed in an Enterprise, which could not be effected until two Years
afterward, tho all that time a constant course of ill Fortune ran against the
Turks: And let us see what Preparations were making at Venice, and recount the
Actions and Achievements which this Republic carried on this Year against the
Turks, pursuant to the Proclamation of War lately published.

The Doge of Venice, called Marco Antonio Gustiniano, who entered upon the
Governmernt the 26th day of April of this Year, The Venetians prepare for War,
and nominate their Officers.
Francisco Morosini Captain General, Dominico Mocenigo Proveditor General of
Dalmatia, the Prince of Parma General of the Infantry, Alessandro Molino and
Antonio Bembo Captains extraordinary of the Ships, Paulo Michiel, Matthew
Pisani and John Morosini Commanders extraordinary of the Galeasses; and General
Strazoldo quitted the Imperial Service for that of the Republic.

The whole Venetian Fleet consisted of Sixteen Galleys, six Galleassas, and
sixteen Sail of Ships; to them were joined five of the Pope's Galleys, and
seven of Malta, and four Galleys belonging to the Great Duke of Toscany. With
part of this Fleet the Captain General Morosini put to Sea from the Coast of
Italy, on the 10th of June, for the Island of Corsu, Rendezvous at Corsu.
where the general Rendezvous for the whole Fleet was appointed: At this Place
a Council of War was called, where all the General Officers were present,
together with the Proveditor General Cornaro, and General Strazoldo; and by
them it was unanimously resolved to Attack the Island of Santa Maura.

This Island of Santa Maura was formerly joined to the Continent of Greece, and
reckned amongst the Western, as those of the Archi-pelago were amongst the
Eastern Islands; it was anciently known by the Name of Leucas, Santa Maura.
and was part of the Kingdom of Ulysses. It was once a Peninsula, adjoining to
Epirus by a narrow Isthmus of Land, but at the great Charge and Labor of the
Inhabitants of Corinth, it was cut off from the Continent, and made an Island:
It is near the Morea, at the entrance into the Gulf of Lepanto, where was
fought that famous Battle in the Year 1571.

Sultan Mahomet, the Son of Sultan Amurath, took this Island from the Venetians
in the Year 1457. But with the Aid and Assistance of some Vessels from the
Pope, King Lewis the 12th of France, and the Knights of Rhodes, it was, after a
bloody Fight, recovered out of their Possession, in the Reign of Bajazet the
II, in the Year 1499, Benedetto Pesaro being General. But the Year following a
Peace being made, it was restored to the Turks, conditionally, That the Island
of Cephalania should remain to the Venetians for ever. This Island being the
chief Harbor at present, and Refuge of all the Pirates and Corsairs of
Barbary, which much infested the Gulf, and rendered the Navigation very
unsecure, and which hindered the Venetians from being the absolute Masters of
those Seas, this Enterprise was resolved to be the most necessary and
methodical in order to more important Adventures.

Accordingly, on the 19th of July, the whole Fleet, together with Tartanas and
Felucas carrying Landforces, set Sail from Corfu, and the next day arrived at
Little-more, then Cannon-shot distant from Santa Maura, where they cast Anchor,
and landed their Forces, which consisted of two Battalions of the Pope's, and
of Malta Six hundred Men each, and Eight hundred Men drawn out of other Troops:
Amongst those of Malta were a Hundred Knights, who, clad in their Coat-armours
of red Satin, with the white Cross of their Order, made a splendid Appearance.
The next day the whole Fleet entered the Port of Demata, which lies to the
Eastward of the Town, and is capable to receive great numbers of Vessels, and
the Captain General Morosini went in Person on shore, taking a view of the
several Posts, in which the Forces had lodged themselves, and of that
particularly called Chiche, which was a House of Pleasure belonging to the
Aga's Son, possessed by Captain Manetta. But before Morosini thought fit to
commit any Act of Hostility, Summons sent to Santa Maura.
he sent to Summon the Place; and in a Writing set forth the Cause and Reasons
which moved the Venetians to raise a powerful Army against the Turk, who had
violated the Peace, by harboring the Corsaires of Barbary, and practiced other
Hostilities against the Subjects of that State: And that in case they did not
Surrender up their Town and Island, the next Morning he would proceed to force
them, and make use of the Privilege and Power of a Conqueror. To which the
Governor returned no other Answer, Than that God would punish the Venetians
for violating the Peace, and making an unjust War upon the Grand Seignior.
Whereupon, the Admiral-Flag being spread, which was the Signal of Battle, the
Galleys and Galleasses made above Twelve hundred Shot against the Town, The
Batteries.
which did great Damage to the Houses and Fortifications, and entirely ruined
one of the Moschs. Nor were the Turks idle, but fired continually, tho with no
great hurt; for their Cannon being mounted too high, did not hinder the Forces
of the Pope, Malta and Toscany from possessing themselves of the Suburbs, nor
the Batteries from raising, which by direction of Lorenzo Venier, played on the
Walls with good Success, and did great Execution, and the Bombs which were
thrown into the Town put all the Defendants into a Consternation. For, on the
first of August, the Batteries had razed a Bulwark to the Ground, and widned
the Breach, and dismounted four Pieces of the Enemies Cannon, and the Bombs had
set Fire to several parts of the Town; and so far was the Siege carried on, in
order to a general Assault, that on the 6th of August the Turks hung out a
white Flag, as a Signal that they would Capitulate: Accordingly a Treaty was
had, and Hostages given, and at length an Agreement was concluded, That the
Turks with their Families might have Liberty to leave the Town, with so much,
The Turks parley and surrender
and no more than they could carry on their Backs. The Garrison being Seven
hundred Men, toward the Evening marched forth with Sword and Musket, and were
shipped and carried on the farther Shore of an Arm of the Sea; all the Christian
Slaves were set at Liberty, on Condition to serve on Ships and Galleys of the
Republic, in the Quality of Seamen and Soldiers. The Venetians entered the Town
at the Breach; the Plunder whereof, which was considerable, was given to the
Soldiers: In the Place great store of Provisions were found, with Eighty Pieces
of Cannon: The Venetians lost about Two hundred Men in the Siege: Morosini
immediately caused the principal Mosch to be Blessed, in which Te Deum was
sung, and dedicated to St. Savior, because it was the 6th of August, on which
day is the Feast of the Trasfiguration, when the Turks hung out the white Flag
of Surrender. The Command of the Place was given to Lorenzo Venier, a noble
Venetian, one of whose Ancestors was Commander in chief of the Venetian Army,
when Selimus was entirely defeated at the Battle of Lepanto.

The Fortifications of Santa Maura being repaired, and a Garrison left in it;
General Morosini set Sail to the Port of Petula, and thence to the Port of
Dragonetta, where he cast Anchor, and landed his Army, which consisted of Two
thousand Venetians, about One thousand of the Pope's Auxiliaries, and about
Fifteen, or Sixteen hundred Greeks. This Army advanced on the Plains; upon
approach of which, several Turkish Troops, which were employed to defend
Passages, retired without any Resistance, which gave opportunity to the
Christians to Burn four or five Villages; which having done, they returned to
the Fleet and re-embarked themselves. At the same time General Morosini with
his Gally got sight of Patras and Lepanto; and thence Sailing to the Port of
Damata, a Council of War was called, and there it was resolved to Attack
Preveza, without which Santa Maura could not be secured: Preveza is a Fortress
which now stands in the place of the ancient Nicopolis of Epirus, the Situation
of which is very Commodious, for it Commands the entrance into the Gulf, and
was anciently the Royal City of Pyrrhus. This Enterprise being resolved,
General Morosini dispeeded five Galleys and six Galleasses to approach the
Castles of the Gomenizze, which being discerned by the Turks from Preveza, they
sent back those Soldiers which they had lately drawn from thence, on
supposition that the Venetians would make all their Attempt upon Preveza; which
happened according to the Desire and Intention of Morosini, whose Aim it was to
divide their Forces. The Army in the mean time having left Damata, came to an
Anchor on the 20th of September, at the entrance into the Gulf; and the next
day Captain Manetta, with Twenty four Barks, and some Brigantines, Preveza
attacked.
entering the Gulf, landed part of his Forces; which the Turks in vain
endeavored to hinder by great and small Shot; and next Morning, by break of
Day, the Galleys (which had anchored under the Hill of Mahomet Effendi)
appeared within Musket Shot of the Place, which gave a Diversion to the Turks,
who having drawn all their Forces to that side, gave opportunity to the
Christian Forces to land on the other without much Annoyance, under the Conduct
of General Strazoldo, which Error, so soon as the Turks discovered, Shaban
Pasha the Governor immediately ordered Five hundred Spahees to ride full speed
to Attack the Forces before they were landed; but before they could come, they
found the Christians already drawn up in Battalia, upon whom having made some
slight Charge, they retreated again in disorder with the loss of several of
their Men.

Thus did the Christians advance, without much difficulty, and make themselves
Masters of the Out-town, and of the Hill of Mahomet Effendi, which Commands the
City; and at the same time the Galleys and Galliots approached yet nearer to
Preveza, when Morosini thought it seasonable to Summon the Town, letting them
know, that in case they deferred the Surrender, until the last extremity, he
would grant no Quarter, nor any Conditions whatsoever: But the Officer who
commanded in chief under Shaban Aga, (who was gone to head Four thousand Men
without the Town, and observe the Motions of the Enemy) refused to read or
receive the Letter, but barbarously shot the Messenger who brought it, having a
Confidence the Governor, whose Deputy he was, would speedily return and raise
the Siege. Whereupon Morosini having viewed the Posts and Situation of the
Place, caused his Cannon and Bombs to be landed, and raised his Batteries,
which played with so good Success, that several parts of the Town were fired,
and most of the Enemies Guns dismounted; and those which remained on their
Carriages were so ill managed, that they did little or no Execution, for there
was as yet of the Christians but one Soldier killed, and five wounded. The
Breach by this time was found very considerable, and on the 28th a Lodgment was
made in the Ditch, and a Mine being ready to be Sprung, Orders were given to
prepare for an Assault; which the Turks fearing to expect, hung out a white
Flag, and offered to capitulate, and to accept the same Conditions, which were
given to Santa Maura; But at length it was concluded, that Thirty only of the
most considerable persons amongst them, might march out with their Arms and
Baggage, and the rest without Arms, and with no more than they could carry
about them; and that all the Christian Slaves should be set at Liberty.
Accordingly the Day following the Turks to the number of Two hundred Men
marched out at the Gate toward the Sea; Preveza Surrendered.
and were Embarked on some Grecian Boats with a Convoy, and were Landed within
four Miles of Larta, about Two hundred of the Inhabitants remaining in the
place. The Town being taken the Standard of St. Mark was set up on the Walls,
and all the Turkish Colors and Banners taken down, and sent to the Admiral
Gally. In the Town were found Forty six Pieces of Cannon, Eighteen of which
were Brass, and carried Fifty five pounds of Ball. The place was well Stored
with all sorts of Provision, and with Muskets and Bullets, and Six hundred
Quintals of Powder. This Town was very beneficial to the Venetians, for it put
them into an entire Possession and Dominion of the Gulf, and the places of that
Coast, the Fishing Trade whereof is so considerable, that it yielded to the
Turks a Thousand Crowns every year arising on the Customs thereof.

The Auxiliary and Venetian Forces return to their Winter quarters.
Thus ended this Campaign to the Honor and Reputation of the Venetian Arms: And
the Auxiliary Galleys and Forces returned home, having been more diminished by
Fatigues, and making Incursions into the Land, than by slaughter or loss
sustained from the Enemy. The Venetians took their Winter Quarters in several
Isles belonging to the Republic. Molino, Captain extraordinary of the Ships,
brought back his Squadron to Corfu; but General Morosini wintered at Preveza,
with design to render that place impregnable, and to engage the Greeks, who are
a People of an unconstant Humor, to remain steady in that Duty and Faith,
which they caused them to Swear to the Venetian Republic; whilst these things
were carrying on, some matters of less moment were acted in lighter Skirmishes
near Clissa, from whence the Turks carried away seven Prisoners; but being
pursued by the Morlaques, they were again rescued by them, and forced to quit
their whole Booty, with the loss of Fifty of their Men killed on the place.
Seignior Antonio Zeno, Proveditor extraordinary of Cataro came to Perasto, and
pillaged, and burnt all the Towns and Villages near Castle Nuovo, and hindered
the Turks from carrying in their Harvest, and seized great Stores of Wheat, and
other Corn which he carried to Clissa. To complete the Successes of this year a
Galliot of Dulcigno was taken, Commanded by Solomon Reis a famous Corsaire: In
the Fight Solomon himself with Twenty of Men was killed, and Twenty two
Christians were Released and set at Liberty, whom this Pyrate was carrying into
Slavery.

And now having given a Relation of the Venetian Successes of this year, it
will be time to return to the German Camp, which we left at the Siege before
Buda.

The Siege, as we have said, being completely formed, on the 12th of July a
Mine was sprung near the great Tower, which tho it had done great effect, yet
it plainly appeared, That the Turks were too strong as yet in the Town to be
assaulted at the entrance of any Breach, until such time as their numbers were
more diminished by a longer Siege. The Vizier of Buda slain. He is succeeded by
Shitan Ibrahim.
On the 14th the Vizier of Buda, called Kara Mahomet, died of a Wound, which he
had received on his Face; he was one of the best Officers amongst the Turks.
Shitan Ibrahim succeeded him in the Government: He was a Person very well known
to the English Nation, which had lived in Turkey, to which he bore a signal
kindness and respect, and particularly to that worthy Person Sir Jonathan
Dawes, with whom he cultivated a Friendship, which was extraordinary and unsual
for a Turk toward a Christian. When I came first into Turkey he was then
Tefterdar, or Lord Tresurer; whom I have seen when he was giving out the Pay to
the Army to bestow Money on the Earl of Winchelsea's Pages and Servants, who
being then Lord Ambassador Extraordinary to the Grand Seignior, was returning
from an Audience which he had had with the Grand Vizier: He was afterward
Married to the Grand Seignior's Sister, and was sent Pasha to Gran Caro, which
is an Office of the highest Degree amongst the Turks; having remained three
years in that Employment, which is the usual time allowed to that Government,
he was then recalled, and taxed at Six hundred Purses of Money; he was forced
to lay down one half in ready Money, and to pay the other Moiety in a few Days
afterward, upon Penalty of being committed to a Prison, from whence he had
never been delivered but by Death. The Character of Shitan Ibrahim.
He was afterward made Pasha of Damascus, then of Aleppo, and with his Forces
was engaged to pass by Sea to the Siege at Candia. I remember him at Smyrna,
when he embarked there, and then he told me, how grievous it was for him and
his Men to leave their Horses, (than which nothing was more pleasing and dear)
and to Embark on a Gally, and pass the Seas to which he and his Soldiers had
never been accustomed. Afterward he was employed in many great Offices, to
which he had been bred from his Youth, and in which he had deported himself
with singular Reputation and Esteem, being naturally of a frank and a generous
Temper: He was then about Eighty years of Age, and nothing declined, but still
as Robust and Vigorous as if he were but Forty, when he defended Buda, and
succeeded the Pasha who was killed on the Walls; and in this Condition we shall
leave him for a year or two, until being involved in the Common Fate and
Misfortunes of the Turks, he yielded to the Destiny which was provided for him.

Sallies from the Town.
On the 16th of August the Besieged made a Sally, and were beaten back with some
loss; but the next day they had better Fortune, and killed many of the
Christians, as they did also in several other Sallies. But to encourage the
Christians in this Siege, several Deserters escaped out of the Town, and to
flatter the Party into whose Hands they were fallen, they told a thousand
Falsities concerning the distresses and wants of the Town. But notwithstanding
all their Reports, it was concluded necessary, to open the Breach in the Wall
of Buda much wider than it was before; to which end the Cannon played
continually upon that part of the Town, where the Assault was to be made. But
in the mean time to disturb these proceedings, the Seraskier Pasha with all the
Force of the Ottoman Army, appeared often times in sight of the Camp, which
gave such frequent Allarums, that the Duke of Loraine thought fit to draw out a
great part of his Army to engage them, leaving all the left Wing in the
Approaches, under Command of Count Staremberg, General of the Artillery, and
with the remainder of the Infantry, and all the Cavalry he marched between the
upper City, and Mount St. Gerard, to meet the Seraskier; and so soon as the Way
opened into the Valley between Buda and Strigonium, he discovered a great Body
of Turkish Horse upon a Hill opposite to the Army, upon view of which the
Christian Army drew into Battalia; A Fight before Buda.
and tho the way to an Engagement with the Enemy was rough, craggy and very
steep; yet such was the Spirit, which by frequent Victories had possessed the
Christian Soldiery, that with incomparable Valor, their right Wing moved over
all the difficulties of the Ground against the left Wing of the Turks; but they
fearing to stand the Shock, made their Retreat to another Hill within
Cannon-shot of Buda, where their right Wing was drawn up: The Imperial Troops
still continuing to advance against the Enemy, detached Two thousand of their
choice Horse, who making as if they intended to form another Line before the
Front; posted themselves under the Walls of the City; during which time the
main Body of the Turks stood firm, and kept their Ground, until the Christians
were come within Musket Shot; and then their foremost Troops fell violently
into the Trenches on the right Hand, A Sally from the Town.
whilst a Sally was made out of the City by the Janisaries on the left: And so
Furious was the Charge they made, that they gained the first Post, which was
maintained by Count Furstemburg, Captain the Regiment of Grana, and passed to
the second Guard, defended by a Captain of the Regiment of Baden, and proceeded
even to the third Post under one of the Batteries. But Count Aspremont, and
Colonel Bek, with two Battalions coming to their assistance, as did also the
Battalions of reserve under Staremberg and Souches, the Enemy was so vigorously
repulsed by them, that they not only recovered the several Posts which they had
lost, but gained a Fort from the Enemy, which was Situated on the Danube, and
took four Standards from them, with the Slaughter of many Janisaries.

At the same time the Enemies left Wing of Horse was so warmly charged by the
Imperialists, that they were put into a disorderly Flight, and run over and
trampled down their Foot; howsoever Rallying again they made a stand, as if
they had intended to renew the Fight: But observing the right Wing of the
Christians to advance toward them, and the left Wing to come into their
assistance, they durst not adventure to stand the Shock, but fled in full
Career; but such as were worse mounted, and trusted not to the Swifness of
their Horses, in a desperate manner made their way into the City for Refuge.
This enterprise of the Turks cost the Christians Three hundred Men; those of
Quality killed were the Counts of Fustemberg and Carlovitz, and the Counts
Guido Staremberg, and Scalemberg were wounded, for which the Turks paid most
dearly, leaving Seven thousand of their Companions slain upon the place.

The Seraskier, An Assault on lower Buda.
and his Army being thus repulsed with great slaughter and much dismayed; the
Duke of Loraine resolved to attempt the lower Town by, the Breach which was
made: The which was accordingly executed by the Baron of Asti, who in despite
of the Grenades, and continual Vollies of the Muskets surmounted the Ruins,
and took possession of the Breach; and being seconded by other Forces, he
proceeded and made himself Master of the more inward Retrenchments, destroying
the Palisadoes and the Works in such manner, that the Defendants had no other
Shelter than their Houses remaining to them. By this time Count Tulli and a
Captain of the Regiment of Mansfield were come to their assistance, and
together with Asti advanced to the Gate which opens to the Danube; where after
a sharp Fight, with much effusion of Blood on both sides, they forced open the
Gate, and gave entrance to Colonel Culemfels with Five hundred Men, who being
also followed by great numbers of Hayducks, they so overwhelmed the the Turks
with their power, The lower Buda and Castle taken.
that they fled for refuge to the Castle: But being closely pursued by the
Christians, who were now mixed with them, those in the Castle feared to open
their Gates, lest by giving entrance to their Friends they should receive their
Enemies; so that as many as were excluded out of the Castle fell by the German
Sword; others betaking themselves to their Houses, barred their Doors, and hid
themselves in Vaults and Cellars: But there being no protection for the
miserable, Fire was applied to the Houses, whereby those who had escaped the
Sword, perished in the Flames.

In this Glorious Action it is said, That 12.000 Janisaries were Slain, with
the loss only of Seventy five or Eighty Christians killed and wounded; after
which the several Posts, and Gates of the Town were well secured; and Orders
given to Attack the Palanca and Castle of St. Gerards; which at the first
sight, and appearance only of an Attempt, the Defendants abandoned, carrying
away with them all their Cannon and Ammunition. The lower Town being thus
subdued and possessed by the Christians, the very same Night Batteries were
raised on St. Gerard's Mount, and Trenches and Approaches made on that side,
whereby the upper City of Buda was more closely Besieged, and the Enemy reduced
within a more narrow Compass. Whilst these matters were Acting, Count Lesly
with a Body of Fifteen thousand Men, made an Attempt upon the City and Castle
of Virovitz, which is in Sclavonia, Situated on the Frontiers of Croatia, and
is sometimes called Berseck. To Succor this place the Seraskier caused several
Troops to advance, who encountering a Detachment of Eight hundred Croats, they
put them into Disorder, and caused them to Retreat unto their main Body, with
the loss of three of their Standards; but pursuing them too far, their Career
was stopped by the Army of Lesly, Two parties of Turks Defeated.
who vigorously repulsed them, and put them to Flight with the loss of Five
hundred of their Men, and Two hundred killed on the side of the Christians.
This good Success was seconded by another happy Encounter which Count
Trotmansdorf, with a Party of Four thousand Croats, had over a Party of Two
thousand Turks, designed by the Pasha of Marotz (who was appointed to Guard the
Bridge of Esseck) to Succor the Town and Castle of Virovitz; for they were all
defeated by him, as was also another Party of Fifteen hundred Horse, who were
marching with all diligence to join with the Two thousand lately routed and
dispersed. Thus the Town and Castle having lost all their hopes of Succor and
Relief, they spread a white Flag on the Walls, which demonstrated their
intentions to Capitulate. Vi^ovitz Surrendered.
Accordingly a Treaty being had, several particulars were agreed, and the
places Surender'd: The Turkish Garrison, which consisted of about One thousand
Soldiers, were permitted to march forth without their Arms, unless Fifteen of
the principal Officers, who had liberty to go forth with their Horses and Arms;
the rest were to have no more than what they could carry on their Backs. The
Turks having quitted the City and Castle, the Christians supplied it with a
Garrison of Two hundred Men, under the Command of the Baron of Schelardt. The
News of the loss of Virovitz, put all the Country thereabouts into such
Consternation, that several places were abandoned by the Turks, and a way
opened to General Lesly to march without any impediment to the Bridge of Esseck.

In the mean time the Approaches, and Works before Buda proceeded with infinite
diligence and labor, so that by the 26th Day of July, they were advanced
within Sixty Paces of the Counterscarp: The Proceedings at the Siege of Buda.
Likewise other Batteries were raised of Twenty five Pieces of great Cannon,
and Twelve Mortar-pieces, which fired continually; and on the side of Pest,
they annoied the Turks with long Guns, and small Pieces of Ordnance, that they
were not able to approach near the River for Water, of which there was great
scarcity and want in the Town. The Batteries not doing the Execution which was
expected, by Reason that the Walls were filled with Earth, endeavors were made
to Under-mine a corner of the Counterscarp; and on that side toward Strigonium
to advance the Works within Sixty Paces of the Tower: The ill Condition of the
Besiegers.
In which Attempts One hundred and twenty six Germans were killed in one day
and night. Within the Town they were industrious and brave, every Janisary
behaving himself, with Resolution and indefatigable Labor: And on the other
side, Without the Town the Soldiers were harassed, and tired with continual
Watchings and Pains; and the Pioneers and Laborers working beyond their
strengh, in the excessive heats fell into Malignant Fevers, and Diseases of the
Camp, by which the numbers of those People being greatly diminished, the Mines
and Works advanced very slowly. On that side toward Strigonium, the
impediments and hindrances were as great, as on the other; for the Defendants
continually Fired upon the Laborers, which obstructed them in such manner,
that it was impossible to join their Trenches to the Wall of the Bastion which
Flanked the Curtain; and such showers of Grenades, and Vollies of small Shot
were thrown amongst them, that they were forced to desist from their Work, and
to proceed by Mining the Earth, which required much time, and retarded the
Conquest of the place.

On the 30th of August, about Sunrising the Turks made a Furious Sally into
the Trenches of the Germans, causing them to Fly, with the loss of Forty or
Fifty Men; but other Troops coming to their Succor, they were forced to Retire
in much Confusion and Disorder, and endeavoring an Escape by the Breaches in
the Walls, and narrow Avenues, they exposed themselves to the Swords and Fire
Arms of their Enemies, who destroyed them with great Slaughter.

Sept.
At the beginning of September, the Rains fell in such abundance, that the
Soldiers in some of the Trenches remained a whole Day up to the middle in
Water, which increased the Diseases of the Camp, from which some of the
Commanders were not freed; and particularly the Duke of Loraine, who became so
indisposed in his Health, that he was constrained to Retire unto Old Buda for
ease and remdy, where he continued not above four or five Days, before he
returned again to the Camp; during this time the Turks made other Sallies upon
the Christians, Sallies from the Town.
for several Days, to their great loss and discouragement; for besides Three
hundred Common Soldiers, many principal Officers were killed and wounded;
amongst which those of chief Note were the Marquis Cavalieri, Lieutenant
Colonel of the Regiment of Gran, Count Tirheim a Captain of the Regiment of
Baden were slain, and Major General Schaffemberg, and the Marquis of Parella,
with several other Officers were wounded. But to suport the Spirits of the
Christians, which were not a little dismayed by these losses, and the great
difficulties which were yet to be overcome; the Bavarian Infantry fortunately
came to their Succors, (tho those of Franconia were Countermanded) which so
enlivened, and cheared up the Hearts of the drooping Camp, That the Duke of
Loraine sent a menacing Message to the Governor of Buda, Summons sent to the
Town.
giving him to understand, that in case he stood out longer and refused to
surrender, until he was forced thereunto by a General Assault, which he was
preparing to make, that then he would put all to the Sword, giving Quarter to
none, nor sparing Age nor Sex: To which Summons he returned this answer, That
in such Case he would neither demand Mercy, The Vizie's Answer.
or Quarter for his own Person, nor for any of the Soldiers, or Inhabitants of
that place: And on the other side he declared, That he would give no Quarter to
the Besiegers, but when they fell into his Hands, would treat them with the
same usage, which was threatened unto them: And to show how much he was in
earnest, he caused Forty Christian Prisoners to be brought before him on the
Walls, and in Presence of the Person who brought the Summons, he commanded them
all to be put to Death; saying, His Cruelty.
That if it were in his Power to Massacre the whole Christian Army, he would do
it with as little Remorse, as he executed his present Rage on those miserable
Wretches: And it being farther told this Vizier, that the Duke of Bavaria had
in Person, and with 30.000 Men reinforced the Army which encompassed the City:
He made answer, That he knew very well what a Petty King of Germany meant, and
that his Three thousand Men which he had brought with him, could not terrify
him who commanded a Place, where the Soldiers were many and brave, and where
was no want of Ammunition and Provisions.

On the 8th, The Christians Sprang a Mine under one of the Towers, where the
Turks had placed their principal Battery; and at Night Sprang three or four
more under the Curtain, but not with so good effect as was expected: Howsoever,
they had brought their Attacks to the very Ditches of the Town and Castle, and
had made a Lodgment upon one of the Breaches.

On the 9th and 10th, Several other Mines were fired with such Success, that
they overthrew a great part of the Wall, and opened so wide a space, that four
or five Carts might enter abreast: Howsoever, it was not thought advisable to
make an Assault, by Reason that the Defendants had formed several Retrenchments
within, and guarded them with many Troops and Batteries: And besides, the
Infantry were so weakened by Dissenteries, and other Sicknesses, that it was not
thought fit to hazard them upon so desperate an Attempt. Howsoever, having
fired a Mine at Kulakupee with good effect, The Christians make an Assault and
are repulsed.
they seconded it with a furious Assault, but were again repulsed with much
loss, and great slaughter of the common Soldiers; and the Counts of Harach and
Nassau, and the Major of the Regiment of Mansfeldt were all killed; and the
Counts of Staremberg and Aversberg were amongst the number of the wounded.
Amongst these Disorders and Discouragements, five Christians found means to
make their Escape out of the Town, and informed the General, that the Turks had
raised two Batteries each of five Pieces of Cannon upon a Horn-work which was
palisadoed, and was guarded by another Tower behind this Work, and joined to a
more inward Wall made of Earth above nine Foot thick: That there was also a
Ditch and Palisadoes behind the Breach, and that there were still 20.000 Men
within the Town, who were capable to bear Arms; and that the principal Officers
upon hopes of being relieved by the Seraskier (as was assured them by some
Soldiers lately come from Belgrade, and the Bridge of Esseck) had resolved to
maintain the Town to the last and utmost Extremity: Howsoever that there was
some division amongst them; for tho the Inhabitants seemed resolute to stand
out unto the last drop of their Bloods, fearing lest they should be treated
like the Garrison of Virovitza, yet the Janisaries (who had no other Concerment
in the Place, than their own Lives) protested that in case they were not
speedily relieved by the Seraskier, they would constrain the Governor to
surrender upon Capitulations.

If the Garrison of Buda were in a bad Condition, the Imperial Camp in the
Leaguer was not in a much better; for most of the Officers were either killed,
The ill Condition of the Leaguer.
sick or wounded; and such was the scarcity of all Provisions, caused by the
Obstructions which the Seraskier had laid in the way to intercept the Convoys,
which fetched them from far distant Places, that the proportion of Meat, and
weight of Bread, distributed to every Soldier, was much diminished; so that the
Siege had then been raised had not the Duke of Bavaria (as we have said) come
to the Camp on the 9th of September, with his Infantry, which gave new Hopes
and Encouragement to continue the Siege; tho the Death of General Dunewaldt in
his Tent, who had the Reputation of a valiant and an experienced Soldier, did
very much add to the Sorrow and Discouragement of the Camp.

Still did the Turks continue to make their Sallies with much Bravery, in one
of which they spiked or nailed three Pieces of Cannon. Sallies made by the
Turks.
The Prince of Saxony Eisenach had his Leg taken off with a great Shot, and
General Kops fighting valiantly at the Head of his Men was wounded, and died
shortly afterward in his Tent. But it was very observable, how Forty stout
Turks, naked to the Wast, behaved themselves with two-handed broad Swords,
hewing and cutting down all before them; they advanced as far as to the
Riverside, and having covered the Ground with dead Bodies, they returned with
the loss of few of their number into the Town.

The Reinforcement which the Duke of Bavaria brought to the Christian Camp, put
the Turks into an Apprehension that the Town would certainly be taken, unless
it were relieved by some signal Success of the Seraskier's Army within the
Lines of the Christians; which the Turks speedily designed so soon as they were
reinforced by some Troops, which were daily expected. After some time, the
Seraskier received a Letter from the Grand Vizier, that it was impossible for
him to send any considerable Recruits; The Vizier's Orders to the Seraskier.
having been obliged to dispeed such Troops, as were with him, to the
Dardanelles, Tenedos and Morea, to prevent the Landing of the Venetian Army,
which had already made themselves Masters of Santa Maura. And that therefore he
should supply the want of numbers by his extraordinary Vigilance and Art, and
to hazard every thing rather than suffer Buda to fall into the Hands of the
Enemy. The Seraskier accordingly marched with about 25.000 Men, or at most
27.000 to Alba Regalis, and encamped before the Town, with intention very
speedily to disturb the Siege; but hearing that the Duke of Bavaria was come
thither with a very considerable Force, he altered his Design, and marched
toward the Bridge of Esseck, to fight those Troops which were sent thither
under the Command of Count Erdedi, the General of Croatia, and to hinder them
from burning the Bridge, or taking the Forts which covered it. Count Leslie in
the mean time followed the Seraskier to observe his Motion, and assist Erdedi;
The Duke of Loraine Marches after the Seraskier.
which the Duke of Loraine conceiving not of Force sufficient to oppose
themselves against the whole Turkish Army; he recalled all his Cavalry from the
Frontier Towns, and those which blocked up Newhausel, and with three Regiments
of Foot lately come from Moravia, and some of the Bavarian Forces, he departed
from the Camp on the 16th, with resolution to Engage the Seraskier, leaving the
whole Conduct of the Siege to the Elector of Bavaria. But the Seraskier fearing
to hazard the whole Affair on the fortune of a Battle, retired under the Cannon
of Alba Regalis. Whereupon five Regiments of Horse, and a Thousand Foot, were
ordered to Post and Forrify themselves on certain Hills, by which the Turkish
Army was necessarily to pass, and could not move without being observed by them.

In the mean the Batteries, The Bavarians advance their Works.
which the Bavarians had raised, had begun to open a wide Breach; and on that
side by the Water, their Works were advanced one third in length of the lower
Town; and several Redoubts were perfected to impede and disturb the Seraskier
in his March from Alba Regalis, toward the Siege of Buda: The Expectations
were great of the coming of the Bavarian Horse, and other Cavalry from the
parts near Presburg, under the Command of Count Caraffa, and also of the
Swedish Infantry, which were now much wanted at this Siege.

The Rains which fell in such great abundance on the 18th at Night, did greatly
retard the progress of the Works which the Bavarians were making, tho their
Batteries had good effect upon that Angle, which was contiguous to the Tower on
the Castle side; but the Approaches appeared daily more difficult than before,
and the Works on the Riverside proceeded slowly, and on the side of the
Curtain, the Miners were not able to advance above three Pikes in length.

The Duke of Loraine being returned to the Camp, the Bavarians who had the
Attack by the Riverside, sprang a Mine under the Tower with so good Success,
that it overthrew a great part of the Wall, with one of the Gates: They also
made a Line of Communication, which joined their Attack with that of Count
Maximilian de Staremberg: The Defendants at the same time made several Attempts
to enter the Lines of Bavarians, but could not prevail, by reason that the
Entrance was strongly fortified; and farther, to defend themselves, they made
several Retrenchments within the Town, and pulled down several Houses, covered
the Streets with Beams to cast off Grenades, and hinder the Bombs from doing
hurt and damage to the Houses. The 20th of this Month the Defendants had the
good fortune to seize a Boat laden with Provisions, The Besieged take a Boat
with Provisions.
as it was going to the Imperial Camp, which caused much Joy in the City,
whereby the Report which some Fugitives made of the scarcity and want of
Provisions in the Place, was clearly confirmed: And the same day a Party of
Fifteen hundred Turks attacked some Foragers sent from the Leaguer, of whom
they killed several, and took some Prisoners, with the laden Wagons, the rest
making their Escape as well as they could.

In fine, the Seraskier being resolved once more to attempt the Relief of Buda,
raised his Camp on the 21st from under the Walls of Alba Regalis, and began his
March; of which the Duke of Loraine having Advice by a Polonian, The Seraskier
endeavors to raise the Siege.
who was escaped out of the Hands of the Turks, immediately drew out his Forces
into the appointed Places, and with such Order, as was lately agreed at a
Council of War, where they attended all day for the coming of the Enemy; which
not appearing, the Forces drew off toward the Evening into their several
Quarters, having been greatly incommoded by the Rains, which had continued all
that day to fall in such abundance. Howsoever, the day following, Two thousand
Turks attacked the Lines in two places with much Resolution, endeavoring to
force their Passage into the Town; but finding great Resistance, A Sally ou^ of
the Town.
they were beaten off with considerable loss, leaving two Standards in the
Hands of the Imperialists. Whilst this Attack was made, Fifteen Hundred Horse
and Foot made a Sally out of the Town, and cleared all the Trenches before
them, and advanced to the very Batteries, killing about Two hundred Men; but
some Squadrons coming to their Relief, forced them back with the loss of Four
hundred Men.

The Seraskier, who was retreated to his Camp about two Leagues distant from
the Siege, kept the Christians in a continual Alarm, and on the 23d made as if
he would have attempted the Lines once more; but the Mettle of the Turks was
not so warm and hot as formerly; howsoever, Four hundred of their Men wading
over a marshy Ground, up to the Armpits in Mire and Water, found a Way, which
before that time, was esteemed unpassable; and got into the Town, except some
few, who, sticking in the Mire, were birded off and killed with Musket Shot.

By this time the Bavarian Troops being come, with three German Regiments from
Bohemia, the Duke of Loraine esteemed himself in a Condition able to engage the
Turkish Army, and so marching out of the Lines with a considerable Body, he
followed the Enemy, and provoked them to a Battle; but the Seraskier having
already performed his Design, by putting some Men into the Town, he declined
the Fight, so that the Duke of Loraine without other Action returned again to
the Siege; but before they entered the Lines, the Garrison made a desperate
Sally both with Horse and Foot, and with such Success, that they drove the
Besiegers out of their Trenches, filled up some of their Works with Earth,
levelled one of their Batteries, A Sally out of the Towe.
and killed above Three hundred Men upon the Place; and after having routed the
Bavarians, they fell in upon the Quarters of the Imperialists, who being less
harassed than the others, gave them a Repulse with equal loss.

On the 25th the Seraskier appeared a third time in sight of the Leaguer,
showing as if he intended to offer Battle; upon appearance of which, the
Christians drew out of their Lines; but whilst they were ranging themselves
into a posture of Battle, a Detachment of Four thousand Horse were dispeeded
under covert of the Hills, and before they were discovered, assailed a Quarter
of the Imperialists, which was defended only by two Regiments of Horse, and two
Battalions of Foot, whom charging by Surprise, A Defeat given the Christians.
they totally defeated, and killed above a thousand Men, amongst which were
Count Tilly and several other Officers of Note. During this Consternation in
the Christian Camp, a Thousand Turks sheltring themselves under the shadow of
the Hills, found a Passage into the Town.

The Elector of Bavaria, and the Duke of Loraine being much heated and incensed
with these Successes of the Enemy, resolved with some Hungarian and Polonian
Horse, and some Regiments of Foot, to Attack the Turks in their Camp; The
Seraskier retires.
but the Seraskier having done his Business by sending Relief and Recruits into
the Town, retired under the Cannon of Alba Regalis, and there fortified himself
so well, having a moorish or fenny Ground before him, that it was impossible to
force his Camp, or hinder the Alarums which several Parties detached from the
Turkish Army, appearing sometime on the Hills, and then again in sight of the
Leaguer, did daily give them, and disturbed much the proceeding of the Mines
and other Works. The Difficulties of the Siege.
The Town it self was raised in an advantageous Situation; the Walls were so
strong, and filled with Earth, that notwithstanding the many Batteries, they
could not make a Breach wide enough for four Men to enter abreast; nor could
it well be expected, that they should be starved or constrained by Famine to
make a Surrender, during the short remainder of this Year's Season; for indeed
this Governor of the Town, had so well husbanded the Provisions, that there
was no scarcity as yet of any thing necessary for Human Sustenance; and
besides, the Defendants had some times the fortune to seize certain Boats laden
with Provisions, designed for the Christian Camp; for it was not possible
wholly to debar them from all Communication with the River: Wherefore there
seemed no other way left to win the Town, but by a vigorous Assault, the which
also had so much difficulty and hazard in it, that it seemed neither prudent
nor reasonable to be lavish of the Lives of Men, in an Attempt so desperate,
that there seemed little or no hope of the Success thereof. The Garrison
within, notwithstanding their frequent Slaughters consisted of Ten thousand
Janisaries and others, all resolute and approved Men, as had been evidenced by
many Proofs: The ill Condition of the Christian Camp.
On the other side, the Imperial Army was greatly diminished; the Horses for
the most part were dead, or unfit for Service for want of Forage; all the
Troops were harassed, weak and sickly; the Duke of Loraine himself ill disposed
in his Health, and in danger of a Relapse; the best Officers for the most part
were either killed or wounded; so that considering all these Matters together,
it was not to be expected that the Siege could long continue; besides all which
the Rains fell in such extreme abundance, that the Trenches were filled with
Water, and all the Mines and Works ruined and destroyed. Howsoever the
Bavarians being but lately come, and not so much harassed as the other
Soldiers, on the 24th at Night advanced their Post near to the Wall at the Foot
of the Castle-ditch. On the same day a Body of Two thousand of the Enemy
appeared in sight of the Leaguer; who, tho they retired again without any
Action, yet they caused an Alarm in the Camp, and several Troops were drawn
out against them, which made a Diversion, and retarded the Proceedings which
were advancing against the Town.

The Bavarians being the most active of any, had made a Breach in the Wall near
the Castle, which they stormed, and made themselves Masters of a Redoubt or
Bulwark on the Wall; but the Turks being very strong on that side, gave them
not sufficient time to shelter and ward themselves, but forced them to dislodge
with the loss of Three hundred Men.

On the 2d of October a Battery of Sixteen Pieces of Cannon of Twenty six Pound
Bullet, on the side of the Imperialists, October.
had entirely razed and beaten down a little Tower belonging to the Castle, and
next day they endeavored with Four thousand Men to make a descent into the
Ditch, and possess the Breach; but the Turks having with great industry and
diligence Repaired it again with Earth, Faggots and Palisadoes, The Christians
receive a great Loss.
defended it with such vigorous Resistance, that after a most bloody and
desperate Fight the Christians were droven thence with the loss of Fifteen
hundred Men, amongst which was a Major, and several Captains and Officers
belonging to the Bavarian Troops.

Howsoever the Imperialists and Bavarians not being dismayed with all these
Losses, continued to advance their Works at the Gate toward the River, and to
make their Batteries on the Breach, which as yet, was not wide enough for two
Men to pass abreast; but being a little more opened, the Bavarians stormed it
for the space of five Hours; and tho they were several times repulsed, yet they
lodged themselves on part of the Breach, from whence they discovered a
Fort-Royal with four Bastions, which the Turks had built in the middle of the
Town, A Saelly from the Town upon the Bavarians.
with intent to fly thither for Sanctuary, in case of the last Extremity; but
that Hour was not yet come; for the Defendants, animated with their late
Successes, made another Sally on the 14th instant with such numbers, that they
dislodged the Bavarians from the Breach, drove them out of their Trenches,
filled up part of their Works, and killed Two hundred of their Men; to Succor
which the Elector coming himself in Person, repulsed the Enemy with a great
Slaughter, and caused his Soldiers and Laborers to open their Works again, and
repair to their former Stations. The Miners still continued to Labor, but
received considerable impediments by Springs of Water, which overflowed their
Works.

The Seraskier kept the Christian Camp in a continual Alarm until the Raising
of the Siege: And whenever he came so near as to engage with the Enemy, the
Defendants at the same time Sallied from the Town, and retired again with
different Successes, sometimes with advantage and at other times with loss. On
the 24th, a general Alarm was given over all the Camp, Alarums given.
that the Seraskier with all his Cavalry, and Eight thousand Janisaries drawn
out from Alba Regalis and other parts, and Fifteen Pieces of Artillery, was
come within two Leagues of the Lines; upon which Report all the German Cavalry
mounted on Horseback, and drew themselves up into a Posture of Defense; but it
proved a false Alarm, and served only to increase the Fatigues and
wearisomness of the Soldiery. As the Spirits of the Besiegers were Drooping and
Fainting without, so the many Successes of those within, filled them full of
hopes of a speedy delivery; for they had lately taken so many Boats laden with
Provisions designed for the Christian Camp, that their wants of necessary
Sustenance were supplied. And on the 29th, Some Deserters from the Christian
Camp discovered to them several Mines which were preparing against them, by
which intimation they opened the Earth, found and disarmed them of their
Powder, which was so great a disappointment and discouragement to the
Christians, that it was esteemed by the most experienced Commanders almost
impossible to gain the Town, The difficulties of gaining the Town.
in regard the Season of the Year was spent, and the Winter already entered.

In Consideration of which, the Duke of Loraine assembled a Council of War to
deliberate concerning the Resolutions, which were to be taken in the present
Exigency and Conjuncture of Affairs: At which time Prince Erman of Baden,
President of the Council of War at Vienna, arrived in the Camp, having been
dispatched by the Emperor, with Commission to Command the German Infantry,
during the Sickness of the two Counts of Staremberg; and with Instructions and
Orders also to the Duke of Loraine to raise the Siege, in case there was not a
certainty, or at least some probable hopes of reducing the Town in a very short
term of time; for that his Imperial Majesty desired not to consume his Forces
in a desperate and fruitless Enterprise. The arrival of this Prince was very
seasonable at this time, both for the Message he brought, as also for his
ability and knowledge in War, being a wise Man and an experienced Officer:
Consultations about, raising the Siege.
In whose Presence matters were again taken into Consideration, and the State
of the Town within, and of the Camp without, was laid before the Generals and
Field-Officers; some few advised to continue the Siege, until the Success was
tried and seen of certain Mines, which were still forming in the Bavarian
Quarters: But the greatest part, representing the ill. Condition of the Troops,
the want of all necessaries in the Camp, the extremity of the Season, and the
apparent hazard of a total Destruction to the whole Army, in case of a general
Assault, were of Opinion, That the securest way were to raise the Siege in the
best order possible, for saving and securing the Army from Sallies from the
Town, and Attacks by the Seraskier and his Army: But before this Point was
concluded, the Duke of Loraine, the Elector of Bavaria and Prince Erman with
sevetal other Chief Officers, took a Survey of all the Lines and Quarters of
the Camp, and having considered, that the Defendants were still Ten thousand
strong, and well provided with Victuals and Ammunition, and that it was
impossible without greater Force to debar them from all Communication with the
Danube, from which they received daily Supplies; and that the Mines in which
they had placed their greatest hopes, had either been discovered by the Enemy
and disarmed, of by the inexperience of the Workmen and Ingeniers, had taken
vent, and reversed without any Execution; It was then concluded, and fully
resolved to raise the Siege: A farther Motive whereunto were the Rains which
continued to fall without intermission. In the first place therefore, the
Winter Quarters were agreed and assigned by the Council, so that the Troops
might know, unto what Towns they were to march; then all the Heavy Cannon,
Morter-pieces and Bombs were ordered to be carried away and secured.

On the 1st of November the Siege was raised, Nov. The Siege raised.
in which the Christians had lost 25.000 Men: And now to bring off the
surviving part, and to fortify the Rear against the Sallies of the Garrison,
and defend the whole Army in their march against the Seraskier, who being well
informed of their weaknesses, and loss of numbers, attended their Motion, was
an Action wherein to employ the Art and Conduct of the wisest, and most
experienced Captain in the World. Wherefore all imaginable care, and caution
was used in drawing off; the lighter Cannon and Fieldpieces were placed so as
to defend the Rear, as also the Flank and Wings; because that most of the Horse
being Dead for want of Forage, the Men were forced to walk on Foot, in the
Ranks of the Infantry which lay exposed, and naked to the Cavalry of the Enemy.
The Imperial and Auxiliary Troops, to the number of 30.000 took their march
toward Gran: The heavy Artillery and Baggage, with Eight thousand sick and
wounded Men, were embarked on several Boats to be carried up the River against
the Stream; and such as were most Sick and Weak, were with a small Guard
Transported to the Island of St. Andrews, which was designed for an Hospital to
receive and Cure them: But the Tartars entering into the Island, The Tartars
take the Island of St. Andrews.
killed above a Hundred of the wounded Men, before they could be removed, and
pillaged the Baggage with the Equipage of Colonel Piccolomini, and so much as
they could not carry away they burnt and destroyed: A like Accident happned to
some other Boats laden with the Bavarian Troops, which by some accident or
other, being by the Winds, or breaking of their Ropes, or Cordage put on Shore
were suprized and taken by the Enemy, Ill Accidents after raising the Siege.
which to observe their Motion had laien concealed in the Flags and Osiers,
which grew by the Banks of the Danube. Great were the Murmurings and
Discontents which arose upon these two unhappy Accidents, occasioned as they
talked by the neglect and ill Conduct of the Officers: Nor was the Resolution
of abandoning the City of Pest less approved, tho the Fortifications were
demolished, the Walls and Gates Blown up, and the most considerable Bulwarks
demolished: Howsoever, those who conceived another Opinion, alleged, That the
Masters of the Field would be able to maintain that Fortress, in despite of
the ill Neighbors on the other side: And that it would be difficult, and a
great loss of Men and time to recover that place, whenever a fairer
opportunity presented to renew the Siege of Buda: Others of a contrary sense
produced opposite Arguments, all People blaming each other, as is usual in
Sinister events, when matters succeed in an unlucky manner, different to the
first conceived hopes.

Winter Quarters assigned.
The Duke of Loraine before he would leave the Army, saw the several Troops
disposed in their respective Winter Quarters. The Imperialists were lodged in
Comorra and the Parts adjacent, and as many as these places could not contain
were sent to Silesia, Moravia and Bohemia. The Bavarians advanced into the
Counties of Arva, Czepus, Lipze, Saraz and other places appointed for them.

The Seraskier having information of the several Quarters, and of the Troops
which were lodged in them; gathered what Forces he was able, to the number of
18.000 Men, with which passing the River, he Sat down before Wazia or Vualtz;
a place defended by Five hundred Soldiers belonging to the Regiment of Thaun,
and Commanded by the Lieutenant Colonel only: The Fortifications were chiefly
the Breasts of the Soldiers, Vuazia Attacked.
there being only an old Wall in many places Ruinous, and a few weak Palifadoes
unable and unfit for the least Defense. The Turks encouraged with these
advantages, stormed the place on all sides; the Imperialists repelled their
Force with Force, and defended themselves with as much Bravery, as was possible
to do, with such unequal numbers: But finding it at length impossible, unless
by Miracle, to sustain so mighty a Force, without hopes of Relief; they agreed
to Capitulate, and sent Propositions of Surrender: The which being accepted,
and the Articles signed, the Gates were opened, with intention that the
Christians might march out, and leave the Town to the Possession of the Enemy;
but instead thereof the Turks rushed in, and with their drawn Cymiters killed
and massacred all before them: It was then to no purpose to call out, and
revile them with the breach of Faith and violation of Articles, having the
Seraskier's Commands not to observe them, or lend an Ear; nor did it much avail
to use resistance, the Enemy being already in the midst of them; all that could
be done, was to sell their Lives at the dearest rate. In fine, Five hundred
Christians put to the Sword.
This Tragedy ended with the Slaughter and Butchery of this whole Party, which
was much lamented at the Court of Vienna, as a loss of the highest concernment,
that Regiment consisting of old experienced and veteran Soldiers, Men of
approved Valor, and long inured to Labor and Sufferings: This Misfortune also
was become the common Discourse of the Army, blaming the Officers for assigning
Quarters at so far distance from other Succors, which was to sacrifice the
Lives of so many brave Men, without any regard to the Fury of the Enemy; and if
Pest which was a Walled and well Fortified Town, and capable of making
Resistance was to be Demolished and Dismantled only, because it was esteemed
too far distant from Succors and Relief; how much rather should Vualts, or
Vualtz have been judged an improper and dangerous Quarter, which was but an
open Town without other defense, than the naked Breasts of the poor Soldiery?

Thus ended this Campaign unluckily in respect to the Siege of Buda, and the
Successes which followed, tho in other Parts Fortune smiled on the Christian
Arms; for General Schultz took Barsfeldt, Barsfeldt taken.
Situated on the Frontiers of Poland, after a Siege of three Days, tho it be a
place encompassed with a deep Ditch full of Water, and good Walls, and
Fortified with Towers, Redoubts and Ramparts. The Garrison consisted of Four
hundred Men belonging to Tekeli, of which Three hundred after the Surrender
took up Arms for the Emperor, and One hundred which refused, were Convoyed as
far as Ragowitz. Likewise General Schultz took the Castle of Stropko belonging
to the Malcontents, And Stropko.
by Surrender upon Composition; therein were Eleven Brass Guns, with Ammunition
and Provisions for War: He took also the Castle of Makovitz. Count Zober, who
Commanded the Hungarian Troops at Neutra, Surprised the Castle at Suram, whilst
the greatest part of the Garrison was gone out to seek for Forage. But these
small advantages made but a poor amends for greater losses; the sense whereof
served to move Anger, and desire of Revenge in the generous Breasts of the
Soldiery, and to quicken the Imperial Councils to make Preparations against the
next Campaign: And in regard Newhausel was in the first place aimed at, as a
Prize for the ensuing Year, General Heysler was Ordered to enlarge his Quarters
in all parts round the City, that so keeping it continually Blocked up, the
Conquest thereof might be rendered much more easy, at that time, when the
Season of the Year should make it convenient for an Army to make a nearer
approach.

The King of Poland's Actions this year.
But before we conclude the Successes of this Year, we must not omit and pass by
the Actions of the King of Poland, of whom we have Wrote, and declared such
Heroic and generous Enterprises and Achievements in the Relation of the last
Year's Wars: For being one of the Allies of the Empire, we are not to be silent
of him; but give him a place in this History, as well, as we have already done
unto our Confederates the Venetians: Tho we shall not need to be very Prolix in
our Relations of his great Prowess and Deeds, which fell very Flat, and in no
manner agreeable to his first beginnings.

The King of Poland entered not the Field this Year until the middle of August,
when on the 22d of that Month, he took a Review of his Army near unto Budziack;
and the next Day he Detached a considerable Party to Invest Jaslowitz, a Town
about two Leagues distant from the Camp; and toward the Evening marched
thither in Person with the rest of his Army. The next Day Summons were sent to
the Town commanding them to Surrender; To which the Governor made this reply,
That the Town was committed to him by the Grand Seignior, and accordingly he
would defend the same unto the last Extremity: Hereupon Batteries were raised,
Jazlowitz taken.
and the Cannon having played upon the Town for the space of two or three Days,
the Defendants thought fit to Capitulate; and Hostages being given, the Town
was Surrendered on the 26th, when the Garrison, to the number of Five hundred
Men, marched out with their Arms and Colors Flying. After this the King
marched to Swaniec, Situate on the Niester, over which having made a Bridge, he
passed his Army; but having received intelligence, that 30.000 Tartars had made
their way into Poland, he returned again back to the other side. And tho the
Tartars are a sort of People, who stay not long in a place, but are in
continual Motion; yet the King had the good Fortune to meet with a Party of
them, and Cut Four hundred of them in pieces; the rest not being willing, A
party of Tartars defeated.
as is their Custom to adventure on a Battle, returned into their own Country,
as did also the King of Poland into his Winter Quarters, the Season of the
Summer being already spent.

At the Actions and Successes this Year of the Poles, the Turks at
Constantinople made an open Scorn and Laughter; (and indeed their slothfulness
in doing nothing deserved no better) and made it their common talk and
discourse, The Turks censure of the Poles.
That the French King, who was their only Friend amongst the Christian Princes,
had with his Money and Presents blunted the Sword of Poland, and laid all the
Spirits of that Kingdom into a Sleep; and that the young Prince, the eldest Son
was Enchanted, and led away Captive by a French Lady: So that the Turks seemed
to apprehend nothing of danger from Poland; against which they made no
Preparations for the ensuing Year, making it the common Subject of their
politic Reasonings, and giving it, as it were for granted, That the Poles,
Turks and Tartars had for some time entertained a friendly understanding
between each other.

The Turks always made slight of the Venetians, And of the Venetians.
as of an Enemy whom they could at all times, and at their pleasure crush and
suppress; they regarded little, what they had done this Year at St. Maura, or
in the Morea, or Dalmatia; the Venetians having been more beholding for those
Successes to the Albanians, and others of the Grand Seignior's Subjects, who
revolted to them, than to the Power and Conduct of their own Arms; and
whenever Fortune shall but a little change her Hand, they doubt not but to
recover their Losses from the Venetians, without much Blood, or perhaps but
with asking for them. And indeed (if it be well considered) the Venetians, have
trifled much in their Proceedings, amusing themselves, and the World, in taking
small and inconsiderable Places, in comparison of greater Enterprises, and with
dislodging some Nests of Pirates, when as they might have a stroke at the very
Heart of the Ottoman Empire, by entering the Dardanelli with a Fleet, against
which the Turks were not capable to make any Resistance, with less Force than
that which was used in taking Santa Maura and Preveza; the Venetians improving
the Advantage of the present Fear and Consternation of the Turks, might have
made themselves Masters, of the Castles on the Hellespont, and sailed to
Constantinople it self, and destroyed or burnt it without any considerable
Opposition. They might with this Opportunity have destroyed the whole Turkish
Fleet of Galleys, which would have made them Masters of all the Islands in the
Archipelago, the yearly Tribute of which is very considerable. They might in
all probability have taken twenty Sail of Ships coming from Alexandria, with
Janisaries and Merchandise to a considerable Value; which whilst the Venetians
were pedling about Santa Maura, arrived at Constantinople to the great Joy and
Encouragement of that City.

The Pasha of Candia put to Death.
About this time the Pasha of Candia's Head was brought to Adrianople, and
exposed before the Gate of the Divan; all his Treasure, which was considerable,
according to the Custom of the Turks, was confiscated to the Grand Seignior; he
was a bad Man, and unmerciful to all sorts and Sects of People; he had
strangled the Metropolite or Bishop of Candia, and miserably tyrannized over
the poor Christians there; and yet for all that, the Crime alleged against him
was, That he was too indulgent to the Christians; that he had sold them Corn,
and held a good Correspondence with the Venetians. The Pasha of Damascus called
Ibrahim Pasha, incurred the like Fate; he had been Janisar-Aga, and one of the
greatest Men in the Empire; but his Enemies taking advantage of his absence
from the Court, upon bare Suggestions, without fairer process, took away his
Life.

ANNO 1685.
BEfore we enter upon the Martial Affairs of this ensuing Year, let us take a
short View of the State of things in Christendom, and in Turkey, and the
Preparations that were making on both sides for carrying on a more bloody War
(if it can be possible) than that of the preceding Years. The Eyes of all
Christendom, The State of Christendom.
and I may say, of the World too, were at a gaze to behold the Successes of ths
important War; and yet Europe for the most part was either engaged actually in
War, or at least in Fears and Jealousies one with another. The
Plenipotentiaries of France and Spain were at Variance concerning the Confines
and Dependencies, and the Encroachments which the French King made on the
Rhine; and Motions in Alsatia, caused such Fears and Jealousies in the Minds of
the German Princes, that they withheld much of that Force, which they designed
as Auxiliaries to be employed in Service of the Empire, which was then the
common Cause and Interest of all Christendom. Howsoever, the generous Elector
of Bavaria, a valiant and active Prince, who had in the two last Campaigns
improved his youthful Years with the Exercises of War and Military Discipline,
was resolved to employ his own Person, Armies and Fortune in prosecution of
this Religious War against the Enemy of Christendom. The Elector of Bavaria
Marries with the Emperor's Daughter.
The Affections he had to the Welfare of the Imperial Hereditary Countries, and
of all Germany were elevated and rendered more zealous and warm by the Love he
professed to the Arch-Duchess Maria Antonia, eldest Daughter of the Emperor, a
Princess of great Virtues, whom he afterward espoused, and with her all the
Interest of the House of Austria in so zealous a manner, that he seemed to have
contracted the same Desires and Passions with the Emperor himself.

Tho the last two Years Wars had consumed both Men and Money, The Emperor's want
of Money.
yet had not the Emperor's Coffers been exhausted, the warlike People of
Germany would not have wanted Soldiers to fight in defense of their Country,
nor the respective Princes a readiness to complete and recruit their Troops
beyond the numbers, that, during this War, had appeared in Hungary. The Pope
Innocent XI. had already contributed in so liberal a manner, that his Treasure
was sunk to a low Ebb, and could not furnish such large Sums as formerly: The
Archbishop of Strgonium, Primate of Hungary, an opulent Prelate, who had made
large Contributions, died about this time, aged Ninety three Years; he had also
supplied the Imperial Army with vast quantities of Corn out of his own
Granaries, which gave a seasonable Relief to the Soldiers before Buda, who were
ready to famish in their Trenches for want of Provisions.

But to promote the common Cause, Consultations and Treaties were assiduously
and warmly held at the Diet at Ratisbone, Treaties with the Princes of the
Empire.
by the Commissioners and Plenipotentiaries from the Emperor, and by the Agents
sent from the Duke of Bavaria to the other Electors, and by the Convention of
the Circles held at Norimburg. Moreover, the Emperor dispatched the Count de
Thaun, and the Baron of Meyershein for his Envoys extraordinary, to represent
unto all the Courts and Princes of Germany the pressing exigency of Affairs,
which did not only concern the Emperor and his Hereditary Countries, but did
involve likewise the common Interest, Welfare and Safety of the whole Empire,
and all Christendom. These Matters being well inculcated, and circulary Letters
wrote, and dispatched to the Cities of Saltzburg, Passaw, Ausburg, Cologne,
Ratisbone, Norimburg, Ulm and Francfurt, desiring their Assistance with Men and
Money, with the use of their great Cannon for Service of the Army; in
Compensation for which, the like weight of Metal, was offered, with so much
Money as should pay the Charge of new Casting the Guns, in regard that in the
two last Years of War, most of the Emperor's Artillery had been consumed, and
the Touch-holes widned and blown, and to New-cast the Metal again, there was
not time sufficient before the Commencement of the following Campaign.

These Matters were so well represented and negotiated in the Courts and
Councils of the respective Princes, that nothing almost was denied which was
demanded. The Houses of Brunswick and Lunenburgh furnished an Army of Ten
thousand fighting Men, Auxiliaries of the Emperor.
all select and veterane Soldiers, under the Command of experienced Generals
and Officers; and what was of high Importance, they were so early dispeeded,
that they arrived at the Camp about the beginning of the Campaign. The Duke of
Saxony was not less forward with his Army, which, tho inferior in number, were
yet well-disciplined Soldiers, and conducted by Officers of approved Valor and
Experience. The Archbishop of Saltzburg sent unto the Emperor a Hundred
thousand Rix-dollars in lieu of his Quota, and of the Troops which he was
obliged to send. The Elector of Brandenburg had promised to send an Army of
12.000 Men into Hungary, with a considerable Train of Artillery, and so to
march with them in Person; but the Appearance of Troops from France on the
Rhine, and in the Dukedoms of Cleves and Juliers, the Numbers of which still
increasing, gave such an Alarm to that Prince and his Neighbors of the
Circle, that a stop was given to the Proceedings of his and their Forces; and a
supply only sent of Men and Money according to the Quota in such cases agreed,
and established by the ancient Constitutions of the Empire: Notwithstanding
which, the Emperor's Forces in Hungary, contrary to the expectation of all
Europe, much exceeded the general Calculation, and composed a better Army, than
had during this War appeared on the Plains of Hungary. The Pope was not less
sollicitous than the other Princes in this Christian Cause; The Pope gives
Assistance.
toward the Advancement and Maintenance of which, as he had formerly, so also
this Year he sent supplies of Money from Rome to Vienna, and granted unto the
Emperor a full third of the annual Rents of all the Ecclesiastical Benefices
within his Hereditary Dominions; to exact and raise which, Cardinal Bonvisi,
Apostolical Nuntio, and the Bishop of Newstadt, were fully authorized and
empowred by the Pope, with Instructions to Erect a particular Office, wherein
it was Registered how much was paid, and how the same was particularly employed
and expended for the sole Use and Advancement of this War.

Nor were the Turks less sollicitous and active on their side, in their
Preparations for the War, The Turks prepare for War.
which they still resolved to continue on their defensive part; under which
Notion, neither the Grand Seignior nor Vizier Azem were obliged to go in
Person. Shitan Ibrahim Pasha, late Governor in Buda, during the Siege, (of
whom we have already given a Character) was appointed Seraskier, or General of
the Army. And tho the Grand Seignior minded nothing so much as his Sport of
Hunting, to which he was so immoderately addicted, that he was scarce persuaded
to omit and decline it upon Fridays, and spent two whole Months entirely in it,
within the Countries between Adrianople and Constantinople; yet the Grand
Vizier, who was esteemed one of the wisest and most experienced Ministers that
ever had been in that Place, closely attended and followed the main
Concernment, both for raising Money, and levying Soldiers. As to the first, The
Grand Seignior's Treasury had already this Year been twice opened, and at each
time, the Value of Four hundred thousand Pounds Sterling had been taken out of
it, all which came far short of the necessary Provisions which the War required.

The Naval Forces were very inconsiderable, consisting only of some few poor
Galleys, commanded by the Mosaip or Favorite to the Grand Seignior, a Person
of no great natural Talent of Understanding, and of no Experience in Maritime
Affairs; The Turks Forces at Sea.
nor were the ten Men of War, which they had for the two Years past been
laboring to Equip, in any Posture or Condition to make Sail this Summer; so
ignorant and averse are the Turks to all Matters, which belong unto the Seas,
and so unable for any Naval Fight, that it seems a Complement or Compassion in
the Venetians, not to have destroyed them long before. The Mosaip Admiral.
This Mosaip or Favorite, who was Captain Pasha or Admiral of the Seas, had
for a long time enjoyed the Air of his Master's Favor; his Privilege was to
be clothed in the same Habit with the Sultan, to Ride always on his Right Hand,
to Converse intimately with him, and sometimes to sit and Eat with him; and yet
I never heard, that he was ever esteemed for a Man of extraordinary Shapes or
Beauty, or to be charming in his Discourse, or to have had any great Talent of
Wisdom or Prudence: And therefore if Enquiry should be made on this Occasion
into the Reasons, Why Princes elect such and such for their Favorites, no true
Cause in my Opinion can be assigned, unless finding in that Person, of whom
they make choice for their Companion, a certain Harmony of Affections and
Humor, they love him by Sympathy, and adore their own Image in him, without
which, all other Qualities would be mean and contemptible.

But to return to the Vizier, his greatest Study and Application was to make
Levies by Land, both in Europe and Asia: Commands were dispatched to that
Purpose to Aleppo, Damascus, Diarbiquier and Gran Cairo, the remotest parts of
the Empire; but those being Countries ill Peopled, Levies made in Europe and
Asia.
Levies were made with much difficulty; and such as were constrained to go by
reason of the far distance from the Rendezvous, came late; many sickned in the
March, and some ran away and deserted; and diverse of the European Troops,
which had been harassed the last Year, retired into the Mountains, where they
passed the whole Summer; and in the Winter came out from thence, and returned
home, where they told Stories, as if they had been engaged in all the Sieges
and Battles, which had happened that Year. The Grand Vizier finding the numbers
allotted to be raised, to fall much short of the Quota, and of a reasonable
Calculation, attributed the Default thereof to the negligence of the Musselims
or Deputy-Governours to the Pashas, for which some of them were punished with
Death; and others being affrighted, hereby used all the Tyranny and Force
imaginable to compel the poor People unto the Wars; to which many of them
going, with much unwillingness, stole aside, and never came so far as the Camp.
Howsoever, it was impossible, but that, out of so vast a Tract of Ground, as is
the Ottoman Empire, consisting of many Kingdoms and Principalities, there must
be some out of every part, who having Courage enough to sacrifice their Lives
for their Religion and Country, came in, and united themselves with the Camp;
and these, tho inferior to the numbers designed and expected, yet composed an
Army very formidable, and such as was able to bid defiance to the Forces of
Germany. Howsoever the Turks did not think fit to trust so much to their Arms;
but that they would first assay and try, if it were possible, to put an end to
the War by a fair Accommodation: The Person appointed to manage this Treaty,
was Shitan Ibraim, as yet Vizier of Buda, a Person (as we have
beforementioned) of refined Parts, and good Address, The Turk propose a
Treaty.
and a Courtier fitted for such a Negotiation. In pursuance of this Design,
this Vizier wrote Letters of Complement to the chief Ministers of State at
Vienna, acquainting them of the Grand Seignior's Inclinations to a Peace. And
tho it had never been the Custom of the Sultans to be the first Promoters of
Peace, or to ask it before it was offered or begged; yet such was the Clemency
and Compassion of this Emperor, and his desire to stop the Effusion of Human
Blood, that contrary to the Dignity of his Sublime Station, raised above the
Throne of earthly Kings, he would now condescend so low, as to be the first who
should make this Religious Motion; in order unto which, he desired, that a
Passport should be sent him for a Chiaus, who was an Armenian by Nation, and
(as I think) by Religion a Christian, freely to pass and repass, and to carry
the Proposals, and to Treat thereupon: The Passport was accordingly sent, A
Chiaus sent to Vienna.
and the Armenian conducted to Comorra, where, being taken rather for a Spy
than an Ambassador, he was so closely confined and guarded, that he complained
of his Restraint to be contrary to the Laws of War and Nations; at length he
was guarded to Vienna, where he was detained under Custody, with as jealous and
watchful an Eye, as when he was at Comorra: Howsoever, the reception of this
Chiaus became the Subject of much Discourse and Talk in the City, and gave
occasion to the World to censure, as if the Emperor had designed to make a
Peace underhand, without the Privity and Concurrence of the Allies. The
Audience of this Chiaus was deferred for some time, until it was promoted and
hastened by the Envoy from the Prince of Transylvania, then residing at that
Court, and by him at length conducted to the presence of the President of the
Council, to whom he delivered the Propoposals and Articles of Peace: The which
after mature Examination, seemed to be projected with such Sagacity and
Subtlety, without sincere and open Terms, that they were generally concluded to
be Fallacious, and not to be Grounds for a faithful and lasting Peace: And so
in sine, the Armenian was dispeeded back with this Answer only, That the
Emperor could not conclude a Peace without the Concurrence of the King of
Poland, He is sent back.
and the State of Venice, the true Allies and Confederates with the Emperor; by
which Answer, the Minister from Apasi Prince of Transylvania being assured of
the Emperor's Resolutions to continue the War, changed the Tenure of his former
Memorials, and in his Master's Name, proposed that he might remain in a
Condition of Neutrality, thinking it more secure to remain as a Friend to both
sides, rather than by adhering to one, to rise or fall according to the dubious
fortune of War.

But if we look into the Winter Quarters before we Treat of the Feats of War,
which were Actions most fit for the Summer Season; A miserable Plague and Famine.
we shall find the Imperialists and Bavarians so miserably in want of all
Provisions, and of things necessary for the sustenance of Human Life: That one
would wonder, how it were possible for these Men to be so soon recovered, and
made fit for new Services and Fatigues. For such was the Famine in the Lower
Hungary, that the Inhabitants were forced to Abandon their Dwellings, and Fly
for Bread into the Town of Buda; where they were entertained for Day-labourers
to Repair the Fortifications, with the Wages of eight pence a Day, two pounds
weight of Bread, and a pint of Wine. In the Emperor's Country, a Bushel of
Wheat, which in the times of Peace, was worth no more than ten Groats, was now
advanced in price to Eighteen shillings. In Presbourg the Streets were covered
with famished and dying People; the Soldiers were either Dead or Languishing,
or had deserted their Colors: A Pestilence, as is natural, followed the
Famine, and Cattle died of the Murrain. The Island Schultz, which used to be
the Granary of the Upper Hungary, was now in a Starving condition, and the
Inhabitants forced to Eat Roots and the Barks of Trees: Nay, this Misery and
Desolation extended even to Vienna it self, where in the Garden of the
Archbishop, two Women were seen to Eat the Raw-flesh of a Horse lately Dead.
But for a remedy to this Epidemical Calamity, the Emperor, who is the Common
Father of his People, caused great quantities of Corn to be brought from all
the Neighboring Countries round about; but the Ways were so broken by the
great Rains and Marching of Armies, and heavy Carriages, that the People were
brought to the last extremity before the supplies arrived. Notwithstanding this
great want of Provisions, even to a Famine, and the Snows and Rains, which fell
in abundance, with Cold Weather of the Winter; General Schultz with a Body of
Four thousand German Horse and Dragoons, and some Companies of Hussars,
maintained a Blocade round Newhausel. To Relieve which, Count Tekeli, Blocade
o^ Newhausel.
and the Pasha of Agria were particularly encharged with the Commission: Tekeli
had 6000 Men which he had drawn from the Frontier Garrison, and the Pasha had
Four thousand, which were all his own Troops. General Schultz being informed of
their motion fell upon them with such bravery, that he put them to a total
Rout, without much loss or fighting, and took most of their Provisions and
Baggage, which were designed for the Relief of that place. Howsoever, Tekeli
made a second adventure for the Succor of Newhausel, and with a Party of Three
thousand Horse, he made way for a Convoy of Three hundred Carts, A Convoy
brought thither.
laden with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, with as many Horse, each
carrying a Sack of Meal to enter into the Town: In the strength and
encouragement of which, the Garrison made Incursions at four and five Leagues
distance, Plundering and Destroying all before them, which caused the poor
Inhabitants to abandon their Dwellings, and seek for Succor and Refuge in
fortified places. Not long afterward a second Convoy brought Two thousand
Sacks more of Meal into the Town, which with the former were good Preparations
against a Siege; but to prevent the like for the future, Count Palfi, who
commanded the Hungarian Troops, was ordered to join with Colonel Heusler, who
having but Two or Three thousand Men, was so unable to guard the Avenues to
Newhausel, that the Blocade seemed of no importance: But Heusler being thus
considerably reinforced, he defeated a third Convoy which the Turks were
sending to the Town, consisting of Eighty Wagons, Other Convoys.
which carried Ammunitions and Provisio^s, and Sixty more of Timber for
Building and Repair of the Fortifications. A fourth attempt was again made to
carry Succors into Newhausel, of which General Schultz having intelligence, he
lay in the way and intercepted them, killing Three hundred of the Enemy upon
the place, and putting the rest to Flight. Tekeli having notice of this Defeat,
pursued after Schultz with a Reinforcement of some Turks, and having overtaken
him in the Mountains between Soniati and Rozenau, he Charged him with such
Success, Successes of Tekeli.
that he killed Nine hundred of his Men, and took Four hundred Prisoners with
all their Baggage. Afterward meeting with a Regiment of Bavarians in their
Winter Quarters at Neudorf, he entirely defeated them, and so returned to
Newhausel, which he again Relieved with another Convoy.

The Spring coming forward with the time for Action; the Emperor's Council
calling to mind the Miscarriages of the last Year, caused for the most part by
extreme Famine, and want of necessary Provisions for the Soldiery, all possible
care was taken to prevent the same for the succeeding Year; and such quantities
of Corn from the more remote parts of Germany, and from Poland it self, which
is a Country abounding with Wheat, and all sorts of Grain, were brought and
laid up in Magazines, as were judged sufficient to sustain the Army for the
whole Year without such wants, under which it lately labored.

All the remaining part of this Winter was spent about Esperies, or
intercepting Convoys designed to Newhausel. Esperies.
Esperies is a Town of Hungary in the County of Sarax very well fortified,
Situate upon the River of Tarbez toward the Mountains, and on the Frontiers of
Poland; it has always belonged to the Emperor as King of Hungary, until such
time as in the Year 1678, it fell into the Hands of Tekeli, from whom it was
recovered by force of the Imperial Arms in the Year 1685. Howsoever, at the
beginning thereof, the attempt of General Schultz was fruitless, and of evil
consequence; for laying Siege to it in the Winter, the Cold and extreme
Weather, and want of all things necessary, enforced him to Rise again with the
loss of Five hundred Soldiers killed and wounded, with several Captains and
other Officers, who were all slain by the many brisk and desperate Sallies
which the Defendant made from the Town: And being upon his Retreat, Tekeli in
person Charged him in the Rear at the Head of his own Men with such Success,
that he defeated the whole Party, and Schultz with much difficulty saved his
Cann^n.

Toward the end of February Five hundred Janisaries, and Three hundred Spahees
belonging to Newhausel, possessed themselves of the Fortress of Gutta, Gutta
taken.
after a Fight of nine Hours; the Garrison consisted only of One hundred and
fifty Hussars, under the command of a Lieutenant, who with two Soldiers only
escaped to Commorra, all the rest being put to the Sword. This Town is Situate
on the River Waagh; it was Built during the late Wars in a Moorish or Fenny
place, between the Danube, the Waagh and Swartz; it is but Five English Miles.
a Mile from Newhausel, and may be seen from the Top of the Steeple of the
great Church. The Turks having made themselves Masters of Gutta, were carrying
away the Plunder with two pieces of Cannon to Newhausel. Two thousand Spahees,
and Six hundred Janisaries were giving Convoy unto Sixty Wagons laden with
Ammunition for the same place, when Colonel Heusler with several Detachments
from Comorra, Papa, Vesprin and Leventz, endeavored to obstruct their Passage
by Ambuscades which he had laid in their way: Of which the Turks having had
notice, they altered their Course, and endeavored to fortify themselves in
some advantageous Ground; but Heusler joining with Count Zabor, allowed them
not time to secure themselves, but attacked them near Weitzen with such
Bravery, that he put them all to Flight, and seized on their Wagons, Successes
of Colonel Heusler.
with the Provisions in them, which he burnt, because he knew not in what
manner to carry them off safe: He afterward took Weitzen, and put all the
Garrison to the Sword; which having done, he received information that a Pasha
with Five hundred Janisaries appointed for Convoy to Five hundred Wagons,
drawn by Five Oxen apiece, were retired within a little Fortress not far
distant, where they concealed themselves until the Enemy was retired; he
immediately went and invested the place, where he killed the greatest part of
the Janisaries, took the Pasha with many Prisoners, and all the Wagons, which
he carried to Leventz.

About the same time the Marquis Doria, and the Baron of Soyes having passed
the Tibiscus with a strong Detachment of Bavarian Troops, A party of
Malcontents defeated.
and a Hundred Horse belonging to the Regiment of Caraffa, defeated a Party of
Five hundred Horse belonging to the Malcontents, killed Four hundred of them,
took twenty Prisoners with eight Colors, and a considerable Booty. But General
Schultz was not so succesful in his Attempt upon Ungwar, being forced to Retire
from thence with considerable loss.

The Successes of General Heusler much troubled the Thoughts of the Vizier of
Buda, and the Seraskier, in what manner to defend themselves against the
Complaints which Tekeli and the Pasha of Novigrade had made against them to the
Grand Seignior: To prevent which, and stop these insinuations from receiving
credit, The Pashas Erla and Novigrade strangled.
they caused the Pasha of Novigrade to be Strangled, with the Pasha of Erla,
after which they dispatched two Agas to the Port with all expedition to be
beforehand with their Complaints against Tekeli, and the Pashas, representing
that they had put the two Pashas to Death for their Cowardice and evil Conduct,
with some Reflections upon Tekeli, as if he entertained a secret Correspondence
with the Christians. The Grand Seignior and Grand Vizier, being prepossessed
with these first advices, applauded the care and justice of the Vizier of Buda,
and Seraskier, advising them to be careful in the chocie of such Men, who were
to succeed them in those Offices of Trust.

Notwithstanding the advantage which Tekeli had gained over General Schultz
before Esperies, and given it some Relief; yet the Town labored under great
want of necessary Provisions, A Convoy sent to Relieve Esperies, taken.
to supply which Tekeli sent a strong Convoy to support the place with Grain
Flesh, Pulse and all things required for a Siege: But Schultz recovering his
Forces, and animated with desire of Revenge, watched his opportunity to fall on
the Convoy, which he charged with such Vigor and Bravery, that he killed Three
hundred on the place, took all their Carriages, with great quantities Tokay
Wine.

Thus did all matters proceed with various Successes on both sides; the
Imperialists having it in their intentions, to open the Campaign with the
taking of Newhausel, made a Preparation thereunto by cutting off all Convoys,
and Succors which were designed for it is Relief: The Turks labored to support
it, and lost many Men this Winter in the Enterprise; and more particularly
remarkable was that Defeat which Colonel Heusler (after having destroyed all
the Country to the Gates of Newhausel) gave unto a Party of Five hundred
Spahees and Three hundred Janisaries, Another Convoy defeated.
assembled in the Neighboring Villages, to give Convoy to great numbers of
Wagons laden with Provisions for supply of the Garrison; the Fight was very
warm, and doubtful for some time; but the Spahees at length turning their
Backs, left the Janisaries exposed, who still maintained their ground under the
shelter of the Trenches, which they had hastily cast up, and the Covert of
their Wagons with which they had encompassed themselves: But being at length
overwhelmed with numbers, they were entirely overthrown, Two hundred of their
Men were killed with an Aga, and about Forty Prisoners taken, with all their
Wagons to the number of Forty, laden with Provisions: To complete this
Victory, the Imperialists lost not above ten Men, and freed above Fifty
Christians out of Slavery; and of all this Detachment not above Two hundred
Re-enter'd the Garrison, the remainder being either dispersed, or else had made
their Escape to Novigrade.

The Great Vizier being informed of these Successes, and thereby made
apprehensive of the danger of losing Newhausel, resolved to bend the main Force
of the Ottoman Empire against Hungary. The War on the Frontiers of Poland
seemed not so formidable, as to need much Aid; the Tartars, The Turks slight
the Poles.
who in times past were considered as Free-booters, and like Locusts and
Catterpillers, fit only for Rapin and Spoil, and to lay a Country Desolate,
were not ranked in the number of Martial and Well-disciplin'd Troops, and
esteemed a match sufficient for that Warlike Kingdom of Poland. The Tartars,
who availed themselves much on this late Opinion, which the World had conceived
of them, began to stand on their Terms with the Polish and Ottoman Courts: The
first offered them considerable rewards to accept of a Neutrality; The Poles
and Tartars Treat.
and the latter fearing lest this Mercenary People should fall from their
dependence on the Port, overcame their Minds with greater Sums, than what had
been offered by Poland, together with a Concession of all the Ukrain, to which
the Grand Seignior would resign his Title unto them, and annex it to their
Dominions, provided they would recover it again by force of their own Arms. The
Proposals of the Sultan being accompanied with a certain Harmony of Affection
and Religion, which is between the Turks and this People, were more charming
than the faint Offers from Poland, and fixed them in their Resolution to Live
and Die, Stand and Fall with the Ottoman Interest.

The Season of the Year being now well advanced, and the Weather become mild
and sit for Action; the Imperial Troops from the Hereditary Countries, with the
Auxiliaries and Bands of Volunteers, composed of diverse Nations, began to
descend from Moravia, and with their Officers to march toward the place of
General Rendevous, The place of General Rendervous.
appointed in the Plains between Newhausel and Barkan, being esteemed the most
convenient Situation for Atchieving any Enterprise, according to the
Resolutions of a Council of War. The Imperial Army consisted of Twenty four or
Twenty five thousand Men, but the Auxiliaries were above double the number: The
House of Brunswick furnished 10.000 Fighting Men, Commanded by Prince George
William, eldest Son of the Duke of Hanover, who marched in the Head of them.
General Chauver commanded the Troops of the Prince of Zell. The Elector of
Cologne sent Six thousand effective Men, and the City Six hundred, composed in
all of Forty five Companies of Foot, Twelve of Horse and Ten of Dragoons: All
the other Electors and Princes of the Circle complied with their Quotas
according to Agreement, The Forces of the Circles.
Commanded by Officers of Experience and Bravery. The Archbishop of Saltzburg
over and above the Money already mentioned, contributed to this Summers
expedition, a considerable Train of heavy Cannon: So that the Quotas of the
Empire according to the true Calculation, amounted unto Forty thousand Men,
besides 16.000 Bavarians, all veterane and experienced Soldiers, which were
added as Recruits to the other Forces, already employed in the War of the last
Year. Count Rabata was appointed Commissary General for raising and amassing
Provisions wherewith to supply the Army; and for the more effectual performance
thereof, it was recommended as a particular Charge to every Circle, Care taken
to supply the Army with Provisions.
to furnish their Men respectively, with a sufficiency of Victuals for the
Campaign; by which means there was an abundance of all things in the Camp, and
the Army freed of the misery of Famine attended with Pestilence; which two
evils ruined all the designs of the last Year.

About the beginning of May General Palfi was ordered to march into Hungary,
and join with Colonel Heusler at the Blocade of Newhausel; which they so
straightened, that the Pasha Governor of that place, turned out all useless
Persons out of the Town, who were not capable to bear Arms, and so many of the
Christian Slaves, May.
as served only to consume and lessen the Provisions, and not defend the Town:
By these Persons the Commanders received information, that the Garrison
consisted only of Two or Three thousand Janisaries, of which a great number was
Sick and Infirm.

The better to reinforce the Blocade, and streighten the place in such manner,
that it might receive no Relief either of Men or Victuals, Newhausel
straightened.
three thousand Horse, and as many Foot were sent to join with Heusler and
Palfi, and with them many Carts and Wagons laden with all sorts of Ammunition
and Provisions, by which there was no want of any thing necessary for the
comfort, and encouragement of the Soldiery, that so with the more Strength and
Vigor they might be ready to oppose a strong Party which was preparing at
Pest, to Convoy Eight hundred Carts with Victuals, and to make way for them
into the Town by Force of Arms.

At this time that Palfi and Heusler were employed in Blocking up Newhausel,
General Lesly departed from Vienna to Gratz, from whence he drew his Forces
into the Field in order to march into Croatia, where he was to Command this
Year, with a Reinforcement of Seven thousand Men more than he had the last.

General Schultz, who had newly distributed a Hundred thousand Florins amongst
his Soldiers, finding them Courageous and in good Heart, was resolved to begin
the Campaign with the notable Exploit of laying Siege to Ungwar, a small, but
the Capital City of the County of Ung, in which Tekeli had placed a strong
Garrison. So soon as he invested it, he took a Redoubt, and began to make his
Approaches, and raise his Batteries, and throw Bombs into the Town; and having
by his Cannon opened a sufficient Breach in the Walls, he Stormed it, and with
great slaughter and loss of Men, Ungwar taken.
he entered and took the Town; and without giving the Enemy farther respite, he
Invested the Castle, and lodged his Soldiers in the Ditch, where in the space
of three Days he lost Three hundred Men, besides Twenty Officers killed and
wounded. Upon this News, the Malcontents, with a great Body, came to relieve
the Place; but General Schultz bravely encountered them, gave them a Repulse,
and took three of their Standards; and returning with this Success back to the
Siege, he was ready to give Fire unto a Mine, when News came that Tekeli having
joined himself to a strong Body of Tartars, was marching against him, Schultz
forced to leave the Town.
he raised the Siege with so much Have and Precipitation, that he was
constrained to leave the greatest part of his Artillery behind him, after he
had lost Nine hundred Men, which were killed, and Two hundred wounded; amongst
which was Count Strafoldo, who was shot through the Arm with a Musquet-bullet,
and Baron Arti his Lieutenant Colonel, was wounded likewise.

It was now the beginning of June, when the Duke of Loraine, appointed General
of the Imperial and Confederate Forces, with absolute Power and Authority from
the Emperor, came to the Army, which was encamped near unto Gran, A Council of
War called.
where a Council of War was held, and therein diversely debated, whether they
should begin this Campaign with the Siege of Novigrade, which would interrupt
all Communication between Buda and Newhausel; or return again to Buda, where
the Fortifications were not as yet fully repaired, nor the Inhabitants totally
freed from the dread and fear of their late Danger; but upon farther
examination of this Matter, it was made to appear, that Buda was in a much
better Condition than it was before the Siege; June.
for that the Fortifications were all finished, and made better and stronger
than they were formerly; that the new Governor had demolished all the Houses,
which had been ruined and defaced by the Bombs, and totally destroyed the
Suburbs; that the Garrison consisted of Ten thousand Men, all stout and brave
Soldiers; that the Seraskier, The state of Buda.
with the like number of Men, had encamped between Buda and Alba Regalis, and
12.000 more had passed the Bridge to join with a Body of Ten thousand Tartars,
so that impossible in a manner it was to lay a Siege, which was daily in hazard
of being disturbed by such potent Armies. The Enterprise upon Novigrode seemed
much more feasible; but before any Resolution would be taken therein, the Duke
of Loraine, with General Souches, Scaffemburg, Colonel Beck, and several
Officers belonging to the Artillery and Ingineers, thought fit to take a view
of the Works and Situation of the Place. The Duke at the head of Three thousand
select Horse, commanded by Count Caprara, on the 25th passed the River Grana,
on a Bridge of Boats, and foorded over the River Hippol, which, at that Season
of the Summer, was not deeper than the Bellies of the Horses. The next Day
before Noon they came in sight of Novigrode, and by their Appearance, gave an
Alarm to the Town and Castle, from whence they fired many of their Cannon, for
a Signal to those who were abroad, laboring in their Vineyards, or keeping
watch over their Cattle in the Field, to hasten back and retire under security
of the Fortress: The Report of the Guns warned every one of the Danger, so that
the Guardians of the Cattle, as well as others, drove in their Herds from their
Pastures as fast as possible; but could not make such speed, as to get them all
into Security, before the Hussars, a People used to that kind of Prey, came up
with them, and seized a great share of the Cattle, driving them away for
Service of their own Camp: And tho a Party of Horse sallied out of the Garrison
upon them, endeavoring to regain the Spoil, yet being supported by a stronger
Body, they retired within the Palisadoes, where they were received by several
Chambers of Janisaries.

Novigrode*
Novigrode is raised upon a high craggy Rock, fortified by Nature, and the Way
so narrow as is not capable to receive above one Man abreast, and encompassed
with a Ditch of about Thirty four Foot deep; this Place was taken from the
Christians in the Year 1663. The Duke of Loraine, and the other Generals and
Engeniers, having well observed the Situation of the Place, and all the
difficult Accesses thereunto, sounded a Retreat, and began their March back
again to the Camp; the Rear-guard being committed to the Care and Conduct of
the Count de Ofkirk, with whom were several Princes in Quality of Volunteers,
as the Prince de Conti, de la Roche Sur-yon, de Commerci and de Turenne. Upon
this Retreat, a Party of the Turkish Cavalry sallied out of the Town, seeming
as if they resolved to fall on the Rear, with design only to draw them into an
Ambuscade of Janisaries, who lay hid in certain Hedges and Bushes, not far
distant from the open Road. The Stratagem succeeded in part; for these young
Gallants thirsting after Glory, and desirous of an Engagement with the Enemy,
could not refrain from pursuing the Turks to the place of Danger, where in all
probability they had most certainly been destroyed, had not the Duke of Loraine
sent some Troops seasonably to their Relief. The next Day this Party being
returned from Novigrode to the Camp, General Caprara, who lay confined in his
Bed by a Fever, delivered into the Hands of the Duke of Loraine a Letter from
diverse poor Christian Slaves, Greeks, Hungarians, and others in Newhausel,
miserably complaining of their Servitude, and of the Famine of that Place,
which was so great, that they were ready to Perish for want of Food; False
Letters delivered to the Duke of Loraine.
so that in case he would only appear with his Army before that Place, the
Distress of it, by reason of Famine, was such, as would cause them to Surrender
without farther Violence or loss of Time. The Particulars of the State of this
Place, was again confirmed by a Turk, who carrying Letters from Newhausel to
Buda, was intercepted in the way, and brought to the Camp; where being examined
before a Council of Officers, he there confirmed the Truth of what was related
in the Letter, and that the Garrison did not exceed Twelve hundred Men; so that
the Pasha, an ancient Soldier, did much lament the Miseries of the Place, which
he could not maintain, and must either be forced to make a Surrender of it, or
else Sacrifice his own, and the Lives of all the Inhabitants, to the Fury of
the Enemy. This Report seconding the Letter wrote from the Christian Captives,
the Truth thereof was no longer doubted, so that without farther dispute or
demurr, it was resolved, at a Council of War, to open this Campaign with the
Siege of Newhausel; tho in reality both the Letter was feigned, and the Report
given by the Turk false, as will appear hereafter, before we make an end of the
Siege of this Place: Howsoever, it served for the present to alter the design
from Novigrode, The Siege of Newhausel resolved.
and turn it on Newhausel, against which all Preparations were making, and
Orders sent to the Prince of Hanover to advance toward the Town, and cause his
Men to provide themselves with Faggots and Timber to make Gabions, with other
Materials necessary for this Enterprise; and all the Boats, and Floats for
Bridges, which lay below Comorra, were ordered to be drawn up against the
Stream: And lest in the mean time, during this Siege, Preparations thereunto.
the Seraskier thinking to make a Diversion, should lay Siege either to
Strigonium or Vicegrade, the latter Garrison was reinforced with Three hundred
Men, and the former with Fifteen hundred, under the Command of Count Mansfeld,
besides several Troops of Hussars, who were appointed to scower the Country
round, and observe the Motion of the Enemy.

July.
All things being prepared in order to a Siege, on the third of July the Duke of
Loraine Commanded the whole Army to raise the Camp, and March toward
Newhausel; and on the 6th they pitched at a Bog or Fenny place in sight of the
Town, being hindered from proceeding farther by the Storms and continual Rains,
which gave great retardment and stop to their March: But to lose no time,
General Heusler was appointed with a Party of Horse to survey the Fenns, and
give an account of the Ways and Passages over it; Heusler beats a Party of the
Enemies Horse.
and meeting with a Party of Horse belonging to the Garrison, which was
commanded to prevent and stop his Passage, he charged them with such vigor, as
caused them to fly back to the Town, pursuing them to the very Gates thereof.
After which, having well observed that the Fenns were not to be passed by the
Infantry, it was ordered, That every Horseman should mount a Footman behind
him; so that the Day following all the Army passed, and encamped by the Banks
of the River Nitria or Neutra, about Cannon-shot distant from the Town.

At the appearance of the Christian Army, the Turkish Garrison being greatly
dismayed, they quitted the Palanca, which was raised at the Gate of Strigonium,
and broke the Island-Bridge, causing all their Forces to be dispersed without
the Town in little Forts and Redoubts, to retire within, that being gathered
into a Body, they might be the better enabled to make a valiant and an
obstinate Resistance. The same Day the Pasha opened the Storehouses of the
Place, where Provisions were laid up in such abundance, that, being distributed
with Frugality, and managed with good Husbandry, were sufficient to conserve
and maintain the City for many Months without Famine.

The Town Surveyed.
But before the Siege was formed, the Duke of Loraine, with other Officers and
Persons of Note and Quality, took a View or Survey of the Town, to discover the
parts and places where the Attacks might be carried forward with the best
Advantage, and tried where the River Neutra was fordable, as it was at that
Season of the Year in diverse places. In the mean time, the Troops of Hanover
and Zell, Commanded by the Prince of Hanover, and his Lieutenant General
Chauvet arrived in the Camp, against whom the Turks spent many of their
Cannon-shot without any Effect; which Troops being drawn up in open Field, made
so good an Appearance in all Respects, as gave great Satisfaction to the Duke
of Loraine, and the other General Officers.

On the 9th about Noon, the Bavarian Infantry advanced forward, commanded in
chief by Count Serini.

On the 10th the Imperial Generals, with the Elector of Bavaria, and the Prince
of Hanover, designed the place where the Town should be first attacked; and
Horses were sent, and Wagons to draw up the heavy Cannon which were arrived in
Boats near to the Camp, and the places chalked out and designed where the
Batteries were to be raised.

On the 11th a Council of War was held, The Form of the Siege resolved,
and there resolved by all the General Officers to open the Trenches, and to
make the main Attack at the same place and side on which the Turks had done,
when they took the Town in the Year 1663.

Great Labors were used on the 12th to enlarge the Trenches, joining unto
which there was a Valley, which served for a Parade, wide enough to draw up Two
thousand Men, and therein to remain under Covert, and out of danger of the
Enemies Shot. Two Lines also were drawn, and described.
one toward the Point of the Bastion adjoining to the Port of Strigonium, and
another leading to the Bastion which was contiguous to it; and on this part of
the Town the chief Effort was to be made. The Bavarians maintained the Attack
on the Gate-side, and the Imperialists the other; and a third Attack was
intended on the side toward Vienna, on the Banks of the River Neutra, which
was to be committed unto the Swedes, The Swedes come to the Siege.
so soon as they entered into the Camp, as they did the Day following; and
having formed their Trenches, they cut a Drain from the Town Ditch, where being
a kind of declivity, the Water fell in abundance, and ran with a full Channel
into the Neutra. To these several Attacks Three thousand Men were every Day
appointed to relieve each other, under Command of the General of the Artillery,
two Sergeant-Majors of Battalions, two Colonels, and other subordinate
Officers, which the Prince of Croy, Count Serini, and the Duke of Hanover were
successively to Command, according to their turns.

All the Day following was spent in opening and enlarging the Trenches, The
Trenches enlarged.
which were broad enough to contain three Men abreast, and advanced unto Five
or Six hundred Paces in length; and sufficient Ground secured to lengthen them
about One hundred and fifty Paces more, which would reach unto the side of the
Ditch; all which was performed without any considerable loss, notwithstanding
the continual Firings from the Enemy, both of small and great Shot. At the end
of every Line a Redoubt was raised, and a Parallel Line of Communication drawn
from one Attack unto the other, with a place of Parade in the middle, about
which three Batteries were raising, one behind the Line of Communication, which
was to be the biggest, containing Seventeen or Eighteen Pieces of Cannon,
because it was to front and succor the other Batteries on each side; the other
two were to the right Hand, and to the left of five Pieces of Cannon, each to
Flank the main Battery.

On the 14th, the Redoubts, the Parallel Lines of Communication, the Parade,
and the Trenches were all perfected and sufficiently opened, so that now the
Siege was completely formed; and an Allodgment prepared on the brink of the
Ditch; which tho the Besieged did endeavor to disturb by constantly Shooting
on the Workmen, The Siege formed.
yet nothing hindered to perfect the Allodgment which was made wide, and
extremely well fortified on all sides.

The City of Newhausel is Situate on a Plain with some little rising Hills
about it, and on the Banks of the River Neutra; it is not far from Comorra, and
about a Days Journey from Strigonium; it is encompassed by six Bastions,
Newhausel
according to the manner of the modern Fortifications; the distance of the
Curtains, and of the Flankers are of an exact equality, and the Form is a
Sex-Agon, or Six-Angles. After the Turks had taken it in the Year 1663, they
brought the Neutra round the Town and filled the Ditch with Water, and made it
so Deep, that it was almost impossible to form any Mine under it.

The presence of the Duke of Loraine, who was always an Overseer and director
in making the Trenches, in which he for the most part remained until after
Midnight, did very much contribute to the dispatch of that Work: So that
between the 14th and 21th all matters requisite for the Siege were finished,
the Allodgment on the brink of the Ditch was more enlarged than before, the
Water whereof being Fathomed, was found to be seventeen or eighteen Foot in
Depth; and sometime increased, notwithstanding the Drain, by the excessive
Rains, which not only supplied it with Water, but much incommoded the Soldiers
in their Trenches. The Batteries make a Breach.
The Batteries continually played with good Success, and not only had beaten
down a great part of the Parapet, but had made a considerable Breach in the
Bastion it self; which they intended to widen, and open yet more by the help of
another Battery newly raised, consisting of eighteen Pieces of Cannon; but
whilst these things were in agitation, News was brought to the Duke of Loraine,
that the Turkish Army began to march toward Buda and Alba Regalis, and that
Six thousand Turks and Tartars were advanced toward Vicegrade. Upon this
intelligence General Lesly, who was appointed to watch the Motion of the Enemy,
was Ordered to endeavor unto the utmost of his power to hinder and obstruct
the Passage of the Seraskier over the River Sava and Drove; Leisly attend^ the
Motion of the Seraskiers.
and Colonel Heusler with Two thousand Horse was dispeeded toward Pest, to get
intelligence of the Designs of the Vizier: Soon after this Advices came, That
the Seraskier was advancing with all his Forces toward Buda, and had made a
Bridge not far from thence over the Danube; but that it was not yet known,
whether he intended to attempt the raising of the Siege, or to Sit down before
some Town whereby to make a diversion: But to be better provided, and in a
readiness either to meet the Seraskier in the Field, or to defeat his Attempt
against any fortified Place; The Duke of Loraine ordered a Detachment of a
Regiment of Savoiard Dragoons, to join with some of the Bavarian and Lunenburg
Troops, to the number of Three thousand Men, and therewith to Reinforce those
Regiments, which guarded the Bridge of Comorra.

During the time that a considerable Force was employed to observe the Motion
of the Seraskier, the Siege was carried on with all imaginable Courage and
Resolution; the Cannon continually fired from the several Batteries, and the
Bombs and Carcasses were thrown into the Fortress with such good Success, that
on the 22d, The Town on Fire.
the Town appeared to Smoke and Flame in three several places, which continued
all Night, to the great Terror and Labor of the Defendants: But at length by
the great Rains which fell, the Fires were not only extinguished, but the
Christians very much incommoded in their Trenches, and the Waters of the Ditch
increased, as fast almost as they were sunk by the Drain: So that it seeming a
long and tedious Work, before the Ditch could be emptied of it is Water; a
contrivance was made to pass a Miner over the Ditch in a Boat, and six it to
the Breach in the Wall; but the Boat receiving a Shot from the Town, was ready
to sink, and those therein were so incommoded with showers of Stones from the
smaller Guns, and Petreras planted on the Walls, that they were forced to
Retire, and give over that Design.

On the 24th, the Defendants made a Sally on that side, where a Guard was
appointed of Swedes and Suabians to defend the Drain, which was made to sink
the Water of the Ditch; and surprised them at a time, A Sally from the Town.
when they were overcharged with Wine, which they had unfortunatly gotten, and
laid for the most part in so profound a Sleep, without so much as a Match
lighted, that a Hundred of them with their Lieutenant Colonel, two Captains and
two Lieutenants did never awake from their natural Sleep, but insensibly passed
from it, into the last Sleep of Death. The Turks returned back again into the
Town without much harm; but with great Joy and Triumph, which they testified by
the Music, which was heard from the Walls into the Trenches.

But on the 25th, greater care was taken with the Guards on that side, and
endeavors used to enlarge the Channel, which being performed, the Water in the
Ditch sunk eight Foot, The Ditch filled with Rubbish.
so that the Faggots, Stones and Rubbish were prepared to fill it up; and that
Labor so closely followed, that in one Night the Ditch was half filled up on
that side, where the Imperialists were lodged: But on that of the Bavarians,
they advanced little, by Reason that the Defendants fired so continually from
the Parapet of the Bastion, which was opposite to them, as disturbed the Work,
and hindered them very much in carrying Faggots and Rubbish, so freely as was
done on the other side.

The Work was how to fill the Ditch on each side, as well where the
Imperialists, as where the Bavarians were Quartered: To prevent which, the
Turks on the 27th, about Noon made a Sally by the Port of Strigonium; and
stopped the Channel, by which the Water vented it self out of the Ditch and ran
into the River; but being opposed by Three hundred Bavarians they received a
Repulse, and made their Retreat back into the Town; The difficulty of draining
the Ditch.
the Bank being again opened, the Water fell so low, that the Imperialists
discovered a secret Passage, by which the wet and moorish Ground kept a
Correspondence with the Ditch, and supplied it with some Waters from thence;
the Christians endeavored to stop this Conveyance, and the Turks to open it,
so that what one did by Day, the other destroyed by the Night.

The increase of the Waters in the Ditch, caused the Besiegers to despair of
being able to effect any thing by their Mines; Galleries prepared.
but finding that their Batteries opened the Breach more and more, they
resolved to perform their work by the two Attacks, on the right and on the left
Hand: The two Galleries were in a short time advanced; that to the right, went
drawing near to the Wall, being well covered, and flanked with Baskets, Barrels
and Gabions filled with Earth, in which Action the Lieutenant Colonel of Count
Souches was killed: The Turks labored with all possible Industry to keep off
the Approach of these Galleries, which most certainly threatened the Ruin of the
Town; to effect which, they threw certain artificial Fireworks upon the
Galleries, They are burned.
composed of Sulphur and Bituminous matter, which burned so violently, that it
was impossible to extinguish it, until it had laid all in Ashes; and so
forcibly did it burn, that it took hold of the next Battery, and set Fire to
the Powder in it, with which diverse of the Gunners, to the number of Forty Men
were Blown up. Nor did the Gallery on the left Hand fare any thing better, for
the Turks shot such numbers of Arrows with artificial Fires into it, that
nothing could resist the violence of the Flames: All the Gallery took Fire,
with the Parapet and Neighboring Battery, The Galleries and Batteries burnt.
and burned with such fierceness, that it became too hot for the Guards, and
dismounted four Pieces of Cannon. The Duke of Loraine came immediately in
Person to the assistance of the place, and remained where the Fire was most
impetuous, commanding the Officers to march their Troops to that place; and in
the mean time employed all his Servants and Attendants, who were about him,
even his very Pages to stop and extinguish the Fire. The Example of the General
was so prevalent, that every one gave a helping hand, with such diligence and
vigor, that the Fire was extinguished, and a great part of the Battery was
saved, with the Cannon and Powder: Whilst this Action was doing, all those who
worked about the Fire lay open to the shot of the Enemy, of which about Sixty
Soldiers were killed, and twelve of them near to the Person of the Duke, who
exposed himself without fear to the utmost Peril of his Life.

The Fire being extinguished, Order was given to repair the Damage which the
Fire had done; which accordingly was executed with such diligence, that on the
next Night following the Parapet was repaired, and the Cannon being remounted
began again to Batter the Town; new Galleries were also making of such matter,
as should not be so easily combustible as the former.

The Disorders being composed which were caused by these Fires, The Elector of
Bavaria comes to the Camp.
the Elector of Bavaria entered the Camp; and immediately repaired to that part
where his Soldiers were lodged. The Duke of Loraine having made him a Visit,
and passed those Complements which are due to his Person, and Character; he
attended him abroad and showed him all the Attacks, the Approaches, Batteries,
and the whole Form of the Siege.

Whilst matters were thus in Action at the Siege, Advices were daily brought
of the Seraskier's motion, that his whole Army consisted of 60.000 Men,
including the Tartars, and lay Encamped at the Foot of St. Gerard's Mount near
Buda, with Twenty five Pieces of Cannon, small and great.

The Turkish Army near Buda.
On the 26th it was certainly advised, that they had passed the Danube, and that
the Vanguard bended toward Vaitz, and the Rear-guard toward Vicegrade and
Strigonium. Upon this intelligence it was almost certainly concluded, That the
Turks intended with one part of the Army to lay Siege to Strigonium, and with
the other to attempt the Relief of Newhausel; to confirm which two Hussars
about the close of the Evening, brought News, that the Turkish Army about Noon
of the same Day, had pitched their Camp in sight of Strigonium, and had made a
Bridge at the Isle of St. Andrew, for better Communication of their Troops. It
being now out of all doubt, that the Turks would either Invest Strigonium or
Novigrade; the Duke of Loraine with the concurrence of his Electoral Highness
the Duke of Bavaria, resolved to leave 16.000 Men under the command and conduct
of Count Caprara to continue the Siege; and with the Gross of his Army to march
against the Seraskier; but before their departure they had the satisfaction to
see the four Regiments of Infantry belonging to the Elector of Cologne, Their
motion observed.
to come and join with them, all brave and stout Men well Armed and well
Clothed. Colonel Heusler, who with Fifteen hundred Horse watched (as we have
said) the Motion of the Enemy, gave certain intelligence, that on the 30th of
July, the City and Castle of Strigonium were Invested by the Seraskier, which
caused the Duke of Loraine to hasten his march toward the Relief of that
place, leaving all things belonging to the Siege in very good order. Strigonium
besieged.
The News sent by Colonel Heusler, was confirmed on the 4th of August, by
Report of the Cannon, which being carried by a favorable Wind, were heard at
the Siege before Newhausel: The Duke of Loraine being on his march, passed his
Army consisting of 40.000 fighting Men over the Waagh on a Bridge of Boats,
bending toward Comorra: On their way thither intelligence was given them, that
the Night before, the Turkish Army had been Alarmed by a Party of Hussars
which had fallen in upon their Baggage: Howsoever, they continued still to
force the Place, having given a fierce Assault upon the lower Tower Town, but
were bravely repulsed. This News quickening the march of the Army, the next Day
they passed the Danube upon two Bridges near to Comorra, and afterward Ranged
the whole Army into order of Battle: The Imperial Troops were divided in the
first and second Lines of the two Wings; with them joined some Dragoons, and
some Battalions of the Allies; The Order of the Christian Army.
the Elector of Bavaria Commanded the left Wing; the main Body of Bavarians and
Swedes were comprehended in this Wing, and that of Franconia and Lunenburg in
the Right; the Prince of Hanover and General Chauvet, Commanded at the Head of
their own Troops, as the Marquis of Tutriac, and other Generals of the Allies
at the Front of theirs. Count Rabata General of the Horse, the Commissary
General, Count Palfi and Baron Mercy, and other Chief Officers were of the left
Wing; Prince Lewis of Baden, Count Dunewaldt, Count Taaf and Stirhaim, Major
General, were added to the right Wing. Prince Waldeck and Count de Fontana, one
of the Major Generals marched at the Head of their Troops, and Prince Lubomiski
commanded the Cannon: In this order the Army marched, and on the 10th of August
they Encamped within three hours march of Strigonium: And the next Day
approaching yet nearer, the Report of the Cannon, and all Noise toward the
Town seemed to cease; so that it was concluded, that either the Town was taken,
or the Siege raised. Whilst they were in this suspense, the Garrision of
Vicegrade came in sight of the Camp, They are met by the Garrison of Vicegrade.
to the great surprise of the Generals, who until that time, had never been
informed that the place had been Invested by any part of the Ottoman Army: It
seemed a little strange to meet that Garrison in the open Field, marching with
their Arms and Baggage, with their Matches Lighted, their Drums Beating, and
their Colors Flying; but this Wonder ceased, when the Officer in Chief
acquainted the Generals, how that the Fortress of Vicegrade, had sustained a
Siege for the space of sixteen Days, against all the Force of the Ottoman Army;
that the Tower which was adjoining to the Castle was Blown up, which made so
wide a Breach, that it was impossible to sustain another Assault of the Enemy,
having endured two Assaults before: And therefore, after a loss of the greatest
part of the Garrison, which was reduced from Three hundred and fifty to One
hundred and thirty Soldiers, the Surrender thereof seemed excusable, and not to
be imputed to the Cowardice, or want of Conduct either in the Commander, or in
the Soldiers. There was also something more than ordinary in the behavior of
the Turks toward the Garrison, when this place was Surrendered: For they out
of a Principle of hatred to the Christian Religion, and of scorn and
indignation against all People, but those of their own Profession, were
commonly provoked to use their Victories with Pride and unlimited Insolence;
and to break their Faith and Engagements, The Turks Civility to that Garrison.
to which they had obliged themselves by Articles and Capitulations; did now
contrary to their usual practice, Treat the vanquished of this Fortress with
due respect and kindness; and lest any thing should happen, which might seem
disagreeable to their Capitulations in their march by Land, care was taken to
Transport them in Boats, and to Land them as near as was possible to the
Christian Camp; and for the better security on the way, they were accompanied
by three Turkish Officers, whom the Duke of Loraine treated with a Civility,
corresponding unto which they had used toward the Garrison.

The next Day being the 11th of August, the Christian Army pitched their Tents
at Almatz, about a League distant from Strigonium: From whence an Officer was
sent to Complement the Duke of Loraine, and the other Generals, with a Relation
of what the Turks had acted in the late Siege: He told them, A Relation of the
Siege of Strigonium.
That one the 30th and 31st of the last Month their Approaches were begun (as
were to be seen) on the side toward Comorra, at the Foot of St. Thomas his
Mount, and were in two Days time, carried on to the Counterscarp of the lower
City, where they Sprang four Mines, and seconded them with as many Assaults, in
which so many were killed, that the Ditch seemed to be levelled, and filled up
with the dead Bodies of the Slain, and made equal with the Border of the
Counterscarp. In fine, About two Days before, the Turks having received certain
Intelligence of the Approach of the Christian Army for their Relief, had raised
the Siege with so much have and precipitation, as gave Courage to the
Defendants to make a Sally upon them at their departure; and falling on their
Rear, took a Bloody Farewell of them, with the Slaughter of Three hundred of
their Men. The Success of Strigonium made some amends for the loss of
Vicegrade, and gave undoubted proofs, that where is any equality in Force, the
Christian Valor and Conduct, challenges Fortune to be of their side, and to
favor and assist them.

The Duke of Loraine having recruited the Garrison of Strigonium with Five
hundred Foot, and succored it with Ammunition, and Provisions necessary for
it is Defense; raised his Camp on the 13th, and marched away in quest of the
Seraskier, with resolution to give him Battle, in case the moorish and fenny
Grounds, which interposed between the two Armies, did not prevent the
Engagement. The two Armies in sight of each other.
The Day following, with rising of the Sun was opened a clear Scene,
representing the whole Turkish Army, which having passed the Danube to join
with some Tartarian and Turkish Troops, were Encamped on the farther side of a
fenny or moorish Ground, which lies between Newhausal and Senan, extending it
self from the Banks of the River to a certain rising Ground, on which they had
planted their whole Train of Artillery; the Appearance of which seemed very
formidable, and not consisting of less than 55 or 60.000 fighting Men, which
for the most part were experienced Soldiers, who had tried the Dint of the
Enemies Sword, and often without fear beheld Death in the Face.

The fenny and moorish Ground, which interposed between the two Armies, was the
Bar which restrained the Courage and Mettle of the Christians; who otherwise,
in despite of all disadvantages, where had been any possibility of Engagement,
would have broke through all to have closed and mixed with their Enemy. To
perform which, the boggy Ground was tried and assaied on all sides; but being
found unpassable, the Generals feigned a kind of fear, and unwillingness to
Engage, in expectation thereby to draw the Enemy to remove; so that raising
their Camp, as if they had feared a Battle, the Turks carried on by their own
Destiny, followed after them, leaving the place of a more advantageous Ground.
The Christians retreating at the distance of an hour's march, The Christians
Retreat.
drew up in the Form and Order before mentioned, extending their left Wing
toward the Danube, and their right toward the Hills of Saran. The Seraskier
animated with this Retreat, as if it had been caused by his more formidable
Force, which much exceeded the Christians in their numbers, And are followed by
the Turks.
raised his Camp and followed the motion of the Christians; and leaving a great
part of the Infantry, with the heavy Cannon behind, on the rising of the Hill;
on the 15th and 16th Instant, he passed the moorish Ground, and marched toward
the Enemy. At break of Day in Morning, so great a Fog or Mist arose, that for
some hours neither Army could discover the motions of the other; during which
time the Christians had the advantage to draw up their Army undiscerned into a
posture of Battle, and to reinforce the left Wing with some Regiments, which
were not as yet disposed. No sooner was the Army drawn up in its due Order,
than the Fog dispersed, and a bright Day appeared, which showed the two Armies
each to the other, both moving with a slow and regular Pace to join Battle. The
Turks, who are of the more fiery and fierce Temper, A Battle begun.
caused their left Wing to March with some have to charge the right Wing of the
Christians; upon which they three times made an Attempt, but the Germans, who
stood firm and unshaken like a Rock, three times repulsed them with great
Slaughter: The Duke of Loraine perceiving that the Turks pressed the right Wing
with their main force, caused his left Wing to move with a slow pace to their
Succor: The German Foot were conducted by their Captains at the head of their
respective Companies, with their Artillery in the Front; which being charged
with Musquet-bullets, were fired upon them so opportunely, and seconded by
Vollies of small Shot, that the Turks began to draw back at some distance. The
Seraskier observing the disorder of his left Wing, advanced with a strong Body
of Turks to charge the utmost part of the right Wing of the Christians; to
sustain which, the Duke of Loraine redoubled the firing of the first Line, and
commanded Count Dunewald to reinforce the first Line with such Squadrons and
Battalions of the second Line, as were nearest unto it. The Elector of Bavaria
coming at the same time to their Assistance, put the Turks into a disorder and
confusion, and afterward forced them to make a Retreat, and draw a little off.
The Hungarian Troops which were accustomed to the Turkish manner of Fighting,
were ordered to charge them in the Rear; which having done, they wheeled about
and made a stand. So soon as the Turks were out of reach of the German
Muskets, they rallied again, and made another Charge as furiously as they had
done the first; but the Imperialists maintaining their Ground, and not giving
one Foot backwards, many principal Officers amongst the Turks fell in this
Charge at the head of their Squadrons, which caused a second Disorder amongst
them, and to turn their Backs; and being pursued slowly by some Troops, which
continually fired upon them, they were put to the rout and fled. The Turks
defeated.
The right Wing of the Turks observing the Disorder of the left, wheeled about
toward that side, not only to Succor the flying Party, but to join with them
to make a second Effort and trial of their Fortune: To this Purpose a
considerable Detachment advanced to charge the Christians in the Flank; but
being repulsed, the whole Army was put to flight, and being pursued by the
Hungarians, Croats, and some Troops of Dragoons, fear so possessed many of
them, that they took their Way, without any consideration, over the Moorish or
Fenny Grounds, where, sinking up to their Middles in the Water, and their
Horses plunging in the Boggy places, above Two thousand Men were lost and
perished in the Quag-mires. In the mean time, the right Wing of the Christian
Army having knowledge of the Passage over the Marsh, by the Turks, who led them
the Way, pursued them beyond the soft Ground; and perceiving that the Turks
began to rally on the top of the Hill, where they had left their Cannon with
some Chambers of their Janisaries; they made a stand until the Duke of Bavaria
was come up with the left Wing. So soon as these two Bodies were joined on the
other side of the Moorish Ground, the Turks durst not stand another shock; but
leaving their Camp, Tents, Cannon, Baggage and Ammunition, they all betook
themselves to a shameful flight: Such was the general Fear and Consternation
amongst them, that they fled by three several Ways; and the Janisaries to
Revenge themselves on the Spahees, for exposing and abandoning them upon the
Hill, killed many of them to get their Horses. Tho the Turks in the first
Action did not lose above Four thousand Men, yet double the Number perished in
the Fenny Ground, and in the Pursuit the Seraskier himself was wounded, and
Osman Pasha of Gran Cairo, and two other Pashas were killed. The Christians
lost not above Two hundred Men, and took but few Prisoners, because that giving
Quarter was almost out of Fashion: The Loss which the Turks sustained.
The Pursuit continued not far, by reason that the Turkish Horse were more
nimble than the Christian, and fled to Buda and Alba Regalis; the Foot saved
themselves in the Woods and in the Mountains: Howsoever, afterward in more
cool Blood, many were hunted out, who had layn hid amongst the Reeds and Ofiers
which grew in the wet and marshy Grounds, so that about Four hundred Prisoners
might be taken, and many Christian Slaves obtained their Freedom. The Turks
lost Thirty eight Colors, Twenty three Pieces of Cannon, two Mortars, and
great store of all sorts of Ammunition. After the Battle was ended, Te Deum was
sung, and Thanks publicly rendered in the Camp to Almighty God for so signal a
Victory; and the Prince of Neuburg was dispatched with all diligence to render
an account unto the Emperor of the happy Success of that fortunate Day.

Whilst the Turks were engaged in Battle, and their Army routed and totally
defeated; their Garrison in Newhausel declined, and the Besiegers daily
advanced upon them. The Galleries were again refitted and repaired, and the
Soldiers lodged at the Foot of the Breach, All things ready for an Assault upon
Newhausel*
so that all things were ready for a general Assault, only Count Caprara
thought fit to demand first the Orders of the Duke of Loraine, not knowing
whether he might be desirous to be present at this great Action, to add the
Subjection of this Place to the Glory of his late Victory: But the great Mind
of the Duke, which was zealous for the Service of the Emperor, and the
Christian Cause, gave orders not to defer the Assault for one Moment; but first
to advise the Besieged of the defeat of their Seraskier, and to verify the same
by some Prisoners taken in the late Battle, which were sent into the Town, that
being informed of their desperate Condition, they might be induced to accept
Terms of Mercy for their Lives. The 18th was the Day appointed for this
Attempt, but the Rains were so violent, that it was thought fit to expect more
favorable Weather, and to break some Palisadoes with the Cannon, which were
newly erected within the Breach. The next Morning being the 19th, at break of
Day, the signal of the Assault was given by the discharge of Thirty six Pieces
of Cannon, upon which, An Assault made.
immediately Three thousand Men were appointed to make the Assault. Count
Scaffemberg, at the head of his Men, Commanded the Attack in face of the right
Bastion, and mounted thereupon without the loss of one Man, and was followed by
the Troops of Lunenburg and Suabia; the Turks now losing their Courage, did not
dispute the Breach with such Resolution as was agreeable to the Resistance they
had made at first, and thereby gave opportunity to Scaffemberg to possess
himself of the Bastion without much difficulty. The Baron of Asti, and Colonel
Kaletz, who Commanded the other Attacks, with the Troops of Cologne, Bavaria
and Franconia, were in like manner successful, and planted the Imperial
Standards on the Breach, where a Pasha which Commanded it was killed; he was a
Native of Bohemia, and of the Family of Garasba. In the Bastion Eight hundred
Men were slain, excep^^ng Two or Three hundred, who cast themselves over the
Wall into the Ditch, where they met the Sword of the Bavarians, and under that,
ended their Days. All this time Seventy Pieces of Cannon continually played upon
the Town, and Twenty Mortar-pieces which threw Bombs and Carcasses, and Three
thousand Men already upon the Walls and within the Town, in which Amazement the
Turks spread a white Flag, which was the signal of a Parley or of a Surrender:
But alas it was too late; for the Christians being already Masters of the Town,
they killed all without remorse, or distinction of Age or Sex, either of Men,
Women or Children. The Governor of the Place died the next Day of his Wounds
which he had received on the Breach; the Garrison which consisted of Three
thousand Men, was reduced to On thousand Seven hundred, most of which also were
killed on that fatal Day. The Town is taken.
At length the Town being taken, Orders were given to stop the effusion of
Blood, which came only in time to save the Lives of about Two hundred Persons.

In the Town Eighty Pieces of Cannon were taken, with great quantities of
Ammunition. About Forty Christian Slaves were set at liberty: The Plunder of
the Town was esteemed to amount unto two Millions, besides Plate, good
Furniture, and Movables belonging to the Houses. There were Fifty Horses of
Price taken, which were distributed amongst the General Officers; all which was
performed with the loss of Fifty Soldiers only, and one Lieutenant. So soon as
the Place was taken, Count Scaffemberg took Post to carry the joyful News
thereof unto the Emperor, who was graciously pleased, in Reward of his
Services, to conferr upon him the Government of that Place. The News of two
such Achievements, as the defeat of the Turkish Army, and taking Newhausel
filled all Christendom with Joy and Wonder, and Thanks to Almighty God for such
glorious and unexpected Successes; which also being accompanied with the taking
of Esperies, by General Schultz, and the burning of the Town and Bridge of
Esseck, by Count Lesly, increased the Jubilee of that Year in Christendom; as
on the contrary, never was there such a Damp on the Spirits of the Turks, nor
such Sorrow and Grief as at that time: For the Loss having been Universal
through the whole Empire, the Death of Friends and Relations was lamented, as
far as to Bagdat or Babylon it self, and to other remote parts of the East.

The Advice of taking Newhausel was brought to the Duke of Loraine, whilst he
was in Discourse with the Elector of Bavaria, and the other Generals, of
carrying on the Wars with such other Enterprise, as might conclude and
terminate this Campaign with the greater Glory. Upon the News hereof, the
Generals moved with a desire to see the Place, The dismal Condition of
Newhausel.
entered into it on the 20th, and there beheld the most horrid Spectacle of
Slaughter and Desolation in the World. To cover which, immediate Orders were
given to bury the Dead, and to repair the Breaches which the Cannon had made in
the Walls, and, with the Labor of Turkish Slaves, to fill up the Trenches and
Approaches which were made without the Town during the Siege. The Christian
Slaves, which, on occasion of the late Defeat, had escaped out of the hands of
the Turks, came in great numbers to Newhausel, and there related, how that the
Seraskier was come to Buda with a slight Wound in his Leg; The ill Condition of
the Turkish Army.
that the Confusion amongst the Turks was so great, that they killed and robbed
one the other, in the Flight; that in the Sieges of Strigonium and Vicegrade,
they had lost at least Four thousand Men; and that the latter place was so
weakened by blowing up the Tower, and required so much time and labor to repair
it, that they expected Orders from the Seraskier to demolish and abandon the
Place. And in fine, That the Turkish Forces were so scattered and divided, that
after all these losses and discouragements, they were scarce able to Rally an
Army of 30.000 Men.

We having not thought fit to interrupt the Relation of two such great Matters,
as the Fight near Strigonium, and the Siege of Newhausal, with a Digression
unto other Actions; which being now past, let us look back, and behold the
Progress which Count Lesly, and General Schultz were making against the Common
Enemy in different Places. Lesly being advanced into the Country near Kanisia,
had the good fortune to meet a Party of Turks, belonging to that place, which
he defeated, and with the Slaughter of several hundred of them, caused the rest
to Fly into their Fortress. After which with an Army of about Eight thousand
Men, composed of Croats, Hungarians and Germans, he resolved to render himself
Master of the Bridge of Esseck: The Expedition of Count Lesly to the Bridge of
Esseck.
In order whereunto, having left his Baggage at Turnawitz, under the Custody
and Guard of Two thousand Men, he marched away on the 9th of August, with Four
thousand Germans and Two thousand Croats, all choice and experienced Soldiers
toward Esseck, taking with them Provisions for ten Days, in regard the Country
was so wasted and destroyed by the War, that it yielded neither Food for Men,
nor Forage almost for Horses. The same Day a Detachment was made of Five
hundred Croats, under the Command of an Officer to Invest Michalowitz, which
upon the first Summons Surrendered, before the Body of the Army appeared,
without making any Terms, or Conditions for their Liberty. The Guard of this
Fort was committed to the defense of Two hundred Foot and One hundred Heyduks;
and the Prisoners taken, both Men, Women and Children were secured in a Tower
belonging to the Fortress. After which the Army marched with all diligence
toward Esseck: Upon sight hereof, the little Forts and Palancas on the way,
fired their Guns to Alarm the Country round about; and passing by Carafina,
which is a Town fortified with strong Walls, and a double Ditch, the Turks
Sallied forth with Horse and Foot, and Skirmished with some of the Troops,
without any great hurt or damage on either side. After three or four Days of
hard march, Lesly drew up his Forces on the 13th of the Month, into order of
Battle in the Plains of Esseck, expecting to meet the Enemy in those Parts: But
finding no opposition, they pitched their Tents, and Hutts so much to
advantage, and which took up so much Ground, as if they had contained an Army
of at least 30.000 Men: Soon afterward, a Thousand Turkish Horse came and took
a view of the Camp, with some Infantry marching in their Rear. Whereupon the
Army Commanded by Siaus Pasha, drew out into order of Battle, and marched
softly against the Enemy, who stood firm, neither advancing nor retiring, The
Turks near Esseck defeated.
until the Christians were come within Musket Shot; and then they began to
give Ground, which the Croats perceiving fell upon both their Wings, and gave
them a total Rout and Defeat. The Horse fled by the way of Belgrade, but being
hotly pursued by the Croats, several of them were killed; but the Foot found a
nearer Refuge in the Town and Castle of Esseck. The German Horse and Foot,
advanced still in good Order to the Suburbs of the Town, which at the first
Assault they took, and Plundered; and thence found an easy entrance into the
City it self; from whence the Turks had the Day before sent their Wives and
Children by Water toward the Danube, into which the Drove falls not far from
the City: Those who remained, were with their Goods and Movables retired into
the Castle.

The City of Esseck is not very large, but well peopled and well fortified; and
as I remember, after the modern fashion; it has about Five hundred Shops
belonging to Tradesmen, Esseck.
and adorned with many Mosques and Caravasaries, or Inns built for the
Reception of Travelers, which are commonly stately Structures. It is very
strange, that this place which was esteemed so strong, and well fortified by
the Turks, that they made it their Granary, and Storehouse for all sorts of
Provisions for supply of those Parts of the Country, should so easily be
abandoned, and opened to the Enemy, which was capable of sustaining a Siege of
many Months against an Army of far greater Force, than that of Count Lesly's,
Taken by Count Lesly.
which did not exceed Six thousand Men; especially being well provided with
quantities of Rice, Bread, Biscuit, Salt and powdered Flesh; and with Barley and
Oats; all which served greatly to refresh, and feed the Men and Horse of Count
Lesly's Army, which were languishing before for want of Victuals, the ten Days
Provisions which they had taken with them being almost consumed. So soon as
Lesly became Master of the Town, Guards were set to oppose any Sally from the
Castle, whilst the Soldiers were Ransacking the Houses, unto whom all the
Plunder and Pillage was given. In the mean time, Count Lesly went to take a
view of the Bridge, like which there is none in the World, and of which we have
already given a Description in the former part of our History: The River Drove
is not very broad in this place, there being only Sixteen Boats to sustain the
Bridge, which the Turks had broken down the Day before, loosing them that they
might drive down the Stream; the Christians endeavored to recover them the
next day following, but could not get aboard for want of smaller Boats; nor
could they for want of this Bridge, pass over the Drove to burn the Bridge of
Esseck, which on that side is Eight thousand Paces long, and all built of Oak.
It Is true, Money and good Rewards were offered to some French Soldiers, of the
Regiment of Erbeville, who with certain Germans and Croats under-took to pass
the River, and burn a great part of the Bridge; but the Boats on which they
endeavored to pass were so small and leaky, that they sunk under them, and
saved themselves only by Swimming. Howsoever, That part of the Bridge which was
on the Town side, being Eleven hundred Paces in length, was in a very short
time reduced to Ashes: Whilst these things were acting, a Rumor was spread
amongst the Soldiers, that all the Riches of the Pasha, and Movables of value
belonging to the Citizens, were conserved within the Castle; which so animated
the Soldiers to make an Assault up it, that Count Lesly could not restrain them
from running the utmost hazard of Storming the place with open Force: But
whilst they were preparing Faggots, and other combustible Matter, to fix at the
Gate which looks toward the City, a furious Fite took in diverse Houses, caused
by the Rabble of the Soldiers, which burnt so violently, by reason that all the
Houses are built with Wood, and the very Streets Planked with Boards and
Timber; Esseck burnt.
the Ground being a Clay, and sort of Owsey Earth, not capable of a Stony
Pavement; that there was no possibility to quench it, or to Approach near to
the Gate of the Castle on that side, so that in a few hours the whole Town was
utterly consumed: Wherefore they fixed some artificial Fire to the other Gate,
on the Bridge side, with which both the Gate and the Bridge burnt together,
without much offense to the Defendants within the Castle; but rather, the Fire
and the Retrenchment made within, served to secure them from an Assault:
Wherefore General Lesly thought fit, not to Attempt any thing further upon the
Castle, but having left all the Town in Ruins, he returned back the next Day to
Turanowitz, where he had left Two thousand Men to Guard and Secure the Baggage.
With the good News of this Success, Prince Deichtrestein was dispatched to the
Emperor, and for Confirmation thereof, he carried with him five Colors of the
Fourteen, which were taken from the Turks.

Whilst these matters were acting to the advancement and Glory of the Christian
Arms, General Schultz on the 19th of July, Schultz before Esperies.
began to lay Siege to the Town of Esperies, and by the 8th of August had
formed all his Works, Trenches, and raised his Batteries, and threw such
quantities of Bombs and Carcasses into the Town, that it took Fire in diverse
places. Esperies is a City of Hungary, in the County of Sarax, very well
fortified, Situate on the River of Tarbez toward the Mountains, and on the
Frontiers of Poland; and has always been considered by the Malcontents as a
strong place, and of great importance to them: The Garrison consisted of a
Thousand Soldiers, all stout and brave Men, and more resolute than the Turks;
for the Malcontents having been provoked by the ill usage, which the Emperor
guided by his evil Council had put upon them, were always more obstinate and
fierce in Fight; either, because they were made Angry by Oppression, or became
desperate, and out of all hopes to obtain Pardon from the Emperor: Some
Attempts were made by Tekeli to Reinforce the Garrison with Six hundred Men,
but they were prevented and beaten back; and the Besieged made their Sallies,
but with ill Success, which moved them on the 16th to display a white Flag in
token of a Parley; but so soon, as some Soldiers and Officers came near to
receive their Offers, they withdrew their Flag and Fired upon them, killing a
Lieutenant and four Soldiers. Schultz being justly incensed with this
Treacherous Action, omitted nothing which might destroy the Enemy: He
continually threw Bombs into the Town, and Battered the Walls; and having
opened a Breach, an Assault was made, but his Soldiers were repulsed with
considerable loss. After which a Mine being formed, and ready to Spring, the
Malecontes on the 10th of September desired a Parley; but their late act of
Treachery made the Imperialists more cautious in their Dealing with them, and
to give them no answer, until they had sent two Officers for Hostages; those in
the Town refusing so to do, the General more furiously plied his Cannon and
Bombs than before. But at length, the Governor being made sensible of the
impossibility of defending the Place much longer; Capitulations made.
desired to Capitulate, and sent Hostages for assurance of the Treaty, which
was concluded on the 18th of September, on these following Articles.

First, That the Commander, and several of the Officers and Soldiers being
Germans, should be received into the Service of the Emperor, and be advanced a
Month's Pay.

Secondly, That such as were not willing to enter into the Emperor's Service
might have liberty to return to Tekeli, and to have safe Conduct into his
Quarters.

Thirdly, That the Inhabitants should have a free Exercise of their Religion,
and that the Churches and Schools should remain in the same Condition, as
before, and enjoy the like Freedom and Liberty, as those did, which had on the
same Agreement and Articles submitted to the Emperor.

Fourthly, That the Nobility might be restored to their Estates, and having
taken a new Oath of Fidelity to the Emperor, might quietly enjoy the Privileges
belonging to Noble Persons.

Fifthly, That the Magistrates of the Town, and Judges shall continue in their
respective Offices, and Places of Trust.

Sixthly, That the City shall be conserved and exempted from the Plunder of the
Soldiery. And finally, That these particulars shall be approved and ratified by
the Emperor.

These Articles being agreed, a Surrender was made; but with much difficulty
could General Schultz, and the Duke of Wirtemberg restrain the German Soldiers,
The German Soldiers belonging to the Garrison endeavor to Plunder.
who belonged to the Garrison, and had taken part with Tekeli, from Plundering
the Town: For they being informed of the many Successes of the Imperial Arms,
were desirous to show their Zeal to the Cause of the Emperor, and so signalize
the Return to their Duty and Allegiance, by opening the great Gate of the City
to the Soldiers of the Duke of Wirtemberg, with liberty to Plunder and Spoil
together with themselves; but General Schultz and the Duke of Wirtemberg being
resolved to maintain the Articles, Ordered two Officers with a Thousand Men to
Enter by the Breach, and at the Postern Gate; whilst the Duke of Wirtemberg
with Two hundred Men joined with the Germans of the Garrison, and together
marched into the Town. These Germans were so Zealous to testify their Loyalty
and Kindness to their Country Men, That they invite them to fall upon the
Spoil, and to Plunder with them; but by the care and good conduct of the
Generals a stop was put thereunto, and the Town preserved from Pillage,
according to the Tenure of the Capitulations.

The Day following General Schultz entered the Town, and caused the Ditch to be
cleared of the dead Bodies, and the same to be decently Interred; and the
Breach with all possible speed to be repaired. On the Walls were found Thirty
Pieces of Cannon mounted, with a Mortar-piece carrying Sixty pounds Weight, and
several Thousands of Cannon Bullets, the greatest part of which were Cast by
the Imperialists in the time of the late Siege; Provisions and Ammunition in
the Town.
when the Town was taken by Tekeli in the Year 1678. There was no want of
Provisions in the Town, nor of Powder, of which there was One hundred and
twenty one pounds weight. The Germans who were Two hundred and seventy in
number, of which Thirty were Dragoons, were Listed into the Emperor's Service,
as also the greatest part of the Talpazzi, a sort of Hungarian Soldiers under
their Hadnag or Captain. The others which were but Eleven, Swore never to Fight
more against his Imperial Majesty, but to return home, and live quietly and in
peace amongst their Neighbors. Such virtue and power has good fortune, and
success in War, that it not only subdues by Force of Arms, but converts the
Minds of Mankind, making them wise and gentle, free from Passion and Masters of
Reason.

The taking of Esperies was followed by that of Cassovia, which contrary to the
Expectation of the Court at Vienna held out a formal Siege, and made a Vigorous
Resistance. Cassovia called by the Hungarians Caschaw, is the Capital City of
the County of Abanwivar; Cassovia.
it is very well fortified, being Situate on the River of Kunnert, which
empties it self into the Tibiscus. Tho it be a Town which enjoys great
Privileges, yet it has long acknowledged and submitted to the Emperor, as King
of Hungary; but in August 1682, it was unhappily taken, and possessed by Tekeli
and his Party, and continued firm to them until this Year 1685.

When on the 6th of the Month of October, Count Caprara appeared with his Army
before Cassovia, Caprara Besieges Cassovia.
and immediately raised two Batteries, from which he warmly plied his Cannon
and Mortars upon the Town; the like was returned from thence upon the Besiegers
with much more Damage. The Garrison within the Town, consisted only at first of
Four hundred Soldiers besides the Citizens, who were resolved to hold (...)
unto the last Extremity. The Count ^eterhasi, who was a valiant Man, and the
best Soldier of all those belonging to Tekeli, had made some overtures of
returning to his Obedience, and to the Allegiance which he owed unto the
Emperor; but all proved nothing but a mere Plot, Peterhasi relieves Cassovia.
and design to convey himself with Seven hundred Men into the Town: The which
having succeeded according to his desire, the Defendants were greatly thereby
Reinforced, and animated to make a more Vigorous Resistance than could be
expected.

For on the 8th the Besieged made a Sally and passed far within the Trenches;
and tho they were forced at length to Retire, yet above Eighty Men were killed
on both sides. On the 14th, Count Caprara Summoned the Town, and received a
fierce and disdainful Answer; and the same Day three or four Sallies more were
made, in which many were Slain, and amongst the rest the Prince of Wirtemberg,
with several other Persons of Quality. In the mean time General Schultz took
the Castles of Kalo, Ibrano and Vihel belonging to Tekeli; as the Generals
Heusler, and Mercy had done of all the small Places about Erla, for better
convenience and enlargement of Winter Quarters.

Count Caprara continued still to Batter the Town, but with little effect, in
regard the Garrison within was strong and resolute: And the differences which
happened between General Schultz and Caprara, were great obstructions to the
Surrender of that place: But at length an accommodation, and good understanding
being made between those two Generals, Schultz came to the Siege, and joined
his Army with that of Caprara, with which united Force a vigorous Attack being
made, the City came to Terms of Treaty, Cassovia surrendered.
and Surrendered on the 25th Day of this Month of October.

Thus have we related the particulars of all the most Glorious Successes, with
which the Imperial Arms were blessed this Year in Hungary; which We have done
so Amply, that we shall not need to add much more thereunto, until we have
given an Account of the Progress of the Venetian Arms, which though very
prosperous and considerable this Year in the Morea; yet we thought not fit to
interrupt the Story of the dreadful Wars in Hungary, by a Digression to any
other Action.

THE Venetian Successes AGAINST The TURKS, 1685.
Morlaques retained in the Service of the Republic of Venice, made frequent
Incursions and Spoils on the Turks in Dalmatia; The Mainiotes, (who are another
sort of People, much like the Morlaques) being animated with the Venetian
Successes, began to take up Arms against the Turks: But for better
understanding of what is to follow, we will describe a little the Countries and
Humors of these two People. The Morlaques are a People who inhabit the
Mountains of Croatia, on that side which looks toward the Adriatic Sea. In
the Year 1647, the Pasha of Bosna and Tekeli, The Morlaques.
Father or Grandfather of the famous Tekeli of these Times, committed a
Massacre upon many of these poor People at Knin; in resentment whereof, at the
instance of a certain Priest called Stephen Horien, who could manage his Sword
as well as his Crucifix, wholly submitted themselves to the Venetians, and
desired to live under their Protection: They receive no Pay from them, but have
the Reward of a Sequin (which is Nine Shillings Sixpence English) for the Head
of every Turk which they bring to the Venetian Officers; for Lucre of which,
they have made such constant Enterprises upon the Turks, and such cruel
Slaughters, as have rendered them irreconcilable Enemies to the Port. They are a
sort of Militia always on the Wing, under no Discipline but their own, encamp
on the Plains, but live with their Families in the Mountains, avoiding the
Licentiousness which much Conversation brings, and the Luxury of Cities: They
have no Learning amongst them, nor understand much what belongs to keeping
Faith or Promises with an Enemy, as appears by their dealing with the Turks of
the Garrison of Clissa, which in the Year 1648, having surrendered it self up to
the Venetians on Capitulations, as the Soldiers were marching out of the Town,
they fell upon them, and killed Twelve hundred Men; and not one of the rest had
escaped, had not the Venetian Officers interposed their Persons and Authority
to save those who as yet survived.

The Mainiotes are in their Manners and Honesty not much differing from the
Morlaques, tho much distant from their Country. They are called Mainiotes from
Braccio di Maina, or an Arm of Land in the Morea, stretching it self out into
the Sea; so called by the Venetians, but anciently part of the Country of the
Lacedaemonians: The Mainiotes.
These People by their nearness to the Sea, and ruggedness of their Mountains,
have in despite of the Turkish Arms, conserved themselves after the manner of
the Ancient Greeks, in form of a Republic, whereby they had some kind of
Government and Justice amongst themselves, tho they entertained a Turkish Aga
or Lord, rather out of Respect to the Turks, than Subjection; but as to other
People, they lived upon the Spoil, keeping no honest Intercourse with them,
unless with the Venetians, whom they feared, because of their Galleys which
frequented their Ports. In the Isle of Cervi, which belongs to them, and about
Cape St. Angelo, which is opposite to the Isle of Cerigo, they maintain several
Brigantines, with which, when thy take Christians, they transport them over to
Tripoli in Barbary; where they find a Market for them; and when they have the
fortune to seize Turks, they sell them to Venice, or to Malta; and so are
Free-booters on all sides: I could of my own Knowledge, give diverse Instances
of their way of Trading, and of their Treatment used toward some Englishmen of
my, own Company, who unadvisedly and without due regard, set footing on their
Land; but because it is not material to our present Discourse, and would be too
great a Deviation from our present History, we shall wave all that, and proceed
to show, That the Mainiotes hearing of the ill Success of the Turks in all
places, and that their Fortune was changed, declared for the Venetians, to whom
they were more inclined on account of the Christian Religion, professing to be
of the Greek Church, and to follow that Party and Interest which they observed
to be in the most thriving Condition. The Mainiotes worst the Turks
The Turks to prevent the Revolt of the Mainiotes, sent some Forces to reduce
them; but they being supported by Venetian Succors, under Seignior Delfino,
withstood the Turks, and charged them with so much Vigor, that of Three
thousand five hundred Men, there escaped but an Hundred and Forty, all the rest
being either killed or taken. The News hereof encouraged the Greeks of Monte
Nero, which is a Mountain in the Morea, to descend and Combat with the Turks
on the Plains, in which Fight many were killed and wounded on both sides.

In the mean time Paulo Michiel, a noble Venetian, with a Thousand Horse and
some Foot joined with Three thousand Morlaques, made Incursions into the
Country round about. The Pasha of Bosna, who with Seven thousand Men was on his
March toward Hungary, alarmed by these Forces, returned back to Clin, for
Conservation of his own Country: And having altered the Design and Expedition
of that Year, he resolved to wage War nearer home in Dalmatia, and accordingly
sent Eight thousand Men to lay Siege to the Fortress of Duare. Duare besieged
and relieved.
The Place defending it self with great Resolution, gave time and opportunity
to the Generals, Valier and Michael, to come to its Relief; which they
performed so effectually, that in less than an Hour's time the Turks were
obliged to raise the Siege, with the loss of Two hundred and fifty Men killed,
and Seventy Prisoners taken; and on the Christians side no more than six were
slain, and about thirty wounded. The Morlaques continued the Pursuit, and
routed the Pasha of Bosna himself, who with a Body of Four thousand Horse was
marching toward Duare, to maintain the Siege. These were Preludes to greater
Matters, which were then acting by the Venetian Fleet, and gross of the Army
under the auspicious Conduct of Francesco Morosini, Captain General of the
Venetian Forces both by Sea and Land: For the Fleet being completely equipped
and furnished with all Necessaries, both for the Services of Land and Sea,
joined with the Galleys belonging to the Pope, to Malta, and to the Duke of
Florence; all which together composed a Fleet consisting of Five Galeasses,
Thirty seven Galleys, Twelve Galleots, The Venetian Fleet and Auxiliaries.
Twelve Men of War, Four Petaches, Three Pinks, and Three Tartans; besides,
Twenty two stout Ships of War, which triumphantly Sailed into the Archipelago,
under the Command of Alexander Molino, and Girolamo Delfin, two Noblemen of
Venice. The Galleys of Tuscany were four, Commanded by Admiral Guidi, on which
were Three hundred Land Soldiers, under Prior Vandomi. The Pope's Galleys were
five in number, which carrying no Flag, joined to the eight Galleys of Malta,
and composed one Squadron together, under the Command of Prior Brancaccio, who
had the Title of General, under whom was Cavalier Malaspina, Director of the
Ecclesiastical Galleys: Upon the Pope's Galleys were Three hundred Land
Soldiers; and on those of Malta were a Thousand, including the Knights
themselves, Commanded by their General Le Tour, who by many brave Actions had
signalized himself in the last famous Siege of the City of Candia. The other
Land Forces, were Three thousand Italians, One thousand Sclavonians, and about
Two thousand Four hundred Germans, under Command of Prince Maximilian William
of Brunswick; all which together made up Eight thousand Foot, besides Horse,
and besides several Persons of Quality, who were Volunteers, and amongst the
rest Prince Philip of Savoy, a valiant and a generous Prince; all which
Landforces were Commanded by Count St. Paul, a General of great Ability and
Experience, having for a long time served the King of Denmark and the Duke of
Newburg. These Forces being joined in the Port of Dragomestre, which was the
Place appointed for their general Rendezvous; a Council of War was held, where
it was resolved to Sail to Cape Sapienza, both to make a Diversion of the
Turkish Forces, which in great numbers were assembled about Patras, and to
confirm the Mainiotes to continue firm to the Venetians; but it seems their
Successes were different to their first beginnings, for the Venetians having
with drawn their Forces from them, they were over-powred by the Turks, and
compelled to give Hostages for their future Faithfulness and Alliance to them.

The Guard and Care of Santa Maura and Preveza, being committed to Giacomo
Cornaro, Proveditor General of the Islands, the Fleet, as was agreed, sailed
for the Waters of Sapienza, from whence a Messenger was dispatched to the
Mainiotes, encouraging them once more to make a Defection from the Turks, which
they promised to do in despite of their late Agreement and Hostages given,
being resolved upon any Terms whatsoever to free themselves from their
Servitude to the Turks. In the mean time, a Council of War being called, it was
put to the Question, Whether they should Besiege Modon, The Fleet Sails to
Coron.
Coron or Navarin; after some Debate thereupon, it was unanimously concluded,
that Coron should be the Place first to be invested, being the most feasible
Enterprise of any, and the most probable to succeed; and being nearest to the
Mainiotes, was the more commodious for keeping them firm and constant to the
Republic: So soon as this Matter was resolved, the Fleet weighed Anchor, and
steered their course directly to the Place.

Coron described.
Coron is a Fortress situate in Messenia, one of the Provinces of the Morea; it
is built in a triangular Form, after the ancient Fashion, on a Promontory of
Land, and is fortifyed with six Towers and a Castle. The Walls are high and
thick, made of large square Stones; the lower Town is inhabited by Greeks and
Jews, and the Castle by the Turks: It is distant about twelve Miles from Modon,
which together with Coron, belonged anciently to the Venetians; but were taken
from them by Bajazet, in the Year 1499: After which, Prince Doria of Genoua,
Commander of the Spanish Fleet, retook it from the Turks in the Year 1533; and
having left one Mendoza therein Governor, with a mean Garrison of Spaniards,
it was in some few Years afterward surrendered to the Turks, who knowing the
Importance of the Place, have ever since that time conserved it in their Hands
until this Year 1685. When on the 25th of June, the Captain General Morosini,
in the Morning, landed his Forces almost within Cannon-shot of the Place,
without any Opposition from the Turks, and approached the City under the
shelter of some Olive Trees.

The Venetians land their Men, and open their Trenches.
On the 26th they began to open the Trenches, and to streighten the Enemy on the
side toward the Land: The Battalion of Malta, those of Brunswick, and the
Pope's Forces, were posted on the Right Hand toward the Sea, and the Venetians
and Sclavonians on the Left toward a Suburb or Out-town, of which they made
themselves Masters without opposition: The Works also went forward without much
Interruption; and two Batteries were raised, each of four great Pieces of
Cannon, with four Mortars for Bombs. In the mean time the Captain General kept
the Place blocked up by Sea, that no Relief or Succors could come to it; and
dispeeded the Squadrons of Tuscany, with that under the Captain of the Gulf, to
Cruise toward the Levant: And because the Tower of the Fort erected to the
Sea, incommoded the Fleet, Order was given to Andrea Navager and Agustin
Sagredo, the Captains of two Galeasses, with four principal Galleys to approach
near, and to Batter the Tower, which was performed with good Effect and great
Execution. The Works were continued with great Industry and Labor, and the
Completing of them hastened with the more expedition, by reason that News was
brought to the Camp, that the Pasha of the Morea, with a Body of Three or Four
thousand Horse and Foot were assembling together to raise the Siege; to oppose
which with the more advantage, all the Olive Trees near the Town were cut down,
and a large. Field and Campaign opened without any shelter for the Enemy.
Notwithstanding which, they were much encouraged in the Town, by Letters
privately conveyed therein, giving them hopes from the Pasha of speedy Relief;
in expectation whereof, they returned an obstinate and a rugged Answer to the
Summons which the Captain Pasha had sent them, signifying that the Fortress
belonged to the Grand Seignior, which they were resolved to defend, so long as
one Stone thereof remained on the other. Nor were the Besieged therein
deceived; for the Captain General by most certain Intelligence was informed,
that in the parts near to Lepanto and Patras Three thousand Turks were got into
a Body; and that some few Days before, Twelve hundred were upon the March under
Mustapha Pasha, and that the others commanded by Halin Pasha were following
them with all expedition, and already on their March.

On the 7th of July in the Morning, a considerable Body of Turks appeared about
two Miles distant from the Trenches, The Turks march to? relieve the Place.
advancing slowly and with Circumspection on their Way thither; the Number and
Quality of which, (as was advised by a Janisary, who was a Fugitive from the
Enemy) were Five hundred Horse, One hundred Janisaries, Four hundred Segmen,
besides Two hundred more who were supplied from Modon, and gathered from the
adjacent Villages, besides a Thousand more not far distant; and the Three
thousand Turks, who had lately mustered near Lepanto and Patras, were also on
their March with the same Design of Relieving the Town. As these Forces
advanced nearer to the Venetians, Skirmishes daily happened, in which the Turks
were for the most part worsted; and in regard Siaus Pasha found himself much
weaker than the Christians, Siaus Pasha.
be issued his Commands into all Parts near to Calamata and Misitra, and the
Parts adjacent, requiring them to send a Man out of every House, with Mattook
and Shovel, to level the Ways, and render them more passable and commodious for
Transportation of Cannon, which he intended to plant on a Battery, designed to
annoy the Venetian Fortifications: To Countermand which, the Christian
Ingeniers projecting where to erect another Battery to offend that which the
Turks were designing, raised one in a very short time, with three Pieces of
Cannon on the highest Port, where the Forces of Brunswick were lodged, which
did great Execution, not only offending the new Battery of the Turks, but
likewise the whole Camp.

The Pasha being come up with all his Forces very near to the Venetian Leaguer,
fortified himself with a good Retrenchment; and with the Battery he had raised
of four Pieces of Cannon, The Pasha of the Morea fortifies his Camp.
he played cross-wise, which much incommoded the Christian Camp, and the two
Armies lying so near each to the other, it was impossible but Alarums must be
continually given on both sides, and daily Skirmishes must happen with various
Successes. The Besieged being herewith encouraged, redoubled their Fire, and
seemed neither to fear Assaults, nor the Springing of Mines, which being to be
penetrated through a hard Rock, took up no less than three Weeks time to
perfect. The Fortifications of the Place, tho much ruined by the Batteries, and
much Damage caused by the Bombs, yet the Situation thereof was advantageous,
being placed on a Rock, flanked with great Towers, defended with eighty Pieces
of Cannon, with store of Ammunition and Provision of all sorts, and a good
Garrison within of Eight hundred Men, besides many others fit to bear Arms; it
seemed impossible to become Masters of the Town, but by opening a wide Breach
with Batteries and Mines, entering thereat with a vigorous Assault; during which
they were to expect an Attack from the Turkish Army, which lay near them, and
in a manner Besieged them.

This posture of Affairs gave some Trouble to the Christian Generals, in what
manner to offend the one, and at the same time to defend from the other; for
the Mines were all ready, one under the great Tower, Mines prepared.
contrived and managed by the direction of the Ingenier Bassignani; and the
other opposite unto it, near the Attack of Brunswick and Malta by Ingenier
Verneda. And now to put these Matters in Execution, the Captain General
Morosini came on shore, and having called a Council of War, it was thereat
agreed, That the Day following being the 24th of July, a general Assault should
be made, and the Mine of Verneda should in the first place be fired: All things
were accordingly prepared; Segres a Knight of Malta, was to begin the Assault
at the head of Sixty Granadiers, seconded by a Detachment of Fuseliers and
Sclavonians: La Bar Lieutenant General of the Battalion of Malta, was to
follow the Chevalier de Refuge, Orders for an Assault.
at the head of the Pope's and Venetian Forces; these were to be seconded by
the Prince of Brunswick, with a Hundred and thirty Men, and afterward followed
by Monsieur de la Tour Maubeuge, General of Malta, with a Body of Knights
carrying the Standard of that Order. All things being thus prepared and
ordered, the Mine charged with a Hundred Barrels of Powder was fired, which
threw up some of the Earth, and part of the Wall, but had not force sufficient
to move the Rock, but recoyled and vented it self another way. The Turks taking
this to be the Signal for an Assault, immediately invested the Redoubt and
Battery, which (as we have said) was erected on a certain Eminence of rising
Ground for security of the Lines, and stormed it so vigorously, The Turks take
a For^ from the Venetians.
that the Venetians and Sclavonians, who had the Defense thereof, were forced
to give way and quit the Station, and the Turks remaining Masters thereof,
planted twenty of their Colors thereon, to the great Encouragement of the
Besieged. Monsieur de la Tour, who with his Knights was posted nearest to the
Redoubt, considering that the Turks could not be permitted to remain in
Possession thereof without great Annoyance to the whole Camp; and that the same
was not to be recovered without some extraordinary and signal Action; he
without farther delay, called his Men about him, and with much Have and
Bravery, which was natural to him, advanced toward the Enemy, and was the
first who leaped into the Redoubt, and with his own Hand killed two Turks; who
opposed him; a third coming behind him, threw off a light Helmet which he wore,
and gave him a cut over the Head with his Cymeter, with which he fell to the
Ground; and having received two other Wounds, from whence much Blood issued, La
Tou^ killed,
his Companions designed to have carried him off, but were prevented by a
Barrel of Powder, which accidently taking fire, carried him nearer toward
Heaven, a Place designed for him in Reward of his Religion and Virtues. He was
followed close by several Knights, namely, by de Terms, with many other
Knights of Malta.
a most valiant Person, who was also slain, as was Michon by a Musket Shot:
Gramont received two Wounds with a Cymeter and a Musket Shot; Bourgon, de
Galliard, and de la Motte, were mortally wounded, besides many others, who so
signalized themselves in this Action, that they drove the Enemy headlong from
the Redoubt, They regain the Fort.
took eleven of their Colors, and in place thereof planted the Standard of the
Order of Malta, at the sight whereof all the Army with a loud shout cried, Viva
Malta, or May Malta live. The Venetians and Sclavonians, animated with this
Success returned to their wonted Courage, and killed Three hundred Turks, who
had lodged themselves in the Redoubt, suffering none of them to Escape. The
Fight being ended, the Venetians exposed the Banners they had taken from the
Enemy, with One hundred and thirty Heads in view of the Besieged, who being
nothing affrighted herewith continued still with much Valor and Resolution to
maintain their Fortress. The Death of General de la Tour, was lamented by all
the Army, and especially by the Captain General Morosini: His Funeral Rites
were celebrated with all the decency, and ceremony belonging to a Commander,
whose Merits and Valor had made a deep Impression in the Minds of his
Soldiery; for the Sweetness of his Temper, with his modest and engaging
Deportment, had made his Conversation agreeable to all that knew him. His Heart
and Bones were Embalmed, to be carried to Malta, where afterward they were
Interred. The Cavalier de la Bar being the next in place, was preferred to
his Command of the Battalion, a Person qualified in all respects to succeed so
worthy a Predecessor, having acquired a general esteem by the bravery of his
Actions, and long experience in the War.

Notwithstanding the repulse which the Turks had received from the Redoubt,
they returned again to make fresh Attempts upon the Lines, and with redoubled
Force, having their Cymeters in their Hands they cast themselves once more into
the Fort, The bravery of the Forces of Malta.
which was called St. John's Fort, by reason that it had been preserved by the
Valor of those Knights, who had the good Fortune to drive them once more from
thence; by which and several other Actions of Chivalry, they became so
formidable to the Turks, that they would Fly before them, so soon, as they saw
the Standard of St. John advance. The Mine of Verneda, having (as we have said)
recoyled without much effect; Considerations were had of Firing the other of
Basignani, charged with Two hundred Barrels of Powder, and thereupon to proceed
to a General Assault: But in reguard the Turks in the Camp, who were now grown
to Six thousand Men, were ready on such an occasion, immediately to fall upon
the Assailants; it was agreed as absolutely necessary to give them Battle, and
drive them out of their Works, before it could be safe, or possible to Storm
the Breaches.

Whilst these Matters were under Consideration, two of the Rulers of the
Mainiotes, or grave Counselors (called by them Vecchiardi) happily came to the
Captain General on the 5th of August, to offer to him in the name of their
People a Recruit of Fifteen hundred Men, Aug.
which were kindly accepted, and the Messengers treated with all imaginable
Civility, and the next Day the Captain of the Gulf, with four Galleys was sent
to Transport them to the Camp. In the mean time, the Turks daily receiving new
Recruits and Refreshments, from diverse parts of the Morea, infested continually
the Christans in their Works: The Defendants also let down small Parties by
Night from the Walls of the Town, who covering them under the Rocks, and in
Holes, Fired upon the Guards; and being good Marks-men, and shooting with Art,
The Venetians annoyed in their Trenches.
seldom missed the Man they aimed at; and being nimble and active Men, skipt
over the Rocks and made their Escape. By Night they threw their Artificial
Fires from the Walls into the Trenches, which easily seized the Beams and
Coverings, made of Olive Tree and Rafters of old Houses, taken from a
Neighboring Village, which burned so impetuously, that with great difficulty
the Fire was quenched; in doing which the Christians were exposed to the small
Shot from the Walls, which by the light of the Fire they poured upon them.
Their numbers thus daily decreasing by those who were Slain, Sick and Wounded,
there seemed a kind of necessity of performing speedily some considerable Feat
of Arms, before they languished, and consumed away in their Trenches; and
before the new Re-inforcements were come from the Captain Pasha; who, as it was
said, was already arrived with his Fleet in some part of the Morea. This
Council being agreed, as necessary by all the Chief Officers; An attempt
resolved on the Turkish Camp.
The Captain General selected out of the Venetain Galleys and Galliots Fifteen
hundred Levents, or Soldiers belonging to the Fleet, who were stout and robust
Fellows, under Command of Lieutenant Colonel Magnanin, whom he commanded
silently to Land after Midnight; Twelve hundred whereof were to take their way
toward the Enemies Trenches on the left Hand, at the opening into a Valley, and
the remaining Three hundred to the right Hand; and to confound the Enemy the
more, the Fleet was ordered to weigh Anchor, and move from their usual Station.
At the same time Three thousand choice Soldiers under command of General St.
Paul, were appointed to march out of their Line; and on the 7th of August by
break of day in the Morning to Attack the Enemy in their Trenches, who were
more numerous in their Men than the Christians, and had much the advantage over
them by their Horse. All things were punctually observed, and executed
accordingly; And on the 7th Day, with the dawning of the Morning, the Signal
was given by Firing two Barrels of Powder under the Breach, which was
immediately followed by all the Cannon of the Fleet and Camp; and with such
thick Vollies of small shot in the Front from the Three thousand Men, which had
Sallied out of the Line, and from the Levents, who had placed themselves both
in the Rear and Flank; that the Enemy believing the Venetian Camp to be much
augmented by the accession of the Mainiotes, The Turks defeated.
and other Auxiliaries, affrighted with a panick fear, put themselves generally
to Flight: Those who were more courageous and stood the Brunt, were not able to
resist long, but either were beaten, and trampled down by their Fellows, or
killed by the Venetians, who pursued the Flying Enemy, as far as they could
without Horse, leaving the Ground covered with dead Bodies and with Blood.

This Victory was the more remarkable, because it was obtained on the 7th of
August, which was the same Day of the past Year, on which Santa Maura was
taken. The Booty was very considerable; for besides the Artillery, Arms and
Ammunition of all sorts, The Booty taken.
with store of Provisions, the Turks left Three hundred Horse behind them,
which they had not time to mount with their Tents and Colors, and two Horse
Tails, which are the Ensigns of Siaus Pasha, who also fell in this Action: All
the Artillery was taken, amongst which were six Pieces of Brass Cannon, three
whereof were marked with the Arms of the Republic.

The Day following the Captain of the Gulf employed (as we have said) to bring
Fifteen hundred Mainiotes to the Camp, arrived with Three hundred only: And on
the 9th, the Commander in chief of the Forces belonging to the great Duke of
Toscany, alleging that the Term of his Commission was expired, and that he was
not authorized to remain longer at the Siege, he was licensed by the Captain
General to depart, and a Farewell taken with all expressions of kindness and
civility. And now to complete and consummate these Successes by taking the
Fortress, which was the chief and principal design of this Campaign; all
industry and care was used to clear the Passage of the Rocks, Rubbish and other
impediments which lay in the Way, on the side of the Attack of Brunswick and
Malta. Preparations for a new Assault.
And on the other side toward the Venetian Attack, to lay open, and widen the
principal of the three Chambers of the Gallery, which was formed by the
Engenier Bassignani, and thereby to make an entrance so far, as was possible
under the chief Bulwark: This work was so industriously carried on, that on the
10th of this Month of August the Mine was finished, and charged with Two
hundred and fifty Barrels of Powder, which were found in the Turkish Camp. And
that Evening at a Council of War, at which the Captain General, and all the
principal Officers were present, it was agreed next Morning by break of day to
give Fire to the Mine and make a General Assault: Aug. 11th.
Accordingly on the 11th the Troops being drawn into Battalia, the Mine was
fired, which had it is due effect, overthrowing the Bulwark, A Mine sprung.
and widening the Breach, and blowing up all the Garrison which defended that
part, into the Air, and not without hurt to many of the Venetian Soldiers, who
were nearest to the Mine, and ready to second the Mine with an Assault.

So soon as the Blow was given, the Italian Troops commanded by Sergeant Major
Jovij, with much Courage and Resolution proceeded to the Assault, An Attack on
the Venetian side.
in the Front of which was Captain Marco Ferri, a Person who had greatly
signalized himself at the Siege of Candia; and from thence, and from other
places had brought many Scars and Wounds, which were so many Signs and Marks of
Honor. The Assailants were received with Bravery by the Defendants: Howsoever,
an opportunity was given them to Enter the City at that time, had they not
instead of improving the advantage, contented themselves with a Lodgment on the
Breach. At the same time, so soon as the noise of the Mine was heard, An Attack
on the side of Malta.
the Forces of Malta, who were at the Head of the other Attack, seconded by the
Pope's, and those of Brunswick, with great Vigor gained the Top of the Breach,
which had been some Days open, tho it was of very difficult access, and had
been repaired in some manner by the Defendants: Here now began a very furious
Fight, in which the Knights behaved themselves with as much Manhood, and
Prowess as became their Order, endeavoring to force the Retrenchment; but it
being well Flanked and furnished with Artillery, they fired so terribly upon
them, that four of them were killed on the place, and above thirty wounded. The
Cavalier de la Bar, who commanded that Battalion, behaved himself with all
the Courage imaginable, and tho seconded with like Resolution by the Pope's
Officers, and those of Brunswick, yet they were repulsed and forced to Retire.
But the Knights having heard how great a Breach the Venetian Mine had made,
they resolved to give a fresh Assault in the Afternoon; and in the mean time
the Levents were Landed from the Galiots, to give better Countenance to this
Enterprise. All things being prepared accordingly, and the Troops Marching out
of their Lines to attempt the ultimate Assault, gave the Besieged cause to
believe, A Parley offered.
that it was not possible longer to resist, their Commander in Chief with many
others of their principal Officers being buried in the Ruins; they spread a
White Flag in token of a Parley.

The General St. Paul upon sight hereof, gave a stop to the Assault; but the
Captain General refused to accept any Treaty, unless the main Tower were in the
first place delivered into their Hands. But whilst they were Capitulating on
this Preliminary, it unfortunately happened out, that two Soldiers quarrelling
together a Pistol was shot off, and the Bandeliers of another Soldier took
Fire, which gave such an Alarm to the Besieged, that they cried out Treachery,
and therewith fired one of their Cannon planted at the entrance of the Breach,
laden with small shot, which killed several that were mounted thereon: Coron
taken by Storm.
This Accident was sufficient to put an end to the Treaty, and incense the
Soldiery, who transported with Fury, broke into the middle of the Town, and
with miserable slaughter put Men, Women and Children to the Sword, without any
respect either to Age, or Sex.

Thus ended the Siege of Coron, on the 11th of August, which was Seven and
forty Days after the Trenches were opened. It was a Bloody Day to both sides.
The Christians lost about Three hundred Men, but the Turks near Three thousand;
all the Inhabitants, as well as the Soldiery being miserably slaughtered, and
the Town committed to the Plunder and Pillage of the Soldiery. After which Te
Deum being Sung, with other Hymns of Praises, and Thanks to Almighty God, the
Captain General embraced all the Chief Officers with much affection and
kindness, as namely the two Princes of Brunswick and Savoy, and all the others
in their several Degrees: He declared, That Count St. Paul with his Venetians
had gained much Honor; That the young Count of Brunswick had signalized
himself in a particular manner; That the Forces of Florence had given good
proofs of their Valor, to the time of their Departure, which was some Days
before the end of the Siege. That the Battalion of Malta, which were always
joined with the Pope's Forces deserved immortal Glory, as did all the Knights,
who so bravely had sacrificed their Lives in defense of the Christian Faith;
and that the Cavalier de la Bar, by many brave Actions had maintained the the
same Honor which de la Tour had gained. He also particularly applauded the two
Sergeant-Majors of Battalia, Jovii and Alcenago, the Marquis of Corbon, Colonel
of Dragoons, with the Ingenier Bassignani, on whom he bestowed a Gold-chain and
a Medal in Reward of the great Service he had done, Morosini applauds the
V^lour of his Officers.
by well contriving and fortifying the Mine, which gave the ultimate and fatal
Blow to the Town. In fine, he bestowed due Praises and Commendations on the
inferior Officers and common Soldiers, amongst whom the Booty of the Town being
distributed, every one remained entirely satisfied. In the Town and Fortress
thereof were an Hundred twenty eight Pieces of Cannon, of which Seventy were of
Brass, of which, some were buried in the Ruins; in digging for which, there was
a Stone found with this Inscription: Hoc opus fieri fecerunt
Magnifici
Et Clarissimi D. D.
Bernardus Donato
Castellanus
Et
Ludovicus Contareno
Capitaneus
Et Provisores Coroni
M.CCCCLXIII.
Before the Departure of the Captain General, the Government of this important
Place was committed to the Care of Georgio Benzon, to be Proveditor in
extraordinary, and to Justin de Riva in ordinary. The Super-intendency over the
Arms was committed to Count Alexander Vimes, and his Brother was declared
Governor.

The Siege of Coron being thus honorably concluded, the Prior Brancaccio,
General of Malta, and the Cavalier Malaspina Antiano, Commander of the Pope's
Galleys, The Pope's Galleys, and those of Malta return home.
declared, that the time allotted them for their continuance Abroad by
Commission and Instruction being expired, they desired leave to return to their
respective Countries. The Captain General, who was desirous to add one brave
Action more to the Glories of this Campaign, showed himself unwilling to lose
so good Company, and so great a Diminution of his Forces, instantly desired
their Aid and Assistance for prosecution of a farther Design; but they urging
that the term of their Commissions was already expired, and therefore against
their own Inclinations, they were obliged to depart, and more-especially that
their Forces were more than half diminished, and most of their Knights either
killed, sick, or wounded, they at length prevailed with the Captain General to
grant them a Release; from whom having received the Visits and Complements of
Farewell, they set Sail on the 22d of August at Night; with whom also departed
General St. Paul, a Person very aged, and tired with the Toils of the Campaign,
had License given him to ease himself in the Island of Zant, as also to the
Colonel his Son, who had for some time labored under the Indispositions of a
malignant Fever.

The Captain Pasha having received Intelligence of the loss of Coron, sailed
with his Fleet of Galleys in sight of Cerigo, hoping thereby to divert the
Venetians from attempting farther any Design for that Year: But this Sally was
only in Bravade, rather than in earnest; for the Venetians were become so
terrible to them by the late Successes, that the Captain Pasha with fear
retired into the Port of Napoli di Romania, The Captain Pasha retires to Napoli
de Romania.
where, so soon as he was entered, he drew the Chain cross the Mouth of the
Harbor for Security of his Galleys, and landed the most choice and select Men
of his Militia on the Shore; where he formed a Camp, as well to receive the
scattered and dis-spirited Troops, which were fled from before Coron, as to
give Life and Courage to the affrighted People of those Provinces, and restrain
the Mainiotes from their intended defection from the Ottoman Empire; promising
to remit unto them all the Money they owed for Charatch or Pole-mony, and to
free and exempt them from all sorts of Taxes and Impositions for the three
ensuing Years. This Captain Pasha was chief Favorite. The Captain General who
was still at Coron, repairing those Fortifications with great diligence, set
Sail to the Coast of Zarnata, being recruited with the Forces of Saxony, which
(as we have said) were lately arrived in the Island of Corfu.

Zarnata
Zarnata is a Fortress almost of a round Figure: It is naturally strong, being
situate on a high Hill, but rendered much more considerable by Art. The Captain
General sent a Detachment to Summon the Place, which began at the first
Overture to entertain a Treaty; and tho the gross of the Venetian Army was not
within five Miles of them, and had not as yet made any descent; and the Turkish
Forces, under the Captain Pasha, were much at the same distance from them:
Howsoever, the Aga which governed the Place, whether out of fear or affection
to the Christians, Surrendered it at the first Demand on the 11th of September.
is yielded.
The Garrison, which consisted of Six hundred Men, was embarked, and guarded by
a Convoy within a small distance from Calamata; but the Aga fearing Death for
his Cowardice or Treachery, remained in the Venetian Camp, where he was
entertained by the Captain General with a Pension of Thirty Pieces of Eight a
Month, after he had received Baptism, with Twenty other Turks, who were
consenting to the Surrender. In this place were fifty one Pieces of Cannon, Two
hundred Quintals of Powder, with great store of Bullets, Ammunition, and other
Provisions: After which, Seignior Morosini put into the Town Two hundred and
fifty Foot Soldiers, under Command of the noble Venetians, Batholomeo Contareni
and Angelo Emo.

Whilst these things were acting, the Captain Pasha, who was encamped about
five Miles distant from Zarnata, with Seven thousand Foot and Three thousand
Horse; upon News of the Surrender of the Fortress, withdrew his Forces under
the Cannon of Calamata. This fear which the Turks showed, animated the
Christians to adventure a Battle, without which, it was concluded at a Council
of War, that nothing could be enterprised either toward Subjection of
Calamata, or any other Town in the Maina; upon which Resolution the Venetians
landed their Forces on the Shore of Agiasio, which is situate at the entrance
of the Province of Maina, The Venetians land their Forces.
a Place secure and advantageous, having on the Right Hand Mountains, on the
Left Woods and Ditches, and on the Front several little Hills and Torrents of
Water. So soon as some of the Venetian Troops appeared on the Shore, the Turks
advanced to the tops of the Hills, on which they planted forty or fifty Colors
or Banners, and about Five or Six hundred of their Horse placed themselves
under the Hills in the Valley: To dislodge these, and secure their own Camp,
the Venetians had raised two Batteries of three Pieces of Cannon each, at the
appearance of which, both the Horse marched away, and the Colors were
withdrawn. The Christians taking this for an Instance of the Enemies fear, the
Captain General put his whole Army into Battalia, with the Troops of Saxony,
conducted by General Deghenfelt, an old and experienced Commander, and marched
toward the Enemy; and at the same time, about a Thousand Mainiotes flanked by
Two hundred Morlaques, appeared on the top of a Hill to the Right Hand. In this
posture the Christians remained all Night, and the next Morning being the 14th
of September, which was the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, the General gave
Orders to the Army to move and attack the Enemy: But the Turks not thinking
themselves safe under the Walls of Calamata, set fire to their Magazines, and
quitted the Town, making a Retreat with some small Skirmishes, without much
Damage to one side or the other. The Captain Pasha put to Flight.
This Retreat or Flight rather, was so shameful, that the Christians believed
it at first to be some Stratagem, and were cautious either to pursue the Enemy,
or enter the Town; but at length a Party of Sclavonians and Mainiotes being
commanded to advance to the Town, they observed it to flame in diverse Places;
for the Inhabitants finding themselves abandoned by the Captian Pasha,
despaired of all Relief, quitted the Town and set fire to their Houses: And
thus did the Christian Army enter Calamata, without any opposition. The News of
these Successes encouraged the Mainiotes that they repaired to the Venetian
Camp in great numbers; Calamata taken,
a Party of which was presently sent in pursuit of the Enemy. In the Castle
were only found nine Pieces of Cannon, and those nailed and rendered
unserviceable; the Ammunition was equal to the Arms, and the Place of it self
being esteemed inconsiderable and unfit for a Garrison, And demolished.
was dismantled, and the Walls demolished.

Calamata is situate on the River anciently called Pamissus, or Panissus, in
the Province of Belvedere, now Spirnazza: The Town is not environed by Walls,
but defended by a Castle, which was only tenable against some present
Incursion, and for that reason, both the Turks abandoned it, and the Christians
demolished it.

After Calamata was taken, the Venetians seized on Porto Vitalo, in which were
fifty Pieces of Cannon, ten of smaller Artillery, with store of Ammunition.
After which the Captain General appearing before Chielifa, the Garrison therein
conceiving themselves in no Condition to make defense Surrendered upon
Articles. Chielifa Surrendered.
Asan Pasha, who was Governor of that place, and of all the Province round,
was the first to lead the way out of the Town, and being accompanied with a
Thousand People, carried the Keys to the Admiral Gally; Three hundred and fifty
of which were Transported to the Island of Cervi, with their Goods and
Movables.

During this Summer Seignior Molino Commander of Twenty Sail of Ships, employed
(as we have said) to Cruise in the Archepelago, The Captain Pasha droven into
Rhodes.
Chased the Captain Pasha from place to place, and at length drove him into
Rhodes, where he secured himself and his Fleet, with a strong Chain drawn cross
the Harbor, not daring to adventure a-broad, tho the Venetians came often to
brave him, and challenge him to an Engagement.

Thus ending this Campaign with great Reputation and Glory to the Venetian
Arms, The Captain Geneal draws into Winter Quarters.
the Captain General Morosini Sailed for Corfu, to take his Winter quarters
there: The Troops of Brunswick were sent to Zant, those of Saxony with the
Dragoons to Santa Maura, and other independent Regiments to Corfu, all due care
being taken to make Provisions for their expected Guests. Whilst these Forces
were drawn into their Winter Quarters, to enjoy some case after the labors of
War; the Seignior Molino Captain extraordinary of the Ships, was appointed for
a Guard to the Coast, and with his Squadron to Cruise near Cape Sapientia, and
the Gulfs and Narrow Streights in those Seas.

But before the Captain General thought sit to lay up his Fleet until the next
Season in Corfu, he touched at Santa Maura and Prevesa, to take a View and
Survey of the State of those Places; but in his way thither, accidentally
putting into the Port of Gomenizze with some Galleys, he ordered the Proveditor
with the rest of the Fleet to pass to the other side, and bestow a few Shot
upon the Castle; which being done, some Troops were landed, The Venetians take
Gomenizze.
and marched in Military form toward the Castle; upon sight of which the Turks
were become so Cowardly and Timorous, that they fired one Gun and abandoned the
Castle, and fled into the neighboring Mountains and Woods for Refuge. So the
Venetians took immediate Possession of the Fortress, in which were Twelve
Pieces of Brass Cannon.

This place of it self was of no great consideration; but in regard it was the
Nest, and Sanctuary for Pirates and Robbers, who in the times of Peace
continually infested Corfu, Parga and Pazo, the News thereof was satisfactory
and pleasing, to all the Inhabitants of that Coast: So that when the Captain
General on the 13th of November entered into Corfu, he was there received with
loud Acclamations, extolling the Glory of his constant and continued Successes,
with joyful remembrance, and with particular Thanks for having reduced the
Castle of Gomenizze, which had long been an ill Neighbor, and had much annoyed
and infested their Seas.

Thus were the Affairs of the Turks ruinous as well at Sea as at Land, in
Hungary and in the Morea; the Pasha overthrown at Esseck was called Siaus, and
so was the Captain Pasha, or Admiral of the Galleys, A Character of the Captain
Pasha.
as if there had been something of Misfortune in the Name. Siaus, who was
Admiral of the Fleet had formerly been Mosaip, or Favorite, and in his younger
Years being a comely Person, was much beloved by the Grand Seignior; he was
always in his Presence, and ever had the Honor to be Familiar with him in
Conversation; to be Clothed like his Master, and to Ride equal with him on the
right Hand, which is the inferior place with the Turks. But he that had always
been educated in a Court, was upon the trial found unfit, and unable to perform
the Office of an Admiral at Sea; and therefore was ordered to leave the care
and conduct of the Fleet to Mazzamama, so called because he had killed his
Mother, but he was a good Sea Officer, bred up in the Galleys from his youth,
Mazzamama takes the Command of the Turkish Fleet.
and one of the Beys of the Archipelago, of which there are Twenty four in
number, who are obliged to Arm, and Man their Galleys at their own Cost and
Charge, having in Consideration thereof the Haratch or Pole Money of the
Islands, settled on them for their Maintenance. He was the Son of a Captain
Pasha, killed by the English in Fight at Sea; for which cause he has ever
since declared his Hatred and Malice against our Nation: He was a very fat and
corpulent Man, afflicted much with a Fistula in Ano, which he cherished by
excessive Eating and a Sedentary Life, using no other Exercise than what he
received by the motion of his Gally.

Siaus Pasha being discharged from his Office of Admiral, was made
Generalissimo of all the Land Forces in the Morea, but he was as unfit to
Command an Army, as he was a Fleet; for he was no Soldier, nor of any
experience in a Camp; and besides he was affected with an incurable Lameness in
one of his Knees, whereby he could neither Walk, nor mount on Horseback
without help. His Success was agreeable to his Abilities; for (as we have said)
his Forces were defeated, his Kaya or Lieutenant killed, and he himself with
difficulty escaped.

When the News of these ill Successes came from the Morea, Hungary and other
parts, the Court at Adrianople used all imaginable Arts to conceal the losses;
the Curriers were ordered to come privately by Night into the Town, and none
durst to Cabal or Discourse of News, The Grand Vizier's Caution.
which was the cause that nothing but Lies were whispered about the Town. Upon
these Emergences frequent Councils were held, at which the Mufti, Kadileschers,
or Chief Justices, Reis Effendi, or Secretary of State, and Janizar-Aga, all
firm and entire Friends to the Grand Vizier, were always present and assistant
to him; by which unusual method of proceeding in this Court, he gave the World
to understand, that acting nothing of himself, he was not to be blamed or
censured for the Success, or to be accountable for the miscarriages of the War.
And whereas there were several Murmuings amongst the People, and in the Army
especially, against the Vizier for not going to the War; he publicly desired
the Grand Seignior's leave and commands to go; to which when the Sultan seemed
inclinable, the Council unanimously opposed it, representing that it was never
accustomary, nor decent for the Emperor, to send his Representative with his
Seal and Authority without a Royal Army, or without expectation of performing
some Signal Enterprise: And that on any other Terms or Circumstances than
these, his going would be Prejudical and Dishonorable: It was farther
alleged, Excuses for not going to the War.
That the attendance on the Vizier would consist of many useless Mouths, and
the occasion of business draw many Followers to his Court, who must necessarily
consume a great part of those Provisions, which would be more usefully employed
for the use and sustenance of the Camp.

But the best Excuse of all, was the ill state of the Vizier's health;
concerning which there were various Reports; sometimes it was said, that he was
desperately ill, then again that he was recovered, then that he was relapsed;
some said, that he was Sick in Policy, others in Reality; but what seemed most
probable was, that he was afflicted with the Spleen, by reason of which all
kind of ill News made a sensible alteration in him: The Cares which constantly
tormented him, kept his Mind always bent, and increased the pain in his Side,
which kept him from Repose: These matters with Sixty six years of Age, were
Afflictions sufficient to weary out, and harass a Body much more strong and
robust than his. Tho formerly he had the Report, and that not without reason of
a bad Man; yet after his being Vizier, his Comportment was with all Justice and
Moderation; and tho naturally he was Passionate, yet striving with his Temper,
he became mild and easy in his Conversation. Our English Nation in Turkey were
sensible of this great change of his Humor; for he became kind to them (which
is extraordinary in a Turk) without other advantage to himself, than his usual
and regular Presents.

It was impossible, The ill state of the Turks.
but that the whole Empire, even as far as to Basora, to Babylon or Bagdat, and
the most remote parts of the East, should feel the dire effects of this
unfortunate War; little Money was stirring and Trade interrupted, the want of
which affects the Public, as much or more than private Members. The Grand
Seignior was forced at the beginning of the last Campaign, to disfurnish his
Coffers in the Seraglio of all the ready Money in Cash; for the Riches there
consists for the most part in Jewels and rich Furniture, rather than in Banks
of Money: After which about the middle of the Summer, they ransacked the
Treasury of the Stables, and took out from thence in Silver and Gold Stirrups,
and other Horse-furniture, which they caused to be Coined with 30 l. per Cent.
Allay, to the value as was reported of Two thousand Purses, which made just a
Million of Dollars. Misfortunes and Scarcity made the Soldiers mutinous upon
every small occasion, and averse from going to the War: The Lord Treasurer was
removed from his Office, and made Pasha of Damascus, and sent to supply the
place, and charge of Siaus Pasha killed at Esseck, and ordered to repair the
Bridge and defend that Pass: A Party of about Two thousand five hundred Spahees
then at Adrianople, were commanded to follow him upon this Expedition. A Mutiny
amongst the Spahees.
But Five hundred of these, withdrawing themselves from the rest demanded their
Pay, and refused to March; saying, That by the original constitution of their
Order, they were not obliged to go to the War, but with the Vizier, or Standard
of the Prophet, which it was their Profession and Office, to Guard and Defend.
But to give a stop to this Sedition, and Nip it in the Bud, the Vizier
immediately sent his Kaiah with all his Retinue, and Janizar-Aga to the place
where they were assembled, not far distant from the City; Twenty of them were
taken and sent to the Grand Seignior, who caused four of their Heads to be cut
off, and the other Sixteen were sent to the Galleys; and two of their Chief
Officers were Banished to Cyprus, for keeping no better Order amongst their
Men; all the rest were dispersed, and in an hour's time the whole Business was
over; and in a few Days afterward, those who were banished, and those who were
sent to the Galleys were recalled and restored to their places, and all of them
contentedly, and in good order marched toward Hungary. But they had not
proceeded far on their way before advices came, that after Ibrahim Pasha's
defeat near Strigonium, there had arose differences and disturbances between
the Spahees and Janisaries, to suppress which Ibrahim had cut off several of
them: Whereupon it being not thought fit to suffer these Mutinous Spahees, to
join with the discontented Parties, a stop was put to their March; until such
time as Agiemzade, a grave and wise Person, one who had formerly been Reis
Effendi, or Secretary of State, was sent to the Army in Hungary, with a Sum of
Money to appease the Mutinies, and soften the Minds of the Soldiery. These
little disturbances caused the People to talk, and brought the Vizier's name
upon their Tongues: And those who pretended to be Politicians discoursed, That
this Empire had been raised, and supported by the Soldiery; and that from them
deserving Persons had been promoted, and advanced to the high Degrees of
Viziers and Generals; and not from Parasites and Syphcoants, or from effeminate
Courtiers and Favorites: And that the Grand Seignior, who diverted himself
wholly in Hunting and with Women, neglecting the main concernments of the
Empire was not like his Progenitors, who in Person marched at the Head of their
Armies, and encouraged their Soldiers by their Presence and Personal Valor:
From such Discourses as these amongst the Commonalty, who reported much worse
of their Affairs, than perhaps they were in reality, we may expect some greater
Changes for the ensuing Years: For the Army was become Cowardly and Mutinous,
and running from the War more willingly than coming to it; and the Common
People affected with a strange Superstition, that Fortune will change with
exchange of Officers.

But before we put an end to this Year 1685, let us a little return once more
into Hungary, and take a view of what was acting in the Upper parts of that
Kingdom; where the Success of the Imperial Arms had produced such Dread and
Terror in the Minds of Turks and Malcontents, that many places yielded at the
first Summons, or at the appearance of an Army before them: In this manner
Potak, Regentz, Several places belonging to Tekeli surrender.
Ungwar and Serau, all Garrisons belonging to Tekeli, yielded without one Blow,
and received the Imperial Troops, which being welcomed with real Joy by the
Inhabitants, the Military Parol was maintained, and not the least injury or
damage offered to the People. The Surrender of these Places were leading Cards
to Senetz, Valdachin, and to the Castles of Sonna, Annoin, Pallotz, Duron,
Spadiz, Joram, Hinghen, Zatmar and other places, which submitted to Count
Caprara, and willingly received German Garrisons, and being pardoned and
absolved from their Rebellion by this General, they took a new Oath of Fidelity
and Allegiance to the Emperor.

But that which chiefly facilitated the defection of these Places, was a report
that Tekeli was seized by the Turks, and lay chained at Waradin; the Fame of
which had some Foundation; for the Seraskier Shitan Ibrahim having had very ill
Success the last Summer, Tekeli in Disgrace.
knew not where to charge the Fault, and excuse himself better than by laying
all the blame upon Tekeli; and to evidence his Resentment, caused him to be
imprisoned at Waradin, until his Crimes were notified to the Court, and Orders
given by the Grand Seignior for his Punishment. But Tekeli by his Agents had so
well managed his Cause before the Divan, that he was fairly acquitted from all
Blame, and the Seraskier disgraced for his rash Judgment, as will hereafter be
discoursed more at large: And received to ^^vour.
And indeed the Grand Seignior and his Council did wisely consider the great
Interest of Tekeli in Hungary, and what Influence his present Disgrace had
already had over the many Towns and Castles which belonged to him, and which
had Surrendered upon the Report only of the Imprisonment of their Prince;
wherefore the Grand Seignior and his Council hastened, with all possible speed,
Orders to the Pasha of Waradin for his Release, and at the head of his Army to
proclaim his Innocence, and repair his Honor; the which was accordingly
performed, as appears by a Letter from Tekeli himself, dated the 4th of
December 1685, from Alba Regalis, directed to his Wife, the Princess of
Ragotzki, wherein also he signified his Intentions to return with the Spring
into Hungary, with a Body of Fifteen thousand Turks and Tartars, and endeavor
to recover those Places which were revolted from him. These Advices so
encouraged the Princess, that she bravely refused to receive an Imperial
Garrison into Mongatz, tho her Town was blocked up by Count Caprara during the
whole Winter, of which we shall speak more at large at the beginning of the
ensuing Year; and we shall conclude this, with the taking of Arad by Colonel
Heusler, a Place situate upon the Banks of the River Maroz, between Temeswar
and Giulia, distant twelve Leagues from Temeswar, and about as far from Sigeth.
Heusler being not far from Arad, detached a Party of Hungarians before, to
provoke the Janisaries, and draw them forwards to an Engagement: Arad taken.
Upon sight of the Enemy, the Janisaries made a Sally, supported with Fifteen
hundred Spahees, Commanded by the Pasha of Soffia, which were newly come
thither from Constantinople: These Forces in the vigor and briskness of their
Courage, pursued the Hungarians, who made an orderly Retreat until they came to
their main Body, at which the Pasha nothing dismayed charged with much Bravery;
but Colonel Mercy coming up with his Germans, fell in upon them with such fury,
that the Turks in a confusion and disorder endeavored to make their Escape by
flight into Arad; but were so closely pursued at the heels by the Germans and
Hungarians, that they entered into the Town in mixture with the Turks, killing
and destroying them with such a Slaughter, that a Thousand of them, together
with the Pasha, were slain at the Gates and within the Town, which remained a
rich Booty and Prize to the Conquerors; for these Spahees lately come from
their Homes, were well furnished with Money, scarce any of them had less about
him than Two hundred Hungarian Ducats in Gold, with good Vests of fine Cloth,
well lined with Sables or other Furrs, and their Horses of the best Breed of
Asia, A rich Booty taken at Arad.
well adorned with the Accouterments belonging to them, all which became a Prey
to the victorious Army; besides, the Town was well supplied with all sorts of
Provisions in great abundance, with which the Soldiers refreshed themselves,
Turks who escaped the Slaughter fled to Temeswar, whereupon, this News was so
great a Consternation, that the Pasha to prevent the like fate on his Town,
thought fit to burn the Suburbs, to the great damage and ruin of the
Inhabitants.

We have formerly mentioned, that the ill Success of the Turks in Hungary had
caused Mutinies in the Army, and that one Aremzade, a grave and wise Person,
was sent with a Sum of Money to appease the Soldiery, and enquire into the Cause
of these Disturbances: The Matter being examined, a Report was made much to the
Prejudice of Shaitan Ibrahim, by reason of the disaffection of the Soldiers and
Commanders to him; for it seems impossible for a General to be unfortunate and
beloved: When the Report was come to the hands of the Grand Seignior, the
Capelar-kiasee, or Master of the Ceremonies, was speedily dispatched, with a
Command to take off the Head of Shaitan Ibraim, and to make Apti, then Pasha of
Buda, Seraskier or General in his place, and Osman Pasha, Ogli Pasha of Buda;
but Osman's Head was cut off by Ibrahim three Days before the Order came: In
return for which, Shaitan Ibrahim put to Death.
Shaitan Ibrahim's Head was brought to Adrianople the 6th of December. He had
been in the greatest Employments of the Empire for the space of forty Years,
and rendered considerable and signal Services thereunto: One might have thought
that his brave and valiant Defense of Buda, would have attoned for future
Misfortunes; or that his Marriage with the Grand Seignior's Sister deceased,
and afterward with his Aunt, would have been Interests sufficient for his
Protection; but the Grand Vizier feared him, and therefore was willing to wreak
upon him all the Misfortunes of an unhappy Campaign, laying it to his Charge,
that he had converted the Soldiers Pay to his own Profit: And so he fell about
the Eightieth Year of his Age, commiserated by all, and according to the
Character we have formerly given of him, he might have deserved a milder Fate.
And so we shall put an end to the Martial Enterprises, Wars and Confusions of
the Year 1685.

ANNO 1686.
THE Grand Vizier being of a melancholy pensive Nature, The Grand Vizier's
Distemper.
and much afflicted with hypocondriacal Distempers, made his Thoughts more
burdensome by suppressing them, and not communicating his sad Apprehensions to
other Friends. At the Siege of Buda he was ill for the space of a Month; but
when good News came, he recovered again, and his political Disease had its cold
and hot Fits, according to the changes and vicissitude of Times. About the end
of the last Year, or beginning of this, Soliman Pasha, who was General of the
Army against Poland, had not only defended the Confines, but worsted the Poles,
and returned to Adrianople with much Applause; for it was now no less Glory for
a General amongst the Turks to save his Army, and not be Overcome, than it was
formerly to Conquer. This was the Fortune and Honor of Soliman, for having
brought off his Army entire and unbroken; which was a piece of Service so
highly esteemed, Soliman Pasha's reception.
that the Grand Vizier received him upon his arrival, with all Honor and
Appearances of real Friendship, sending the Chiausbashee and Chaouses to
conduct him to his Presence, where at the same time were the Mufti, the
Generals of the Janisaries and Spahees, and other great Ministers of State
assembled, and all congratulated the Honors and Glories he had acquired; which
Ceremonies being ended, all these great Persons (except the Mufti) attended
Soliman to the Seraglio, where the Grand Seignior received him with much
Kindness, clothed him with a rich Vest of Sables, entertained him with a
splendid Banquet, and presented him two Horses richly furnished: According to
which Example, as is accustomary, all the great Men made him their Presents;
for whom the Sultan will Favor, the inferior Officers are obliged to Honor.
The next Day Soliman came to the Vizier's Palace, held a Divan, and acted all
public Business, and in the Mouths of the Commonalty, he was cried up for
Vizier Azem. And tho what Soliman Pasha acted was only as an Assistant or
Coadjutor to the Vizier, during his Weakness and Infirmity; yet Soliman got so
much ground in Esteem of the Sultan, and of the People, that the Vizier thought
it time to rouse up his Spirits, and to act every thing by his own Person. The
Grand Vizier jealous of Soliman.
And to secure himself from the danger of being supplanted by so powerful a
Rival, he addressed a Memorial to the Grand Seignior, wherein he represented
the Virtues and Abilities of Soliman in an eminent manner, that he was a
faithful, experienced, and a fortunate Minister, and the only Person in the
World fit and able to be General in Hungary, and to conduct an Army in this
dangerous and difficult War. The Grand Seignior entertaining a like sense of
the Abilities of Soliman, inclined thereunto, and would have given him that
Employment, had not some Accidents intervened to prevent it. For the Embrahor,
or Master of the Horse, the Kuzlir Aga, or Eunuch of the Women, and the Sultana
or Empress her self, being all Friends and Confidents to Soliman, advised him
of the Plot, which might bring upon him the like Fate, which had befallen
Shaitan Ibrahim; and that the best way to avoid it, would be to push at the
Office of Vizier, and demand the Seal. Soliman encouraged by such powerful
Abettors, boldly cast himself at the feet of the Grand Seignior, and told him,
That he was ready to lay down his Life either at Home or in Hungary for the
Service of him his Master, and sacrifice all to his Pleasure and Glory; but to
go into Hungary without the Seal (which was without the power of Vizier) would
be of Prejudice and ill Consequence to the whole Empire, for which he alleged
many Reasons, and being an eloquent or a well-spoken Man, was seconded by
others, who represented the present Vizier to be a Person infirm and unfit for
War. The Grand Seignior was prevailed upon, and agreed to constitute Soliman
his Vizier; Soliman made Vizier.
but the Execution thereof, at the desire of Soliman was deferred until next
Morning; and in the mean time, the Matter was carried so secretly, that the
Vizier had no Intimation or Jealousy of the Resolution. Next Morning being the
time, when the Pay of the Spahees was to be delivered out, Soliman came to the
Vizier's Chamber, and pressed him very instantly, that since he was now in
better Health, that he would be present at giving out the Pay unto the Spahees;
and that in case he were wearied or uneasy, he would perform the remainder of
the Trouble for him; but the Vizier excused himself, and would not come, but
desired Soliman to take the trouble upon him of that Day's Office; which as he
was performing, and had half done, the Bostangibashee to the Grand Seignior, or
he who is Master of the Wardrobe, came to the Vizier and demanded the Seal,
showing him a Warrant for it, under the Hand of the Grand Seignior: The Vizier
was so struck with the Surprise, that he had scarce power and strength to put
his trembling Hand into his Bosom to give it to him; and Nature being weak in
him, he fell in a Swoun, and so was left. So soon as Soliman had finished the
giving out the Pay, a Capigibashee came to call him to the Grand Seignior, to
whom being come, he had the Seal conferred upon him, with the Character of the
Supreme Vizier, and so was conducted to the public Palace belonging to that
Office; from whence the former Vizier, without other Ceremony or Warning, was
in a moment removed, and being by his Servants put into a Coach, was carried to
a private House, and four Days afterward was ordered to retire unto
Constantinople, with a Pension of an Hundred and fifty Aspers a Day, which may
be about eight Shillings English Money. This Ibrahim (for so we must now call
him) having a House and Garden of his own upon the Bosphorus, The late Vizier
sent to Constantinople.
obtained leave to retire thither, but not to go to Mecha, as he instantly
desired: But he had not long continued there, before a Command was issued to
seize his Estate, which was executed early one Morning by the Janizar-Aga and
Bostangibashee, who surrounded his House, the latter of which went in to him,
and told him that he must go with him; Ibrahim apprehending that his End was
near, asked him, If he came for his Head; and when he told him no, he could not
believe him, until he had Sworn by his Law and by his Prophet; being herewith a
little comforted, he was carried Prisoner to the Middle-gate of the Seraglio;
in the mean time his House was rifled, and all his Servans and Pages of any
fashion were taken into Custody, and Examined for better Discovery of his
Estate. All the Money found, did not amount unto more than Five thousand Purses,
besides his Jewels, and his great Revenues in Lands and Houses. His Estate
seized.
Being thus stripped of all his Estate, he was on the 18th of March put into a
Gally, and sent to Rhodes, there to remain a Prisoner in the Castle. Soliman
Pasha, now Vizier, compassionating his Case, and not knowing how soon it might
be his own turn, sent him Five thousand Dollars, with a Vest of Sables, and
obtained a small Allowance for him from the Grand Seignior.

Nor was this Change only of the Vizier, but attended with others at the Court;
for the Janizar-Aga, or General of the Janisaries was put out, and one Hassan
Aga, Lieutenant General of the Janisaries at Buda was put in his stead: Changes
of Officers in the Turkish Court.
Zulficar Aga a vast rich Man, one of the Pashas of the Bench, was sent to
command in the place of Mustapha, Brother to the late Vizier Kupriogli, who was
recalled to Court and made Chimacam at Constantinople. Ahmet Pasha named for
Captain Pasha last Year, was made Seraskier, or General in Hungary, in the
place of Shaitan Ibrahim, and Apti Pasha (whom we have formerly mentioned) was
returned again to his Province of Pasha of Buda. The Reis Effendi, or Secretary
of State was displaced, the Reason not known, and that Office supplied by a
Relation of the late Vizier's, who wrote his Letters for him, a raw and an
unexperienced Man. The Mosaip was continued General in the Morea, and
Missir-ogli was made Captain Pasha in the place of Mazzamama, to whom as we
have said, the care of the Fleet was committed the last Summer.

These were the Changes with which this Year began in the Ottoman Court, after
which care was taken to Recruit the Army, and make all Warlike preparations in
Hungary, for which the new Vizier Solomon was preparing; and all the Court and
People were full of hopes, and expectations of mighty Successes under the
auspicious Conduct of Solomon, whose very Name had been Fortunate to the Turks.

Tekeli (as we have mentioned before) being set at Liberty, Tekeli receives Aid
from the Turks.
and restored to his Command with Honor; received Money from the Vizier to
Raise Two thousand Men, and was recommended by the Vizer to the new Seraskier,
to give all the encouragement and assistance he was able, that so he might once
more try his Fortune in the Upper Hungary.

Amongst the many ways and contrivances to raise Money, one was to discover the
hidden Riches of the Imprisoned Vizier, for which, whilst they made diligent
Search in his Seraglio, or Palace at Constantinople it came to be known, that
Three hundred Purses belonging to the Vizier Kara Mustapha, who was Strangled
at Belgrade, were found in a secret conveyance of the House, the Chimacam and
Embrahore, or Master of the Horse, would be present at Sealing of the Baggs,
and had counted out Two hundred, when it proving dark and late, The Viziers
Palace Burnt.
they deferred the remainder until the Day following; but that Night, by what
Accident is not known, the Palace took Fire and was Burnt to the Ground.

At Adrianople, where the Court resided, an Envoy arrived from Muscovy, and
another from the General of the Cosacks, with Complaints against the Tartars
and Governor of Asac, a Fortress of the Turks on the Tanais, for Incursions
made upon them: The Muscovites remained until this time in suspense, whether to
make War, or confirm a Peace with the Turks; Addresses to the Ottoman Court.
but the Success of the Emperor, and the Provocations received from the
Tartars, put that Business beyond all doubt, and brought the Muscovites into a
League with the Emperor and Poland, as will shortly be made manifest by the
Capitulations between them. Amongst other Applications to the Ottoman Court, a
new Ambassador from France arrived at Adrianople, to assure the Sultan of his
Master's Friendship, and his Resolution to stand Neuter in this present War:
But the Turks, who rely not with much confidence on the Word and Stories of the
French, gave them an ordinary Reception, without Favors, or any unsual
Concessions, denying to them the Guardian-ship of the Holy Sepulcher at
Jerusalem, which had formerly been granted to them.

This was the State of the Ottoman Court, in the beginning of this Year 1686;
when Count Caprara kept the Town of Mongatz Blocked up, which is strongly
fortified with a Castle, Situate on the River Turza, between Ungwar and Zatmar,
Mongatz Blocked up.
near the Mountains. The place belonged to the Countess Tekeli, in right of her
former Husband Prince Francis Ragotski; She was Daughter of Count Peter Serini,
and Married to Tekeli, as we have formerly mentioned. Caprara having all the
Winter his Quarters not far from Mongatz, sent frequent Messages to this Lady
to Surrender the Town and Castle to the Emperor, promising in the name of his (
Coesarean Majesty, to conserve both her self and her Son, in the same Condition
of Greatness, and Estate as at present; adding thereunto many Complements,
which are commonly given to a young and beautiful Lady. The expressions he made
to her, were so full of tenderness and respect, that she could not refuse to
return an Answer, agreeable to so much concernment as he testified for her;
assuring him, That nothing so grieved her, as to see herself embarked in a
Cause against the Emperor; and that nothing could be so uneasy to her and
difficult to determine, in what manner she was to behave herself, between the
Duty and Faith she owed to a Husband, and Allegiance to the most gentle and
gracious Prince of the Universe: But as to the Surrender of the Town and
Castle, it was not in her Power, but depended entirely on the Secretary and
Deputy of her Husband, who was there constituted Governor, with all the Riches
and Wealth of the place; and that the Citizens and Chief Magistrates thereof,
were joined in the same Resolutions with him, to defend and maintain the Place
to their utmost hazard of their Lives and Fortunes; and that herein they were
the more encouraged, by Advices lately received from Count Tekeli, whereby he
not only gives them the good News of his Liberty, and the great Honors and
Aids, which the Turks had bestowed upon him in recompense for the Affront,
which the late Vizier had cast upon him; but promised them very speedily a
Relief sufficient to drive their Enemies from their Doors, and at a distance
from their Country, and would bring Rewards in his Hands for those, who should
in the mean time remain true, and constant to his Interest.

A Sally from the Town of Mongatz.
Count Caprara rightly judging, that by such delays and excuses as these, the
Princess intended only to gain time, and to illude his designs, began to draw
his Forces nearer, with a Train of Artillery, Mortars and other Engines proper
for a Siege: But the Garrison nothing dismayed thereby, made a Sally with Six
hundred Men, and gained a Redoubt which the Imperialists had raised near the
lower Town, with the slaughter of Four hundred Soldiers therein; and having
taken out the Arms and Guns, they demolished the Fort, and rased it to the very
Ground. Howsoever, Caprara having received a Recruit of Two thousand Men,
possessed himself of a Post, whereby he hoped to bar the Town of the Water,
which supplied both that and the Castle: But matters happened quite otherwise,
for the Rains fell in such abundance, as filled the Cisterns with Water, which
were anciently made to supply the wants of the Inhabitants on such occasions.

In the mean time Apafi Prince of Transylvania, labored with all his power to
gain a Neutrality for himself between the Turks and the Emperor; by the first
of which he was pressed with all imaginable instances, to serve in this War
both with Men and Money, according to agreement and obligations of his
Investiture, when he received the Standard from the Sultan: And by the other,
That is, by the Emperor he was threatened to declare himself either a Friend, or
an Enemy, for that no sort of indifferency would be admitted in this Case: And
the better to compel him thereunto, Count Caraffa advanced into his Country
with Eight thousand Men, Two thousand whereof were Hungarians, and took up
their Quarters on the Frontiers of Transylvania, which was now in a Condition
under such a Force rather to receive Laws, than to give them. Apafi desires a
Neutrality.
The Prince Apafi being much incommoded by Quartering of Soldiers, dispatched
three Agents to Vienna, to Treat of those matters, to which he was altogether
averse in former times, and readily offered to give free Quarter to those
Troops which were sent into his Country; but as to an open Declaration of
nearer Alliance he desired to be excused, considering that his Country was
environed by the Turks, and their strongest Garrisons bordering on his
Confines, so that until the Emperor had driven the Enemy at a farther distance,
it could not be advisable for him to make a more public Declaration.

The City of Debrezin, Debr^zin redeems it self from free Quarter.
Situate between Tokay and Great Waradin, is Populous and Rich, and had
voluntarily desired to be received into Protection of his Imperial Majesty,
after Zolnock and Cassovia had been reduced, having conserved themselves in a
Neutrality during the late Revolutions of Hungary, without taking part in any
Engagement with the Malcontents. This City I say, was received into
Protection, upon promise to maintain with free Quarter Five thousand Germans,
and One thousand Hungarians; but finding themselves overburdened and harassed
with Quartering these Soldiers, they agreed to pay Eighty thousand Florins per
Month, for the space of six Months, in lieu of their free Quarter, by which Sum
of Money they eased themselves from the inconvenience and insolence of
Soldiers, as did also many parts of the upper Hungary, the main burden of
Quarters being cast upon the Counties bordering on Transylvania, which was of
great relief to the Hereditary Countries.

This Year began early with Action; for the Generals Mercy and Heusler having
their Quarters at Zolnock, made frequent Incursions upon the Turks with great
Success and Advantage: And having intelligence, that in Transylvania a Convoy
of about an Hundred Wagons was providing laden, with Money, Ammunition and
Provisions for the subsistence and relief of Buda, they made a Detachment of
Five thousand choice Horse, with some Auxiliaries from Count Caprara, and
ordered them to march toward Segedin, and to Way-lay them in their Passage
over the River. Heusler being advanced about a League from Segedin, gave Orders
to Peterhasi, with a strong Battalion to embosk himself within the Woods, which
grew very thick in that Country; and when the Garrison of Segedin should Sally
forth to the assistance of the Convoy, That he should then with his Battalion
arise from the place of Concealment, and seize upon the Town, which might
perhaps be left naked, and void of all defense. Matters did not in all things
answer expectation; for the Convoy being Guarded with a strong party of Turkish
Soldiers, they Fought with such Valor and Resolution, Heusler Attacks a Convoy
of the Turks.
that tho the Imperialists remained Masters of the Field, and of the Convoy;
yet the Action cost so much Blood, that it could not properly be called a
Victory; for a Victory may be too dearly bought, when it is purchased with the
Lives of so many brave Men, as are not to be estimated by any advantage
whatsoever: And so it happened now; The Victory dearly bought.
for tho Three thousand Turks were killed on the place, yet they were not to be
valued with the Blood of Two thousand Germans and Hungarians, all choice and
select Men, who lay dead in the Field. But as it happens commonly amongst
Soldiers, those who live and survive, have little sense or regard for such as
are slain; unless that being made Mad, and more Furious by the death of their
Companions, they breath nothing but Revenge; as did this remaining Party, which
exasperated by the difficulty of the late Fight, fell upon the Lands of Seudin,
Geset, Bahatz, and the Parts adjacent, or not far from the place of Battle,
destroying and consuming all with Fire and Sword. The News of these Successes
were not very pleasing at Vienna, where they esteemed the Victory too dearly
obtained; and tho they publicly applauded the bravery and resolution of the
Officers and Soldiers, yet in their private Councils, they could not but
secretly blame the rashness of the Commanders.

As all places in the upper Hungary were filled with Slaughter and Confusion;
so no less Damage was caused in Croatia, Floods of Water in Croatia.
by the vast Floods and Inundations, which for some time drowned all that
Country, and carried away whole Towns and Familes, Castles and Provisions down
the Torrent: And not only hindered all Commerce and Correspondence of one Town
with another, but prevented the intended Incursions on the Enemy, destroyed the
Provisions necessary for support of the Army, and superinduced a grievous
Famine over the whole Land. Count Nicolas Erdeody, who was then Ban or chief
Commander at that time of Croatia, being much affected with the Common Calamity
of his Country, assembled a Convention of all the Estates at Zagrabia, to
consider of the said Condition and Desolation of their Province, where after
diverse Conferences, they concluded it necessary to represent unto the Emperor,
the State and Condition of Croatia, and the Confines and Militia thereof, and
how necessary it was to defend and guard those Frontiers, from the Forces then
gathering between Belgrade and Esseck.

Nor were these Advices ill grounded; for the Turkish Forces were daily on
their march from Belgrade to the Bridge of Esseck, which they had received
Commands to Repair and Defend, being the most important Pass of all Hungary.
Apti Pasha now Seraskier, or General of the Turkish Army, was extremely
diligent and active to provide every thing necessary against the next Campaign;
The Seraskier Reinforces several Garrisons.
and with admirable Sedulity, as well, as the shortness of time would admit, he
succored all the Frontier Garrisons with Provisions, and reinforced Waradin,
Agria, Segedin, Temiswar, Buda, Alba-Regalis and Kanisia with Recruits, and all
necessary supplies, being places most exposed to the Enemy; and such as might
with Reason be believed, would all or some of them be attempted, and become the
Enterprise and Design of this Years Campaign. This Apti Pasha, was a Man of
some experience in the War, but being of a sower and morose Temper, was ill
beloved by the Soldiery.

Tekeli being intent to Relieve his Countess and City of Mongatz, and raise the
Siege which Caprara had laid, and now completely formed; departed from Great
Waradin about the beginning of February, with Seventeen Standards, and took his
march by way of Hongland into Transylvania, Tekeli marches toward Mongatz.
about two Leagues from Clausemberg, where understanding that several of his
Troops, which the last Year had made a Defection from him, were Quartered in
the Parts thereabouts, he hoped either to surprise and cut them off, or else to
regain them back to his Party; but these Hungarian Troops having advice of his
near Approach, changed their Quarters, and marched away to join with the
Croatian Regiments of Lodron, and six Companies of the Regiment of Spinola; of
which Tekeli being advised he altered his design, and resolved to pass the
Tibiscus, and march with all expedition toward Mongatz. This Motion of Tekeli
Alarmed all the Countries, and caused Caraffa to endeaver to Way-lay him, and
take some convenient Post to intercept him in his march; but Tekeli upon this
intelligence directed his Course toward Giulia, to join with the new Pasha of
that place, and to concert other Methods, in order to their future proceedings.
In the mean time Caraffa not to remain idle, having a Force of Four thousand
Germans and Three thousand Hungarians, with four Pieces of Cannon and four
Mortars, sent to Summon the Fortress of St. Job, about three Leagues distant
from Great Waradin, Situate in the middle of a great Marsh or Fen, The Fortress
of St. Job.
which rendered it naturally very strong; and was formed by Art in a
Quadrangular Figure, encompassed by four Bulwarks, joined by strong built
Curtains, and encompassed by a very deep Ditch: Upon one side of this Fortress
there is a great wide open place, in which many Houses are erected, and is
called by the name of the Little City; which also is fortified in the nature of
a strong Palanca, encompassed with a convenient Ditch, by which it is joined to
that of the Castle, and has communication therewith by a Drawbridge:
Notwithstanding the strength of this place, Caraffa invested it on the 9th of
February, Invested by Caprara.
raised his Batteries, threw Bombs and Fired instantly upon the Town, which was
rereturned in like manner from thence. But so it happened by the Divine
Providence, that one of the Bombs fell directly into a Tower in the middle of
the Castle, where the Powder and Ammunition was conserved; with which all
blowing up, not only tore and rent the Tower in Pieces, but shook the whole
Castle and the neighboring Town, and put all the Soldiers and Inhabitants into
such amazement and consternation, that they knew not which way, nor how to
apply themselves for their defense and safety. This fatal Blow gave advantage
to the Christians to Attack the Fortress in three several places; for which
when the Turks perceived, that preparations were making, they spread a white
Flag on the Walls, and demanded Terms of Surrender, which were readily granted
and allowed to the Garrison, and to all the Inhabitants to march forth with
their Arms, with their Wives and Children, and with as much of their Baggage,
as every person could carry. Possession being taken of the Gates and Entrances
by the German Soldiers, Six hundred Turks of the Garrison marched out, And
Surrendered.
besides Women and Children, which were according to the Faith given, safely
conducted within a League of Great Waradin; only an unlucky accident happened,
that as the Garrison passed forth, about Twelve Persons were discovered amongst
them, to have been Hungarian Christians, and such as had become Renegadoes, and
denied the Faith of Christ: Upon the sight of which the Christian Soldiers
became so scandalized and incented, that forgetting the Capitulations agreed,
they violently seized upon them, with intention immediately to Hang them up, or
by some other way to put them to Death as Apostates: This Busle caused great
disturbance, and made the Turks to Cry aloud, that the Conditions and Articles
of Surrender were broken: But the Officers applying themselves with their
Authority, to restrain the Licentiousness of the Soldiery, the Tumult was
appeased: After which due care and diligence being used to extinguish the Fire,
which still raged both in the Town and Castle, it was at length overcome, and
much of the Ammunition and Provisions conserved; what Goods remained were given
to the Soldiery. In the Castle were eight Pieces of Cannon, without other Arms;
about Two hundred and seventy Christian Slaves were set at Liberty. The taking
of this Place was esteemed of much importance, by Reason, that thereby the
Counties of Zathmar and Zobolesch were freed of all Contributions, and the
Towns and Boroughs in all Parts round, as far as Waradin were bridled and kept
under some restraint, by a Garrison of an Hundred Musketeers, and Two hundred
Heydukes and a Hundred Hussars, which Count Caraffa had put into St. Job, which
were esteemed sufficient to resist any sudden Incursion of the Enemy until
Relief came, which could not be long wanting from the neighboring Places.

In the mean time (as we have said) Count Caprara had drawn his Line of
Circumvallation before Mongatz, and laid a formal Siege: Against which, the
Besieged wanting no resolution to defend themselves, Mongatz Besieged.
fired continual Vollies of great and small shot: And on the 10th of March made
a Sally to ruin the Batteries of the Imperialists, but were vigorously repulsed
with some loss: Tho not long afterward they made another Sally with more
success, Sallies made.
having overthrown a Battery, and made the Cannon unserviceable: But in regard
the Defendants found by experience that frequent Sallies cost the Lives of many
Soldiers, which they could ill spare, they resolved to conserve them selves
within their Walls, on the Defensive part, without other hazards of offending
the Enemy. On the other side, the Imperialists pressed forward with much
Resolution, played with their Cannon on the Palanca, and threw Bombs and
Carcasses into the Town; but what damage was done thereby was soon repaired by
the diligence of the Besieged, returning their Shot with fiery Bullets of a new
invention, which did great execution within the Lines. This and other
Successes, raised their Spirits within the Town to a steady defense; to secure
which, the Princess Ragotzki imposed a new Oath of Fidelity on all the
Soldiers, which they cheerfully took, and to express their readiness
thereunto, they fired all the great and small Shot round the Town, with
resolute Protestations never to hearken unto any Offers or Conditions for
Surrender of the Place: To confirm the Soldiery in this good Humor, it was
noised in the Garrison, that there were sufficient Provisions in the Magazines,
for the subsistence of a whole Year; that the Princess had received Letters
from her Husband Tekeli assuring her, that he would very suddenly appear
before the Town, with an Army sufficient to raise the Siege and restore their
Liberties, Reports of Tekeli's March.
and reward all those, who had continued firm and constant in their Faith and
Allegiance unto him. Nor was this Report confined within the Walls of Mongatz,
but it was spread over all the Imperial Camp, that Tekeli had joined the
Seraskier's Army, with a Force of Eight thousand Turks and Tartars, and shortly
resolved to attempt the raising of the Siege before Mongatz, and to Reinforce
the place with considerable Recruits. To prevent which, Count Caprara dispeeded
General Piccolomini, with a strong Detachment to join with Mercy, Caraffa and
Heusler, and with united strength to oppose the Enemies passage, and watch some
favorable opportunity to engage them: But the Report of the Turks numbers, and
Tekeli's design soon vanished, there being no such apparent Force in the Field
to give them opposition.

In the mean time the Siege proceeded vigorously, Bombs and Carcasses being
daily fired and thrown into the Palanca and Castle; one of which fell into the
very Room, where the Princess Ragotzki was at Dinner, which without any
disorder, or affrightment of the Lady was soon extinguished. Howsoever, the
Besiegers made such a Breach into the Palanca, that they lodged a strong Party
upon the brink of the Ditch. The Besieged on the other side had raised a great
Battery behind the Breach, which dismounted several of the Imperialists Cannon,
and made diverse Retrenchments, and fired continually Bombs and Carcasses into
the Lines, which often times did considerable execution. But when the Officers
of the Garrison considered, that the only means to preserve the place, was to
prevent the Draining of the two Ditches of the lower Town, which were extremely
deep, they cut a passage for several streams of Water, by secret and hidden
Channels to fall into the Ditch, which being increased by the melting of Snow
from the Mountains, and continual Floods of Rain, which fell in that Season of
the Year, the Ditches were not only filled, but the Earth made so soft and
moist, that it was impossible to maintain their Works; so that Caprara could do
nothing more than Batter the Town with his Cannon, and throw some Bombs and
Carcasses with little or no Execution. In fine, the Season coming on for
Action, which required an application to something more profitable and
promising than this difficult Work; The Siege of Mongatz raised.
the Siege was raised by Order of the Emperor about the end of April, after
five Months had been unprofitable spent before that place.

But before the great and most considerable Actions of the following Campaign
began, there were certain Preparations or Preludes thereunto represented in
Fights and Skirmishes between certain Parties detached from the main Bodies, in
all which the Imperialists gained the Advantage, and sometimes had the fortune
of a clear Victory: On the 14th of March, some Imperial Troops having their
Winter Quarters in Croatia, routed Fifteen hundred Turks drawn up in open
Field, and put them to flight; Achmet Aga their chief Commander was killed, and
his Son taken Prisoner: Achmet Aga defeated.
This Engagement happened near a little Town called Jalonne, which the Croats
stormed, and took and pillaged it, and set at liberty Eight hundred Christian
Slaves, of which Three hundred were in a condition to take up Arms. Another
Detachment of Croats possessed themselves of the Castle of Clanitz, where they
found a considerable Booty; as also of the Town of the great Cladussa, about
four Leagues from Strediclo, from whence they were enabled to make Incursions
into the Territories of the Turks without any opposition.

April.
About the beginning of this Month, other Detachments from the Garrison of
Vesprin, and Places in the Lower Hungary, took the Castle of Palotta, about two
Leagues distant from Alba Regalis, Other Successes.
and put all to the Sword. About the end of this Month, Count Baragotzi with a
Regiment of German Horse, and some Hungarian Troops, intended to surprise
Tekeli in Giena, a little Town belonging to the Turks; but the Design failed,
Tekeli being retired a little before the coming of the Enemy: Howsoever his
March was not altogether fruitless, for in his return he took forty Turks, whom
he made Prisoners.

The Turks on the other side, with Three thousand Horse and Foot, under the
Command of Fonduck Pasha, designed to surprise Wirowitza in Croatia; but the
Governor of that Place having notice thereof, got together about One thousand
Seven hundred Horse and Dragoons from the neighboring Garrisons, with which he
surprised the Enemy in their Camp, before Day in the Morning, and charged them
so briskly, that they killed about an Hundred and Seventy on the Place, took
Thirty seven Prisoners, amongst which were two Agas, and several Officers of
Note, with three Standards, Drums, Timbrels, and a considerable Booty.

The Imperialists were still within their Winter Quarters, which were so well
disposed, and in that Military Order, as if the Army had been drawn in
Battalia, The orderly Disposition of the Christians in their Winter Quarters.
by which means they kept the Seraskier in continual Alarums, on both sides of
the Tibiscus. The Hungarian and German Troops possessed a vast Tract of the
Country; for General Barkotzi, with Four thousand of his Countrymen, acting
jointly and by agreement with Piccolomini, and the Regiments of Schultz and
Dunewald, extended themselves all along the Upper Hungary, as far as to the
Confines of Poland, to hinder the Incursions of the Tartars, who were used to
make that Way their common Road to Pillage and to Infest those Countries. The
Quarters of these Forces reached so far as to be near, or (as we may say) in
call of General Caraffa, who with the Counts Getz and Terzi, extended their
several Bodies of Horse and Foot all along the Confines of Transylvania, and
the Counties of Chege and Debrezin, even to the neighboring Jurisdiction of
great Waradin. In like manner General Marcy and Heusler, extended their
Quarters from the Province of Zolnok, beyond the Tibiscus, into the very Heart
of the Turks Country, bringing all those Parts under great and heavy
Contributions, and still maintaining a mutual Correspondence with the other
Generals: By which means the Turks were so locked up on all sides, that they
could not come to the Relief of any one Place without fighting, unless it were
Pesth and Buda. The Prince of Transylvania was environed on one side by
Caraffa, who laid grievous Impositions on his People; and on the other, Prince
Apafi in distress.
by many Troops that Quartered on the Confines, which so humbled him, that he
became much more pliable and submissive in his Language toward the Emperor,
than he had formerly practiced in all the Treaties hold with the Imperial
Ministers. In this straightened Condition, the Prince Apafi acquainted the Ottoman
Port, and the Seraskier, that it was impossible for him to answer the
Expectation of the Turks either with Men or Money, unless he were relieved from
the Oppression of the Christians, who levied those Moneys on his Subjects,
which were designed for his own and the Turkish Forces. To remedy which, the
Seraskier drawing forth a Detachment from the Garrisons of Buda and Agria,
marched in two Bodies; one by way of Giulia and Lippa, and the other passed the
Danube at Pesth, by which Marshall Marcy and Heusler being greatly Alarmed,
drew out their Forces into the open Field, with resolution to give Battle to
the Seraskier, who considering that the Success of War was hazardous, and that
the ill event thereof might prejudice the Turks in all the Enterprises of the
ensuing Campaign; he thought fit to draw off and return back to his former
Quarters: Howsoever, lest he should seem to act nothing, he detached a Body of
Fifteen hundred Men to advance forward, and make a discovery of the Forces and
Disposition of the Enemies Camp; but being met by a Party belonging to Marcy,
were treated so ill by them, that about an Hundred and fifty were killed on the
Place, and Fifty taken Prisoners, the remainder in a disorderly manner betaking
themselves to flight. This Victory opened a free Passage for the Cavalry as far
as Wesserhasel, a Country abounding with Provisions for Man, and Forage for the
Horse, which the Inhabitants freely bestowed upon them. The Cruelty of Schonot.
The Garrison of Schonot much offended at this Kindness of Wesserhasel to their
Enemies, sent Commissaries to examine the Matter, and without much Dispute,
empaled diverse People, plundered and burned their Houses and Mills, threatening
greater Destruction in case they continued to afford Relief to the Christians.
Marcy on the other side being greatly enraged at this manner of Proceedings,
resolved to revenge the same on Schonot; and to that end, joining with Heusler,
they attempted the Town, and were proceeded therein so far, as to enter the
Ditch, the News whereof so allarum'd the Turkish Camp, that they resolved with
all their force to endeavor the Relief of Schonot; Schonot relieved by the
Turks.
which Mercy not being of sufficient strength to oppose, drew off from the
Town, and possessed himself of a Pass at the Bridge of Arath, where he hindered
the Turkish Forces from joining; and with a party of Hussars and Dragoons so
charged the advanced Troops of the Turks, that they defeated a great number of
them, and took the Bey of Lippa, and the Aga of Jiena Prisoners.

But all these were petty Actions, and inconsiderable Preludes to what was to
follow in the succeeding Campaign, which was now in its beginning. May, between
Gran and Barkan. The main Body of the Army, which was to act under the Command
of the Duke of Loraine, Preparations for the Campaign.
was to be composed of 14.000 German Foot, and 12.000 German Horse, drawn out
from the Troops of Saxony, Brandenburg and Suabia, to which Three thousand
Hungarians were to be joined, with other Troops, so far as would make up an
Army of Fifty five thousand Men; Count Caprara and Count Staremberg were to be
Major Generals; the Duke de Croy was created General of the Foot, Prince Lewis
of Neubourg, and Count de Susa Lieutenant Generals; the Barons of Tinghen,
Thun, and the Marquis of Nigrelli were made Sergeant Majors of Battle. There
was likewise another Army preparing under the Command of the Duke of Bavaria,
Officers appointed.
consisting of Thirty five thousand Men; of which Eleven thousand were to be
Foot, Eight thousand German Horse, to which the Bavarian Troops were to be
added, with those of Franconia, and Two thousand Five hundred Hungarians. Of
these Count Leslie was nominated for Major General, Count Serini for General of
the Infantry; the Marquess of Vergne and Count Schaffemberg for Lieutenant
Generals; the Barons of Walis and Berk, and the Count de Apremont for Major
Generals. Prince Lewis of Baden was made General of the Horse, the Counts
Caraffa and Gonda Lieutenant Generals, and the Counts Piccolomini and Veterani,
and Baron Heusler Major Generals.

In this manner all things being prepared and disposed in Martial Order, for
carrying on the War for the present Campaign; a Council of War was called to
consider and determine the Proceedings and Methods thereof, and to resolve of
the Enterprise which was first to be undertaken; upon Debate whereof, two
different Opinions arose; one proposed the Siege of Agria, or Alba Regalis, and
the other that of Buda. The first urged the difficulty and hazard in the
Attempt of Buda, which was much better fortyfied than in the former Siege; A
Council of War called.
for that several new Works were raised on the Banks of the Danube; and that on
the other side, the Ditch had been made much more deep and large than it was
before: That the Turks had prepared diverse Countermines in those places where
the Christians had lately made their Mines: That they had made diverse new
Sally-ports: That they had unpaved all their Streets, uncovered the tops of
their Houses to prevent the Mischief which was feared from Bombs and Carcasses,
against which they had fortified the large Cistern of Water, Arguments against
the Siege of Buda.
which was built in the middle of the City: That they had furnished the Town
with such quantities of Provisions and Ammunition, and Stores of all things
necessary for War and support of Human Life, as were sufficient without other
Supplies or Recruits to maintain a Siege for six Months: That the Garrison
consisted of Twenty five thousand select Men at least, chosen out of the
Janisaries and Spahees, and were all resolute Men and good Soldiers: That the
Governor in chief was a stout and valiant Man, a Renegado, and one who was
learned and experienced in all the Military Arts of the Christians: That under
him six Agas were subordinated, all Men of Conduct and Bravery to succeed in
the Government, as one or the other of them should fail. And lastly, That the
Town was discharged of all useless and unnecessary Inhabitants, such as Women
and Children, and Jews and Armenian Merchants, who were permitted to withdraw
themselves, with all their Goods and Estates, out from the City.

Notwithstanding this Discourse maintained and urged by diverse, the contrary
Opinion prevailed for the Siege of Buda; as if the Difficulties thereof served
rather to inflame, than to discourage so many valiant and generous Spirits: The
Siege of Buda resolved.
Such an Enterprise as the taking a Capital City, with the Conquest of which,
the whole Kingdom would follow, and fall a Prey into their Hands, seemed an
Adventure and an Exploit worthy the undertaking of so many brave Soldiers, who
were certainly the greatest Captains of this Age, and perhaps we may speak it
without injury to past times, that they were the best Soldiers that ever the
World had produced. Indeed, the whole Army of this Year was in a most
Flourishing Condition, well Provided and Accoutred, Fleshed with Blood and
Victory, and so Courageous that nothing seemed too hard and difficult for them.
And this was one Reason, to persuade the Military Councils to the Siege of
Buda, not knowing whether the next Year would produce such an Army as at
present; which as it was capable to undertake any thing, so it was pity to have
it wasted and employed in trivial matters, and taking in of Fortresses from
whence no Important Consequences could be expected. There was moreover one
thing more especially urged, that by the last Siege the Defects and Errors, and
false Attacks were all seen and discovered, the which might now easily be
rectified, and provisions made against the mischiefs, which cost the Lives of
many Men; and the Ground and nature of it, and Situation being perfectly known,
the subjection of this place would become much more easy than the time before,
notwithstanding all the Provisions the Turks had made. In fine, with these
Arguments, as I said, the Siege of Buda was resolved, and every thing prepared
in order thereunto: In the mean time, the Turks were not idle on their part;
every Day Olacks or Curriers were dispatched in all have from Buda to Belgrade,
and thence to the Port, to expedite the coming of the Ottoman Army, and
Succors for Re-inforcement of their Garrison; Provisions made by the Turks for
the War.
giving them advices of the Motion, and Approach of the Imperial Troops against
them, which if not prevented would quickly surround their Walls, and intercept
their Advices and Relief. The Turkish Officers and Soldiers in all their
Quarters in Hungary amassed, and gathered what Forage and Provisions they were
able, which they laid up, and disposed in those Garrisons which were most
exposed to the Enemy; and Reinforced them with Troops drawn from other places,
which were in the least danger of the Enemy, and at farthest distance from them.

The Tartars were urged and solicited, not only to hasten their march to the
Confines of Poland, to keep that Country in Awe; but also to send another Body
to join with the Ottoman Camp in Hungary. In the mean time, Skirmishes daily
happened between several Hussars and Dragoons belonging to Raab and Strigonium,
and detached Parties from Buda; to which place Reinforcements were so
constantly sent, that the Garrison was calculated to amount unto above Nine
thousand Men, The Pasha of Buda changed.
who incessantly labored both Day and Night about the Fortifications; for though
it was not certain, whether the Imperialists would make that Siege the business
of this Year; yet it was greatly feared, and too much labor and caution could
not be used, for the Defense of a place of such Importance.

In the mean time the Grand Seignior removed from Adrianople to Constantinople,
The Grand Seignior goes to Constantinople.
to pass his Summer there, in hopes that his Presence would bring some Trade to
that City; but the War had drained all the Money in such manner, that the
Merchants found little benefit, or alteration in the quickness of their Trade.
The Grand Vizier intended at the same time to have moved from Adrianople
toward Belgrade, but the great Fire which had happened lately there, caused him
to retard his March for some Days, in order to rebuild the public Edifices
consumed by the Fire. Besides the Fire and Sword, Scarcity of Corn amongst the
Turks.
there was great Scarcity of Corn in all the Ottoman Dominions; by the two
first, the Rich were the greatest Sufferers, but the latter was an Aggrievance
which most affected the Poor. Howsoever, they supported these Troubles and
Losses with Patience, without Murmurings amongst the Citizens, or Mutinies as
yet in the Camp.

The Moscovites were all this time playing a double Game, having sent an Envoy
to the Court to complain of the Incursions, which the Tartars had made into
their Country, The Moscovites treat with the Turks.
and of the Depredations which the Turkish Governor of Asac, had made upon
them at the Mouth of the Tanais. The Envoy found a kind Reception, and Orders
were sent both to the Tartars, and Governor of Asac to abstain for the future,
from all such Acts of Hostility, and maintain a good Correspondence with the
Moscovites, who were become Allies and faithful Friends to the Port: And more
to engage the Envoy, some few Russian Slaves were given him, with License to
rebuild an old ruined Greek Church in Constantinople; with which to outward
appearance, the Envoy returned with entire Satisfaction.

The Polish Inter-nuntio, who from the beginning of the War had been kept under
restraint at Constantinople, was now upon exchange for a Turk of quality, again
set at Liberty; and being upon his return into Poland, was on the Confines met
by a Polish Jesuit, who had some Months before been sent by the late Vizier
with Letters to that King, containing a Project for making a Peace; and was now
returning with Answers to those Letters, and Instructions to the Inter-nuntio,
in what manner to manage a Treaty with the Turks. T^^ Poles make pr^posals.
The Inter-nuntio returned herewith, and made Proposals, That in case the Turks
would Surrender Caminiec, with all they had taken in Podolia, That then the
Polish King would become a Mediator for Peace with the other Confederates: But
the Turks were not as yet sufficiently humbled, to give up any Places they had
in Possession, especially that important Fortress of Caminiec, which was the
very Key of Poland; and though an Expedient was offered to Demolish the same, it
would not be accepted by the Turks, who had a greater value and esteem for that
Place, for having been the only Conquest, which this Grand Seignior had made in
Person. And the Turks having no great value of late for the Poles, either as to
their Prowess in War, or Conduct in Peace, gave a proud Answer to the Demand;
resolving this Year to stand on the Defensive part, and to tire out the
Christians with a long, and an expensive War: For tho they had lost some of
their Towns, and been often beaten in the Field; yet they kept up that Pride
and fierceness, which is agreeable to their nature and former successes in War.

The French Ambassador, who had for a long time maintained a Controversy about
the Safraw, (as formerly mentioned) did now conceive that it might be a very
proper Season, after such various revolutions and change of Officers, by which
the Pride of the Turks might be abased, to obtain those Demands which were
formerly denied. The Grand Vizier at the desire of the Ambassador admitted him
to Audience, The French Ambassadors Audience with the Grand Vizier.
and treated him very civilly: But howsoever, at the beginning of their
Discourse, he gave him a caution not to demand any thing, which was not
warranted by the Capitulations: And when the Ambassador moved, That some
Alterations should be made in the Ceremony of his Audience, that when he arose
to put on the Vest, which the Grand Vizier or Chimacam had given; that they
also should rise up at the same time, until he was Clothed, and that then they
should sit down together. The Vizier provoked a little with this new Demand,
believing that it proceeded from a meaner Opinion conceived of their Power, by
Reason of their late Misfortunes, readily Answered with some quickness, and
said, That the first Turks, who came over into Europe, passed the Bosphorus but
with Forty Men only, and that they would return again by the same Way with the
like number, rather than condescend to any thing tending to a Diminution, or
Abasement of the Honor of the Empire. In fine, Tho the French were treated at
this Audience with more than usual Civility and Respect; yet could obtain
nothing more than a Confirmation of the Privileges they had formerly enjoyed,
and a Liberty to rebuild a burnt Church.

But whilst Preparations were making on both sides for the War of the
succeeding Year; It was adjudged in the Councils at Vienna, to be a matter
absolutely necessary, to engage the Moscovits in the Confederacy, for that
thereby, the King of Poland would not only be freed from all Jealousies, of
being Invaded by the Moscovites, whilst his Arms were otherwise diverted; but
the Tartars restrained from their Incursions, in case the Czars would take that
Incumbence upon them, to give a stop to their Depredations. The benefit thus
doubly considered, Ministers were sent from Vienna and Cracow to Mosco, and
many Arguments offered to induce the Czars to enter into the League; the which
Work found the greater difficulty and opposition, by reason that a Treaty was
so lately concluded with the Turks, Moscovites in reality, could easily
dispense with such Articles and Agreements, provided their Interest was
advanced, and their Territories enlarged; in pursuance of which, a League
Defensive between Poland and Moscovy was concluded for ever, and an Offensive
so long as the present War with the Turks should be continued; the which League
was Dated the 24th of April, according to the following Articles.

First, That a perpetual Peace be concluded, and established between the two
Powers.

Secondly, To avoid all Differences and Disputes, arising about the Titles to
be given to the Czars and the King of Poland, the same was agreed by both
Parties.

Thirdly, That the Poles shall Deliver and Surrender up to the Moscovites, the
Palatinates of Kiovia and Smolensko, with some other Places specified in that
Article.

Fourthly, That the Cosacks of those Countries, shall be mutually discharged of
the Oaths of Allegiance, which they had taken to either Crown.

Fifthly, That the Rebels and Revolters, who had submitted to the Turks, should
find no Protection or Refuge from either Party.

Sixthly, That the Czars should pay 1500.000 Florins of Polish Money, to the
Government of Poland in two equal Payments; the first to be made at the Signing
and Sealing of the Articles, and the second at the Meeting of the next Diet.

Seventhly, That the Towns and Fortresses, Situate on the Banks of the
Boristhenes, from Kiovia to the River of Tasmin, which runs by Czekrim, shall
not be Rebuilt or Repaired, but that all that Country should remain Wast and
Depopulated, until such time, as the Differences arising thereupon should be
decided by more Ample Authority: The Plenipotentiaries of Poland declaring,
That they had no Power nor Instructions in that particular.

Eighthly, That to avoid all Differences, which might arise about the Cities and
Places, which were to be Surrendered by the Moscovites into the Hands and
Possession of the Poles, shall be particularly nominated and mentioned: And
accordingly they were afterward nominated in this Article.

Ninethly, That free Liberty be given to the Roman Catholics, to Exercise
their Religion in the Suburbs of Kiovia and Smolensko: Notwithstanding any
endeavors or opposition, which the Patriarch shall make thereunto.

Tenthly, That their Majesty's the Czars, being desirous to introduce and
establish the Christian Religion within the Mohammedan Dominions, at the
Instance and Request of the King of Poland, and in pursuance of the League
Offensive and Defensive concluded with His Majesty; do Promise and Oblige
themselves immediately to make War upon the Turks, and with a numerous Army to
Invade his Dominions this Summer, by such Ways and Roads, as the Tartars have
usually Invaded Poland, and thereby give a stop to their Incursions: And that
Commands be immediately dispatched to the Cosacks of the Tanais, That they
forthwith Equip their Fleet for the Black Sea, and Trouble and infest those
Cities and Countries belonging to the Turks, which are Situate on that Coast.

Eleventhly, That in case the Turks shall lay Siege to Kiovia, or any other
place appertaining to the Dominion of the Czars, That then the King of Poland
shall send an Army for the Relief and Succor of such place Besieged: And in
like manner, in case the Turks shall Besiege Leopolis, or any other City in
Poland, the Moscovites shall endeavor the Relief and Succor thereof.

Twelfthly, That the Czars shall forthwith give Advices to the Ottoman Port of
the League concluded with Poland, and their Intentions to make War upon the
Grand Seignior: And though the Turks upon such intimation shall offer to give
satisfaction to either, or both Parties; yet no heed shall be given thereunto,
or Conclusion made without the Approbation and Consent of all the Confederate
Christians.

Thirteenthly, The Moscovites engaged to send their Ambassadors into diverse
parts of Christendom, as, England, Denmark, Holland, and other Princes to crave
their Assistance and Union against the Mohammedan Armies.

Fourteenthly, That after a Peace shall be concluded by common Consent of the
Confederates with the Turks; And that afterward one of them shall be desirous
to commence a new War, That then the other Confederates shall not be obliged to
join therein.

Fifteenthly, That whereas some Disputes remain still undecided, touching the
Limits and Bounds of Poland and Moscovy, That Commissioners shall forthwith be
authorized and dispatched for accommodation of that Matter; especially about
the Dependencies on Kiovia.

Sixteenthly, That Security of Trade and Commerce be established between the
two Kingdoms.

Seventeenthly, That the Debts which are owing from the Subjects of one Kingdom
to those of another, shall mutually be accounted for, and satisfied by one to
the other: And that what Suits do or shall arise between the Subjects of either
Kingdom, shall be determined by the ordinary Courts of Justice, where the
Defendant abides.

Eighteenthly, Those Points which remain undecided, and cannot be agreed by the
Commissioners, the same shall be remitted to the Determination of the
Sovereigns.

Nineteenhly, That the People on each side, who live on the Borders, shall pass
friendly and peaceably one with the other; and in case of Differences arising
between them, the smaller Causes shall be determined by the Palatines, and the
greater by Commissioners.

Twentiethly, Neither side shall give Succor or Assistance to the common
Enemy, nor entertain any of their Subjects in the War, or in any Office or
Employment.

One and twentieth, That their Majesty's the Czars shall Swear to the
Observation of these Articles in presence of the Polish Ambassadors. And the
like shall be performed by the King of Poland, at a meeting of the Diet, in
presence of the Ambassadors from the Czars; and in the mean time, the
Ambassadors shall mutually engage, that all these Articles shall be observed
and maintained.

Two and twentieth, That whilst these Articles are interchanging, and before
the Ratifications are made, It shall be lawful for the Merchants of each
Country and Nation to Trade and Traffic without any trouble or interruption of
Commerce: Only Tobacco and Brandy shall not be brought into Moscovy, but remain
Contrabanda, as by ancient Articles.

Three and twentieth, In case the Poles or Moscovites shall have occasion to
dispatch Messengers to Persia or other Parts, no molestation, let, or hindrance
shall be given them, nor Passports denied.

Four and twentieth, And in regard a good Understanding and Communication is
necessary in this War, the King of Poland obliges himself to maintain and
defend the Confines and Country of the Dukedom of Solensko, and the Czars so
far as Kohzi^* And that private Letters shall pay Postage on both sides; but
the Public and Royal Letters shall go free without Charge.

Five and twentieth, That both Parties shall give Advices to all the Allies and
Confederates of this happy League and Agreement.

Six and twentieth, That this Contract shall as well oblige the Heirs and
Successors as the Princes, who are Parties thereunto. And in case this Original
Instrument of Accord should be lost or embezled in the Chancery, or
Paper-Office of either side, yet the Agreement shall not be Rescinded thereby,
but stand in full Virtue and Force.

The League being in this manner agreed, signed, and ratified on both sides,
the News thereof soon spread it self over all Europe, and was particularly
received at Vienna, and in the Confederate Camp, with as much Joy and Triumph,
as it was at Constantinople with Trouble and Confusion. And now it was expected
by all the World, How the Treaty was put in execution.
that this Agreement should be executed, and that the Moscovites should in the
first place, to give a beginning, have made Incursions into the Enemies
Country, and without farther delay, have invested those Places, which lay upon
the Frontiers; but instead thereof, their first Exploit was to take Possession
of the Dukedom of Smolenzko, and of Kiovia, and of about Fifty Leagues of
Country, which lies along by the Banks of the Niester; but as to other Acts of
Hostility, unless it were by some ranging, and confused Incursions made by
their own Cosacks, with design rather to Pilfer and Pillage, than to Offend and
Damage the Enemy, nothing of Moment was performed; by which means the Tartars,
against whom the Moscovites were obliged to oppose their Arms, found an
opportunity to join with the Cosacks of Poland, who with united Forces, not
only disputed the Passes with the Polanders, but likewise recruited and
reinforced the Grand Vizier's Army in Hungary.

After this Agreement was finished, the next Treaty in hand was to deal with
Apafi, Prince of Transylvania, to draw him off from his Adherence to the Turk.
Treaty with Apafi begun.
This Prince finding himself between two great Powers, the least of which was
able to crush him to nothing, kept and maintained his Agents at both Courts,
only to protract time, and divert a Storm. Count Caraffa quartering with a
strong Party of Horse and Foot, on the Confines of that Principality, was
appointed by the Emperor to treat with Apafi, and to join Menaces and Force to
fair Words; but little Satisfaction could be extorted from him, more than a
Desire to live in a kind of Neutality; for tho the Imperial Forces were not far
distant from him, yet the Turks were not as yet beaten out of the Field, nor
their Garrisons taken, but all things seemed to remain in a doubtful state and
change of War. Thus Apafi feared both, and demanded Protection and Assistance
from both sides, hoping that whilst he was wavering and seemed unfixt, he
should preserve both his Friends, or at least not provoke them to be his
Enemies. But what Count Caraffa could not obtain by Treaty, he forced by two
Regiments, which procured the Contributions, which were then exacted; to which
Apafi more easily yielded, because such a Compliance seemed rather an effect of
Violence and Necessity, than of Choice. Howsoever, The Turks jealous thereof.
the Turks were not so very well assured of the Constancy of the Transilvanias,
but that just cause of Jealousy remained of their Inclinations toward the
Emperor; to prevent which, the Turks ordered a strong Body of Men to march and
quarter on their Confines, there to attend and observe the Motions both of the
Germans and the Transilvanians; the latter of which seeing the Sword over their
Heads, continued still in a state of Irresolution: So that the Emperor
esteeming, that nothing was to be done by Treaty, commanded the Agents to quit
his Court: Howsoever, for a while a stop was given to their Departure; for that
the Brother of the Prince of Valachia, Catachuzeno sent from his Brother Prince
of Valachia to the Emperor.
called Catachuzeno, (of which Family and Name were the last Greek Emperors)
being privately dispatched to Vienna, to enter into a Treaty and League with
the Emperor, in the Name and Behalf of his Brother, did insinuate many fine and
hopeful Projects, for gaining without Blood or Treasure the three
Principalities. In order unto which, a Dispatch was sent to the Count
Scaffemberg, under the Imperial Signature, immediately to march with his Forces
to Cassovia, where he should find Orders for his farther Proceedings; the Count
accordingly obeyed; and immediately upon his arrival, received a positive
Commission to join Seven thousand Germans to Four thousand Hungarians, His
Promises.
detached from the Troops quartered in the Upper Hungary; and with that Army,
without any farther delay, to march to the Confines of Transylvania, situate on
the River Maros, where Catachuzeno had given Assurances, that Twelve thousand
Transilvanians, well provided and armed, would there be ready to meet
Scaffemberg, and join with his Forces at their first appearance; and with
these, proceeding farther to Valachia, he should there on the Confines have his
Numbers increased by an addition of Sixteen thousand Valachians and Moldavians,
with which formidable Force composing a most powerful Army, it was not to be
doubted, but that after the Example of their Soldiers, the three Provinces
would revolt, and yield to the Emperor; and with such a Force, which nothing
could oppose, Incursions might be made with Fire and Sword into all Towns and
Quarters of the Turks, from the River Danube to the Confines of Poland, and
whereby an intercourse of Arms, and other intelligences would be obtained. This
had been a rare design, and a happy project, had all things corresponded with
the like Success, and in such a manner as they had been promised, and
insinuated by Catecuzeno: But though all things did not answer these
expectations; yet in other matters, the March of these Forces came very
opportunely into those Countries, and served to obstruct the Tartars passage
into the upper Hungary, where they were speeding to join with Tekeli, and to
wast and destroy all those Counties.

By this time the Sultan had received a new Confirmation of the Advice, That
Apafi had sent Commissioners to Treat with the Emperor at Vienna; Orders sent
to the Grand Vizier to relief Prince Apafi.
and though the Turks were well assured of the inclination of Apafi toward them,
yet not knowing how far the fear and dread of the succesful Arms of the
Imperialists might prevail, Orders were dispatched to the Vizier then at
Belgrade, immediately to send Succors into Transylvania, to six and confirm
the wavering Mind of that Prince: Accordingly a very considerable Force being
on the march thither, they were encountered on the way by Count Schaffemberg,
who charged the Ottoman Troops sent to secure Transylvania with such Bravery
and Success, that he killed and routed that whole Party, and made himself
Master of that important Pass of Hermansburg: After which he pressed the
Estates of Transylvania once more to declare, but they seeking new pretenses
and excuses of delay, endeavoring so long as they could to maintain their
Neutrality, The Transilvanians join with the Imperialists.
were so distressed at length by Oppression and Free quarters, and Insolence of
the Soldiers, that seeing no other remedy they joined their Troops with the
Imperialists, Tartars and put them to Flight.

In the mean time the Season coming on for laying (as was resolved) Siege to
Buda, the Duke of Loraine departed from Newstadt, with intention to go to the
place of General Rendezvous; but being seized by some Indisposition, he stopped
at Odemberg and came not unto the Muster, and Review of the Army until about
19/29 of May: At which time the Elector of Bavaria, and Prince Lewis of Baden,
Count Staremberg, and Count Bielk with a Regiment of Swedish Curassiers, raised
for the Service of the Duke of Bavaria, together with the Auxiliary Troops of
Saxony came to the Camp at Newstadt upon the River Waagh; but the
Brandenburghers, and the Troops of Suabia being not as yet come; the Duke of
Loraine marched toward Raab, Comorra and Gran, and put off the Review and
Muster of the Army until the 5th of June: But on the first of that Month, A
Council held for directing the Siege of Buda.
a General Council of War was held to agree upon such Measures, as were to be
taken for carrying on the Siege of Buda. At that assembly of Officers, all the
miscarriages and defects in the mannagement of the last Siege of the Year 1684
were examined; and Plats brought of the place drawn by diverse Hands. In fine,
After long Discourses thereupon it was resolved, That every one should possess
the same Post, which he held before at the last Siege; and that some false
Attacks should be made at first, until the Lines were formed, and secured in
such manner as to hinder all Succors from being brought into the City. After
the Council was risen, several small Parties of Horse were detached to scowre
about the adjacent Parts of Buda, Alba Regalis and Erlaw, to make discovery of
the State and Condition of the Enemy. The same Day the Commissary Generals
brought unto the Duke of Loraine a List of the Forces, which were formed and in
a readiness to be employed in the Siege of Buda, A List of the Forces designed
for Buda.
the which was composed of Thirty thousand Foot, and Twenty thousand Horse,
besides the Hungarians and Brandenburgers, which were not as yet come to the
Camp: The Artillery consisted of Sixty Pieces of heavy Cannon, Forty Mortar
Pieces, besides a great number of Bombs, Carcasses and Grenades, with vast
Stores of Ammunition and Provisions.

The greatest part of the Army was by this time advanced as far as Gran, which
is about Forty English Miles distant from Buda; the Imperial Troops with those
of Saxony passed the Danube over a Bridge at Gran, whilst the Bavarians
continued their march on the other side; that place being designed for the
General Rendezvous, and where the Feast of Corpus Christi falling out on the
13th of June was to be celebrated; the Solemnity thereof caused so great a
Concourse of People, that the City not being capable to contain them, the
Procession was made without the Walls, and within the compass of the Camp. Some
Writers say, That the People flocked in greater numbers to perform the Festival
in that place, where it had been interdicted by the Turks, for the space of One
hundred and twenty Years; which now they were joyful to see restored: These
Writers had said more properly, if instead of the word Restored, they had used
the word Introduced; for that it is scarce an Hundred Years, as yet, since that
Feast was first ordained. After this Day of Devotion was past, the Duke of
Loraine leaving his Infantry under the Cannon of Gran, marched with his Cavalry
without any Opposition as far as Marotz, a place near to the Isle of St.
Andrew; he caused the Ways to be enlarged, which were Narrow, and full of Woods
and Bushes, and then took a full Survey of all the places Situate near the City.

In the mean time the Turks were not idle to secure and defend themselves; and
for encouragement of the Garrison of Buda, Recruits brought to Buda.
an Aga arrived there from Constantinople, with a great Sum of Money to pay the
Soldiers all their Arreares; and being assured now, that the Siege of Buda was
certainly designed, great numbers of Boats freighted with Ammunition and
Provision, were with a strong Convoy sent up the River; which so drained all
the Countries round of Victuals, that there was almost a Famine in the adjacent
Provinces. Several Troops of the most select and choice Soldiers were likewise
sent to Buda, which increased the Garrison to 12.000 effective Foot and Three
thousand Horse, besides which the Vizier kept an Army by him of forty five
thousand Horse and Foot, which he thought a sufficient Body to oppose any
Force, which could be spared and detached from the Christian Army, and to
disturb them in their Trenches and Works before Buda. And because the
Jealousies which the Turks conceived of the three Provinces of Transylvania,
Moldavia and Valachia grew higher every Day, and more cause to fear their
inclinations toward the Emperor, some Forces were sent against them; but
considering that there was great need of an united Force, a great Detachment
from the main Body could not well be spared; The Turks demand Hostages of the
three Principallities.
and therefore it was contrived, that Hostages composed of the Noblest, and
most considerable Persons of those three Principalities, should be sent to the
Port, for better securing the Faith and Allegiance of those Provinces unto the
Sultan: But whilst things remained in this doubtful Condition, the Turks could
avail little either by fair Terms, or rude Menaces.

But the time now approaching for the Siege of Buda, the Troops of the
Hereditary Countries, hastened their march from every Province. The Auxiliaries
were already advanced to the Confines, and having quitted their Winter-quartes,
marched toward the large Campaign of Barkan, which was appointed for the place
of General Rendezvous. The Military Stores and Ammunition, with the Train of
Artillery being all in readiness, were dispatched away, part by Water and part
by Land, Councils held about the Siege of Buda.
besides the Provisions which accompanied the Regiments and Troops in the
Field: In the mean time, frequent Councils of War were held at Vienna, at which
the Emperor, the Dukes of Loraine, Bavaria and Newburg were present, the
Results of all which tended to the Siege of Buda; toward which place Orders
were given to all the Army to march, and to the Officers to repair unto their
respective Commands; for tho all the Forces were not as yet come up, yet seeing
the Year was so far advanced, it was thought necessary to lose no longer time
before the Siege was formed. The Forces immediately under the Command of the
Duke of Loraine, to whom the Counts Caprara and Staremberg were Major Generals,
consisted of Forty seven thousand and seven hundred Horse and Foot; The Force
of the Christians.
the Troops under Command of Maximilian Elector of Bavaria consisted of Thirty
four thousand Horse and Foot. The Forces under Count Schultz appointed to guard
Croatia, and the Banks of the Drove made a Body of Twelve thousand Men; which
in all made an Army of Ninety three thousand and seven hundred Men, besides the
several Garrisons in Hungary, and the two Bodies of Schaffemberg and Caraffa,
which were appointed to act apart on the Frontiers of Transylvania, and along
the Tibiscus; besides a great number of Volunteers, which flocked from all
places, to gain Honor and Renown in so Signal a Conquest, amongst which were
several Persons of great Quality; James the II. called then Mr. Fitz-James now
Duke of Berwick, with many other English Gentlemen of good Quality: Also two
Grandees of Spain, namely the Dukes of Vejar and Scalona, with about Three
hundred Spanish reformed Officers and Gentlemen of that Nation.

With this formidable Force (tho the Troops of Brandenburg were not yet come)
about the beginning of June the Army began to move. June.
The Duke of Loraine with his Horse Encamped at St. Andrews, The Armies march.
The Count Staremberg with his Foot at Posscamp, The Elector of Bavaria at
Wailun; so that tho the Turks could from the Rampires of Buda discover the
Christians on both sides of the Danube, yet they made no Sallies to hinder, or
obstruct them in their march; believing that this might prove a false
Appearance; whilst the real and true intentions of the Christians was designed
against Alba Regalis: But it was not long before they were undeceived, when
they saw the Bridge of Communication passed over the River, portrait of the
governor of Buda, Hungary Apti Bassa Late governor of Buda who havnig defended
the place to the last Extremity was killd upon ye Place P: 201.
M Vander Gucht Scul.
and the Bavarian Troops near to Pesth, and their City environed on all sides
with armed Force, then they began to believe that the Siege of Buda was
designed; for until that time they were of Opinion (as we have said) that Alba
Regalis or Great Waradin, or some other place would be the labor of this
Summer.

June, the whole Army appeared before the City to the great Consternation of
the Turks; and Orders were given to form a regular and close Siege: And to make
the Communication between the Armies the more easy and expedite, a strong and
spacious Bridge was built over the Danube, by the Island of St. Andrew, The
Turks abandon Pesth.
which was Situate in the middle of the River. The Bavarian Troops approaching
toward Pesth, entered it without any opposition, for that the Turks finding it
to be a place not to be defended without a greater Force, than what could well
be spared from the Walls of Buda; had Demolished the greatest part of the
Works, carried off the Cannon, their Ammunition and their Stores, leaving the
Town dismantled and desolate: Howsoever, before they had wholly demolished
every thing as they had intended, they were surprised by the Bavarian Troops,
and forced to quit their Work and fly to the Bridge; but when they came
thither, they found it broken down by some of their Companions, who had passed
before, fearing to be pursued by the Enemy; so that terrified and amazed, many
leapt into the Water, of which diverse were Drowned, and about Thirty with an
Aga were taken Prisoners; the Boats of which this Bridge was Built, floating on
one side and the other of the River, were taken up by the Bavarians, and
brought to the Isle of St. Andrews, where they served, and contributed much to
the speedy finishing of that Bridge which was there in Building.

Pesth being in this manner possessed; It was agreed at a Council of War, That
those Fortifications which were the least damaged should be repaired; A Fort
raised at Pesth.
which was accordingly done, and a Platform made in a Trianglar Figure, and
surrounded with a deep Ditch, and fortified with some Cannon, and a sufficient
Garrison left to defend it, whereby they cut off from the Enemy all Incursions
and Communications on that side of the River.

Apti Pasha was then chief Commander in Buda: He was an aged Man, but a good
Soldier and of great experience in the War: Apti Pasha Governor of Buda.
He had repaired all the Bastions, and Curtains, and Walls, which had been
battered down and blown up in the last Siege; and that those Repairs might be
the less seen and discovered by the Enemy, he had caused all the Walls to be
new whited, that it might not appear where the Repairs had been lately made,
and the Earth brought, which could not be so close and binding and solid, as
the old Works: Moreover he had erected a strong Wall descending from the Castle
to the River, to secure the Water and Communication with the Danube.

The Duke of Loraine passed over the Water in a little Boat, to Visit and hold
a Conference with the Duke of Bavaria then in his Quarters near Pesth; where
after some Discourse, Examination of Turks taken.
the Aga taken at the Bridge was examined; and a Turk, who had voluntarily
escaped out of the Town was brought before them, and declared, That there was
not above Eight thousand Men in all the Garrison, accounting Janisaries,
Spahees and Segmen (which are a sort of Foot Soldiers, properly belonging to
those Countries) and most of them of the new Levies; and that Apti Pasha
himself, had not gained so much Reputation and Esteem amongst the Soldiery, as
Shaitan Pasha had done, who had so bravely Defended the City in the Year 1684;
and tho the wise Generals gave little or no credence to such Relations as
these, coming from affrighted Prisoners and Captives, whose business it was to
flatter, and mollify the Minds of their Conquerours; yet such Reports
proceeding from Witnesses that were come from the City, served to encourage the
Soldiery, who were ready to believe what they desire, and what may render their
Enemies Low and Contemptible.

Count Staremberg received Orders from the Duke of Loraine to perfect the
Bridge with all possible speed, Proceedings of the Duke of Bavaria.
which being finished, the Elector of Bavaria, with all his Forces, (except
those which were left for the Guard of Pesth) passed and encamped his Men at
the Foot of the Mount St. Gerard, and took possession of the same Posts and
Places which he had possessed two Years before; and on the side of the Mount he
raised two Batteries against the upper Town, and made his own Head-quarter, at
the Baths of hot Waters, to be nearer to that Place, which his Forces were to
Attack; and there raising a Battery of six Pieces of Cannon, he thence drew two
parallel Lines of Communication; to which another was added very large and deep
extending to the lower Town, into which the same day Two thousand Men were
entered to attack that Place. The Quarters of the Army.
Next hereunto were the Quarters of Count Staremberg, to which were united the
Troops of the Prince of Saxony, having their Lines in a circular Form: Next
hereunto the main Body of Horse was lodged, being as it were in the middle, and
in the most commodious place to oppose the Sallies of the Enemies Cavalry; on
the other side of which Prince Lewis of Baden had made his Allodgement. Next
hereunto were the Quarters of the Duke of Loraine, opposite to the Breach,
which they were laboring to lay open. Next in order were placed the Troops of
the Circles, which with the Volunteers reached to the brink of the River,
making a most formidable Body encompassing the Town: And to surround it on all
sides, Trenches and Lines were made on the side of Pesth, guarded and defended
by Heydukes and Hungarians. Thus was this City again encompassed with the
Christian Arms, June.
on the 22d of this Month, which about two Years ago, was accounted the
impregnable Fortress, and the Sanctuary, and Place of Refuge for the Turks,
where Fortune had made its Ne plus ultra, and set Bounds to the Progress of the
Imperial Arms. But these brave Captains and Soldiers being returned again to
their old Quarters, remembering the Disgrace they had received by being foiled,
and beholding the Places where their Comrades and Fellow Soldiers had breathed
out their last, and where some of them had received such Wounds, as were still
smarting, and scarce healed, became more enraged and animated to avenge
themselves, of which they conceived greater hopes by Experience and
Acquaintance with the Situation of the Place, and thereby better enabled to
amend the Errors of the last Siege, having made Provisions of all things in
great abundance, for want of which, Armies commonly suffer more in their
Trenches, than they do from the Efforts, and Violences, and Sallies of the
Enemy.

The provident and wise Duke of Loraine being well advised and aware hereof;
and observing that very little Rain had fallen that Spring, so that the Grass
and Forage for Horses was very short; and that the great Heats and Drought had
burnt up the Pasture in all parts round the Leaguer: He drew out from every
Troop ten Men only, to lodge within the Trenches, which made a Body of two
Regiments, The Horse Quarters.
or Two thousand Horse, under the Command of Count Taff, which were esteemed
sufficient to repulse any Sallies of Horse which the Enemy could make from the
Town: But the main and great Body of Horse were ordered to march toward Alba
Regalis, under Command of the Counts Palfi and Gondola, and other Generals; and
taking their Quarters upon the Banks of the River Saruvitz, they might there
not only find plenty of Forage for themselves, but deprive the Enemy thereof,
and diminish their Stores; besides, the Place was commodious both to interrupt
the Vizier in his March, and all other Succors designed for the Relief of Buda.

The parallel Lines of Communication being finished, by which the Soldiers
might pass under shelter to the lower Town, and the Batteries raised on the
side of the hot Waters, where (as we said) the Duke of Bavaria had his Head
Quarters; Six Pieces of Cannon of Twenty four pound Ball, began first to play
on that Wall, Batteries raised.
where two Years before a Battery and Breach had been made, and an Assault
given; the Place was called the Burg of Wasserstadt, in English, the
Water-Town; and here it was thought fit to renew the Battery; for that the
Earth having been lately laid, and the Work repaired, it could not be so well
settled, and so firm as the ancient Fortifications, the which was manifested by
a plain and open Proof; for being for one whole Day continually battered, so
great a Breach was made, and so wide, as to open a Way to a formidable Assault:
On the other side the Turks plied their Cannon very hard upon the Camp, which
did not much damage, tho lodged within Musquetshot. And tho the Breach was
made, yet it was thought necessary to defer the Assault until the Approaches
were perfected, June.
which before Morning were almost finished, under the darkness of the Night.

On the 24th all things being prepared, and a Breach opened of above twenty
Paces wide, a Signal for an Assault was given by firing three Pieces of Cannon;
The lower Town assaulted
upon which the Troops appointed for that Service, advanced with such Bravery
and Resolution, that the Enemy yielded up that Station with little Resistance;
and a Party of them descending from the upper Town, gave only a single Volly of
Shot, and so again retired with some Disorder. and taken.
This being the first Action of this Siege, there was scarce a Voluntier or
Gentleman-Adventurer in the whole Army, but who presented himself in this
Enterprise, being desirous to signalize his Valor in the first beginning. The
Night following the Turks kept continually firing, which did not hinder the
Christians from lodging themselves to the right and left on the Breach of the
lower Town; in the taking of which, they lost but Eight Soldiers in that Day
and Night's Service, which being so cheaply obtained, the Generals suspected
that the Enemy had abandoned the Place with Design, and with Intention to Blow
up the Assailants with some Mines prepared for them; and for that reason they
gave a stop to the Advancement of the Troops; but the next Day, having searched
and examined those Places, and finding all secure, they proceeded to make a new
Lodgment in the Angle of the Wall of the lower Town, which answered in a right
Line to the main Tower of the upper City, under which they lay secure from the
Enemies Shot. This Exploit being performed with the loss only of Sixteen Men;
there was but little Plunder found therein, besides some Horses and Oxen, and
some few Fieldpieces upon one of the Works; for all the Houses were beaten
down by the Turks themselves, and consumed by Fire, and the Inhabitants either
fled or retired into the upper Fortifications; which shows evidently that the
Turks looking on that Place as not tenable, had drawn their Force into the
higher Town, in which they placed all their Security, hoping to make a most
vigorous Resistance, both by the advantageous Situation, Lines drawn in the
lower Town.
and the goodness of the Fortifications: But the Christians finding the
Advantage of the lower Ground, whereby to offend the upper City, employed
immediately Two thousand Men, with diverse Labors to draw the Lines, and
deepen the Approaches from one Gate to the other.

In the mean time the Turks, who lived in the parts adjacent to Buda, being put
into great Consternation by the concourse of the Christian Arms, The Turks near
Buda fly to the Isle of St. Margaret.
prepared themselves to fly, and seek Refuge in remote parts; so that many,
with their Wives, and Children, and Servants, having taking with them the best
of their Housholdstuff and Goods, passed over to the Island of St. Margarets,
which is situate in the Danube, and of a very great length; but finding this
Place of too near Neighborhood to the Christian Army, and very unsecure;
having got about thirty large Boats and Barges, they had laden their Goods and
embarked their Persons thereon, with design to pass down the River to Belgrade;
when a Body of Hungarians, Hussars, and Heydukes, under Command of Count
Budiani, having Advice thereof, Are attacked by the Christians and plundered.
armed out a good number of Boats and Barges, and with Three hundred Dragoons
by Land, boarded their Vessels, and having killed the Boat-men, and the chief
amongst them, easily made themselves Masters of the rest, and of all the rich
Housholdstuff, Money, and Goods, in such abundance, that every Common Soldier
had a Suit and Vest of Silk for his own Share, with other good Booty and
Plunder, which they carried away, and departed; but being informed afterward
by some Rascians, that the Inhabitants of that Island had committed many
Cruelties and Outrages upon the Christians, Many of them killed.
they returned again to the Island, which is about seven Hungarian or German
Miles long, (which make about Twenty eight English) and there put all to Fire
and Sword, Budiani went purposely to the Duke of Loraine, June.
in the Camp, to render an account of his late Achievements; and in testimony
thereof, he presented him with seven Turkish Standards, which he had won in
that, and in another Rencounter, in which he had defeated a Party of the Enemy
near Ersein, together with some Prisoners of Quality and Condition, amongst
which there was an Aga and Chiaus.

The Christian Soldiers animated with these daily Successes, some few of them,
26th.
with more Temerity than Prudence, made an attempt to Lodge themselves nearer
to the Upper City, without those due Precautions of Defense, which are commonly
used by throwing up of Earth, and making some little Blinds as is practiced in
all Military Approaches; The Boldness of the Christian Soldiers.
but these bold Men adventured with open Breasts to enlarge their Lodgments on
that side of the City which looks toward Strigoniam; which when the Turks
observed, a great number of them flanked on one side by the round Tower, and on
the other by a Party of Musketeers, throwing Stones and Hand-granadoes,
assailed the Germans, (who were not above Fifty in all) with so much Fury as
forced them to make their Retreat; the which notwithstanding they did with good
Order, being assisted by their Comrades, who came to their Help, and repulsed
the Enemy, and made them with some loss to retire back into the City: Sallies
made by the Turks, and are repulsed.
Howsoever, in a short time after, about the Close of the Evening, the Turks
made a more vigorous Sally on the Left Hand of the round Tower of the old City:
The Count of Ausberg and the Cavalier Rohne having the Command that Night of
those Quarters, with great Bravery received the Enemy, and engaged with them
for above an Hour's space; when the Prince of Commarcy, and the Prince of
Vaudemont having their Quarters near thereunto, came seasonably into their
Succor with many Gentlemen, who were Volunteers, and Soldiers of Fortune, and
forced the Turks back into the City, with the loss of about Fifty Janisaries:
Of the Christians were about ten killed in this Action, which was well paid by
the advantage then gained; for whilst the Parties were engaged in this manner,
they opened the Trenches on both sides of the old City, with two large Parades
or places of Arms, and extended the Lines of the Approaches toward the two
Bulwarks of the upper City. And because it was necessary to Batter the City on
that side, a Battery was raised, without the old Wall, of Sixteen Pieces of
heavy Cannon, from which many Shot were made at the round Tower, and several
Bombs thrown into the City.

The Turks nothing disanimated herewith, made a vigorous Sally on the Quarters
of the Bavarian Forces, with Three thousand Horse and Foot; and tho the Elector
was at that time indisposed in his Health; The Turks made a Sally and were
repulsed.
yet his Bravery prompted him to mount on Horseback, and with the assistance of
the Horse, under Command of Lieutenant Colonel Hofkerken, which were Quartered
in a Valley on the Way toward Strigonium, he with a steady Foot opposed the
Turks, and forced them to Retire with Disorder into the Town. In this Action
Twenty four of their Officers were Slain, with many Janisaries, and many
Wounded. Of the Bavarians about Forty were Killed, caused by a Surprise at the
first beginning of the Sally: The Prince of Savoy according to his natural
Courage and Valous, pressing into the thickest of the Enemies numbers, had his
Horse Killed under him; but mounting another, pursued the Enemy to the very
Gates of the City.

Whilst these things were acting, it was a matter of great encouragement to the
Camp, to find their Forces daily augmenting by new Recruits. The Swedes and
others come to the Camp.
For the Swedes were then newly arrived under the Command of the Marquis of
Turlac, and took their Station on that side, which leads to Alba Regalis. These
were followed by Lieutenant General Schoning, Commander in Chief of the
Brandenburg Forces, whose arrival at the Camp sooner than was expected, was a
cause of much Joy and Satisfaction to the whole Army. About the same time also
came Prince Lewis of Newburg, Great Master of the Knights of the Teutonick
Order, with Count Dunewalt, and many Knights of that Order: As also diverse
famous Engeniers, together with Count Rabata, who brought with him many Bombs,
Mortar-Pieces, with a new Train of Artillery, abundance of Ammunition, and all
Warlike preparations: With which, and with the Addition of new Forces, they
were enabled to draw a new Line of Communication, without that which was next
to the City, extending from one Encampment unto the other; which they supported
with small Redoubts raised and fortified with Cannon, which proved to be of
great use against the Sallies of the Turks, which were very frequent, and
performed with Resolution and Courage: Besides all which Recruits, the
Auxiliary Troops of Suabia and Franconia, to the number of Five or Six thousand
Men, with two Companies from Passau and Ratisbone arrived in the Camp; and on
the first of July they took those Stations which were appointed for them. July.


The Town was now Battered on all sides, and particularly by a Fort raised by
the Swedes, which on the third of this Month, began to make a Breach on three
Towers which defended the upper Wall. The Works of the City battered.
The Cannon on the side of the Loraine Quarters, had in four Days time
absolutely demolished two Bulwarks, which flanked the Wall on that side, and
ruined the Wall it self, having made a very large Breach; to discover which,
and to know in what manner it lay open to an Assault, four Musketeers were
Ordered to mount thereupon, and see in what Posture the Turks remained on that
side; so soon as these adventurous Men appeared at the Mouth of the Breach, the
Turks cried out and took a general Allarum, running immediately to drive them
from thence, but they being succored by another Party of Musketeers, and by
continual Peals of Cannon, and Fourteen Mortar-Pieces, which threw Bombs, the
Turks were worsted and lost many Men; and being not able to endure the constant
Firings, were forced to Retreat, as also did the four Musketeers with some
Wounds received by Stones and Grenades. By two or three Inhabitants, who for
fear had deserted the Town, informations were given, That by the many Bombs,
and the continual Firing of great Cannon, the Consternation was so great, The
Turks uncover their Houses.
that both the Inhabitants and the Soldiers esteemed themselves in as much
danger within the City, as those were who mounted the Guards, and were actually
employed in Defense of the Walls: Wherefore, to secure themselves the better,
the Tops of the Houses were uncovered, and Caves and Vaults made under Ground,
to Lodge both the Citizens and the Soldiers; Mines and Counter-Mines.
and for the better safeguard of the Garrison, which was always exposed on the
Walls, it was contrived to make some Mines without at every Bastion, well
charged with Powder, that upon any Attack might be ready to be Fired: Of which
the Duke of Loraine having intelligence from these Fugitives, he ordered
Countermines to be made, which hindered the Turkish Laborers something in
their Works; but either by the looseness of the Ground, or the unexperience of
the Miners, the Success did not answer Expectation: For tho the Miners had
proceeded a great way under Ground, by which it was believed, that the
Springing of one Mine would widen the Breach and facilitate the Assault; that
Project had little effect, An Assault given,
for the Mine being fired did not cast up much Earth: Howsoever, It was
followed by an Assault on that side of the Duke of Loraine, of which the Turks
being aware made a most vigorous resistance, throwing great quantities of
Bombs, Stones and Hand-Granadoes amongst the Besiegers. In this Action above
Sixty Musketeers were killed and wounded; the General Tingen, To the damage of
the Christians.
and Major Besancon were wounded with Stones, and the Cavalier de Rosne was
shot through the Shoulder. Howsoever, the Imperialists keeping their Ground in
their Trenches, about Two hundred Paces from the Wall, did at length repulse
the Enemy; and with continual Batteries the Walls were so plied, that from the
Tower in the Corner of the City, to the first Bulwark, they were almost ruined
and beaten down, as were also the three Towers which were opposite to that
Attack.

July.
The Turks make a Sally on the Brandenburg side.
On the 9th of this Month about break of Day, the Turks made another Sally to
the Left Hand, where the Brandenburg Troops were lodged, which was performed
with such Fury, that the Brandenburgers being surprised, quitted their Posts,
and were beaten out of their first Line, with the loss of about Two hundred Men
killed, amongst which there was one Captain, one Lieutenant and an Ensign: And
the Enemy firing at the same time a Mine, in which four or five Miners were
buried, had caused much more disorder, had not a Body of Reserve, and the Main
Guard come in to their Assistance, which so bravely Charged the Enemy, as to
force them to Retire in great Confusion. The Imperialists lost in this Action,
besides the Brandenburgers above One hundred and fifty Men, amongst whom was a
Lieutenant Colonel, who was a Swede, a Captain of the Regiment of Mansfelt, two
Lieutenants and many other subaltern Officers.

In the mean time the Bavarians advanced their Approaches, and from a new
Battery began to Fire, and shoot at a small Tower, which notwithstanding did
little execution, the Walls being very good on that side. The same Day a
Deserter from the Town brought News, That the Besieged expected in Twenty four
Hours time a Reinforcement of Three thousand Men; Succor sent to Pest.
upon which intelligence Three hundred and fifty Men were immediately
dispatched over the Water unto Pesth, to strengthen the Redoubt at that place,
and to prevent the Turks in their design of cutting off all Communication
between that Fort and the Camp. And upon farther intelligence, that the Turks
assembled in great Bodies about Segedin, the Duke of Loraine dispatched away
the Baron Marcy, with Three thousand Horse, and six Battalions of Foot over the
Danube, with Orders to advance as far as Hatwan, and to Engage the Turks in
what place soever it should be his Fortune to meet them: Accordingly Baron
Marcy passed the River, Marcy sent to oppose the march of the Turks.
and posted himself near the Bridge of Pesth, there to attend the Enemy who
were coming upon him, as was reported, with a Body of Ten thousand Men, under
Command of Achmet Pasha: Upon which Advice, the Duke of Loraine dispeeded away
three Imperial Regiments, to join with and reinforce the Detachment under
Marcy, lest the Enemy should seize the Passage over the Teysse. In the mean
time, the Christians working hard upon a Mine on the Bavarian side, which they
designed should make the Breach wider and larger than it was, were discovered
by the Turkish Miners, who were preparing a Mine near thereunto; and had almost
completed it, when fearing lest the Christians should be beforehand with them,
they precipitated matters sofast, that due care was not taken to hinder a
Reverse; but on the contrary, The Turks Fire a Mine to their hurt.
the Turks giving Fire to their Mine, it recoyled back on themselves, and
buried many of their Men, and so shook the Walls and Fortifications of the
Tower, that by the help of a Battery of eight Pieces of Cannon, which were
levelled and played upon it, the Breach was made considerably wide, and so
enlarged, that at a Council of War held on the 13th of this Month, it was
resolved not longer to defer the Assault on the Bavarian side: July.
The Orders for which were no sooner Issued, and the Signal given, than all the
Volunteers and brave Adventurers in the Army, Transported with Ambition, An
Assault made on the Town.
and Desire of Glory, pressed to be the first that should mount the Breach. In
this Action Count Guy of Staremberg, Count Herberstein, and Count Aversberg
were Commanded each with Two hundred and twenty Men to make the Assault in
three several places; the first of which was to enter in the middle of the
Curtain, the second on the right Hand, and the third on the left; amongst which
some Granadiers were mixed, and Pioniers to prepare and level the Ground to
make an Allodgment; and a Reserve of Two thousand Men was appointed to sustain,
and second the Assailants. The Ascent unto the Breach was very difficult, and
the Turks had repaired it in many places with Palisodoes; howsoever to brave
Minds spirited with a desire of Glory, such as were the Volunteers, who were
Gentlemen of principal Quality, from diverse Parts and Nations of Europe,
nothing seemed so difficult and hazardous, but what they were able and daring
to surmount. The Onset was made about seven a Clock in the Evening, and the
first thing attempted was to force up the Palisadoes, which being done, they
found the Besieged posted behind in their Trenches with good Order; the
Christians Attacked them with great Vigor, and the Turks made an equal
Defense, pouring whole Vollies of shot with great numbers of Grenades, and
discharging a prodigious quantity of Stones from their Mortar-pieces upon them;
on each side likewise was a round Tower filled with Musketeers and Granadiers,
who bestowed their Shot liberally upon them; so that the Assailants being
between Firings on each side, as also on the Front were killed and wounded in
great numbers; An Assault given with loss to the Christians.
howsoever they made themselves Masters of the Breach, which they maintained
and defended above the space of an hour; but at length the heat of the Fight
was so great, as had put things into much Disorder, and caused the Pioneers and
Laborers to disperse; and a Provision of Faggots, and Sacks of Earth not being
at Hand sufficient to cover the Assailants, they lay naked and exposed to the
Shot of the Enemy; and at the same time a Mine being prepared, and fired under
the Breach, it did great execution; so that many Persons of great Quality and
Valor were killed and wounded in this Action; and the Turks making a Sally in
another place at the same time, the General caused a Signal to be given for the
Troops to Retreat, which was done in very good Order. The Regiments of Souches,
Mansfelt and Staremberg, were those which suffered most in this Action.

The Persons Wounded were:
The Prince of Commarcy. The Duke of Bejar, a Grandee of Spain. Marquis
Blancfort, Son of Marshall Crequi. Count Staremberg. Count Dona. The Duke of
Escalona, a Grandee of Spain. Two Captains of Souches's Regiment. The Baron
Chifler, the Natural Son of Prince Rupert. My Lord George Savil, Second Son of
the Lord Marquis of Halifax. Count Maldeghen. Mr. Fitz James, Natural Son of
King James the II. of England. Count Urse, three Spanish Gentlemen. Monsieur
Sulpice, a Gentleman belonging to the Prince of Commarcy.
Persons Killed were:
Prince Palatine of Veldens. Prince Piccolomini. Count Hortemback, Page to the
Duke of Loraine. The Cavalier of Courmaillon. Count Ermestein, Major of
Schezfemberg's Regiment. Six English Noblemen, amongst which was that Worthy
Gentleman Colonel Robert Forbus, Second Son to the Earl of Granard. Three
Spanish Gentlemen, belonging to the Duke of Bejar. The Turks had about Two
hundred Men killed, and One hundred wounded.
The Besieged thinking hereby to have gained a great advantage over the
Christians, and thereby to have put them into some Confusion and Disorder, made
a Sally that Night on the Brandenburgher's Quarters; but were vigorously
repulsed back again into the Town, with the loss of many Heads, which the
Brandenburghers carried into the Camp, to receive the usual Rewards promised
thereupon.

For several Days there happened nothing but Batteries, and Firing Mines on one
side and the other; but the Mines on the Christian side did not so much
execution, as did those of the Turks: Howsoever, the Bombs were much available,
and did great damage within the Town; Terrible effects of Bombs to the Turks.
especially those of a new Invention made by an Ingenier called Gonzales, which
not only killed, but set all on Fire wheresoever it fell. One of this sort of
Bombs happening within the Walls of a great Edifice, (for as we said before, all
the Roofs and Coverings were taken off) produced most terrible and direful
effects, not only beating down the Walls, but Killed above One hundred Men,
Women and Children. The Turks to Revenge themselves for all these Slaughters,
were very diligent and active in Springing their Mines, Of Mines to the Chrians.
which they had prepared with great Art; by which many Soldiers and Officers of
note were destroyed, to the great diminution in number of the Besiegers: In the
mean time the Christians plied their great Guns, and Sprang the Mines to widen
the Breaches, in order to make a General Assault, for which Preparations were
daily made, and Ladders brought, and all Instruments provided in order
thereunto.

On the 20th Day of July, July.
about seven a Clock in the Morning, a strange hollow Noise was heard under
Ground, The great Magazine of the Turks Blown up.
and the Earth trembled both in the Town, and under the Feet of the Soldiers in
the Camp; and a dark Cloud of Smoke and Ashes covered the City, so thick and
black, that for the space of an hour, scarce any thing of the Walls themselves
could be seen; which caused a Terror in the Minds of the Besiegers,
notwithstanding their Resolution and Bravery; for whole showers of Stones were
cast up, and thrown into the Bavarian Trenches, whereby many Soldiers and
Officers of Quality were Wounded: And whilst the Elector of Bavaria, and the
Prince of Baden were busily employed in Riding about to confirm their Soldiery,
a Stone of considerable weight and bigness fell between them: All which
Convulsion happened by blowing up of the chief Magazine of the City, whether by
Bomb from the Camp, or any other Accident is uncertain: But such were the
dreadful effects thereof, That it shook down one Wing of the Castle, and that
side of the Wall toward the Water; threw vast quantities of Stone and Rubbish
into the Danube; and Killed above Fifteen hundred People, who were useless and
unfit for Service, and had for their better safety hid themselves in Vaults and
Cellars: By this unexpected Blow, the City being much weakened toward the
Water, Giavarino Lieutenant General of the Heydukes, was Ordered with a Party
of his Soldiers to take the advantage of this Accident, and to post himself in
the best manner he could, to hinder all Sallies of the Enemy by that way, and
to make that side more easy and fit for Storm.

But whilst the Duke of Loraine thought of these things, and how much his
Forces were diminished by Assaults, by Sallies of the Enemy, by Mines, by
Sickness and various other Accidents; and how much Blood it might still cost,
before the Town could be forced to Surrender by dint of Sword, he resolved to
make use of this opportune Misfortune, whilst the Turks remained in their
Terror and Amazement to try the Pasha with Capitulations and good Conditions
in case of Surrender, and to send him a Summons in Writing, by the Hand of
Count Coniseck, who according to his Instructions, represented the State and
Condition of the Affair to the Pasha Governor, that the Christians were very
strong without, Summons sent to the Pasha.
and resolved to take the Town, the Walls of which were almost demolished, and
their Garrison laid open and exposed; and that a General Assault was
determined; and that since they could not reasonably expect any Relief or
Succor, the Pasha would do better Service to his Master the Ottoman Emperor by
saving the Blood of his People, than by a desperate defense to sacrifice the
Lives of so many by his wilful obstinacy; nor hereby could he give occasion to
any to tax him, either for want of Valor or Conduct, since he had given such
fair Evidence of both unto the World. The Pasha received the Messenger with
much more Humanity, than they did ever practice in the times of their
Prosperity, and heard him with great attention; and Read the Letter sent him by
the Duke of Loraine several times over: But before he would make any Reply
thereunto, he called a Divan or Council, in which the Business being debated
for the space of about three hours; at length this Answer was returned in
Writing, and put up in a Purse of White Satin, according to the Custom of the
Turks; which was to this effect. That he did wonder much from which of his
Actions during this Siege, he could ground any Hope upon these Summons, that he
should, or could be prevailed with to make a Surrender, not having been guilty
as he imagined of such mean and Cowardly behavior, as might merit so great an
Affront to his Valor, as to be tempted with Conditions and Terms how
Honorable soever unto a Surrender. But in case He, The Pasha's Answer.
and his Soldiers had appeared in the least manner Timorous and Base, That they
would amend that fault by a more vigorous Defense, and by such Actions as
should make it appear to the World, that, that City was conserved with a
Bravery equal to the Importance thereof; That God would punish the Pride of the
Christians, for daring so much as to conceive a thought of bringing low the
Ottoman Emperor, from whom having received the Command of that Place, he was
resolved to deliver it unto no other, than unto him only.

Whilst this Treaty continued, which was for the space of three Hours, a
Cessation of Arms was granted, during which time, the Soldiers on each side
discoursed friendly, and jested together, and reached to one another their
Pipes, and their Tobacco; from whence it may be seen, how natural Love and
Friendship is to Mankind, and how unnatural and violent is Hatred, War and
Cruelty.

From this Haughty and Resolute Answer of the Turks many did conjecture, That
they had received promises of a speedy Relief; which caused some Reports and
Discourses in the Camp, That the Vizier was marching with a very numerous and
puissant Army for their Succor: Of which tho the Besieged had no intelligence;
yet considering that the thing was not improbable, the Turks conceived some
hopes from thence, and the Christians prepared to receive and engage them. Nor
was the expectation of Relief by the March of the Turks without some ground;
for at Hatwan in the Upper Hungary great numbers of them joined in one Body, A
stop given to the progress of the Turks.
which with much advantage might descend with the Current down the River, and
give trouble and disturbance at the Siege of Buda: To prevent which, some
Bridges were sent, for passing the Regiments of Horse under Caprara, and the
Prince Charles of Neuburg over the Rivers, unto such Commodious Passes, as were
advantageous to restrain those Forces from farther proceedings. In the mean
time some comfortable News was brought to the Duke of Loraine from Count
Caraffa, who advised, that upon intelligence of a very considerable Convoy sent
from Segedin, for the Relief and Reinforcement of Agria; he with General
Heusler resolved to make an Assault thereupon; which design failing, gave an
occasion howsoever to give a Defeat to a great part of the Garrison of Agria;
in which Action Caprara posted himself in a close, and deep Valley, covered on
both sides with Hills; and about half a League beyond Peterhasi with some
Hungarian Troops well Armed, was ordered to lie in Ambush; from whence he
detached about Fifty Hussars to March toward the City, and in their Way to
take up all the Horses and Cattle they could find in the Pastures, with Orders
that in case the Garrison should Sally out upon them, that they should feign a
seeming Flight, and draw them on until they came near the Camp: The which being
accordingly performed by the Hussars, Osman Pasha of Agria pursued them close
with a select number of his best Soldiers, until unwarily he fell into the
Ambuscade which was laid for him; The Pasha of Agria defeated.
from whence the Hungarians Sallying forth renewed the Fight, being seconded by
General Heusler's Dragoons, who kept the Enemy in play until the Foot were come
up to their Assistance: And then Osman Pasha being sensible of the Snare into
which he was fallen, encouraged his Men bravely to defend themselves, and to
make an orderly Retreat, but he was then too far engaged; for after a hot and
desperate Conflict, above Two hundred and fifty of the Garrison were killed,
and about One hundred Prisoners taken, and amongst the rest Osman Pasha himself
was slain: Howsoever this Victory was not gained without some loss on the
Christians side; for Baron Bur a Captain of Dragoons, and the Captain
Lieutenant of the Regiment of Castelli, with above Twenty Common Soldiers were,
killed, besides many wounded; this Engagement being toward the Evening, the
remainder of the Garrison by covert of the Night, made their Retreat back and
recovered the City.

Whilst these things were acting, the Siege of Buda proceeded with various
Fortunes; and the wise Generals were not only intent thereunto, pressing
forward with the greatest Bravery imaginable; but also were wary, and vigilant
to observe the Motions of the Turkish Army designed to raise the Siege: For by
certain intelligence it was advised, That the Seraskier was on his March, but
that he moved slowly, to give time unto the other Troops, which were Quartered
along the Banks of the Rivers Save and Drove to come and join, Advices that the
Seraskier approached
for that the Forces of the Turks were not so numerous, as to admit of any
Detachments, but rather to Fight in one Body only: It being necessary to secure
the Passage by the Bridge of Esseck, Eight thousand Men were ordered to possess
it; but News coming, that the Imperialists were already Masters of it with a
far greater Force, the Seraskier passed the River by a Bridge at Peter Waradin,
and stayed at Segedin; from whence he ordered a Flying Army of Horse composed
of Turks and Tartars, to March unto Alba Regalis, from whence they were ordered
by frequent Sallies and Alarums to offend and amuse the Christian Camp before
Buda; until such time as the Grand Vizier being enforced by the Asian Horse,
and by the Tartars, might be able to join with them at Alba Regalis; from
whence it was designed to make all their Sallies upon the Camp. Schultz watches
his Motion.
Of which General Schultz having advice, whose business it was to observe the
Motions of the Enemy, he pitched his Camp along the Drove, from whence he
observed the March of the Enemy, and narrowly watched the Garrisons of Kanisia
and Zigeth. The Leaguer being thus secured from outward Assaults, every Quarter
of the City was attacked by several turns, sometime by the Bavarians on their
side, by the Brandenburgers on theirs, and by the Imperialists, and others in
their several Stations, with Mines and Countermines, with Cannon and Batteries,
Bombs and Grenades, and all other Instruments of Death, which cost much Blood
on one side and the other. At length, to bring Matters to a more sure and
speedy Issue it was resolved, to prepare all things against the 27th of July
for a General Assault, which was to be performed by Fifteen thousand Men; That
is, Five thousand at the Attack of Loraine, Five thousand of Bavaria, and as
many of Brandenburg, besides Two thousand Talpatsi, which are a People of
Hungary; A General Assault prepared.
and that the Besieged might be attacked on all sides, and their Forces divided
thereby, the Lieutenant General Giavarino Commander of the Haidukes, was
ordered to make a seeming Attack by the Watergate, where part of the Wall near
the Castle was thrown down by the Magazine which was lately fired: For this
General Storm all things were well prepared; the Officers of most experience,
and bravery were appointed to lead the Assailants unto the respective Attacks,
and Laborers placed in a readiness to carry Faggots, and Sacks of Earth to
cover the Men, and make good the Lodgments, and others with Mattocks and
Spades, and such like Instruments to dig and throw up the Earth.

The Duke of Loraine intending to begin the Assault at break of Day in the
Morning, passed that Night in the Trenches; but when they were ready for that
Enterprise on the Bavarian side, all the Palisadoes were on Fire, and burnt
with so violent a Flame, caused by a certain mixture of bituminous stuff, that
the Attack was deferred until toward the Evening; before which time some Rains
falling, served to extinguish the fierceness of the Fire, and the Duke of
Loraine and Bavaria after some Consultations together resolved forthwith to
proceed unto the Assault; The Assault made.
the Sign for which was given by firing three Pieces of Cannon: Upon which
Signal the Imperialists, Bavarians and Brandenburgers drew out of their Lines,
and advanced against the Breaches: The Imperialists soon made themselves
Masters of the great Tower, but were quickly droven thence by the Turks; which
when the Duke of Loraine observed from the place where he had posted himself,
for to give out his Orders; he immediately in Person advanced with fresh Troops
to sustain and support the first; the Presence of the General, who was engaged
in a dangerous place, The Example of the General encourges the Soldiers.
with the Sword in his Hand and Casket on his Head, did so animate the
Soldiers, that inflamed with a desire to imitate the bravery of their General
and preserve his Person, they all returned to the Fight; and tearing out the
Palisadoes all on Fire, in despite of the Enemies shot and resistance, they
bravely lodged themselves upon the Breach of the first Wall, and presently made
themselves Masters of the great Tower, with two other small Bastions on the
Right and on the Left Hand; driving the Turks into the Retrenchments, which
were lately cut behind the new Palisadoes: But the Christians so plied them
with small Shot and Grenades, that they were forced to quit that place also,
with great loss and slaughter of their Men: But while they were laboring to
secure that Ground and the Lodgment there; the Enemy gave Fire to four Mines,
which tossed up many of those into the Air who were the farthest advanced: The
Turks Fire four Mines.
Howsoever, the Presence of the Duke of Loraine so encouraged the Soldiers,
that in emulation of each other, they pressed forward, and made themselves
Masters of that Ground, which their other Fellows had newly quitted with the
loss of their Lives. At the same time, the Brandenburgers were so successeful
in their Enterprise, that they took the Tower which they attacked, whereon were
Seventeen Pieces of Cannon with some Mortars. The Elector of Bavaria also
succeeded in his Enterprise, leading on his Men in Person, and possessed
himself of the great Tower which fronts the Castle, whereon were seven Pieces
of Cannon, and two Standards of the Janisaries.

On that part of the City allotted to the false Attack of the Heydukes, no
great matter was performed, nor nothing expected; for the place was strong, and
the Party appointed for the Assault was to make a diversion of the Forces,
rather than in good earnest to gain a Lodgment.

During these Attacks the Turks made a Sally, and charged the Christians in the
Flank, but being watched by some Squadrons of Horse, were repulsed back into
the Town with great loss; and finding that the Christians were pressing
forward, as far, as to to the second Wall, they set Fire to a sort of
sulfureous and bituminous matter, Sulfureous Fires much annoy the Christians.
composed on purpose to suffocate and poison the Lungs, which being thrown into
the Ditch, gave a stop to the Progress of the Assailants: But a Wind arising
soon afterwatds, which carried the Fire and Smoke toward the Town, annoied the
Defendants in such manner, that they were forced to quit their Station, and
suffer the Christians without farther resistance to keep, and make good the
Ground they had taken.

This Assault continued for the space of four hours, with a vast effusion of
Blood on one side and the other; but the Imperilists, Bavarians, Brandenburgers
and all other the Assailants, with unparalled Valor fighting amidst the Fire
and Smoke, A cruel Assault;
Grenades, Stones, Swords and Lances without any regard to their Lives, and
animated by the Bravery of the Commanders, who were as forward to expose
themselves to danger, as the meanest of the Common Soldiers, possessed at
length, and lodged themselves on all round Bullwarks, and Walls made with
Earth, reaching from one side of the City unto the other. About Sunsetting the
Attack ceased, and both sides as it were by mutual consent gave over the Fight,
which ended with the great advantage of the Christians, who had penetrated to
the second Retrenchment of the Wall and Ditch: Which ends at Night.
And Night coming on, those who were tired with that Day's Labor, were
relieved by others, who were all Night long employed in raising Earth, and
fortifying the places which they had gained, on which they mounted Cannon, and
turned those on the Enemy which they had taken from them; and the next Day
began therewith to Batter the inward Wall. It is impossible to express the
Bravery and Resolution, with which this Attack was maintained: For besides the
Gallantry of all the Officers in general, the Duke of Loraine, and Count
Staremberg gave undeniable Proofs of their Courage, of their indefatigable
Industry, and of their Zeal for the Glory of the Emperor, and the Christian
Religion; not only attending unto their own Quarters, but hazarded their
Persons in all places, where their Presence and Directions were necessary or
useful. In this Enterprise many brave Soldiers and Officers were slain, who
were ready to Sacrifice their Lives, being pushed forward with an Ambition to
signalize themselves in the Presence of their Generals; the numbers of them
were so great, that to make the Victory look more cheerful, it was thought fit
to conceal them; only such as were of principal note, were acknowledged as
follows.

Killed.
Monsieur Artein Agitant General to the Duke of Loraine. Sergeant Major Pini.
Count Schlik. Baron Geta, with many other Subaltern Officers of great
experience.
Wounded.
The Duke of Croy. The Prince of Commercy. Sergeant General Diepenthall. Baron
de Asti. The Sergeant Major of Staremberg, with two Captains. Sergeant General
Dingen. The Lieutenant Colonel of Neuburg's Regiment.
Killed of the Brandenburgers.
The Count of Dona. Sergeant Major Maruvitz.
Wounded.
The Duke of Curland, with many other inferior Officers.
The Elector of Bavaria and Prince Lewis of Baden, with incomparable Conduct
and Bravery, exposed their Persons to danger and hazard in all places which
required their Presence, The Elector of Bavaria secures the Works which he had
taken.
and remained all Night upon the Watch, giving directions in what manner the
Laborers were to work, nor did they Retire, or take any Rest or Repose, until
the Lodgments were secured: For during the Darkness of the Night, they had
formed a strong Trench round the Tower, which is under the Wall of the Castle;
and made smooth the heaps and ruins of Stones and Rubbish, by laying thereon an
innumerable number of Sacks of Earth, whereon the Troops could with a large
Front march up to relief of the Guards. And now whereas the innermost Gate of
the Castle was possessed by the Bavarians, so that it could not longer hold
out; the Turks thought fit for saving their Men to abandon it wholly, the
Garrison being much diminished, and their numbers abated in the late Attack.

Officers and Soldiers killed and wounded.
In which of the Regiment of Bavaria were killed, A Captain, and wounded a
Sergeant Major, a Captain and three Lieutenants.

Of the Regiment of Baden were killed two Lieutenants, and wounded five
Captains, one Lieutenant and three Ensigns.

In the Regiment of Aspremont, Killed one Ensign, and wounded the Colonel, the
Lieutenant Colonel, Count Nicholas Palfi, Sergeant Major, Count Zacco, a
Cavalier of Malta, and six other Captains, five Lieutenants and two Ensigns.

In the Regiment of Rummel killed, A Captain and a Lieutenant; wounded a
Captain and an Ensign.

In the Regiment of Gallenfels, killed the Lieutenant Colonel; wounded two
Captains and a Lieutenant.

In the Regiment of Furstemberg, wounded a Captain, a Lieutenant, and an Ensign.

In the Regiment of Beck, wounded the Lieutenant Colonel, the Baron of
Welsberg, five Captains, five Lieutenants, and five Ensigns.

In the Regiment of Steinau, killed a Sergeant Major and a Lieutenant; and
wounded a Captain, two Lieutenants and an Ensign.

In the Regiment of Seibolstorff, killed a Sergeant Major; and wounded a
Captain and two Lieutenants.

In this Attack, of the Imperialists and Bavarians, were killed Common Soldiers
an Hundred and seventeen; wounded Nine hundred seventy two.

Of the Saxons, were killed a Lieutenant Colonel, two Corporals, and seventy
Common Soldiers; wounded a Lieutenant Colonel, two Sergeant Majors, two
Captains, a Captain Lieutenant, three Ensigns, two Sergeants, two Corporals,
and a Hundred Ninety nine Common Soldiers.

Having in this manner, with a vast effusion of Blood, entered as far as to the
inward Wall, all Art and Industry was used to blow that up with new Mines, at
which they labored with so much diligence, that in a Day and a Night's time
they were finished and fired; Another Assault.
the third of which did such great Execution by opening the Breach, as invited
the Besiegers to make an Assault; to the performance of which, Twelve hundred
foot Soldiers, and Four hundred Dragoons were appointed; but their Officers
being for the most part killed or wounded, the Duke of Loraine was forced to
make use of the two Generals of Horse, the Counts of Lodron and Styrum, to
Command the Attack; and in the mean time that they were coming, a Battery of
three Pieces of Cannon was raised on the Curtain lately possessed, with four
Mortar-pieces, both to widen the Breach, and offend the more inward parts of
the Town. But whilst this was doing, the Besieged were making a new
Retrenchment behind the Breach, which was an evident Proof, that they resolved
to defend the Place unto the last extremity.

But not to drive Matters to that ultimate Period, the Turks sent on their part
two Agas to the Duke of Loraine to enter on a Treaty; and the Duke on his side
sent his Adjutant General, the Count of Lamberg, with his Interpreter, July
31st. A Treaty begun.
into the Town; where he was introduced to the Presence of the Pasha, with such
Respect, Ceremony and Honor, as was agreeable to the ill Circumstances under
which the Turks labored; but he returned again with no other satisfactory
Answer than this: That the Officers and Commanders of that Government could
not, nor would not so easily yield and surrender up that City, which is the Key
of the Ottoman Empire: But when it should be thought sit to conclude, and
establish an universal Peace, that they would then oblige themselves, that an
Equivalent should be given to the Emperor, by the Delivery of two other Places:
And that they were ready to give up the same, and conclude a Peace, for making
which, they had received a sufficient Power from the Grand Seignior, provided
that the Siege be immediately raised. With this Answer the Generals not being
pleased, they began on both sides to fire with the usual Fury, Batteries raised
and Mines fired.
and that Night they finished two Batteries, which were raised for enlargement
of the Breaches, and three Mines were fired, which filled a great part of the
Ditch with Earth; but one of them recoyling back, buried a hundred Men of the
Brandenburger Troops, who were advanced too far, and were not advertised, when
the Mine was to be fired.

The next Day following, about Nine a Clock in the Morning, the Turks beat
again a Parley toward the side of the Breach of the Bavarian Quarter, and sent
the two Agas, which had been employed the Day before with the Duke of Loraine,
Another Parley
unto the Elector, desiring that two Hostages might be returned in their
Places, which being done accordingly, one of the Agas offered in the Name of
the Vizier of Buda, To yield and surrender up the Place, with all the
Dependencies, which he avowed to be very great, and to contain no less than a
Hundred and Fifty Leagues of Land thereupon depending, or otherwise to deliver
up any other two places within the Kingdom of Hungary, being under the Turks
Dominion, at the Will and Choice of the Emperor, provided that a general Peace
might thereupon be concluded and ensue: which is broken off.
But in regard the Elector was sufficiently informed, that it was not in his
own nor yet in the Emperor's Power to make a Peace without the common Consent
of the Allies, for which there was no time at that critical Season: The two
Agas were remanded back, and the Hostages returned, and then the old Trade
proceeded, and they began again to fire on all sides as before. But this
Cessation of Arms was made use of by the Christians, for discovery of the
Breach of the Castle, and the entrance thereunto by way of the Town; of which a
Lieutenant Colonel belonging to the Regiment of Baden, took a particular
Observation.

The same Day a Mine was fired by the Imperialists at the Attack of Loraine,
which made a Breach in the second Wall, and shaked the third, which so alarmed
the Defendants, that in great numbers they came running to that place; The
Bavarians enter the Castle, but are repulsed.
by which such a diversion was made of their Forces, as gave the Bavarians an
opportunity to enter the Castle; but being not able to make good their Ground,
they were constrained to abandon the Lodgment which they had already begun.
August.


During these Actions, Count Staremberg applying himself to all places, Count
Staremberg wounded.
where his Presence was required, without any regard to the hazard and danger
of life, he received a Musket Shot on his Left Hand, which carried away his
Thumb; and with another Shot he was both wounded in the Cheek, and in the
Shoulder; but the Wounds were so slight, Duke of Loraine sick.
as did not constrain him to withdraw from his Care and Command. The Duke of
Loraine was at the same time indisposed in his Health by the accession of a
Fever; which though not very violent, yet it gave some cause of Fear and
Discouragement to the whole Camp; howsoever the Spirit of this Hero was so
great, that he still continued to prosecute his Enterprise, and give direction
for perfecting the Mines, which were now necessary on that side; for that
little thereof could be effected at the Bavarian Attack, where the Laborers
were stopped by Rocks and Quarries of Stone: The Difficulty of the Mines.
And whilst the Miners worked at the Breach of Loraine, they were forced to
withdraw themselves from the pestilential Air, caused under Ground by the
noisome Stench of dead Bodies. Howsoever, the Mine under the third Wall was
finished, and sprung with good success, tho the Ditch was not so filled, that
the Soldiers could pass to the Assault; yet bringing Sacks of Earth, and other
defensible Matter, they lodged and covered themselves at the foot of the Breach.

Whilst the Siege proceeded with all this heat and vigor, certain News was
brought, that the Grand Vizier had composed a Body of Seven thousand Horse,
News of the Grand Vizier's March.
drawn out of diverse Garrisons in Hungary, and caused them to advance as far as
Sarowitz, which is within Thirteen Leagues of Buda, and that other Troops had
passed the Bridge of Esseck, and that the Seraskier was appointed to guard that
way, until the Vizier in Person had made his Passage, who with 40.000 Men was
marching to the Relief of distressed Buda; and that he would be shortly
Reinforced with a very great Body of Tartars and Asiatick Horse, which were
already on their March, and had passed Adrianople. But the Generals, who had
received more certain Advices of the Strength of the Vizier, were well assured,
that neither the Number of his Soldiers was so great, nor the Quality of them
so formidable, being for the most part composed of soft Asiaticks, of
Countrymen and People inexpert and unaccustomed to War; and for that Reason it
was not to be imagined that the Grand Vizier would put all to the hazard of a
pitched Battle. Howsoever, The Christians prepare to receive them.
not to despise an Enemy, the Generals considering hereof at a Council of War,
dispatched immediately express Orders to the Cavalry, quartered in all parts of
the Upper Hungary, where was no apprehension of any Enemy, to march unto the
Camp; and accordingly General Dunewaldt, with several Regiments of Horse under
his Command, and Count Caprara, and General Heusler with their Troops, and
Count Budiani with about Two thousand Hungarians, all valiant and veterane
Soldiers, appeared at the Rendezvous, and with all expedition marched toward
the Enemy, with intention to give them a stop in their Way toward Buda. The
Ban or Governor of Croatia, having given Advice to the Generals, that he had
raised the Militia of that Country for the Service of the Emperor, was
commanded to March toward the Bridge of Esseck, and joining with the other
Forces, to make Head and Opposition to the Grand Vizier in his March.

The rumor and report of the Grand Vizier's approach with all his Army did
daily increase, and as a certain Forerunner thereof, several Thousands of his
Horse were advanced very near to discover the Force and Actions of the
Christians: Whereupon a Council of War being called of all the Generals, it was
concluded to countermand the Advance of the Troops, and appoint them to appear
at a general Rendezvous, where it was plainly manifested, how greatly the
numbers were abated; and therefore since the great Line of Circumvallation was
perfected and well flanked with strong Redoubts, Spurs and other defensible
Works, they ordered, that the same should be maintained by Three thousand Foot,
which were sufficient to give a stop to any Attempt, which might be made upon
the Camp: And the Imperial, Bavarian, and Brandenburger Cavalry, were commanded
to lodge on the Hills and rising Grounds which were round the Town: And the
Heydukes were encamped along the Wall of the old Town, extending themselves
from the Fort situate on the Danube, unto the Trenches of the Brandenburgers.

Having thus secured their Camp, and put every thing in a readiness to receive
the Enemy, in case they should attempt to force their Lines; they proceeded on
all sides to perfect their Works on the Breaches. The Bavarians point all their
Batteries against the great Tower.
The Bavarians being piqued in point of Honor for the Foyl or Disadvantage
they had received about two or three Days before, had incessantly fire on the
great Tower with their biggest Cannon; and from another Battery near adjoining
played continually on the Breach of the Wall, which as yet was not wide enough
for the Attack; and because the Situation of the Place was such, as made it
almost inaccessible and too dangerous to the Soldiers to ascend over the Rocks
and Ruins which lay in the way, the Elector resolved to point all his Cannon
against the Castle, as also his Bombs of greatest weight, with design to beat
down the Walls, and with the Ruins thereof to make the Ascent thereunto more
easy and secure; with which, and some Mines which were blown up, that ancient
and stately Edifice was almost destroyed.

The News of the daily approach of the Vizier and his Army, caused the
Christians to be more watchful and vigilant than before, and scarce gave the
Generals any rest or repose by Day or Night free from Alarums, which the Duke
of Loraine sustained in a manner rather Miraculous than Natural; The Christian
Camp alarmed.
for being scarce recovered of a Fever, the present state of Affairs required
him to redouble his Cares and Vigilance; which agitation of Mind was able to
have droven a confirmed Health into the extremities of Heat and feverish
Distempers; but God, who intended him for the glorious Instrument of subjecting
this strong City, gave him strength for his great Work; so that notwithstanding
the expectation of the Vizier hastening to the Relief, a general Assault was
made at every Breach, which continued for the space of two hours; in which the
Defendants behaved themselves with such Gallantry, that the Duke of Loraine
caused a Retreat to be sounded, rather than unprofitably to lose the Lives of
his Soldiers, of which they began now to be sensible of the great Abatement:
Howsoever something was gained by this Assault on the right side of the Tower,
adjoining to the Castle at the corner of the inward Wall, where they lodged
forty Men. In this Conflict not many Men were killed, but many were wounded,
both Officers as well as common Soldiers, and particularly Count Leopold of
Herberstein, and Sergeant Major Bischoffshausen; and on the Quarter of Bavaria,
the Prince of Savoy, and Prince Lewis of Baden, both slightly wounded.

By the motion of the Seraskier, it seemed as if his Intentions were to enter
his Succor and Relief into the Town by the Bavarian Quarters; Skirmishes
between the Turks and Bavarians.
and some Thousands of Turks appearing on the rising Grounds and sides of the
Hills, put themselves into a posture, as if they intended to Engage; but the
Trenches were so well guarded and fortified, that there seemed to be little
danger of forcing Succor by that way into the City: Howsoever, there happened
daily Skirmishes, in which diverse were killed on one side and the other; and
particularly a Turk well mounted and habited, advancing with more than prudent
Gallantry, was laid dead on the Ground; Letters taken.
and being stripped by the Soldiery, there were some Letters found about him
from the Grand Vizier to the Pasha of Buda, signifying that his Intentions were
to force some Quarter of the Enemy, and thereby introduce the Succors designed
for Relief of the Place; and that in the mean time with a Body of Eight
thousand Tartars, to stop the Passage of all Provisions to the Christian Camp
between Strigonium and Buda. Upon this Discovery, the Duke of Loraine and the
Generals resolved to guard their Trenches with Twenty thousand Men, posted in
the most advantageous Places, The Christians prepare to give Battle to the
Turks.
and to draw out all the remainder of the Army into the Field to meet the
Vizier, and show their readiness to give him Battle; for tho the Turks were
reported to be Seventy thousand strong, they were not in reality above Forty
thousand able to bear Arms; against which the Duke of Loraine forming his
Vanguard of Four thousand Talpatzes and Hungarian Hussars, flanked by a part
of the German Horse, marched forth in view of the Enemy. After some Skirmishes
with loss of Men on both sides, the Turks retired, carrying away with them some
Heads of Cattle, which the Hussars endeavoring to recover, were beaten back
with the loss of thirteen Men. After this, the former Resolution was changed,
and it was concluded at a general Council of War, to keep within, and guard
their Trenches, which were well fortified, until they were certainly assured of
what Strength the Vizier was; according to which Resolution, they continued to
Fortify their Lines of Circumvallation with Redoubts, on which they mounted
several Fieldpieces.

August.
The 9th of the Month the Turks appeared on the Hills, opposite to the Bavarian
Quarters, in greater Numbers than before, and after an Engagement with the
advanced Troops, made their Retreat as they had done the Day before; and in the
return to their Camp, they met with a Party of about an Hundred and fifty
Hungarians, which were sent to discover the Enemy; they cut them all off,
thirty only escaping, of which most of them were wounded; and at the same time
the Besiged made a Sally on the Bavarian Quarter, Various Successes.
and killed about Eighty Soldiers, besides some Officers. On the 10th the
Bavarians had finished their Line of Circumvallation, adjoining to that of the
Imperialists, and had wholly guarded themselves from all Attempts of the Enemy
by a very deep Ditch: Howsoever, things not being so secure, but that the Enemy
might be able to attempt the entering Succors by way of the River, the Water of
which was very low; they fortified that part also with some Boats at a
convenient distance from each other, and with some Turn-pikes called Chevaux de
Frise

On the 11th certain Intelligence was brought, that the Grand Vizier was
encamped about five Leagues off; and the same Day Two thousand Turks appeared
opposite to the Bavarian Quarter, about the same place as before; to discover
which and their numbers, a Detachment was sent, but they were soon forced to
retire in have, the Enemy descending in numbers, which were too unequal a Match
for them. The three Mines on which much Work was bestowed being charged with
Five thousand weight of Powder, were now ready; and on the 12th were fired, A
Mine fired.
but not with such good effect as was expected, having only shaken the inward
Wall, and some few of the Palisadoes; so that it was believed, that the Turks
had discharged them of the greatest part of their Powder, by which
disappointment, the Assault which was intended, was countermanded, and the
Miners ordered to begin a new Work. The Afternoon of the same Day, the Vizier
appeared and encamped on the Banks of the Danube, The Vizier appears.
being as some Deserters reported about Fifty thousand strong; at the sight of
which, the Besieged being encouraged, made a Sally with about an Hundred Horse
and Foot, upon Three hundred Horse of the Vanguard; of the Imperialists, who
feigning a flight, drew them at some distance from the Town, and then returning
upon them, cut the greatest part of them in pieces.

On the 14th, the Turks drew out their whole Army into Battalia, and Detached
Six thousand Men under three Pashas, amongst which were Two thousand
Janisaries, with Orders to make their Way into the Town, A Party of Turks
commanded to enter the Town.
by the Imperial and Brandenburger Quarters. Against whom the Duke of Loraine
sent the Regiment of Hungarians Commanded by Palfi, and the Regiments of
Schultz, Serau, and Lodron to charge the Enemy and begin the Fight: The
Hungarians upon the first Shock or Charge began to give Ground; but Baron Marcy
putting himself at the Head of the Regiment of Schultz, gave a stop to the
Flight of the Hungarians, until such time as Count Dunewalt came up with the
Regiments of Taff, Lodron, Neubourg, Stirum and Staremberg, which being joined
in a Body, charged the Turks with that Fury and Bravery, The Turks defeated.
that they totally defeated and put the Turkish Horse to Flight, by which the
Janisaries being abandoned and laid open, were almost all cut off and
destroyed. The Elector of Bavaria with his Horse pursued them to their Camp,
where Rallying again they endeavored to charge the Christians in the Flank;
which when the Duke of Loraine perceived, he made a stand or a halt, and drew
out some Forces from the Lines, which he caused to march toward their
assistance; but the Turks having received the first Fire retreated to their
Camp, whither it was thought fit not to pursue them, but rather to conduct the
Troops back to the Camp, being much tired and wearied by continal Watchings,
having for the space of three Days and three Nights, been always on the Guard
with Arms in their Hands. The Victory was very clear and signal, for the Turks
lost eight Pieces of Cannon, and Forty Standards, and Two thousand and two
hundred dead Bodies were accounted by the Duke of Loraine himself lying in the
Field, where the Battle was Fought, which he caused to be buried, to prevent a
putrefaction in the Air; and all this with the loss only of about Two hundred
Men killed and wounded, amongst the latter of which were the Count of Lodron, a
Major, and two Captains.

After this happy Success all the Cannon were discharged, and the Colors taken
from the Turks displaied, and many Heads of those who had been killed, were set
upon Pikes, and showed to the Besieged to increase their greater Terror and
Despair.

Notwithstanding all which, the Turks abated nothing of their Courage; the
Grand Vizier giving the Christians every Night Alarms, the better to discover
with what Force and Vigilance the Lines and Avenues were Guarded. Two thousand
Turks force their way into the Town.
At length, on the 20th of August about break of Day, Four thousand Turks, of
which Two thousand were Janisaries mounted on Horseback, made a vigorous
Attempt by the Valley of St. Paul, and with great Fury assailed those Guards,
which they not being able to sustain, gave them Way, and permitted them in a
full carrear, to Ride up to the Walls of the Town: At this confusion of the
Guards, and the Noise made by the Janisaries, the Regiments of Caprara and
Heusler came, and renewed the Fight with them, and killed several hundreds of
the Turks, who as they advanced farther into the Approaches, were so plied by
the Musketeers, that most of them were slain: Howsoever, about Two hundred of
them made their Way into the Town by the Bavarian Quarter: Which so animated
the Defendants, that they made and discharged four Vollies of Shot for joy
round the Town: Though this small Recruit was rather a Weakening to them than
any Reinforcement. This Attempt seemed so desperate to the Turkish Soldiery,
that the Vizier could not prevail with any Man to undertake it, without a
Largess of Thirty Dollars in hand paid to every Janisary, and promise to any
that should get within the Town, The reward promised for the Service.
to have his pay doubled during his Life, and to be freed from going ever more
to the War: Of which sort of People there are above Fifty thousand in the
Ottoman Empire, called Otoracks, or as in Latin Milites immeriti.

All this interrupted not the Bavarians in their Works, Batteries raised on the
Rondel.
or in the Batteries they had raised on the great Rondel, by which they very
much annoied the main Castle, which when the Turks observed, they planted one
of their biggest Pieces of Cannon on the highest part of the Wall, which they
having charged with Musket Bullets, Iron, Stones, etc. did great execution on
the Soldiers, which maintained and guarded the Rondel of the Tower: Howsoever,
not to give ground or abandon so advantageous a Post, the Elector of Bavaria
with advice of the General Officers, resolved to Assault the Tower, which was
half ruined and already demolished, so as thereby to gain the advantage of an
upper Ground: The Assailants so bravely behaved themselves, August.
That on the the 22d without any regard to the difficulty and ruggedness of the
Ascent, or the opposition the Turks made, they surmounted the Breach and killed
about One hundred Men, and made themselves Masters of the Tower: The Tower
taken.
In the mean time whilst this was in Action, the Duke of Loraine, and the
Brandenburgers caused an Alarm to be given without, and with continual Firing
of their Artillery and Vollies of Shot, kept the Enemy at a distance.

The Pasha of Buda finding himself nearly urged, and pressed by the loss of so
important a place, from whence the Christians could now shoot into the Town; he
applied all his endeavors to dislodge them: But the Bavarians having str ngly
posted themselves, The Turks endeavor to dislodge the Bavarians.
being assisted with the advantage of the rising Situation, vigorously repulsed
all the Force which the Turks could make upon them, and easily threw them down
headlong from the Scaling Ladders which they had erected. This place was
gained by the Bavarians without much Blood of the Common Soldiery, but Duke
Henric of Saxon Mersburg was in that Action wounded in two places; and General
Rummel of the Bavarians was slain by a Musket Shot in the Approaches, which
ought to have been made deeper by three or four Foot, so as to cover the whole
Body of a Man; he was an excellent Soldier, and a brave Man, and therefore much
lamented by his Electoral Highness, and the whole Army.

Nothing could more annoy and vex the Defendants, than the taking and
possessing this Tower, which rendered the Case and State of the City almost
desperate; so that no hopes remained, unless they were succored and relieved
by the Army of the Grand Vizier, whom to advise of their Extremity, Two
Messengers sent from the City to the Grand Vizier.
two Messengers were dispatched out of the Town, one by the way of the Water,
and the other by the Land side, both disguised in the Hungarian Habit. The
first was discovered swimming over to the Island of St. Margaret's; and being
pursued was taken, but his Letters he had first thrown into the River:
Howsoever, being brought before the Generals, he confessed and declared the low
and desperate Condition to which the City was reduced; and that it could not
hold out much longer unless speedily Relieved; and that another Messenger was
sent to acquaint the Vizier thereof by Word of Mouth, letting him know, that it
was not sufficient to appear before the Town, One of them is taken.
and flatter them with the hopes of Succor, unless also he could force the
Enemy to raise the Siege; and that the late Recruit of Two hundred Men, who
bravely made their way into the City, was but a small Help and Comfort to a
Garrison already wasted, and almost totally consumed by a long Siege. That the
Castle was in a manner lost, since that the principal Towers and Bulwarks of it
were possessed by the Enemy: And in short, that those who remained alive, were
wearied out with continual Watchings, and every Day diminished by Cannon and
Musket Shot, by Bombs, Fires, and Carcasses continually thrown into the Town.

All these Matters being reported before the Generals, they conceived certain
hopes of putting a speedy end to their Labors and Dangers: Howsoever,
therewithal they so far consulted their own Condition, that they concluded it
very necessary, before any thing was farther attempted, to expect the coming of
that Body of the Army under Count Scaffemberg, and the Twelve hundred Swedes,
which were now on their March, and near at hand. At length Scaffemberg being
come with a Reinforcement of Eight thousand Men, besides the Swedes, raised the
Spirits of the whole Army, and put the Generals into a capacity of executing
the Designs they had already plotted and contrived. Eight thousand Men come to
the (...) Camp.
On the Loraine Quarter a Bridge was made near the great Tower, leading toward
the inward Palisadoes of the Enemy; and to conserve it from fire, they covered
it over with Earth: The like was also performed on the Bavarian side; but
whilst these things were preparing, a stop was put thereunto by an unexpected
and vigorous Sally which the Besieged made, for dislodging the Soldiers which
had possessed the Tower. Three Attempts were made thereupon with the greatest
fury and desperation imaginable, throwing Grenades, Sacks of Powder, and
artificial Fires, composed of Sulphur, Pitch, and all sorts of burning and
fetulent Matter; notwithstanding which, they were most vigorously repulsed with
much loss. The Elector considering the dangerous Post, which his Men had
undertaken to defend, thought sit to withdraw his Soldiers from the Bulwark,
that he might with more advantage batter the great Tower with his heaviest
Cannon, which were so hotly plied, that the whole Tower was beaten down, and
the Enemy thereby made incapable to offend from those Works. The Bridge of
which we spoke, being finished on the side of the Imperialists, with the
Battery on the Rondel, the inward Palisadoes were broken down, and the Breach
widen'd above Forty Paces; so that now all had been surrendered, had not the
Vizier comforted the Pasha with Assurances, that he and the Seraskier had
resolved to attempt the Camp in three places at the same time; and that the
most forcible one should be given at the Waterside, where 'twas believed the
least Opposition could be made. Upon this Advice, the Waterside and Banks of
the River were well fortified and secured, and a strong Chain stretched over
the Water below the Bridge of Boats, from the Shore to the Point of St.
Margaret's Isle, to obstruct the Passage of Spies and Messengers, who used to
swim over the Water with Intelligence, and which also might serve to give a
stop to the Cavalry, in case they should attempt any thing on that side.

The City being now in a languishing Condition, the Grand Vizier resolved to
make his last Effort; and having chosen out of his Army Three thousand of his
bravest Soldiers, which he encouraged with Thirty Dollars a-piece paid them in
hand, and with promise of Increase of their daily Pay, during Life, to such as
should make and force their Way into the Town; and at the same time another
Body was ordered to enter the Line, at the place which they had lately
attempted. The Three thousand descended by way of the Valley called Shamboiuck,
and with great Fury fell in upon the Guards of the Imperialists; but were so
well received by the Baron of Asti, with his Talpatz and Hussars, and by
General Heusler, with his Regiment, that they were vigorously repulsed. After
which they made an Attempt on Count Caprara, and again on the Quarters of the
Duke of Loraine, but in all places were ill treated, and came off with a great
loss of Men. In the mean time, the second Body of Turks assaulted other parts
of the Army, which increased the heat of the Fight; to succor which, the Duke
of Loraine detached all the Forces which were about him, remaining alone only
with two Assistants; but the Battle growing hot, and the Turks endeavoring in
diverse places to break into the Line, the Duke of Loraine put himself at the
Head of two Battalions of Brandenburgers, whose Example gave Life and Courage
to the whole Army. But whilst this Fight was managed in diverse Squadrons,
which confusedly ran from one side to another, some of them had the fortune to
force the Line toward the Wall of the lower City; but passing to the Line of
Contravallation, they met there such Vollies of Shot, and continual Firings,
that knowing not which way to retreat, they fell into the Squadrons of Baron
Marcy and Serau, by whom the greatest part of them were killed upon the place;
and those which escaped were so confused, that being dispersed about the
Fields, they knew not which way to take. Some of them happened to fall in with
the Brandenburgers, others into the general Quarters, where being encompassed
on all sides, they were miserably cut to pieces and slain, not so much as their
Servants, or Grooms of their Horses escaping. The Besieged in the mean time
being Spectators of all that passed, designed by a most vigorous Sally to meet
their Succors, but were so warmly encountered by the Bavarians, that they were
forced to Retreat with precipitation and disorder.

The Body which the Turks kept for a Reserve, observing the unfortunate issue
of these Conflicts, durst not adventure to make another Attack, but retired
back to their Camp. The Turks lost above One thousand Men killed on the place,
and Twenty five of their Colors were taken. Howsoever, this Advantage was not
obtained without some considerable loss on the Christian side, which was the
more to be lamented by the Death of Baron Marcy, who after having killed
several Janisaries with his own hand, received two Cuts on the Head with a
Cymeter, and one on his Shoulder, which tho at first were not esteemed Mortal;
yet the Wounds being neglected, and the Cure thereof not much regarded, he Died
thereof in a short time afterward, to the great Grief of the whole Camp, which
much lamented the loss of so brave a Soldier.

The Vizier being informed of this unfortunate Success, immediately gave order
to the Janisaries of his Guards, which were kept for a Reserve to renew the
Fight, and attempt once more to give succor to the Town; but the March of
these fresh Forces being discovered by the General Count Piccolomini, who was
at the Head of five Regiments of Horse, divided into Twenty five Squadrons, he
marched boldly to meet the Enemy; but the Turks upon appearance of the
Vanguard of the Christians sounded a Retreat, and returned back to the
Vizier's Camp.

Whilst these several Conflicts and Skirmishes were acting in the Field, the
Attacks upon the Town were not neglected; and on the side of Loraine they had
advanced their Lodgment to the Breach of the inward Wall, not above three Pikes
length from the Palisadoes; but because it was necessary to attack the Town
with extreme Resolution and Force, without which it could not be taken; and
that in the mean time, no Interruption should be given to the Assault by the
outward Force of the Enemy; it was resolved at a Council of War, held by all
the Generals then present, that the Lines of Circumvallation should be made
deeper, which being well guarded, would secure the Soldiers from the Enemy
without: And in the mean time, to keep the Design secret, a Report was given
out that the Christians intended to give Battle to the Turks; upon the News of
which, the Vizier applied himself to fortify his Camp, and the Besieged
neglected to provide for their last Defense.

It being now the second of September, September.
the Artillery continued still to play upon the Breaches with Chained-shot, and
to burn the Palisadoes with Bullets red-hot, and to amuse the Besieged with the
report of the Battle; so that several Troops were drawn out of the Lines, as if
all the Army intended to take the Field; when on a sudden, upon a Signal given
by firing six Pieces of Cannon from the Swedes Battery, An Assault made in
three pla-
the Soldiers arose like so many Lions to attack the Breaches in three several
places, of Loraine, Bavaria and Brandenburg; besides there were two other false
Attacks. Baron Asti, with his Granadiers, was the first to mount the Breach,
but being wounded in the Attempt, he resigned his Command to lead his Men to
the Serjeant-Major of Diepenthal. Never was any thing more bravely assaulted,
nor more courageously defended: For the Besieged, notwithstanding the late
Stratagem to amuse them, still continued their usual Vigilance, and oppose
themselves with open Breasts against their Enemy; so that never was made a more
brave and resolute Defense than that of this Fortress of Buda. The
Brandenburgers, not inferior in Courage to the Imperialists, were as forward as
the others to mount the Breach; but both of them encountered an incredible
Resistance by whole showers of Shot, Grenades, Bags of Gunpowder, Stones, and
even Swords and handy Blows, to which they came with the Enemy: But the
Assailants being seconded by Reserves, and animated by the Presence and Example
of their Generals, who marched at the head of their Men rather as Guides and
Conductors, The Commanders Guide to the Soldiers.
than as Commanders, were so encouraged, that they resolved either now at last
to enter the Town, or die on the Breach: The Duke of Croy, the Prince of
Neuburg, with the Generals Souches, Scaffemberg and Diepental, were like Common
Soldiers engaged amidst the thickest of the Enemies; and the Duke of Loraine,
who out of an heroic Spirit, was always present where was most of Danger, was
one of the first to mount the Breach, being followed by the other Generals. The
Fight grew so hot, and the Defendants so hardly pressed upon the Breach, that
the Pasha-Governour of the Place, with the most select and choice Men of the
Garrison came running to succor that part where the Enemy was just ready to
make their Entrance; the Pasha fighting valiantly on the Breach, and giving
undeniable Proofs of his Valor, The Pasha of Buda killed.
was slain on the Ruins, and fell a Sacrifice rather to his own Master than to
his Enemies; for had he escaped the Danger and Slaughter, it is probable he
would have been ill received at Home, and his Death made shameful by the Hand
of the Executioner, which was now made glorious by the Sword of the Enemy. In
fine, after a bloody Fight on the Breach, which continued for the space of
three quarters of an Hour, the Soldiers entered freely into the City, The City
entered and taken.
where a new Engagement began, the Garrison retreating from House to House, and
from Wall to Wall, firing from Windows and Holes, and all parts, being resolved
to sell their Habitations and Lives at the dearest rate they were able, until
at length with great disorder they fled to the foot of the Castle Wall. The
Imperialists being now Masters of the Town, made a most direful Slaughter of
all they met; and being in the heat of their Fury, put Women and Children to
the Sword.

But the Elector of Bavaria met a stronger Resistance at the Castle; for the
Turks who were still in their Trenches, and knew not as yet, that the
Christians had entered the Town, defended themselves with their utmost Bravery,
until at length the Bavarians redoubling their Force, became Masters of the
remaining part of the Castle; when those who had forsaken the Breach, The Turks
demand Quarter.
were flying to take their Refuge in it; but now no Place or Sanctuary
remaining to save the Miserable, some of them threw down their Arms, crying for
Quarter, and others made Signs of Surrender, by the white Turbants which they
took from their Heads, and displayed in the Air, and others thinking to save
themselves in little Boats, and pass over to Pesth; but many of them were taken
by the Bavarians, and most of them killed: But in regard that those, who were
still in their Trenches, perceived that no Quarter was given, they applied
themselves again to their Arms, and as desperate Men, resolved to sell their
Lives at the dearest rate; and having set Fire to diverse Places of the City,
rendered it a most direful spectacle of Horror and Confusion. Quarter not given
In fine, all endeavors being made by the Generals to stop the farther
effusion of Blood; the Soldiers not being as yet satiated with Revenge for the
Death of their Companions; and the Prince Eugene of Savoy, who (with his
Regiment of Horse was posted in a burying place to oppose the Turks, in case
they should attempt any thing from the Vizier's Camp) was deaf to the Cries of
the Conquered; by the Prof Savoy.
for hearing that the Town was entered, and unwilling to lose any part of the
Glory, or that his Sword should appear dry, and not colored with the Blood of
his Enemies, at the end of the Action, forsook his Post, and let loose his
Soldiers, crying out to give no Quarter to the Janisaries, which to the number
of about Sixteen hundred defended themselves within the Trenches and Works of
the Castle; but is granted by the Generals.
but the Generals consulting together, considered that the Night was coming on,
that the Enemies Camp was in sight, that Fires were kindled and furiously
burning in diverse parts of the City, and that the Confusion was everywhere
great; they at length agreed, tho with some Opinions to the contrary, to grant
Quarter to the Janisaries for their Lives only; the which they having accepted,
and surrendered themseves, were by a strong Guard conducted to one of the
Moschs of the City, others to the chief Storehouse, and others to a part of
the Castle, where they were kept in Custody until the Day following.

In the great Action of this Day, being the 2d of September, 1686, which gave
the capital City of the Kingdom of Hungary into the Hands of the Emperor, after
it had remained in Possession of the Turks ever since the Year 1529, when it
was taken by Solomon; There were killed only Four hundred Soldiers, and about
Two hundred wounded; for where is a great Consternation, The numbers slain at
the taking of the City.
there is seldom much Blood spilt on the victorious side: Of the Turks about
Three thousand might be slain, and Two thousand made Captives; of which last,
the Kahya to the Pasha of Buda, or his Deputy, was made Slave to the Elector of
Bavaria; the Aga or Commander of the Janisaries to the Duke of Loraine; as also
the Mufti, the Treasurer, the Hasnadar or Privy-Purse to the Pasha, the
Secretary to the Pasha, with several other Officers of Note: Many others were
taken and killed, who endeavored to make their escape over the River, some of
them being overtaken by the Talpatz in their swift-rowing Boats; and others
taken or killed by the Garrison of Pesth, at their landing on the other side;
but still was the City all this Night in continual Flames and Confusion; for
the Turks had conserved diverse Stores of Powder and Fireworks in places near
the Attacks, which were not regarded by the Christians, when they first entered
the Town; where the Fire increasing, and running from House to House, The
Storehouse of Powder takes fire.
at length touching the Magazines, they blew all up with so terrible a noise,
that the General began to suspect some Treason, and feared that all the Town
was min'd in subterranean Vaults; but considering afterward the place from
whence the Blow came, it soon appeared that it was all nothing but an Accident;
howsoever, with that and other terrible Blows, very few Houses in the City
remained standing, and the Roofs uncovered; only the principal Church of the
City was not much damnified, and the chief Magazine or Storehouse was
conserved by the great Care and Diligence of Count Rabata, Commissary General,
with another containing vast quantities of Powder and other warlike Provisions.

A stop being put (as we have said) by the Authority of the Generals, unto the
Slaughter; and the Fury of the Soldiers growing cool, they began to hearken to
the voice of their Commanders, Endeavors made to quench the Fire.
who with good Words, and promises of Reward, prevailed with them to apply
themselves to the extinguishing of the Fire, which by the assistance of God was
in a few Hours overcome. But a more wonderful deliverance by the Hand of God's
Divine Providence, was the discovery of two Mines under the Castle, Two Mines
discovered.
charged with Ten thousand Pounds of Powder, which the Turks reserved for their
last and parting Blow, which had they taken Fire, would not only have destroyed
the remainder of the City with the Walls and Bulwarks, but therewith buried the
greatest part of the Assailants in the Ruins, and given a sad occasion or cause
of Rejoicing and Triumph to the surviving Conquerors; but the Turks amidst this
great Consternation had forgot these Mines, or else abstained from that
desperate Attempt in hopes of Life.

This was the Fate of this great and strong City of Buda, the Capital of all
Hungary, and Residence of the Beglerbei of that Kingdom, under whom are Twenty
Sangiacks: He is styled the Vizier of Buda, and esteemed after the Grand Vizier
Azem, and the Pashas of Grand Cairo and Babylon, The Greatness and Power of the
Vizier of Buda.
(who are always entitled Viziers) the next in order of Superiority; and
because his Station is on the Frontiers, and Neighbor to such a Formidable and
Martial People, as are the Germans; they commonly choose Men of Valor and
Conduct for that Employment, of which we have had a good Proof and Evidence in
the Person of the late Pasha, who decently Died on the Breach amidst the crowd
of Common Soldiers.

This City was at first taken by Solomon the Magnificent, in the Year 1526; and
afterward in the Year 1527, was subdued by Ferdinand the I. King of Bohemia,
Brother to Charles the V. In the Year 1529, The many Sieges which Buda
sustained.
Solomon regained it by Treachery of the Garrison, and after it laid Siege to
Vienna it self, which after many bloody Assaults he was forced to raise in have
and confused Precipitation. After which, Buda sustained eight several Sieges
without any Effect.

The first was by Ferdinand King of Bohemia,

The second was by the same King, under Leonard Festius, in the Year 1540; but
the King dying, the Siege was raised.

The next Year being 1541, the General Rogensdorf laid Siege a third time to
that City, which again was relieved by a powerful Army under the Command of
Solomon.

The Marquess of Brandenberg, in the Buda, and came so near as to Attack Pesth;
but being repulsed thence with some loss, he returned back into Germany.

In the Year 1598, the Count of Swartzemburg, Rab from the Turks, marched
thence toward Buda, and in the Month of October laid Siege thereunto, with the
Forces of Mathias the Archduke, which after thirty Days time he was forced to
raise, by reason of the continual Rains: And what is observable, the Turks did
the like at Waradin on the Frontiers, being under the same Inconveniences.

The Christians made an Attempt the 6th Rosworm: And tho they had ruined the
Bridge over the Danube, and taken by force the City of Pesth, yet being
overtaken by the rigor of the Winter-season, they were forced to desist from
that Design.

Charles Duke of Loraine, Generalissimo of the Imperial Forces, and of the
other Princes of Germany; which after many bloody Assaults was again raised; as
we have at large declared in the Historical Treatise of that Year.

Turks, this Fortress was forced to surrender to the said Duke of Loraine, The
8th time Besieged and taken.
being overwhelmed by the Power and Valor of the Christians, and taken in the
sight of the Ottoman Army, Commanded by the Grand Vizier himself, in which was
the Flower of the Turkish Troops; but having lost the best and bravest of their
Soldiers in former Battles, and discouraged by a Series of evil Successes,
their Courage failed them, and no wonder, when they were generally possessed
with an Opinion, that God fought against them; in sense of which, so soon as
the City was taken, the Vizier with such Precipitation raised his Camp and
marched away, that he was forced to burn a great part of his Baggage to prevent
the falling of it into the Hands of the Enemy. And indeed it was no wonder that
the Vizier with fear and dread should hasten away, for the Duke of Loraine had
dispatched Count Budiani, with Six thousand Hungarians, to march in pursuit of
him, whilst he with the other Generals rendered Thanks to God, and sang Te Deum
for their Successes in the great Church, Dedicated to St. Stephen King of
Hungary.

In the mean time the Command of this important City was committed to the
Charge of General Beck, with the Assistance of the Lieutenant Colonel of the
Regiment of Salm, The Command of Buda given.
and of Biscofshausen, Serjeant-Major to Diepenthal, with a Garrison of Three
thousand Five hundred Germans, and a Thousand Hungarians: The first Work to be
done, was to clear the Streets of the dead Bodies, which was performed by the
Turks and Jews, who were made Prisoners; those Bodies which were Turks and
Jews, like themselves, by Command of their Taskmasters, they threw into the
River, but the Bodies of the Christians were decently Interred. The next
Business was to demolish the Works, repair the Breaches, to fill up the
Trenches, and level the Lines: But the chief Prisoners, and Persons of Quality,
were conducted by Count Rabata to the Emperor at Vienna, where the Joy and
Triumph of that Court was much increased at the sight of such considerable
Captives.

The Spoil and Plunder of the City could not amount unto much, by reason that
the greatest part of the Housholdstuff and Movables was consumed in the
Flames: Howsoever, there were some who had the fortune to seize considerable
Sums both of Gold and Silver. After which the Place being visited and surveyed
in all parts by the two Generals, Stores found in the Town.
they found therein above Four hundred Pieces of Cannon of great weight; of
which there were four of vast bigness, carrying an Hundred and fifty Pound
Bullet; to which the Christians afterward gave the Name of the four
Evangelists; besides, there were twenty Mortar-pieces, and Provisions and
Ammunition for about a Month longer.

The Generals having refreshed their Armies in Buda for the space of three or
four Days, on the 6th of September they marched toward the Vizier with Twenty
thousand Foot and Twelve thousand Horse; of whom Count Budiani (as we have
said) being dispatched before, gave an account, The Army marches against the
Vizier.
that the Vizier having visited and reinforced the Garrison of Alba Regalis, or
Stultwissemberg, had taken his March with all expedition toward the Bridge of
Esseck; and that his Army was reduced to a very small number, being deserted by
the Country People and Handycraftsmen, whom they had forced to the War; so that
the Vizier not knowing otherwise in what manner to save himself, encamped with
all the advantage he could about three Miles distant from the Bridge of Esseck,
upon the little River of Sarwitz, having his Rear guarded by a Bog or marshy
Ground, intending there to remain, until he saw and discovered the Designs of
the Enemy, who could not in that advantageous Post force him to an Engagement.

The Duke of Loraine being with the Imperial Army encamped at Tolna, about
three Leagues distant from the Vizier, whom he could not force nor persuade to
Fight; he detached Eighteen Regiments under Command of Prince Lewis of Baden,
with Orders to Besiege the Town of Quinque Ecclesiae, whilst he with the
remainder of the Army passed the River, with a Bridge of Boats, at Tolna,
taking his March toward Pesth; and in his way seized on the Town of Hatwan,
which the Turks had abandoned, Hatwan surrendered.
and set on Fire; but the Christians entering therein before all was reduced to
Ashes, they extinguished the Fire, and saved the rest, and found therein
seventeen Pieces of Cannon.

Thus did the Imperial Arms proceed with a prosperous gale of Fortune, nothing
standing before them, but all yielded to the conquering Eagles; for Prince
Lewis of Baden in his March, made himself Master of Simon-Torn, Simon Torn taken
a Fortress encompassed with a Ditch of thirty Paces broad, and that also
defended by a Marsh quite round; the Passage over which is made by a Bridge of
Three hundred Paces long, and the Castle is built of Freestone, with
Fortifications after the ancient Fashion. In this Place were sixteen Pieces of
Brass Guns, and one of Iron, Twenty six Granado-shells, and Twenty five Tuns of
Gunpowder. Then without farther loss of time he proceeded to Kaposwar, and
Kapos^^.
which he Pillaged and Burnt, the Castle only excepted: And being reinforced by
Count Scaffemberg and some Troops of the Croats, which joined with him, they
marched together toward Quinque; Ecclesiae; and being come near the Place, a
Detachment of Three thousand Germans and Croats was made to take a View of the
Situation and Strength of the Town; which they finding to remain in a secure
Condition, enter d it by Surprise, and put an Hundred Turks to the Sword, the
rest flying to the Castle for Refuge, after they had set fire to the City in
four places; Quinque Ecclesiae taken.
but the Dragoons scaled the Walls, and with their Swords in their Hands cast
themselves into the Place, and opened the Gates to give entrance to the other
Troops. After which the Fire was put out, and considerable Booty, and rich
Plunder taken, and about a Thousand Christian Captives set at liberty.

This Success was soon afterward followed by the Siege of Segedin, by some
Troops detached by Order of the Duke of Loraine, under Command of Count
Caraffa, one of the Generals; Segedin besieged.
who, coming before the Place, in a short time raised four Batteries, and
mounted his Cannon thereupon, which were brought from Zolnock; but Forage and
Provisions growing very scarce in the Leaguer, Caraffa went himself to hasten
the Provisions, leaving Count Walis, Major General, Chief Commander of the
Forces before the Town: In the mean time Count Walis received Intelligence,
that Two thousand Turks, joined with a considerable Body of Tartars, were
marching to raise the Siege, or to force Succors into the Town; he detached
six' Regiments of Horse and Foot, with some Croats, and a Regiment of Dragoons,
under the Command of Count Veterani; who having marched all the Night, by break
of Day drew up his Forces into Battalia, and with his right Wing charged the
Tartars with such resolution, Veterani routs the Tartars.
that he put them to flight, and killed great numbers of them in their Tents,
and took Four or Five thousand of their Horses, with all their Baggage: Nor was
the Colonel of the Regiment de Gotz, whose Incumbence it was to Charge the
Turks, less successful in his Enterprise; for tho they had the advantage of a
Palanca for their Defense, yet the Insperialists (to whom nothing could now be
difficult) did Storm it with so much Courage and Vigor, that they soon became
Masters of it, killing Two hundred of the Three hundred Janisaries, A Body of
Turks routed.
which defended the Place; at the same time the Horse charging the others,
forced them to fly in disorder, of which many falling into the Hands of
Veterani, were killed without Quarter given to any. This Action was scarce
over, before the Imperialists espied a great number of Turks, passing a Bridge
which they had laid over the Danube, as if they had designed to reinforce those
Troops newly defeated, and to come in to their Assistance for the Relief of
Segedin. Veterani resolving to charge them also, made a Detachment of some
Regiments to hinder the runaway Tartars from attacking the Imperialists in the
Flank, whilst he assailed the Turks, Turks was beaten, and foreced to retreat
to a Place where their Infantry lay under covert, supported by Six hundred
Janisaries, with Thirty Fieldpieces, which were discharged with terrible Fire
and Smoke upon their Enemies; but the Christians having received their Fire
with undaunted Constancy and Courage, they assailed the Turks and Tartars with
such bravery, that they put them to flight. Another Body of the Turks defeated.
In this last Encounter above Three hundred Janisaries were killed upon the
Place, all their Artillery and Baggage taken, with their Timbals, which they
sound before the Pashas, and many Colors, together with Five hundred Horse,
and Two thousand Beasts of Burden, laden with Baggage and Provisions; and all
this on the Christian side, with the loss only of a Hundred Foot Soldiers, and
about Fifty Horsemen. After which Veterani returning to the Camp before
Segedin, where Te Deum was sung; some Prisoners were released to carry the
Intelligence of these Successes into the Town: And thereupon a Treaty being
desired, Segedin taken.
and Hostages given, it was agreed, That the Soldiers of the Garrison only
should have liberty to march out with as much Baggage as every Man was able to
carry upon his Shoulders and to be conducted in safety as far as Temeswar. Thus
Segedin being taken, great quantities of Provisions were found therein, which
served to augment the Loss, and increase the terrible Consternation in the
Turkish Army, and in the Court, and in all parts of the Ottoman Dominions. Nor
did the Turks Misfortunes of this Year's Campaign end here, nothing being able
to withstand a victorious Army. Prince Lewis of Baden divided his Army into two
Bodies; the first he Commanded himself, and marched toward Darda, which is a
Fortress built by the Turks, and served to cover the Bridge of Esseck; the
other Detachment was committed to the Conduct of Count Scaffemberg, with Orders
to Attack Zyclos, the which he so well executed, that in five or six Days he
took the Place, the Soldiers and Inhabitants Surrendering at discretion: Zyclos
taken.
In the Town were found Twelve Pieces of Cannon, with stores of all sorts of
Provision and Ammunition. The Men were made Prisoners of War, but the Women and
Children were dispersed into several Cities and Towns under obedience of the
Emperor. After the taking of Zyclos, the Count of Scaffemberg joined again with
Prince Lewis, who was now come before Darda on the first of November, where he
understood the two Pashas, who had layn encamped on that side, with about Two
thousand Five hundred Men, were already passed the Bridge of Esseck; and that
the Garrison of Darda had abandoned the Place, and marched the same way,
carrying their Cannon and Provisions, with them, and to hinder the pursuit of
their Enemies after them, had beaten down and burnt a great part of the Bridge
behind them. The Fort and the Bridge being both possessed without any
opposition, Prince Lewis burnt about Six thousand Paces more of the Bridge,
notwithstanding the Cannon-shot which they fired continually from the Town of
Esseck, without any great loss or damage to the Imperialists, The Bridge of
Esseck ruined.
or the People of the Country, which came in to their Assistance; so that by
what one side and the other had done, the Bridge was totally ruined. Prince
Lewis having put a good Garrison into Darda, marched to Zyclos, and thence to
Kapeswar, which he took upon Conditions, that the Garrison should march out,
and be conducted in safety as far as Sigeth. There were in that Town Twenty
four Pieces of Cannon planted, and the Magazines well stored with all sorts of
Provisions and Arms.

In this glorious manner did this Campaign end in favor of the Christian Arms:
And now it being time for both Armies to retire into their Winter Quarters, the
losing Party had leisure to lament and quarrel, and lay the fault on each
other, and the victorious Party to rejoice and triumph. And so it was; for by
this time the news of the loss of Buda, and the several Victories gained by the
Christians, being come to Constantinople, it struck all sorts and conditions of
Men with a wonderful Consternation and Astonishment; and yet under this
Affliction and pressure of heavy Taxes, they behaved themselves with much
Humility and Resignation of Mind to the Will and Pleasure of God, acknowledging
all these Miseries which had fallen upon them, the flights and turning of their
Backs to their Enemies, the loss of their fortified Towns, and the Slaughter of
their brave Soldiers, and valiant Men of War, The Turks humble themselves.
to be all the essects of the Divine Anger and Vengeance upon them for their
Sins. The Imaums or Parish Priests, the Shecks or Preachers in their Moschs,
the Religious Men, such as the Dervices, Kalenderi, Nimetulahi, and others made
diverse Processions, exhorting the People as they passed to Repentance and
Amendment of Life, and particularly to lament their Sins of drinking Wine and
unnatural Lusts, the common Wickedness and Vices of the People: And for better
observation of their Law, which had been much neglected, it was commanded on
pain of Death strictly to observe the Ramazan, which is the Month of Fasting,
during which Month, no Man is by their Law, in the Day time, till Night comes,
to taste Bread or drink Water: Every Friday in that Month, the Mufti and Kadees
clothed in penitential Habits, were obliged to visit all the principal Moschs
of the City, and to make Prayers for turning away the Anger and Displeasure of
God: But the People and Soldiery were of another Temper, being inclined to
enquire after the Cause and Grounds of all these Evils, Slaughters, and
Confusion. The News of taking Buda, Keep peditious Meeting.
and putting all the Garrison to the Sword, (which as reported) consisted of
Eight thousand Men, besides Women and Children, had filled all Constantinople
with a most wonderful Consternation; the common sort of Shopkeepers and
Handycrafts-men ran to Coffee-houses, and Places of public Meetings to hear
the News and Particulars of what had passed. The Kadees, who were Lawyers and
Judges, and the Otorack Janisaries, who are like the Milites immeriti, or
Soldiers with dead Pay, caball'd every Day together without the knowledge of
the Grand Seignior, which so soon as he came to hear, he was affrighted, not
knowing what might be the issue of such seditious Meetings, and thereupon
doubling his Guards in the Seraglio with Bostangees, who are Gardiners, The
Grand Seigmor affrighted at the Meetings, and sends to them.
and stout able Men, he sent to know the meaning of such numerous Assemblies;
to which answer was made, That seeing to their Grief the extreme Ruin and
Danger, then threatening both the Person of his Majesty and the whole Empire,
they thought it their Duty as Loyal Subjects and Slaves, and true Musselmen and
Believers to consult together what Advices and Expedients they might with all
Humility offer to his Majesty, Their Answer.
for his own personal Conservation, and for the Defense of their holy and true
Religion, with the great Body of the Empire. The Grand Seignior, who dreaded
the ill Consequences of such seditious Meetings, returned to them a gentle
Message of Thanks for their Care and Love, desiring them to offer him such
Remedies, which they in their Wisdom did judge convenient for cure of the
present, and prevention of future Evils; it being natural for the common sort
of People in such cases to cast the Blame on the chief Ministers of State, they
immediately replied, That the Musti was a bad Man, and had abused his Office,
and that it was generally murmured in all places of the Empire, They offer
Remedies.
That his Majesty was in such times as these too expensive in his Seraglio, and
too loose in his Government, giving himself up to Hunting and Recreations, and
forsaking as it were the Helm of Government, whilst the Vessel of the Empire
was tossed amidst an Ocean of Miseries, and ready every Day to suffer
Shipwreck. And that his Majesty did too much neglect his Imperial City of
Constantinople, gracing every little Place with his Presence, which made that
Royal Seat become desolate and so impoverished, that it was not possible to
answer and pay the vast Taxes and Impositions which were charged upon it. The
Grand Seignior approves thereof.
The Grand Seignior seemed to take all this that was said very kindly; and
immediately deposed the Mufti, and banished him to Prusa, and calling for one
of the Kadileschers (who are Chief Justices) he clothed him with a rich Sables,
and invested him with his Office: And looking more nearly about him to the main
Chance, he recalled the Orders he had lately given for a general Hunt on a
certain Day, and a vast number of Greyhounds, which with great Charge had been
got together from all parts of the Empire, were let loose, and suffered to run
without a Master through all the Streets of Constantinople: The Expenses of the
Seraglio were also much retrenched, and the daily Allowances reduced to one
Moiety: And after this Example, the Kustir-Aga, the Kimacham, and all the great
Ministers of State made a Regulation in their Families: And to make this
Reformation the more public and notorious to the People, the Grand Seignior
put on a more grave and penitential Face than ordinary, and frequented the
Royal Mosques, going to one or other of them every Day with much Solemnity:
This Reformation quieted the Minds of the Commonalty pretty well; but this and
the News of the Vizier's coming to Constantinople very speedily, to assist at
the Councils for conserting Measures for the next Year's Campaign, terrified
the Ringleaders of the late Cabals, with an Apprehension of being called to an
Account on score of their late seditious Meetings; for the Turks, who can
easily dissemble with the Vulgar, and temporize during the Outrages and
Fluctuations of the People, yet so soon as the Storm is appeased, they never
fail to question the Cause, and punish Captain Tom and his mutinous Rabble with
Punishment agreeable to their Demerit.

As the Grand Seignior was afraid of his People, A Panick-fear possesses them
at Constantinople.
and they of the Grand Seignior and Vizier, so likewise were they generally
possessed with a Panick-fear of the coming of the Enemy, which will plainly
appear by this Instance. The Turks having surrendered up Napoli di Romania upon
Conditions to the Venetians; one of them was, That they should Transport the
Inhabitants and Garrison of that City, to some Place within the Dardanelli,
near to the Castles: The Venetians, in pursuance of this Article, embarked all
the Soldiers, with the Men, Women and Children, and transported them to the
place appointed; to which when they began to draw near, so that many Colors of
St. Mark were seen from the Castles, entering into the Hellespont, the News
thereof was posted from all hands to Constantinople, which put the whole City
into a Consternation, and gave cause of Rumor everywhere, that the Venetians
had already passed the Castles, and Reports flew up and down, that they were in
a few Leagues, or as some fancied in sight of the Town. This put all Hands to
work, and in a confused manner, many Pieces of Cannon were mounted at the
Seraglio Point, on the Maiden Tower, which is a little Fort built on a Rock in
the Water, in the midway between Constantinople and Scutari, where also Guns
were mounted, and Soldiers and Inhabitants of the City posted in all places,
where might be any suspicion or danger of the Enemies descent or landing. This
hurly burly continued for the space of two Days, by which time the truth of the
Matter being known, and that the Venetians were retired, things began to be
quieted, and the People to return to their own Habitations and Business.

Thus have we done with the Campaign in Hungary for the Year 1686, which ended
very glorious for the Emperor: It rests now before we proceed farther, to take
a view and survey of the Successes of the Venetians both by Sea and Land, which
were not less prosperous than those in the parts of Hungary.

In the preceding Years of this War, the Venetians made it their chief
Business and Enterprise to render themselves Masters of the Morea, a fruitful
and ancient Country, in which are many Provinces, and amongst them, that of
Laconia, now called Maina, and the Inhabitants, Mainioti, a sort of People, who
call themselves Christians, but live chiefly upon Spoil and Robbery: In this
Country the most considerable Places are, Calamata, Description of the Country
of Maina.
Zarnata, Chielefa, and Passava, all which Places were subdued by the
Venetians, and taken from the Turks in the preceding Year of 1685, in despite
of the Captain Pasha, and in the sight of him and his Army, Chielefa; to gain
which, he began betimes his Campaign, and on the first of April, he invested
the Place with an Army, The Turks invest Chielesa.
composed of Ten thousand Foot and Fifteen hundred Horse, commanded by himself
and four other Pashas, with a great number of Laborers and Pioniers. At his
first appearance before this Fortress, the Captain Pasha sent a Summons to the
Governor, called Seignior Marin Gritti, Proveditor extraordinary for the
Maina, demanding with many Threats the Surrender of that Town. To which
Seignior Gritti returned a resolute Answer, That he and all his Soldiers would
either live or die in Defense of that Place, not doubting but that the
Omnipotent God would favor their just and brave Intentions. The Captain Pasha
having received this Answer, immediately raised a Battery, and began to fire
upon the Town with six Pieces of Cannon; at which the Governor not being in
the least dismayed, put all things in order for a resolute Defense. The Turks
plied their Batteries so warmly on the Town, that in the space of ten Days they
had opened a Breach wide enough for an Assault; which whilst they were
preparing to do, the News being brought to Seignior Girolamo Cornaro, the
General of the Islands, how that the Turks had invested Chielefa, he
immediately gathered all the Force which was then ready in Zant, consisting of
diverse Nations; and having embarked 'em on a Fleet of Ships commanded by
Seignior Lorenzo Venier, he sailed with a favorable Wind to the Morea. This
News flew likewise with much speed to the Captain General Morosini then at
Corfu, who, with like diligence, having embarked all the Forces he had there,
and being assisted with a prosperous Wind, arrived in the space of four Days at
the Place, where he designed to make his Descent, and the Day following being
the 30th of March, he landed Four thousand Men under the Command of three Major
Generals, that is, Storf, and the Cavaliers Alcenago, and d' Andria.

This unexpected News of the arrival of the Captain General surprised the
Captain Pasha, and filled all the Turkish Camp with Fear and Confusion; so that
at the very Name of Morosini, The Venetians relieve Chielesa.
and the Christian Troops, they raised their Tents, and drew off their Camp,
but with such have and precipitation, that at a little distance from the Town,
they left six Pieces of Brass Canon behind them, four of which were found in
the common Way, and two were thrown down a Precipice, which afterward were
recovered by the industry of the Venetians. So soon as the Besieged observed
the Enemy to raise their Camp, and to fly away with a Panick-fear, the Greeks
and Mainiots pursued them, and killed above Four hundred of them; and the whole
Body of the rest were dispersed through the whole Country of the Morea; only
the Captain Pasha with some few Troops pitched his Camp in the Country near to
Passava, where he labored to gather his dispersed Troops.

Toward the end of May, June appeared in sight of old Navarin, which filled
all that Country round with great Consternation. The Galleasses and great Ships
led the Van, and served to shelter and protect the smaller Vessels in landing
their Men, which being entered on the Shore, were drawn up in Battalia by the
Art and Direction of that valiant General Count Conismarc, in sight of the
People of Navarin. Morosini, according to his accustomary Generosity, sent
first his Summons to the Garrison to Surrender, before he thought fit to make
use of his Force, The Venetians invest old Navarin.
in answer unto which, they desired time to consider until the next Morning;
and then they proposed a longer Term, with design only to protract the Time,
until they might receive Succors from the Seraskier, whom they knew to be not
far distant with a considerable Force; of which the Captain General well
considering, gave order to Count Conismarc to advance with a great part of the
Army toward the Town, and at the same time, he caused another Regiment to take
possession of a Rock which forms the Port; and to plant a formidable Battery
thereon; in which Matters whilst they were thus employed, the Besieged being
greatly affrighted, set forth a white Flag, and dispatched immediately in their
Admiral Gally, certain Deputies to treat on, The Inhabitants treat and
surrender.
and receive some reasonable Conditions upon the Surrender, which, as they
desired, were generously granted by the Captain General. In pursuance of which,
the Inhabitants were permitted to march forth with all their Bag and Baggage
and small Arms, being not above Four hundred in number, of which One hundred
were Soldiers, who were judged to be a sufficient Garrison to maintain a
Fortress so naturally strong, and situated on a high and almost inaccessible
Rock; and afterward according to the Articles, all these People were
transported to Alexandria in Egypt. Thus in a few Hours, without loss of Men,
or the least effusion of Blood, did this old Fort of Navarin fall into the
Hands of the Venetians, in which were found Forty three Pieces of brass Cannon,
with many Arms, much Ammunition and Provisions. The Captain General having
furnished the Place with a Garrison of an Hundred and sixty Men, under the
Command of Pietro Grioni, in Quality of Proveditor in ordinay, he immediately
blocked up the Port, and guarded the narrowest straight of it, to secure the
Passage for the more safe and easy Transport of Cannons, Mortar-pieces and
Provisions unto that Place, where the Camp was pitched with design to Attack
New Navarin, which was a Royal Fortress, and a place of greater Importance than
that of Old Navarin.

June at Night, the Galleys of Donado and Pizzamano, both Noble Venetians, were
the first to enter into the narrow Passage; on the first of which the General
Count Conismarc was embarked, who entered safely within the Port, tho several
Pieces of Cannon were fired at them from a Ravelin, which trolled the Shot
exactly on the Surface of the Water. These were followed by the Captain of the
Gulf, The Venetians enter the Port of Old Navarin.
with three other Galleys, who passed without any damage or loss; and on the
6th at Night, Cornaro, General of the Islands, entered with his four Galleys
also without other hurt, than the breaking some few Oars by a Shot from the
Ravelin: The Cannon and Mortar-pieces, and other Necessaries for an Attack were
first to be landed, which by the diligence, use and labor of the Slaves was
presently effected, notwithstanding the many Difficulties which intervened; and
a formal Siege in a short time laid by the Industry and Valor of Captain
General Morosini, and the happy Conduct of Count Conismarc, who had raised a
Work, on which eighteen Mortar-pieces were planted, carrying Bombs of Five
hundred pounds weight, and on another advantageous Ground had raised a Battery
of Twenty Pieces of Cannon, carrying Fifty pound Bullet.

Whilst these Matters were acting, a certain Greek was taken with Letters from
the Town, directed to the Seraskier, whereby they gave him to understand, That
tho Sefer Pasha, a valiant and resolute Soldier, was come to them, with a good
Recruit both of Men and Ammunition, whereby their Garrison amounted to a
Thousand Soldiers, and that nothing wanted either of Arms or Ammunition, yet
that it was impossible for them to hold out long, unless the Siege was raised
by a vigorous Force. Upon this Advice, General Conismarc resolved with the
greatest part of his Troops to advance into the Country, and engage the
Seraskier: Upon which Advice, Conismarc advances against the Seraskier.
the Turks were so far from designing to disturb the Siege, that they raised
their Camp, and retreated: Upon which also Conismarc thought fit to draw his
Troops off, and return to the Siege; the Turks defending themselves, and
refusing to Surrender upon any Summons or Force, which had hitherto been
applied, upon hopes as they conceived of receiving speedy Succor and Relief
from the Seraskier, concerning whom the Report was, that he was approaching
toward the Christian Camp: In the mean time, the Captain General formed all
the Trenches and Traverses for an Attack, and bomb'd the Town with Twenty
Mortar-pieces, and battered the Walls with six Pieces of Cannon, carrying Fifty
pounds weight of Bullet. The Report of the Seraskier's near approach, confirmed
by the Scouts and other Messengers, and that the Turks with a Body of 10.000
Men were come within six Italian Miles of the Leaguer; Count Conismarc with a
very strong Party advanced once again to meet and give them Battle, leaving the
Cavalier Alcenago, one of the Major Generals, with a sufficient Force to
maintain the Siege.

The next Day after, June.
Count Conismarc had risen from before the Town, being the 14th of June, they
found the Seraskier encamped with 10.000 Men, of which Two thousand were Horse,
in a very advantageous Post, which seemed very difficult to be forced:
Howsoever, the Venetians resolving to surmount all the Disadvantages with their
Valor, entered into the Valley by a very straight Passage, He engages the Turks,
where the Turks lay encamped, and forced them to engage in Battle, which
lasted for the space of two Hours in a dubious Condition, it not appearing as
yet to which side the Victory would incline: The Regiments of Corbon and
Visconti, which were Dragoons, behaved themselves very bravely, and sustaining
the heat of the Battle, the greatest part of the Loss fell on them; but the
Saxons, and overthrows them.
and the Troops of Brunswick coming to their assistance, with four small
Fieldpieces, forced the Enemy to quit the Field, and betake themselves to
flight, leaving about Five hundred dead upon the Place, with all their Tents
and Baggage, besides many of them are wounded, amongst which the Seraskier
himself was one; all which was performed by the wonderful Mercy of God, without
any considerable loss on the Christian side. The Joy of this Victory was
solemnized with Te Deum, and giving Thanks to God, and with many vollies of
Shot and Cannon, which wholly disanimated the Besieged, and put them into such
a distracted Consternation; that with more lenity than before, they began to
hearken to a second Summons, The Town Capitulates and Surrenders.
which the Captain General, to spare farther effusion of Blood, had been
pleased to send to them. After diverse Debates, and Articles proposed, the
Besieged declared themselves willing to lay down their Arms, and yield, on
Conditions that three Days should be given to the Garrison to march out with
their small Arms and Baggage; and that shipping should be given to the Garrison
and Inhabitants, to Transport them to the nearest Coast of Barbary. Whilst
these things were in agitation, it unfortunately happened that by some Accident
a Fire took in certain Houses, near a Magazine of Powder, which on a sudden
blew up, and killed an Hundred and Fifty Turks, with Sefer Pasha, the Commander
in chief of Navarin, and also six Christians, and about fifteen wounded without
the Walls of the City. The Turks fearing lest this Accident should be esteemed
as done with Design, came trembling before the Captain General, solemnly
protesting their Innocence in the Disaster, offering two other Hostages for
performance of the Articles agreed; and laying their Standards and Keys of
their City, at the feet of the Captain General, they were graciously received:
And accordingly at the time appointed, above Three thousand Persons were
embarked, of which, One thousand were capable to bear Arms, and were conveyed
over to the Coast of Barbary; The Venetians take Possession of the Town.
and the Venetians took Possession of the Town, and planted the Colors of St.
Mark on the Walls thereof.

It was not long after before the Fortress of Modon followed the same fortune;
for the Christan Forces losing no time to pursue their good Success, June the
Armada of Ships and Galleys showed themselves before Modon; at which the
Garrison not seeming to be dismayed, the Pasha, who Commanded in chief, Modon
attacked.
returned a resolute Answer, full of Bravery and Defiance, to the Summons sent
to him by the Captain General: Upon which the Approaches were begun, and the
Batteries raised, and Cannons played, and Bombs thrown by Direction of that
famous Engenier Mutoni, by which the Garrison being terrified, on the 7th of
July they spread a white Flag, and surrendered on Conditions, That in three
Days they should leave the Place, and march out with Arms and Baggage; which
accordingly was performed on the 10th of July, Modon surrendered.
all the Inhabitants to the number of Four thousand, of which, about One
thousand were Soldiers bearing Arms, abandoned their Habitations with sad and
dejected Countenances; and, as was agreed by Articles, were all Transported
into Barbary. The Town being seized, there were an Hundred Pieces of Cannon
found therein, of which, Ninety one were of Brass, besides great Quantities of
Powder and Ammunition, and plenty of Provisions.

Thus good Success attending the Venetian Arms, the Captain General resolved to
pursue his Conquests, whilst Fortune inclined to his side; and to proceed to
Napoli di Romania, a Town anciently Famous, and celebrated for its happy and
commodious Situation, in the most pleasant and richest part of all the Morea:
The Greeks call it Anaplia, and Ptolomy Nauplia, The Description of Napoli di
Romania.
being seated at the bottom of a Bay, called in former times Sinus Argolicus,
having a very spacious and secure Port for Shipping, and very commodious for
Trade. The Town it self is situated with great Advantages, being defended on
the one side by the Sea, and on the other by high and craggy Hills, having
Walls filled with Earth, much after the Modern Fortification; but without any
Ditch; only at the Gate to the Land-side, there is a kind of a Ditch about six
Paces broad, and about six Foot deep with Water; it has also something like a
Counter-scarp, but inconsiderable; it has no Drawbridge, but only some
Passages thereunto, which the Turks have made a little difficult to enter.

The Venetians having refreshed their Army for a while before Modon, ordered
Lorenzo Venier, Captain extraordinary, with three Ships of good force, to
Cruise within the Archepelago, where he discovered, between the Islands of
Nixia and Nicaria, a Fleet of Turkish Vessels called the Caravan, bound from
Egypt to Constantinople, plying to Wind-ward, nine of which belonged to
Constantinople, and four Merchant Ships from Rhodes and other Places, under
Convoy of four Tripoli Men of War: A Fight at Sea.
The Venetians immediately made up to them, and engaged with them for the space
of six Hours, with Damage on both sides, tho the Turks had much the worst, and
at length with help of the Night, were forced to take Refuge in the Port of
Rhodes, and the Venetians afterward retired into Trio, a Port on the Island of
Parisi; where having taken some fresh Water, and mended their Rigging, and
other damages sustained in the late Fight, they sailed again toward Rhodes;
and being on their way between Lemno, and the Shore of Caramania, they espied
Two great Ships, and a Sayke; and making up, and passing some Broad Sides upon
them, the greatest Ship ran ashore, and set her self a Fire; all the persons,
being 130, escaped a-shoar and saved themselves; the other Ship and the Sayke
were taken by the Venetians; the Ship which was burned, was called Nachis,
Commanded by Usuf of Rosetto, an Abyssine by Nation, very richly Laden; and the
Prizes taken were well Freighted with Rice, and other Provisions very
seasonable at that time for the support of the Venetian Forces, which by reason
of contrary Winds, were long detained at Modon; but by help of their Oars, and
assistance of the lighter Vessels, they arrived at Port Rogdi about Four Miles
distant from Napoli de Romania on the 30th day of July, from whence they had a
Prospect of the pleasant Gardens, and Fountains belonging to Assan Pasha: And
here having Landed the 200 Foot, and 20 Horse, The Venetians land near Napoli.
which every Gally carried, their Orders were to march to Mount Palamida, which
is higher than the Town, and commands it, being within Musket Shot; This Van
was the next day followed by the whole Army, between most pleasant Streams, and
Falls of Water.

The Town being Situated, as before mentioned, was defended by 3000 men, of
which 300 were lately sent in to recruit the Garrison; well fortified with
Cannon, and with sufficient Stores and Provisions for their Maintenance; the
Commander in Chief was Mustapha Pasha, with whom were Four Brothers, who were
all Beyes, as also a Disdar, which signifies the Commander of the Castle, a
Kadi or Judge, besides the Aga who Commanded the Recruits. Upon approach of the
Venetian Army, all those who lived in the out-skirts and lower parts of the
Town, amongst which were above 100 Families of Greeks, retired with their Goods
into the upper parts of the City, and of a Fortress amidst the Rocks called
Senonbolo. In the Port were Two Galleys unrigged, and disarmed, and all the
Slaves and Soldiers taken out and lodged on a Rock not far distant, to the
number of about 500 persons, one of which by the fall of a Bomb was sunk some
days after the beginning of the Siege, and an English Ship called the Mary,
which came from Alexandria, laden with Rice and Coffee, whose Masters Name was
Edward Wall, submitted her self to the favor of the Captain General: Besides
which there were also Two Galcots in the Port, one of 25 and another of 18
Banks or Seats for Oars, besides 40 Boats, or Barks of several sorts. In
Landing the Bombs and Mortar-pieces, with all the Train of Artillery, they
found little or no difficulty, or opposition, though the Seraksier showed himself
twice at a distance, as if he had intended to have disturbed them in their
Works, and raising Batteries; nor did the Seraskier for that present do more,
than only to fortify his Camp, The Castle Argos.
which he had pitched near Argos, a Castle about 3 hours Journey distant from
Napoli di Romania, the Way to which is all upon a plain, situate on a high
Hill, at the foot of which is a Town containing about a hundred Houses, the
Inhabitants of which, being for the most part Rich and Wealthy, had carried up
the best of their Household Stuff and Moveablss into the Castle above, which is
well defended by its natural Situation; it had also 8 Iron Guns, and 10
Petreroes, some small quantities of Provisions in it, with a Cistern, not very
well furnished with plenty of Water.

On the 3d of August, August 1686.
the Galeasses and Ships appeared in sight of Napoli di Romania, and forthwith
Landed all the Horse and Foot, which were embarked thereon: And on the same day
a Feluca belonging to Mahomet Pasha, a Bey, or Commander of Seven Galleys,
deserted, and came into the Service of the Venetians; upon the Feluca were 7
Greeks, who gave intelligence, That the Captain- Pasha having received advice
of the arrival of the Venetian Fleet, had in Two Nights time entered 300 Foot
into Napoli: But to prevent the like for the future, several Galleys with Four
Felucas were detatched to guard and defend that Coast, and thereby to hinder
and intercept all succors on that side.

But because it was necessary also to dislodge the Seraskier, The Venetians
march against the Seraskier.
who on the other side appeared with several parties of Horse, and gave
frequent disturbances to them in the Lines and Trenches which were then
forming; the Captain General and General Chinixmarch after due deliberation
concerning the manner, resolved to give them Battle: To which end 2000 men
selected out of the Ships, and Galleys, most of them being Volunteers, and
Soldiers of Fortune, were landed in a Creek, or covert place under the Conduct
of Col. Magnanini, who was ordered to take a compass in the Night, and fall on
the Turks in the Rear, whilst the main Body of the Army charged them in the
Van: In the Morning Count Chinixmarch, August 16.
having left 1500 Italian Soldiers in the Trenches, under the Command of
Sargeant Major Count Repeta, advanced two miles with his Army drawn up in good
order to meet the Turks on the Plain; the Seraskier seemed at first very ready
and resolute to join Battle, advancing with a strong Body of 3000 Horse, and
therewith to break into the Venetians; The Turks Retreat,
but finding a stout Repulse, they made a stand; and fearing lest they should
be attacked in the Rear by the Marine Regiments, they made a Retreat; and
taking up their Tents and Baggage, they marched away with all the Order that
their have would permit: And quit Argos.
The People in Argos seeing the Seraskier and his Army, betake themselves to
Flight, resolved to accompany them, and marched toward Corinth, where they
arrived the next day, having lodged the Night before at a Village called
Centera. In the Skirmish about 200 Turks were killed and wounded, with very
little loss on the Christian side: After which having plundered the Castle
Argos of all the Goods which the Turks had left therein, in which they found
about 60 small Boxes of Powder, they returned back again to their Trenches and
Siege as before. In the mean time the City was burning in several places, being
Fired by the Bombs and Carcasses which were thrown into it from the Palamida,
and the Walls which were of Stone built after the ancient manner, were battered
on all sides by the Cannon, which they were not able to resist; but that which
caused the greatest Consternation in the City, and did the severest Execution,
A Bomb blows up the Powder in the Town.
was the fall of a Bomb into the Magazine of Powder, which blowing up beat all
the Houses down which were near it on every side, killed many People, and
filled with Earth and Ruins the chief Cistern which supplied all the Town with
Water, so that the Defendants wanted now both Powder and Water, Two very
principal necessaries for Life and Defense.

The Captain General conceiving, that after such a loss, the besieged would
scarce have encouragement to defend themselves much longer, resolved to try
their inclinations by sending to them his Interpreter Fortis, with a Letter
full of persuasive Motives, and good Articles, and Conditions, which should be
performed upon surrender of the City; and seeing that their Seraskier had been
beaten and durst not approach to give them Relief, The Venetians offer
conditions to the Town,
they were exhorted before it was too late, to accept of the Mercy and Clemency
which was then offered to them. To these Summons the Governor without much
consideration returned a speedy Answer, Their Answer.
That they were very sensible that it was for their Sin, that God had chastised
and punished them; howsoever their Trust was, That God would deliver them, to
whose Will and Divine Providence they remained with entire resignation. The
Bombs and Batteries continuing to do great Execution, by the obscurity of the
Night, several Greeks and Rene^g^^es made an escape our of the Town, (...) came
to the Captain General, agreeing together in their Reports, that there was
scarce a House in the Town which had not been damaged by the Bombs or Canon;
and above 30 Houses burnt down to the Ground, 22 Churches and Chapels ruined
with their Granaries, and Stores for Provisions: Many were the slain and
wounded, and the people forced to drink brackish Water; and amidst all this
misery and confusion, the poor Women in a distracted manner were running about
the Streets, with tears and sighs, and screeks. Howsoever the Governor.
Mustapha Pasha seemed to remain still firm and resolute to hold out unto the
last, and to lose his Life for the sake of his Country. The Seraskier gives
hopes of Relief.
In the mean time the Seraskier fortified his Camp about Corinth, endeavoring
there to increase his Army; and to encourage the Besieged, he frequently caused
certain Bodies to be seen from the Town, and parties of Horse to advance near
to the Trenches; which tho they did nothing, yet it supported the Spirits of
the Defendants with some little glimmerings of hope. Whilst matters were in
this posture, Admiral Duodo being returned from the Coast of Barbary and
Tripoli, where he had landed the People at Modon; he joined the rest of the
Fleet, as did also the same day Captain Pisani with 8 Ships from Argentiera.

The Turks continued still to defend themselves, tho their offense was very
weak, now and then firing a Bomb, whilst the Venetians plied them continually
with Carcasses and Bombs, having by this time spent at least 3500 on the place:
the Batteries also played almost without any intermission, and the Lines and
Approaches daily drawn nearer to the place; and they began now to throw Bombs
into the Castle, which lies upon the Seaside. This Castle is situate on a high
Rock, A Castle near the Sea.
with many Sands and shallow places round about it, so that it is impossible
for any Vessel to approach near to it: The Walls are very high with some
Bastions, and the place fortified with Seventeen Pieces of Brass Cannon, and
Seven Iron Guns, and a Mortar-piece to throw Bombs; it was supplied also with a
good Cistern of Water, and Garrisoned with a hundred Foot Soldiers commanded by
an Aga.

The Christians continuing still with indefatigable Labor, and fearless
Hazards to press the Besieged, entered the Ditch of the Town on the 23d, which
Adventure cost the Life of the Cavalier Alzenago, one of the Major Generals.
About that time also several others dyed of the Camp Disease; August.
namely, Colonel Visconti, Major Cleist, as did also Signior Barbon Bragadino a
Noble Venetian; and Count Charles, Nephew of General Chinixmarch, a young
Gentleman of great hope; likewise Girolamo Ghirardi, Captain of his Guard. On
the 29th by break of Day, the Seraskier, with part of his Army, The Seraskier
shows himself, and attacks the Christians in their Prenches.
showed himself on the Hill which descends toward the Right Hand of the Line,
having his Left-wing reinforced with a thousand Leventz or Soldiers of the
Marine Regiments sent by the Captain Pasha; which having joined the Army but a
few hours before, they all in good order of Battle, being Ten thousand strong
with Horse, and Foot, descended into the Plain, near unto the Line, charging
with their usual cries of Allah, Allah, and much fury on the Soldiers who
defended the Trenches: But General Chinixmarch had with such admirable Order
and Art so well disposed the Militia, that they repulsed the Enemy; and then
Two thousand Sea-Soldiers, by Order of the Captain General, coming to their
succor, they put the Enemy into great confusion; and the Captain General
himself at the same time coming in person, with some Troops of select men, The
Turks put to Flight.
wholly turned the fortune of that day's Fight (which for Three hours had
continued doubtful) to the Christian side, and caused the Turks to betake
themselves to a shameful Flight, leaving Fourteen hundred of their Companions
behind them, killed, or wounded: In which Engagement the Venetians lost not
more than Three hundred and Fifty men, killed and wounded. General Chinixmarch
had his Horse shot under him, but he soon remounted another, and with great
Vivacity, and Courage was present at all places, where the danger was most
pressing: The Princes of Brunswick, and Turene, exposed themselves like brave
Soldiers in all places which required their help and encouragement; and having
thus discomfited the Seraskier's Army, and caused them to withdraw in disorder
from the City, the Captain General to lose no time, left the pursuit of the
Enemy, and returned to the Siege, causing the Batteries from all sides to play
on the Town; and to terrify the Defendants, they showed many Heads of the Turks
ranked in File on the points of their Lances. The Besieged having seen the
Seraskier, in whom was their greatest hope, routed and defeated before their
Eyes, grew desperate of any relief or succor from thence, which caused them to
display diverse white Flags on the Walls, upon which all acts of Hostility
ceased; and Two Turks came forth from the Town; and being conducted to the
presence of the Captain General, The Besieged capitulate.
they presented a Paper to him, subscribed by the Pasha, who was Governor of
the City, declaring his readiness to make surrender thereof, provided they
might have free liberty to march out with their Arms and Baggage, Troy, or to
the Castles in the Dardanelli or Hellespont. And that the Two Turkish Galleys
then in Port might also be freed, with their Chiurma, or Slaves and Equipage,
which (as we have said) were retired into the Rocks, and fast places near the
Town: But this latter would not be allowed, or granted by the Captain General,
nor any thing more, than what had been accorded lately to Modon and Navarin.
The first step unto all which, was the Delivery of the Castle, situate on a
Rock within the Sea, into which a Venetian Garrison was put immediately; and
therein were found Seventeen Pieces of Brass Canon, and Seven of Iron, with a
large Mortar-piece to throw Bombs; after this Eight Hostages were required of
the most principal Turks of the City; And surrender.
and then the other Articles were performed, which related to the Embarking the
Soldiers and Inhabitants, who were accordingly Shipped and Transported to the
Dardanelli, the apperance of which so affrighted all the Coast at first, that
the Alarm ran as far as Constantinople, and put them there into that
Consternation, of which we have before made a Relation.

Thus was this and other famous Fortresses of Greece, which had for many years
remained in the Ottoman power, and withstood great and considerable Forces, in
a few Months subjected to the Christian Arms, by the Valor and Bravery of the
Captain General Morosini, by the admirable Conduct of Count Chinixmarch, and
the courage of those noble Princes of Brunswick and Turene, amongst which the
German Soldiery, and all others did greatly signalize themselves in all their
Achievements. And thus we shall put an end to the Successes of the Year 1686,
which have terminated so gloriously in honor of the Christian Arms, by which
the Turks were reduced to that low and miserable condition, of which they were
never before sensible, nor never accustomed unto, which made them the less able
to bear the Evil, nor endure the Remedy.

ANNO, 1687.
NEver had the Ottoman Empire, since the time, that they first passed out of
Asia over into Europe, been under that Eclipse and in that low of Ebb of
Fortune as at present: And yet this following Year, was so much more unlucky
and fatal to them than the former; as if their Mischiefs would not have ended,
but with the total Ruin, and Downfall of their Empire: To prevent which, the
Grand Seignior meditated on Thoughts of Peace, and sent a Chiaus (a thing which
the Turks never practiced before) to tender Articles to the Emperor, which were
not received, nor other Answer given, than that his Imperial Majesty could not
so much as enter into a Treaty without the consent of Venice and Poland, their
Allies. And tho the Turks endeavored to avail themselves by that Method, yet
they thought, that the best way to facilitate that proceeding, was with their
Swords in their Hands, and by an appearance in the Field with the most
formidable Army they were able to make; The Turks prepare for War.
to which end all Otoracks, who are Milites immeriti, or Men excused from the
War, on account of past Services with a dead pay, (as they call it) of which
there may be Forty thousand in the Empire, were all summoned to appear in the
next Campaign, and forced to the War with the greatest rigor, and on pain of
Death, besides which new Levies were ordered to be made in all Parts of Asia;
and particularly at Smyrna, and in the Parts adjacent; Six hundred Soldiers
were raised at the charge of the Citizens and Inhabitants; besides which eight
or nine Millions being charged to be levied in the lesser Asia: The Quota taxed
on Smyrna, came to a Hundred thousand Dollars, which Sum not being to be found
amongst them, and perhaps scarce the Moiety thereof, the Cappugi-bashee, who
was sent to Collect the Money, carried away most of the principal Turks in that
Town to Constantinople; Taxes rigorously imposed.
where having represented their Poverty, and inability to pay so great a Tax,
it was moderated and brought down to one half, or to One hundred and five
Purses: These proceedings may evidently convince the World, that the
conceptions of the World generally formed of the vast Riches of the Grand
Seignior's Treasury were imaginary, seeing, that it was so exhausted in a few
Years, as to force the Government to those rigorous Courses, and unusual
methods of Oppression, which can scare be repeated without a total Desolation,
or extreme Misery of that Country.

These Taxes joined to the Discontents of the People, made all things uneasy at
the Ottoman Court, Cabals at the Port.
where it was impossible to prevent the Cabals, and liberty of Speech, which
the Soldiers and others freely used in public Discourse; to suppress which,
and to restrain the Mutinies, which were daily expected; it was reported that
the Grand Vizier designed to leave Belgrade, and March back to Constantinople:
But the Grand Seignior consulting with his principal and wisest of his
Confidents, laid his Commands upon him not to remove from the Confines, but
rather to keep a watch on the Motions of the Enemy, than to attend to domestic
Seditions, which the Government was at all times able to appease; The Vizier
ordered to stay at Belgrade.
and to quiet the mind of the Vizier, they gave him to understand, that he was
entirely in the favor of his Prince, who was very sensible, that the
misfortunes of the last year, were not to be attributed either to his ill
Conduct, or want of Courage (as did appear by a Writing under the Hands of the
principal Officers of the Army for his justification) but rather to the divine
Justice of God, who was pleased for the Sins of the People to abate the Pride,
and Glory of the Ottoman Empire. By this Letter the Grand Vizier being well
satisfied of his Master's good Inclinations toward him, and strengthened in his
hopes, that he should yet keep his Head for some time longer, or at least until
the next misfortune, he altered his intention of returning to the Port, and
resolved to pass his Winter at Belgrade, where his Presence was chiefly
necessary for keeping the Army together, and more entire on the Frontiers:
Moreover, during the rigor of this Winter season, he continued to fortify
Belgrade, and gave Orders to erect a Fort on the Danube, for better security of
Peter Waradin, and dispatched diverse Convoys with Ammunition, and Provisions
for the Succor and Relief of Great Waradin, Giulia, Lippa, Zeno and Temeswar.

In the mean time the Imperialists pressed Apafi Prince of Transylvania, to
Declare himself entirely for the Emperor, and receive his Forces to
Winter Quarters in his Country: But that Prince, who had been always very
crafty and subtle in his Negotiations, did so possess the Emperor's Generals,
with the danger which he himself should incur, and the disadvantage which would
accrue to the Emperor thereby, A Treaty concluded with the Deputies of
Transylvania.
whose benefit it would rather be for him to remain in a Neutrality, That Count
Caraffa admitted the policy of his Plea to be good, and concluded a Treaty with
the Deputies of Transylvania on certain Articles; as namely, That for
subsistence of the Troops, which should be put into the Frontier places of
their Country, Michael Apafi their Prince, should furnish them every Month with
Ten thousand Bushels of Wheat and Oats, for which one Moiety should be paid in
ready Money, and that the other should be carried to, and laid up in the
Magazines, or Storehouses at reasonable Rates, which was of more advantage to
the Emperor, being thereby disobliged from the trouble and charge of fetching
and transporting such quantities of Provisions from Countries far distant from
the places where they were to be used. And Secondly, it was agreed to give
Winter Quarters to the Imperial Troops; upon which General Veterani Ordered and
Assigned the several places, and Count Caraffa marched from Zatmar to Kalo,
giving Directions to General Heusler diligently to observe the motions of the
Garrison at Waradine, and rigorously to exact the Contributions of that Country
for maintenance of the Troops.

The Grand Vizier on the other side, who was a person of quick vivacity and
readiness of parts, The Vizier prepares for War, and sends to the Tartars.
(as we have before declared) finding that the Proposals made to the Emperor
for a Peace, were not likely to prevail; he used all imaginable diligence which
was possible to prosecute the War, living in hopes that the following year
would prove more auspicious to the Ottoman Arms, than those lately past. In the
first place, frequent Messages were sent to the Tartar Han, to hasten their
speedy march, and begin the Campaign early, and with one Body to join with the
Turkish Forces, and with another to infest the Borders and Confines of Poland;
and to make the diversion there greater and more violent, endeavors were used
to raise divisions and jealousies between the Cosacks, who were Subjects to the
Boles, and those to the Moscovites, sending rich Presents, and kind Salutes and
Promises, to invite them to Desert and Revolt from their Princes, and take part
with the Ottoman Forces. But this design miscarried, and took no Effect by the
happy arrival of Two Ambassadors from the Czar's of Moscovy at the Court of
Poland; where having occasion of their Union and Friendship, The Czar sends
Ambassadors to Poland.
nothing was omitted to gain their Alliance, tho their demands were so
exorbitant, that nothing but a present necessity could have gained their
concession.

The Vizier being disappointed on that side, looked closely to his business in
the lower Hungary; for having lost Quinque Ecclesiae, Siklos, Capiswar, and a
great part of the Bridge of Esseck being burnt, the strong Fortress of Sigeth
seemed to be in some danger, The Vizier endeavors to relieve Sigeth.
and lie most exposed to the design of the Enemy: To prevent which, the Vizier
caused the Tartars to advance and pass the River Drove, and so to join with the
Turks in the City of Esseck; the Tartars, who are the most expert Soldiers in
the World for destroying and laying waste a Country, having passed the Drove,
left nothing for those who were to follow after them, carrying away all the
Inhabitants with them; and with what Provisions they had plundered, they
supplied the small Garrisons which remained to the Turks on the Banks of the
Drove; and especial care above all was taken to furnish Sigeth with all sorts
of Forage and Provisions, so that it was made the chief Magazine of all that
Country; for better defense and security of which, several new Boats were built
to repair the Bridge before Esseck, and on the sides of the River diverse small
Forts were raised, on which Forty Pieces of Canon were Mounted, to prevent all
Incursions of the Enemy, and Attacks on Sigeth; during which season of a
rigorous Winter, the Tartars played their parts to hinder all Convoys laden with
Forage and Provisions to supply the Fortresses, which the Christians had lately
conquered. Howsoever by the diligence of Thinghen, Sergeant-General of
Battalia, and the Governor of Quinque Ecclesiae, joining themselves to the
Regiment, commanded by Baron de Pace, they agreed to disappoint the aforesaid
design of the Enemy: To which end having detatched Two hundred and Fifty
select, or choice Foot, and Five hundred well-disciplined Horse and Dragoons,
led by Brave and well Experienced Commanders, they sallied out of their
Quarters about Sunset, and the Horse for better Expedition mounting the Foot
behind them, they made such haste, that before day in the Morning, they lodged
themselves secretly near the Town of Sigeth; A surprise given to Sigeth.
and without any noise conveying themselves into the Suburbs, about dawning of
the day set them on Fire; which took with so much fury, that in a short time
Three hundred Houses were all in a Flame; the which more increased the
Consternation of the Inhabitants and Soldiery, because that many of those
Houses were the Storehouses, in which were laid up vast quantities of
Provisions. Many People surprised with the sudden and unexpected Fire, were
smothered in the smoke, and perished in the flames; others at a distance betook
themselves with great Confusion to their Arms, The Fear and Consternation there.
and not knowing as yet where the Enemy or the Danger was, Fired their Canon at
random, they knew not where, nor on whom: The Day coming on, the light
discovered the Enemy, and the Danger in which they were; howsoever in all this
Action the Turks killed but Four Troopers, Three Dragoons, and a Corporal of
Foot, and leaving their Houses in the Town, retired to the Castle, which gave
the Imperialists an opportunity to set Fire to the City, and to burn some
hundreds of Wagons all laden with Provisions, designed for the Camp, and
Relief of Alba Regalis. With this success the Christians retired, driving away
with them some few heads of Cattle, a small quantity of Provisions, and such
Plunder as could be taken, and carried away in so hasty an Action: To recover
which the Turks made a fally and attacked them in the Arrear, to which, shame
and confusion of face gave them Courage; but the Conquerors, whose Valor
increased according to their success, made a stand, and so assailed the Enemy,
that notwithstanding all the considerations of shame, and desire of revenge,
they carried away their Spoils, and honor of the Victory.

The happy consequence of this Action.
The consequence of this success, (tho the Action in it self was not very great)
was yet very considerable; for thereby the intercourse between Quinque
Ecclesiae, Siklos, and other conquered Towns was rendered more free and secure,
and not only the Peasants of those Countries brought their Provisions with
readiness and safety to the Market; but even the Rascians, who were Inhabitants
of the Town of Sigeth, came voluntarily in, and submitted themselves to the
Protection of the Emperor. This Action served likewise to disappoint and
overthrow the design of the Commanders in Esseck, who intended an incursion of
Turks and Tartars in Two separate Bodies; but their Provisions in Sigeth (on
which they depended for maintenance of their Forces) being consumed, that
resolution was put off till a fairer opportunity. Howsosoever the Imperial
Forces remained Vigilant and Watchful on their Guard, having received frequent
Alarums, that the Turks resolved on some sudden Enterprise to avenge
themselves, and repair their Honor; which General Thinghen, and Colonel Pace
greatly suspecting, retired to Quinque Ecclesiae, from whence they sent and
distributed considerable quantities of Corn and Flower to Kaposwar, The
Christian Garrisons supplied and relieved.
and other places for sustenance of the Garrisons, giving special charge to the
Governors thereof to be intent and watchful to prevent any surprise of the
Enemy: And for better security thereof, the Commissary General Count Rabata
farther supplied all those places with Victuals, there being no want amongst
them of Arms or Ammunition. Care likewise was taken to repair the Breaches at
Quinque Ecclesiae, in as good a form and manner as the Season of the Year would
permit: But because the Fortress of Siklos lay much exposed to the attack of
the Enemy, being the most Frontier Garrison, they raised with admirable
industry and diligence a half Moon, which they encompassed with Palisadoes, the
Season of the Year nor time permitting to fortify it with a Wall, or any other
Work. Whilst things were thus tranfacted, and places secured on the Frontiers,
no care or circumspection was omitted for conservation of Buda, though as yet the
Walls and Breaches made in it the last Siege were not repaired, neither time
nor season of the year, Buda cleansed of Rubbish.
and perhaps other great employments, not giving time to so great a Work, which
perhaps we may find neglected for some years afterward; howsoever they
labored for the present to clear the Ditches, fill up the Trenches, level the
Batteries, Breast-works, and other Redoubts; carrying away the Rubbish and
Ruins of Houses and Buildings, which had been beaten down, and demolished by
the vast quantities of Bombs and Carcasses which had been thrown into the Town
during the last Siege: In which Work great quantities of Arms, which lay buried
in the Ruins were discovered, Rich Goods found in Vauits.
with Head-pieces, Corslets, and Semyters of value: And in digging the Cellars
and Vaults, they found many Chests filled with rich Housholdstuff, with Trunks
and Boxes of Writings and ancient Records, amongst which, as was Reported, were
the Charter and Privileges given to that City, with a Register of all passages
which had happened there, since the time that it first submitted to the
Dominion of the Turk.

Nor were the Turks in the mean time idle and remiss on their part; The Pasha
endeavors to secure Alba Regalis.
for the Pasha of Alba Regalis suspecting that that City would be the next to
be attacked, and made the Work and Design of the ensuing Campaign; he
studiously applied the Soldiers and Workmen to raise new Outworks, and repair
the old inward Fortifications, which by time, and the neglect of his
Predecessors were much decayed; and to expedite and quicken this Work, the
Soldiers, besides their ordinary Pay, were encouraged by daily Wages, such as
was commonly given to Day-labourers. But to disturb this Work by frequent
Alarums, a party of Hussars were detached to watch the Avenues about Alba
Regulis, and sometimes to appear in sight of the Town, and intercept those who
should go in or out from thence: Accordingly posting themselves in a private
way, it was their fortune to meet and surprise a party of Turks, of which they
killed some, and took others, from whom they understood that they had been
dispatched by the Pasha there, to carry Letters and Advices to the Grand Vizier
at Belgrade: In like manner they encountered another party coming from Zigeth
to Alba Regalis, to whom only they gave chase, the Turks saving themselves by
the swiftness of their Horses. Howsoever by the Letters which were intercepted,
they came to have a perfect knowledge of the state of that City, and the
intentions of the Vizier; It was therein declared, That the Garrison consisted
of Four thousand Fighting men; but much discouraged, and in great fears and
consternation, The State of Alba Regal^.
to think that they were to be made the next Sacrifice to the fury of the
Christian Arms. Notwithstanding which, the Pasha encouraged the People of Alba
Regalis assuring them that he had received late Letters from the Grand Vizier
at Belgrade, by which he promised them such a speedy relief both of Men,
Provisions, Ammunition, and Money, as might enable them to drive the Enemy from
the Walls: And that he was sending a very strong Force to the Frontiers of
Sclavonia, Croatia, and the River Dravus, under Command of several Brave and
well-experienced Pashas.

The Season of the Year much favored this design; for the Rivers, Marshes, and
Fenns were so Frozen up, that the Turks found an easy passage to all parts,
which they intended to relieve: Of which the Imperialists being very
apprehensive, feared lest the Enemy, who was got together in great Numbers at
Esseck, should attempt some of the conquered places, and thereby making a
diversion, should introduce their Convoys into Sigeth, Canisia, and Alba
Regalis. But the place, which of any other was straightned most for want of
Provisions, was Agria, called by the Hungarians Erla, situate on a River of
that Name, which about Three Leagues from thence empties it self into the
Tibiscus. This place of it self was but small, but very well Fortified; It is
Recorded in Histories that the first Siege which the Turks laid to it was in
the Year 1552. with an Army of Sixty thousand Men, when it was not strong
either by Art or Nature; but the weakness thereof was supplied by the Courage
and Bravery of the Garrison, consisting only of Two thousand Hungarian
Soldiers, and about Sixty Hungarian Nobles and Gentlemen, who had fled in
thither with their Wives and Children, Agria.
and best of their Riches and Movables, and had sworn to defend the place to
the utmost extremity; and to let the Turks understand this resolution, they
raised a Coffin above the Walls in public View, for an Evidence or Sign, that
they would choose Death rather than Captivity. Many great things are said of the
Defense of this place, which the Turks battered for the space of Forty days
incessantly, with Fifty Pieces of Cannon, notwithstanding which the Defendants
abated nothing of their Courage; for tho the Turks assaulted them Three times
in one day, yet they were as often repulsed, and lost about Eight thousand men.
The Women also signalized their Valor above the Nature of their Sex in all
these Actions; amongst which (as is reported) there was one, who fought bravely
in sight both of her Mother, and her Husband; but the latter being killed, the
Mother advised her Daughter to carry away the Dead Corpse; but she Answered,
That she could not do it, until she had first revenged his Death; and thereupon
taking up the Sword and Buckler of her dead Husband, she fell upon the Turks
with such fury, that having killed Three of them with her own hand, she
returned to perform the last Office to her deceased Husband. Several other
particular Actions of this Nature, are recounted of the Siege of this Fortress,
which in fine relieved it self, and caused the Turks to raise their Siege, whom
they pursued so vigorously in the Rear, that they killed great Numbers of them,
and took most of their Baggage. And thus did this City continue in the hands of
the Hungarians until the year 1596, when it was taken by Mahomet the Third,
then in person before it, and has ever since that time remained in the hands
of the Turks; who now hearing that that place was in great distress for want of
Provisions; and knowing the importance of it is Situation, endeavored to send
it relief by all ways and means which were possible.

The Pasha, who Quartered on the Frontiers, was commanded by the Grand Vizier
to put Succors into the place; and he also being a good Soldier, and sensible
of the importance thereof, called a Council of War, to consider in what manner
this Action might most effectually be performed; considering whereupon, it was
moved, Proposals how Agria might be supplied.
That since Tekeli had made several instances to be recruited with Men and
Provisions for attempting some great Exploit, That he should accordingly be
reinforced with a moderate Number of Tartars, and some Turks, and that the care
and incumbence of that great work should be committed to his Charge and Conduct.

Count Caraffa, and General Heusler being advised of the Design, assembled a
considerable force of their Troops together, They are prevented.
and assailed the Enemy near to great Waradin on a sudden, and in a manner of
surprise; the Tartars, who are not much used to make a stand against well
formed Troops, were the first who betook themselves to a speedy Flight, and
were soon followed by Tekeli and his men; howsoever several were killed on the
place, and some Prisoners taken: And so both Caraffa, and Heuster returned back
to Debrezin, with the Forage and Spoil which they had gained in that Conflict.
This misfortune did not much abate the Spirit of Tekeli; for having been lately
supplied with a Sum of Money, he made new Levies of Men, and many of his old
Soldiers who had formerly deserted him, returned to him again; so that he
seemed to recover the Credit and Reputation which he had formerly lost; and
having joined his Forces to those of a Pasha on the Frontiers, Tekeli with
Money makes Levies.
and to a rabble of Soldiers, who in a tumultuary manner followed his Colors;
he Encamped sometimes near Temiswar, then about Giulia, and then near Waradin;
from all which places he sent Parties abroad to discover the posture of the
Enemy, and to spy out how they might most securely succor Agria, for which the
Grand Vizier was extremely pressing. Nor were the Christians less Vigilant to
Observe and Watch the Motions of the Turks, and of Tekeli; whence it was that
several Parties meeting each other, frequent Skirmishes happened, in all which
the Hussars and Germans gained the advantage: So that Tekeli finding the
difficulty of carrying relief to Agria, and other places, made Incursions into
the Countries subjected to the Emperor, marching with a Body of Turks, Tartars,
and a Rabble of new raised Soldiers, which served rather for Guides than
Combatants. In their way they burnt a Village of no great moment; and passed
into the Confines of the Town of Segedin; Enters into the Country near Segedin.
from whence being discovered by the Hussars of the Garrison, they took the
Alarm; and being joined to a Body of German Foot, they made a sally on the
Enemy, and charged them so furiously that Tekeli's new raised Soldiers, who
were placed in the Front, immediately gave back, Is Defeated and Wounded.
and pressed with fear, rushed into the Body of the Turks, which put them into
such disorder, that they were forced to Retreat with considerable loss: Tekeli
himself being wounded with a Musket Shot in the Knee, was forced for his Cure
to betake himself to the Fortress of Temiswar. In the mean time his Princess
being resolved to defend her Town of Mongatz, did not only fortify her self
therein with a stout Garrison, and supplies of Ammunition and Provisions; but
sent several Parties of Horse from the Garrison, to destroy all the Countries
round with Fire, and Sword, and thereby to cut off all possibility of
subsistence from the Imperialists; who having Advice thereof, detached a Party
of Dragoons of the Regiment of Magni; who having the fortune to Encounter the
Enemy, gave them a total Defeat, killing Fifty of them on the place, of which
their Commander was one, and Six Prisoners were taken.

Whilst matters passed thus in the Upper Hungary, the City of Agria suffered
much for want of Provisions, which greatly discouraged both the Inhabitants and
the Garrison, Forty men of Agria desert and join with the Christians.
so that many deserted the place; and about Forty of them came to Onoth,
declaring themselves to be Christians, and desirous to be received into the
Church by Baptism. But the Imperial Commanders being doubtful of the sincere
Faith of these new Converts, were not very forward to receive them into an
Association; of which they being sensible, did voluntarily join themselves to a
Party then going abroad upon a discovery, and so bravely behaved themselves in
a Skirmish which they happened to have with the Turks, that they killed many of
their Brethren with their own hands, and thereby gave evident proofs of their
real Conversion.

All this while no Garrisons were succored; for not only Agria was in
miserable want, Grand Vizier orders relief.
but likewise all the Towns in the Lower Hungary, Sclavonia, and Croatia,
suffered Scarcity and Famine. The Grand Vizier being in great care and pain for
those places, sent strict Commands from Belgrade to the Commanders at Esseck,
to supply all those places with necessary Provisions; for Transportation of
which the Danube being frozen up, there was no other way left than to carry all
by Wagons over the Snow, and Ice; for the Rivers, Lakes, Fenns, and Marshes
being hard Frozen, were seldom strong enough to bear Carriages and Wagons, by
the most direct and nearest way. And yet such had been the misery of the late
Campaign, that the Countries were laid waste and desolate; all the Provisions
and Forage being so destroyed, that to sustain the Famished Towns, and
Countries, Supplies were to be fetched from far distant places: To perform
which, the Commander of Esseck labored with the utmost of his Endeavors, and
dispeeded great Numbers of Wagons laden with all sorts of Ammunition and
Provisions, to the wanting-places under a strong Convoy. The Imperialists
having Advice hereof, made a Detatchment of Three hundred Musketeers, The
Christians endeavor to prevent it.
Three Troops of Curassiers belonging to the Regiment of Newburg, and about Two
thousand Four hundred Soldiers, which were Hussars, and Heyducks: The News of
the Motion of these Forces soon Fled to Canisia, Sigeth, and other places;
where being in some fear for the safety of their Convoy, those of Sigeth sent
out a strong Party, placing them in Ambush about Two English Miles distant from
the Town. The Convoy proceeded with what haste they could, and the Baron d
Orlich pursued them as fast, and overtook them near the place where the Ambush
was planted, and charged them so furiously, that he totally Defeated them,
Killed One hundred and Twenty on the place, dispersed the rest, and made
himself Master of all the Carriages.

In the mean time Tekeli was neither idle or negligent in his Arms or Plots;
for he had employed his Engines in diverse parts to solicit the Citizens and
Inhabitants of Bartfeld, Esperies, and Cassovia to a Revolt; Plots contrived by
Tekeli are discovered
and having droven out the Garrisons, he promised to supply them with a more
numerous Force: These Offers, and the Ways and Methods being happily
discovered, several were accused for Accomplices in the Plot; amongst which a
certain Judge whom Tekeli had formerly employed at Cassovia, was seized and
imprisoned: Likewise several Gentlemen and Magistrates of those places were
known to have entertained Correspondencies with those of Mongatz and Agria; and
that Tekeli had remitted considerable Sums of Money to them for execution of
their design. The Judge being put to the Question on the Wrack, accused Two and
twenty to have been engaged with him in the Plot. And another Conspiracy
against the Life of Count Caraffa was likewise discovered, in which above
Seventy persons, and some of Quality, were engaged. One Radwanski, a principal
Author of the late Commotions was put to the Torture; and after he had Signed a
Confession, dyed by the Anguish of the Wrack; howsoever the Sentence pronounced
against him, Offenders are punished.
was executed on his Dead Corpse, which was to have his Hand and Head cut off,
and his Four Quarters disposed in diverse places of the City. In like manner
Palassi, Sekel, Barrock, and Concoud, were Beheaded and Quartered: As also the
same day one Besseck, a Counselor of Newsol, and Weber, a public Notary,
Tascias, and several incurred the same fate; and so had also Feldmeyer, a
Commissary at War, but that he Killed himself in Prison; howsoever that did not
hinder, but that the Sentence was Executed on his Dead Body. To examine this
Plot, and sift into the bottom of it, so employed Count Caraffa, as for some
time it deferred the design of Bombing Agria; and indeed so many were the
Conspirators, that great Executions were acted in diverse places, and many also
received pardon from the Mercy and Clemency of the Emperor; for that his
Imperial Majesty had been well assured, there were considerable Numbers of poor
innocent People engaged in the Plot rather by delusion, and example of others,
than by a Natural Spirit and inclination to a Revolt.

Tho Caraffa was otherwise employed, yet there wanted not other active Officers
in the Field to watch the Motions of the Enemy, and take the Advantages which
did present. Baron Orlick was commanded to burn the Bridge, which the Turks had
built over the Drove near Esseck; and accordingly marched away from Quinque
Ecclesiae, Baron Orlick defeats a Party of the Turks.
with Six Companies drawn out from the Regiments of Montecuculi, and
Herberville; and being on his march, he received Advice that Eight hundred
Janisaries, and Two hundred Spahees selected out of the Flour of the best
Ottoman Troops, were detached from Esseck, with a design to intercept a Convoy
appointed for the relief of Ziclos, and to take and demolish a small Redoubt
which had some days before been raised on the Banks of that River, by order of
Count Vechi: Wherefore leaving the design of burning the Bridge, Baron Orlick
marched directly against the Enemy, whom he found attacking the Fort, in which
they had already killed a great many men with Grenades: But so soon as Orlick
appeared, the Turks fell into disorder and fear; and being furiously charged by
him, were defeated with the loss of above Six hundred men killed on the place,
amongst which were two Aga's, and a Bey or Lord; Many Prisoners were taken with
all their Baggage, and many Ensigns and Colors, of which Five were sent to the
Emperor by Baron de Hertleben, first Captain of that Regiment: The Turks
worsted in several Skirmishes.
And on the Emperor's side, Six Sergeants, Five Troopers, and Twelve Dragoons
were killed, and many wounded. About the same time another Party of Turks was
beaten near Zolnoch, Twenty of which were killed, Chonad defends it self
against the Turks.
and about Thirty taken Prisoners. Moreover Seven thousand Turks, Tartars, and
Malcontents being joined together, endeavored to surprise Chonad, which is a
Fortress situate on the River Maros, which falls into the Tibiscus, near to
Segedin: But they met so vigorous a repulse and rude entertainment from the
Defendants, that they were forced to desist from their Attacks, and march away
with the loss of Four hundred Soldiers, some of which were principal Officers.

Thus the News of one ill success coming to Constantinople on the Head of
another struck the People of all sorts and conditions with a strange
Consternation; The Ottoman Port in great disorder.
the Government fearing the ill consequences thereof, endeavored by all ways
and methods of gentleness to appease the unquiet and fluctuating Spirits of the
People and Soldiers. To do this, there was a necessity of vast Sums of Money,
wherewith to quiet and gratify the Army and Fleet, and to satisfy the Tartars,
who declared that it was impossible for them to move without Money; and which
way to raise it, was the great difficulty; for the Grand Signior's Treasure was
exhausted, and the People already tired, and over-burdened with Taxes:
Wherefore after a long Debate thereupon in the Divan, it was agreed, That the
Jewels and Plate of the Sultans amassed in several Chambers of the Seraglio
should be put to sale, which might have raised vast Sums of Money, Great want
of Money.
could they have been sold to their value; but there was an impossibility of
finding Buyers; for tho the Money could have been found in Constantinople, yet
there was none, who durst own to be Master of so so great Riches. In fine,
after diverse Debates and Expedients proposed, it was agreed to raise Money, by
way of Contribution, on the chief and prime Officers of the Seraglio, and of
the Empire, and particularly on Kadees, and Men of the Law and Church, Means to
raise it.
on Customers, Tax-gatherers, and rich Merchants, such as lived easily and idly
in their Houses; it seeming reasonable that such who enjoyed Protection and
Safeguard in their peaceable Acquisitions at home, should maintain and provide
them who were venturing their Lives, and fighting in their defense abroad. And
whereas the Tartar Han was very pressing and importunate for Money, without
which he could not move or serve in this Year's Campaign; it was resolved to
send him Fifty thousand Crowns in Money, and to make up the rest of his Demands
in Diamonds, Scymeters studded with Rubies, Emralds, and Pearls; and with
Bucklers set with precious Stones, and other things of value taken from the
Treasury in the Seraglio.

But whilst this was contriving, an unhappy Sedition and Mutiny arose amongst
the Levents, who are Soldiers belonging to the Sea; A Mutiny among the Marine
Soldiers.
who having wanted Pay for a long time, came in a tumultuous manner to the
Captain Pasha, who is Admiral of the Fleet, to demand it; and rushed with such
violence into his House, that he had scarce time to escape out of their hands;
and had proceeded to greater extremities, had they not been appeased with a
speedy tender of Six Months Pay. When these things were quieted, a strict
Examination was made into the Cause and Leaders of this Mutiny, of which some
were strangled, and about Twenty others were put into a Sack, after their
Custom, and cast into the Sea: Howsoever this Severity did not so suppress this
Rabble, but that many of them assembled together in the City, where they
plundered diverse Houses, and committed a Thousand Outrages, until such time as
Proclamation was made, giving License to the People to do themselves Justice,
and kill those who made any attempt on their Houses or Goods; which was the
best way to deal with a Licentious Tumult; for so soon as such a Decree was
known, the lewd Mobile grew afraid, and dispersed, most of them withdrawing
themselves Aboard their Vessels.

But not only did the Ottoman Government labor under a want of Money, but of
Men also. Want of men.
For whereas they expected a Recruit of Forty thousand men out of Asia for this
Campaign, notwithstanding the most rigorus Commands sent, to compel all men to
the War, there appeared not Six thousand: For Turcomania had not furnished
above Two thousand men; Syria and Palestine One thousand Eight hundred, and the
Asia Minor Two thousand: The new Levies in and about Constantinople did not
amount to above Three thousand Five hundred; and all that could at present be
found, wherewith to Recruit the Armies both in Hungary, and in the Morea, did
not amount unto more than Twenty thousand men; many of which deserted in their
march, and fled into the Mountains, where they absconded, and passed the most
part of the Summer, being forced to commit many Outrages for their necessary
subsistence.

These Misfortunes and disappointments moved the Grand Signior and his
Counselors, to judge a Peace with the Emperor, The Turks seek for Peace.
the most compencious Method to secure the State of the Ottoman. Empire, which
was now staggering, and falling with its own weight; Belgrade, to endeavor a
Peace at any price, and rate whasoever. Accordingly the Grand Vizier dispatched
a Letter from Belgrade dated the 6th of March, to Prince Herman of Baden,
President of the Council of War to the Emperor, giving him to understand, That
the Sultan, his Lord and Master being persuaded to put an end to this miserable
War, which had long been maintained at the Expense of much Blood, and Treasure
on both sides. He thought it necessary in order thereunto to Appoint a Place,
and Nominate Commissioners for a Treaty: And to Evidence the reality and
sincere intentions of the Sultan toward a Peace; an Offer was made, as the
first Preliminary to deliver up Tekeli into the hands of the Emperor. These
Proposals were brought by an Aga as far as Debrezin, from whence he demanded a
safe Conduct to proceed as far as Esperies. But to cut this Treaty short, the
Emperor commanded Count Caraffa to let the Grand Vizier know, that he would be
ready to make peace with the Ottoman Port, upon a Grant or Concession of Three
Articles only. First, The Emperor demands three Articles.
That the Grand Seignior should pay to him Six Millions of Gold in satisfaction
of the Ruin and Spoils, which his Troops had committed in Austria, and other
his Hereditary Provinces. 2dly, That all the Towns and Places, which the Turks
possessed in Hungary should be delivered up to the Emperor, and the Turkish
Forces withdrawn from that Kingdom. 3dly, That in all other matters they should
give equal satisfaction to the Allies. But as to Tekeli, he being a Subject and
a Rebel, the surrender of him into the hands of Justice, seemed not a Motive
sufficient, nor any prevailing Argument, whereon to ground the Foundation of a
Peace. These Propositions being sent to Constantinople, were considered as no
other than as an absolute refusal to Treat or Hearken to a Peace; which caused
great Fear and Consternation at the Port; and which was greatly Augmented by
the News, which came much about the same time with the former: That the
Moscovite Ambassadors, who had concluded the Peace already at Leopolis between
the Czars and the King of Poland, were arrived at Vienna, Turks.

These Ambassdors arrived at Vienna on the 18th of March, and on the 24th were
conducted to their Audience with these following Ceremonies and Solemnity. In
the First place, some Companies of the City Trained-Bands, and Garrison of
Vienna marched before, and were followed by Forty Moscovites clothed in Velvet,
and Silk Habits of diverse Colors; they were armed with Scymeters adorned and
beset with Diamonds, and other precious Stones, but without Bows, or Quivers
which they wore on the Day when they made their Entrance; they were stately
Mounted on fine Horses, with Saddles and Housses Embroidered with Gold and
Pearl, every one having a Footman waiting on him at the side of his Horse:
These were followed by Sixteen Coaches, with Six Horses a-piece, belonging to
the Chief Officers of the Court to carry the Train, and Attendants of the
Ambassadors, with Two Russian Priests habited after the manner of their Order:
After these Coaches marched Sixty Citizens all Clothed in Black Velvet, who
carried the Presents, which the Czars had sent to his Imperial Majesty, which
consisted chiefly of Sables, and other rich Furrs, the Teeth of Fish, rich
Quivers Embroidered with Gold and Silver, Pearls, and precious Stones, with
Bows and Arrows suitable thereunto. After all these came a Moscovite alone,
Mounted on a brave Horse, carrying the Czars Letter to the Emperor on his Head;
and was followed by Two Coaches with Six Horses belonging to the Person of the
Emperor, in one of which was the Great Chancellor of Moscovy, with another of
the Ambassadors; and in the second was he that was chief in the Commission of
the Embassy, accompanied by Noblemen appointed by the Emperor to receive them;
and in this Order were conducted to the Palace-Yard, where Three Companies were
drawn up with their Arms presented: The First which alighted at the Gate of the
Palace, were the Moscovites which rode on Horseback: Then the Secretary with
the Letter, and the Ambassadors being descended into the inward Court, they
were met at the foot of the Stairs by the Prince of Swartzemberg, and by the P.
of Dietrichstein, High-Steward of the Emperor's Household in the Knight's Hall;
who conducted them into the Lobby before the Chamber of Audience, where leaving
their Scymeters, and other Arms in the Charge and Keeping of the First
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, they were admitted to the Presence of the
Emperor, of whom they received a favorable Audience. After which they were
conducted back again in the same order, having first been sumptuously treated
at a Dinner in the Imperial Court. In short, after diverse Conferences, an
Alliance and League was concluded with them, on the same Foot and Articles, as
had been the last Year agreed between the Czars, and King of Poland; April.
1687.
and soon the 5th of April the Four Ambassadors received their Audience of
Conge, April. 1687.
and soon afterward Three of them returned to their own Country: And one
proceeded to Venice, where he was received with those Formalities which that
Senate always uses toward Ambassadors of that Quality.

The Grand Vizier being well assured by all these Proceedings, that there was
no further place of hope left for obtaining Peace, commanded the Inhabitants of
all places in subjection to the Grand Seignior, to drive their Cattle under the
Reach and Protection of those Towns, which were defended with Cannon; and to
carry their Grain, and Forage, and Movables into Fortified places, under
Obedience of the Grand Seignior. They finished their Bridge of Boats at Peter
Waradin, and with all the diligence imaginable they labored to repair the
Bridge of Esseck; which they having Finished with admirable Expedition, caused
several of their Troops to pass the same, and make their Excursions to the very
Gates of Quinque Ecclesioe, which giving some jealousy, that the Turks intended
to Besiege that Place, Three hundred Hussars, and Two hundred Heiducks were
sent therein to reinforce the Garrison.

At the same time the Count de Tinghen was ordered with a Detachment of Eight
hundred Germans, and Four hundred Heiducks, with One hundred Horse belonging to
Siklos, and some other Troops to take a View of the Passage over the Drove: And
having passed that River on the 8th of June, where joining with some Troops
under the Command of Baron Orlick, he drove away from the Pastures near Walpo,
Two hundred Head of Cattle, and One hundred Horse, and set Fire to about One
hundred small Cottages, which had been raised since the late Desolation; and
being in their Retreat Encountered by a Party of One hundred Spahees, and Three
hundred Janisaries, they totally defeated them, Killing about Seventy on the
place, and taking several Prisoners, with the loss only of a Lieutenant, and of
Eight or Ten Common Soldiers Wounded. About the same time a Detachment from the
Garrison of Zolnock, consisting of Four hundred Hussars, met another strong
Party of Turks belonging to Agria, which they charged with such Bravery, that
after a very sharp Conflict, the Turks were forced to retire with the loss
almost of Two hundred men; Seven and thirty Prisoners were taken, with many
Horses, and a considerable part of their Baggage: Amongst which they found a
Letter from the Pasha of Agria to the Vizier, setting forth the miserable
scarcity of all Provisions in that place, as also of Ammunition; and that the
Famine was so great that they were forced to Eat Horseflesh, and Dogs; by
reason of which many of the Garrison had deserted, and unless speedily
relieved, they should be forced to surrender the Town. At length the Pasha of
Agria being droven to desperate necessities, Agria in distress.
sent to a Village between Buda and Agria, forthwith to bring them Provisions
upon pain of Military Execution; of which Baron Beck being advertised by the
Inhabitants, immediately detached a Party of Five hundred men, to Attend and
Watch this Motion of the Turks; in which Adventure, he had the Fortune to meet
with them, killing many, and taking some Prisoners, and pursuing the rest to
the Walls of Agria.

This was the beginning of the Campaigne, and a Prelude to the happy Successes
of the Ensuing Year; when News came that the Grand Vizier was marching at the
Head of a Numerous Army toward Waradin, the Number of which was Reported to
amount unto. Fifty thousand men, according to the account which some Spies
pretended to have received from the Muster-Roll, April, in the Plains of
Salankemen near Belgrade; as follows: The Grand Vizier, Janisaries 7000 Pasha
of Bosna, Spahees 4000 Pasha of G. Waradin, Spahees 1000 Beglerbey of Romelia,
Janisaries 2400 Pasha of Soria, Spahees 4000 Beglerby of Sebassia, Spahees 2500
Pasha of Aleppo, Janisaries 3000 Pasha of Damascus, Janisaries 4000 Pasha of
Nicopolis, Janisaries 11400 Pasha of Karahitar, Volontiers 8000 Aga of the
Artillery Granadiers. 1100 48400

To this 600 Miners are to be added; 1400 Camels of Burden, 364 Oxen to draw
the Artillery, 400 Wagons with Ammunition, 45 heavy Pieces of Cannon, 28
Lighter for the Field.


All which belonged to the Army of the Grand Vizier, not accounting the
Tartars, nor the Hungarian Army under Tekeli; nor Garrisons and Parties
dispersed in diverse parts.

On the other side, on the 4th of June, the Duke of Loraine arrived at Buda,
where he was received with Three Salvoes of all the Cannon from the Town; Drove
with a part of his Army; he designed to Encamp near the Bridge of Esseck, where
Count Cherffemberg was to join him with Nine Regiments; And let us here take a
Computation in like manner of the Imperial Army, as we have done of the Turks.
Of Dragoons there were Nine Regiments.

Of Lodron Stirum Castelli Serau Herbeville Savoy Thun Magni Kussel.
The first of which Dragoons consisted of Eleven hundred men, all the others of
Eight hundred each, making in all Seven thousand Five hundred men.

The Cavalry consisted of Nineteen Regiments.

Of Saxelauemburg Caprara Dunewald Palfi Caraffa Gondola Taff Newbourg
Montecuculi Veterani Piccolomini Heusler Commercy Gotz Hannover Saint Croix
Furstemberg Pax Truchs
These Regiments amounting unto Eight hundred men each, completed the Number
of Fifteen thousand Two hundred men. To these we are to add Seven and twenty
Regiments of Infantry, of which Five and twenty consisted of One thousand Five
hundred men each, and Keiserstein's, and Stadel's Regiments of Two thousand men
each, The number of the Christian Army.
so that the whole Number of the Infantry amounted in all unto Forty one
thousand Five hundred men; so the whole Army, according to this Computation,
amounted to Sixty four thousand Two hundred men, besides Pioniers, Gunners, and
Attendants on the Camp.

The Names of the Regiments of the Infantry were as follows: Of Count Ernest
of Staremberg Lesley Keyserstein Baden De Croy. Mansfield Salms Maximilian de
Staremberg Serini Neubourg Souches Scherstemberg Stadel Diepenthal Count Guey
de Staremberg Tinhen Meternich Beck Wallis Aspremont Nigrelli Heusler Aversperg
The Young Prince of Loraine Hourchin Furstemberg Strasler


This being the State of the Christian Army, consisting of Sixty four thousand
Men plentifully supplied with all sorts of Ammunition, and much superior to
that of the Turks in Numbers, and much more for Discipline by Instruction of
the Commanders, and Bravery of the Soldiers; The Duke of Loraine on the Twelfth
of June proceeded on his march to the River of Sarawitz, and in his way
received Intelligence, that Agria was in such extreme want of Provisions, and
that the Famine there was so great, that unless the Grand Vizier did by force
of Arms succor the City with Victuals, June 1687.
and Ammunition, the Place would be constrained to surrender it self into the
hands of the Enemy; to prevent which, and to relieve the Town, the Vizier
appointed a Body of Eight thousand Turks, and Four thousand Tartars immediately
to pass the Bridge at Peter-Waradin to Convoy the Wagons and Camels laden with
Provisions, and force their way into Agria. Upon this Advice the Duke of
Loraine dispatched an Express to Count Caraffa, with Orders to draw out the
Twelve Regiments Encamped between Onoc, and Zolnock, and therewith to interrupt
and stop the passage of the Enemy; but such was the diligence of the Turks,
that marching by secret Ways, they missed of Caraffa; and fell in with a weaker
Body of Col. Heusler; Succor brought to Agria.
who having killed about Sixty Turks, forced one part of them to retire back to
Peter-Waradin, whilst others more bold and forward than the rest, each man
carrying a Sack of Meal behind him on his Horse, got into Agria, which was
sufficient to afford them a subsistence for a short time.

In the mean time the Forces began to gather near Barchan, which was the place
appointed for the General Rendezvous: Thither came also the Troops of Zolnoc,
which were to be commanded by the Elector of Bavaria, who very seasonably
arrived at the Camp to the great joy and encouragement of the whole Army: With
him also came Prince Lewis of Baden, a Person of admirable Prudence and
Courage; and of such experience and fortunate success, that the Elector reposed
great confidence in his Conduct. The Elector of Bavaria comes to the Camp.
The Army being put into a fit posture and condition to march, intelligence was
brought that the Duke of Loraine was far advanced on his way toward Oseck;
upon which no time was admitted to follow him; but the way being long, and the
Ways deep and broken by the late Rains, the Army moved slowly, and could not
unite so speedily with the Duke of Loraine as was expected: But at length with
Industry, Time, and Patience, the Armies joined, when News came that the Enemy
in great Numbers were assembled near Peter-Waradin, and had formed a Bridge
over the Tibiscus, to equal the convenience of which, with that of the Enemy,
and maintain a Correspondence with Forces on the other side, the Duke of
Loraine caused another to be built near Tolna, and Foituar, the better to
facilitate a Conjunction with the Imperial Arms.

It was now made known, Esseck to be first attacked.
that the Campaign was to begin with the attack of the Town of Esseck, that
from thence a way might be opened to the Conquest of Belgrade; in order unto
which, General Dunewalt, with some German Regiments, and Troops belonging to
Croatia, and the adjacent Countries, was commanded to march toward Verovitza,
and there to expect farther Orders from the Duke of Loraine.

The Troops of Croatia, Commanded by Count Philip de la Torre in the place of
Dunebolt, (who was Sick at Vienna) marched in a strong Body with very good
order, and a large Train of Artillery, provided by the Chamber of Stiria, and
happily joined with Dunewalt. The Duke of Loraine having left a strong Party to
defend the Bridge, which he had made over the Danube, moved his Camp from
Mohatz, and without any opposition in the least, June 1687.
pitched again near to Darda on the 24th of June, which is a Fortress that
covers one end of the Bridge at Oseck.

The next day the Imperialists discovered from their Camp a certain number of
Turks, who had lodged themselves in the Marsh, which began to be dry, that they
might take a survey of the, Christian Camp; against which a small Party being
sent, they immediately retired to give advice unto the Town of Oseck, of the
near approach of the Enemy: Against this Party of Turks many more than those
appointed, were out of Curiosity carried to the Skirmish, The Grand Vizier
desired to succor Esseck.
to see who those were who called so frankly to them in the French Language.
The News being brought to Oseck, or Esseck, Expresses were dispatched one after
the other to the Vizier, (who was then Encamped with the Ottoman Army near to
Peter-Waradin) earnestly desiring him to march immediately to their Succor.

In the mean time the Duke of Loraine having disposed his Army in an exact
military posture, he went himself in person with a Body of about Six hundred
Horse to take a view of the Neighboring Passes; and next Morning being the
25th of June, June.
he Decamped with the whole Army, and commanded the Count of Schertemberg,
Major General of the Infantry, to see whether the Bridges were repaired; and
having advanced at a good distance before, without any discovery; it was
resolved to march with the whole Army as far as Uttona, where Orders had been
given to provide all Materials for making a Bridge to pass the Drove. But
before this Design was put in Execution, The Imperialists possess themselves of
Bridges, and a Fort built by the Turks.
Souches received Orders, with a Party of One thousand Three hundred
Musketeers, together with Count Guido de Staremberg, to march along the Banks
of the Drove, upon a discovery which was so lucky, that he soon perceived
certain little Bridges, railed on each side, strong, and covered with Earth
very artificially made; not far from which, there was a Fort with some Guns,
and a Garrison of about Four hundred Soldiers, that were Janisaries. As the
Imperialists approached, the Turks received them with such a Volley of shot, as
at first put them into some disorder; but being animated by the Bravery of
Souches and Staremberg, they immediately invested the Fort with such courage,
as forced the Turks to abandon the place with the loss of Two hundred men, and
the remainder to fly to Esseck, to the Walls of which the Imperialists so
nearly pursued them, that they had almost entered with them into the Gates;
howsoever they took possession of the Fort, and burnt that part of the long
Bridge, for about the space of Five hundred Paces in length, which the Turks
had lately repaired with Rayls, and covered with Earth.

The Garrison of Esseck being in great fear at the so near approach of the
Christian Army, dispatched Messenger after Messenger, to advise the Vizier of
their danger, The V^zier Order, his Army ^o march.
and that they were endeavoring to pass the Drove with Bridges; upon which
Intelligence the Vizier caused the greatest part of his Forces to march,
remaining himself behind, in expectation of the Asiatick Troops, who moved with
less diligence, than the present pressure of Affairs did require.

Tho the Duke of Loraine was not ignorant that the greatest part of the Turkish
Army lay Encamped near Esseck; yet being very desirous to Engage the Enemy,
notwithstanding their Entrenchments, he endeavored to pass the River at
Uttona, being a small Redoubt, or Fortress, which P. Lewis of Baden had raised
the year before, being a very convenient Pass for the Forces; for that falling
down from thence with the Stream, they might conveniently be Landed at Valpo,
about Four Leagues distant from Oseck. To this End the Infantry was commanded
to advance toward Siclos, with the Cavalry of Montecuculi, Ladron, and
Hanover; the rest of the Army was commanded to keep their Station near Darda.
In the mean time whilst the Bridges were preparing, such great Floods of
Snow-waters fell from the Mountains of Stiria, and Carinthia, Floods break the
Bridges.
that the Drove swelled beyond its Banks with a most rapid Stream, and the
Marshes or Morasses were filled in such manner, that it was very difficult to
lay the Bridges, or raise Ways over the Marshes, which were afterward made
firm and passable, by vast quantities of Brush and Faggots, The Marsh^s
repaired.
which the Soldiers had cut and laid: And that no time might be lost, whilst
the Waters were abating, Orders were dispatched unto General Dunewalt, who was
in Croatia with several Thousands of the Inhabitants of that Country, to secure
the passage of those Boats, which were appointed to carry Provisions and
Ammunition to the Army from Stiria. Dunewalt having observed these Orders, the
Duke of Loraine Detached a small Party to view and discover the face and
posture of the Enemy; and to espy and take an account of what Troops lay in the
way to oppose their Passage. This Party being returned with intelligence that
the Way was clear and open; the Imperialists without any opposition posted
themselves on a high Ground near Walpo, over against Uttona; where the Duke of
Loraine in Person passed the River, to lay out the Ground, and open the
Trenches for better Security to the Army in their Passage.

Siaus Pasha at Esseck.
In the mean time the Heyducks had the Fortune to take Six Turks near to Esseck,
who declared upon Oath that the Grand Vizier was still at Peter-Waradin, and
that Siaus, Pasha of Aleppo was come into Esseck with Two thousand men, where
they had raised a Trench of about Two thousand Paces in length.

Howsoever the Duke resolving to pass the Drove, Ferried over in Boats a
considerable Number of Dragoons, and German Foot, to labor in digging the
Trenches, which were intended to secure the Passage of the whole Army, which
was a most immense Labor, and such (as we may say) had not been performed in
many preceding Ages, for that Thirty thousand Faggots were not sufficient for
settling the Marshes, which by reason of the abundant Rains were scarce
passable; A laborious Work.
besides the raising of Five and twenty Bridges in diverse places, all which was
performed with unexpressible industry in the space of Four days; the Duke of
Loraine himself in person encouraging and lending a helpful hand unto the Work:
Howsoever this Work was not done without some loss and damage in the
Transportation of the Horse, Baggage, and Cannon.

Some part of the Imperial Infantry having passed the Drove in Boats, and
followed by the Croats of Dunewalt's Regiment; the Duke of Loraine, in the next
place, caused all the remaining Infantry to pass as fast, and in as full
Bodies, as the Bridges would allow; so that they might be able to make a
resistance against any Force, which they expected might be sent from Esseck to
interrupt their Passage; but the Turks moved not, but remained still in their
Trenches, all the time that the Army, Cannon, and Baggage were with Boats and
Bridges Transporting from one side of the River unto the other: Before which
was finished, they were forced to withdraw their main Bridge, Trees cut and
thrown into the Stream by the Turks.
by reason of the fall of great Trees, which the Turks above about the parts of
Kanisia had purposely Cut down, and Launched out into the Torrent; that being
carried down with a mighty Rapid Stream, increased by an abundance of Rains,
served very much to break and overthrow their Bridges: Howsoever in a short
time the Bridge was repaired, and then the Thirteen Regiments of Horse, which
were left to cover the Bridge, passed over to the rest of the Army.

The Imperial Forces under the Duke of Loraine being thus passed, General
Caprara with his Horse was commanded to do the like at Uttona, which was
performed the 12th of July; July.
and also the Elector of Bavaria passed his Forces on the 13th, together with
Nineteen Imperial Regiments near Siklos. Thus the whole Army being joined on
the other side of the Drove, on the 15th the Generals Dined together, The Army
passed the Drove.
and in the Afternoon made a short march toward Walpo, where the day following
they Encamped near to the Castle, which was defended by a good Garrison. The
same day General Heusler joined the Army, as did also Count Bargozzi with Two
thousand Hungarians.

The 17th very early in the Morning, the Quarter-Master-General was commanded
to advance, as were also those who had the care of the Forage committed to
them; and Heusler with a Party of Four hundred Croats was ordered to seek out,
Marches forward.
and take a view of the Enemies Camp; in his way unto which, he fell in with
some Thousands of them, which he charged so bravely, that he obliged them to
Retreat, and pursued them to a narrow Pass, where he thought fit to stop,
fearing some Ambuscade, or private design to ensnare him: And having posted his
Soldiers in good order, he intended to repose a while, and take a little
Breath; and having called for a Glass of Wine, Heusler wounded.
whilst he was drinking a Musket Shot fired from a Neighboring Wood, passed
his Left-Leg from one side to the other; and having grated a little on the
Boan, it was thought that it might require some time to Cure; so he reposed
that Night near Carazizza, July.
by which ran a small Stream, sending his Spies abroad to prevent surprizal.

On the 18th the whole Army marched, and pitched that Night about Two English
Miles distant from Esseck, where some Parties of the Turks being abroad,
retired to their main Camp. The next Morning by Break of Day, the Duke of
Loraine commanded the whole Army to advance in order of Battle: And because the
Ways were narrow, the Woods and Bushes thick, Commands were given to the
Pioniers, and Laborers to cut down the Trees, The Army marches in Battalia.
and Under-Woods, and so to open the Ways, that the Army might march in Two
Lines; which was done with such expedition and industry, that the Troops
marched in that admirable order, as evidenced the Conduct of one of the
greatest Captains in the World; and in this manner they appeared in sight of
the Enemy.

The Grand Vizier with a Numerous Army, and a well-ordered Camp, lodged under
Esseck, fortified with a deep and regular Trench, and guarded with a good
number of Cannon, in an open Plain, about a Musket Shot from a Wood. The
Viziers strongly encamped.
The Christians were much surprised to find the Turks thus regularly Encamped,
which was an Art unknown to them till now; being therein instructed by some
French Engeniers, and Captains, with Soldiers of the same Nation, under the
Command of the Marquess of Persan, Are assisted by the French.
a person well esteemed by the Grand Seignior, and in favor with the Vizier:
For now it was, that the French Nation began not only to enter into an interest
and confidence with the Turks, by the assistance they gave them of Officers and
Enginiers; but farther obliged the whole City of Constantinople, with
Provisions of Rice and Wheat brought from Alexandria on 14 Sail of French
Ships, when the City was laboring under great want, and Famine almost of all
necessaries for Life.

The Christian Army being now come in sight of the Turkish Camp; it was
expected that the Grand Vizier would have marched out, and given them Battle,
which the Christian Generals bravely offered, The Turks keep within their Camp.
and the Soldiers desired with a Courage answerable to their former Successes:
But the Turks finding it their advantage to remain within their Trenches, made
use of their Cannon against the Imperial Camp; which lying open, and undefended
without Works or Trenches, did great execution both against the Horse and Men;
and amongst other Officers Count Francis Palfy, who was Lieutenant Colonel of
the Regiment, which belonged to the General of that name, was shot in the Head
by a Cannon Bullet. During the time that the Armies lay in this posture several
Skirmishes happened with various Successes; and particularly one proved not very
fortunate to a party of Croats, who being on Foot, and ill armed, were
unskilfully engaged, and too far advanced by the rashness of their Commanders;
Some Croats cut off.
and they firing all their Muskets at one volly, were left open to the Enemy;
and not being seconded by other Troops, above one half of them were killed upon
the place, the rest retiring to the main Body. In this manner did the Turks
make frequent Sallies on the Christian Camp, endeavoring to draw them into
Ambuscades, but not to an equal and fair Battle, which the Vizier was not
willing to adventure, but rather to watch advantages within his Camp, The
manner of the Turkish Camp.
which was strongly fortified with Trenches, Palisadoes and Cannon, having a
Line drawn from the River Drove to a Wood, which with a Morass, and the River
Valkowar to the left, Flanked with the Town of Oseck, and covered behind with
the Castle Valkovar, and the Danube, by which all Provisons were carried in
great abundance; which rendered the Camp impregnable, and not to be focred
either by Arms or Famine: Whilst it was impossible for the Christian Army to
continue long in that posture, both because they lay exposed to One hundred and
fifty Pieces of Cannon of the Turks, Reasons for a Retreat.
which played continually upon them, tho returned with like Damage again from
those of the Christians: And also, because they began in that place to want
both Forage and Provisions, so that there seemed a necessity for the Army to
retire.

Whereupon the Duke of Loraine observing that after he had for the space of 46
hours bid defiance to the Turkish Army, and that he could on no Terms provoke
them to a Battle: He assembled a Council of War, where many things being
alleged, in reference to the strong Encampment of the Turks, Agreed at the
Christian Camp.
their Resolution of keeping within their Trenches, which were not to be forced
without danger of losing the whole Christian Army; and the want of Forage and
Provisions in their own Camp, which were not to be supplied in those places; it
was resolved to make a Retreat, and repass the Drove.

Such an Action as this was now become difficult, and the Army not to be
secured, but by the skill and bravery of such Generals: For the Turks observing
the Retreat of their Enemies, and believing it to be a kind of Flight, either
out of weakness in Strength, or want of Courage, made many Assaults and Attacks
on the Rear, which the Generals with such admirable Art, Martial conduct, and
Discipline defended, that in all the attempts they made, they were repulsed:
Five Regiments under the Command of Piccolomini were commanded to March before
to Siklos; Conduct in the Retreat
and the rest of the Army toward Walpo, drawn into two Lines, often facing the
Turks to the Van, to the Rear, and on each side; in such manner, that it was
almost impossible to break in upon them. The Turks, Against the A tacks of the
Turks.
who had not for some years seen the backs of their Enemies, and seldom a
Retreat made by them, full of vain Glory, and hopes of gaining a Victory
pressed very hard on the Rear, which being defended by the Valor, and
excellent Conduct of that magnanimous, and generous Prince the Elector of
Bavaria, with the assistance of Prince Lewis of Baden, whose Arms and Conduct
were dreaded by the Turks. There was little, or no advantage obtained that day
by the Enemy, the Camp being that night pitched near Walpo.

The day following they proceeded in their March without any considerable
opposition from the Enemy, and encamped near the Drove, between Walpo and
Ussona; only the Foragers thinking semselves so secure were attacked by the
Enemy with the loss of many Men and Horse. The Elector of Bavaria having that
day the command of his own Wing which was the Van-gard, caused almost all his
Baggage to pass the Drove, which much disappointed the design of the Enemy: And
the Duke of Loraine gave order, that all the Baggage, as well that belonging to
the Soldiers, as to the Commanders, which could be transported that night, The
manner how the Christians repassed the Drove.
should be passed over: And the next day the Cavalry of the right Wing, after
them the left Wing, then the Baggage of the Infantry; and the day following all
the Infantry it self were passed over; all which being performed with most
admirable order and conduct, the Bridges were broken, and the Boats burnt and
sunk. As the Christian Leaders showed themselves great and valiant Captains; so
the Turks gave no less proofs of their Cowardice, who might have made use of
this advantage to the total destruction of the Christian Army, had not the
Divine Hand preserved them for more signal Victories, The Joy which the Turks
make for this Success.
and for the more severe punishment of the Turks; howsoever the Grand Vizier
fancying this Retreat to be an entire Victory, dispatched Curriers with the
News thereof to Constantinople, and to all parts of the Empire, glorying that
he had now recovered the lost Honor of the Ottoman power, not doubting but in
a short time to regain Buda, and all the conquered places, and to restore
peace, and quietness once more with Honor to the Musselmin Dominions. This
Opinion was celebrated in the Turkish Camp with Joy and Triumph, and at the
Port, and remote parts of the Empire with diverse days of Festival, all
believing that the side of Fortune was now turned under the auspicious Conduct
of this Vizier, from whom great things, and almost Miracles were expected: In
pursuance of this fancy and belief, so soon as the Imperialists had withdrawn
from Esseck, the Turks detached a Body of Four thousand Horse toward Darda,
with Orders to proceed thence to Mohatz, where they designed, if possible to
burn all the Boats laden with Ammunition and Provision belonging to the
Christian Army: Parties sent by the Turks to Darda.
But this design was prevented by the March of Piccolomini, with some Regiments
of Hussars and Croats, and of Count Cohari, who with Two thousand Hungarians
was commanded to pass that way, July.
and thence to proceed to join with the Marquis Doria, and reinforce him in the
Blocade of Agria: Howsoever, the expedition of the Four thousand Turkish Horse
was not altogether unsuccessful, for it was their fortune to meet with One
hundred and fifty Wagons belonging to the Bavarian Troops, under the Convoy
only of Five hundred Croats, commanded by that brave Soldier Count Orlick; who
notwithstanding the inequality of numbers, sustained the Shock, and at last
orderly retreated by the help of a Morass, with the loss of One hundred Men,
which the Turks at their return to the Camp, reported for a signal Victory.

The main Body of the Christian Army continuing their March, on the 28th
pitched their Camp, about a League distant from Mohatz, before which place all
the Boats laden with Ammunition and Provisions for sustenance of the Army were
then Riding in the River; and here it was that Five thousand Foot, and One
thousand Horse from the Circles of Suabia, The Christian Army reinforced.
and Franconia joined with the Army under the command of the Marquis Charles
Gustavus of Baden Durlach; all choice and select Men, veterane Soldiers, and so
well armed and clothed, that in their March toward the Camp, the Emperor took
delight to see them pass through the Streets of Vienna: With these came also
Count Rabata, Commissary General, bringing Money with him for the Subsistence
and Payment of the Army; in which Office he so well acquitted himself for three
or four years past, that much of the health, and convenient subsistence of the
Army, may well be attributed to his Industry and Mannagment, by which all
things were provided in such plenty, that there was little need of sending
Foragers abroad with hazard and danger, for relief of the Camp. And indeed by
the Successes of this year, it plainly appeared how great a Service such good
Managment was; Loss by the Foragers.
for want of which the Imperialists had not of late suffered in any thing a
greater loss than in their Foragers, who wandering abroad without care, or due
circumspection, were often surprised by the Enemy with the loss of their
Horses, and many of their Lives.

The Grand Vizier finding that the Christian Army had repassed the Drove did
believe that they would not sit idle, but undertake some Enterprise or other,
either by the Siege of Sigher, or some other place of importance; to prevent
which by giving encouragement to the several Garrisons, the Vizier dispatched
Expresses to all parts, to let them know that in case of a Siege, they should
manfully resist, assuring them that in a short time, he would bring them
Relief, and such Succor as they should desire.

On the other side the Duke of Loraine seriously considering what Course the
Enemy might in probability follow, and effect; he imagined, that their Design
might be by a strong Convoy of Horse to Relieve Agria with Provisions; Means to
intercept relief of Agria.
of which (as we have said) there had been a long want; and such a scarcity as
might reasonably be termed a Famine: To intercept this Relief Count Ziacchi
with Two thousand Hungarians, and Count Veterani with five Regiments of Horse,
were commanded to pass the Danube, and draw toward Agria. It was resolved also
to fortify Mohatz, and put a Garrison into it of Four thousand Men; but upon
News brought to the Generals, that the Turks one the 29th of July had begun to
pass the Drove near Esseck, all the Councils and Measures were changed; A Field
Battle designed.
the Detachments, were recalled back to the main Body, the Bridges broken, the
Boats laden with Provisions ordered to a certain Island, there to remain for
better security; and in fine all things were disposed for a Field Battle, which
the Christian Soldiers had long desired, and to see their Enemy in the open
Plain, rather than fortified in the Trenches of a Camp, or within the Walls of
a City.

The Turks having passed the River, advanced toward Darda, and entrenched
themselves very strongly between certain Morasses, or Marshes in that Country
near Baranwar, about a League from the Imperial Camp, where they much troubled
and infested the Foragers belonging to the Christian Army.

The Duke of Loraine being very desirous to entice the Turks to a Battle,
retreated toward Mohatz, August. 1687.
which the Vizier interpreting as a kind of Flight, caused many Thousands of
Turks and Tartars to advance; which being discovered by the German Out-guards
gave an Allarum to the whole Army, and put them all into form of Battle; but
nothing thereupon happened, A Skirmish.
but only a Skirmish between the Christian Volontiers and the advanced Body,
the first of which being supported by some Regiments of Horse, that party of
the Enemy was forced to Retire, and pass the Bridge.

The Duke of Mantoua at the Camp.
About this time, Ferdinand Charles, the third Duke of Mantoua, being desirous
to see, and learn the Art of War managed by the first and bravest Captains of
the World, left the Air, and pleasant Places and Gardens of Italy, to observe
the Martial exploits acted in the more gross Air of Hungary; and being attended
with an Equipage agreeable, he entered the Christian Camp about the beginning
of the Month of August, where he was received by the Duke of Loraine, the
Elector of Bavaria, and the other Generals with all the marks and
demonstrations of Respect, and Honor due to a Prince of such Sublime Birth and
Dignity.

As the Christian Army retreated, the Turks advanced, supposing that the
Retreat was an assured evidence of their weakness. The Duke of Loraine was
amazed, and glad to observe this confidence in the Turk, whom he had for a long
time endeavored to allure, and decoy into a Battle; of which there was a kind
of a necessity at present, A necessity to Fight.
for the gross Air of that Season became very pernicious to Bodies not
accustomed to that Climate, so that the Army began to grow Sickly, and wanting
Forage which was necessary to be supplied, it was procured with a daily loss of
Men taken, or killed by the Enemy, by which an Army worthy of higher
Enterprises was in danger of being destroyed without Fighting or Action. It was
therefore concluded necessary to Fight, of which there appeared great hopes
from the forwardness of the Enemy, who animated with the March of the Christian
Army, pursued after them. The Duke of Lorain intending to draw the Enemy after
him, carried away all the Provisions in Boats up the Stream to Sertio, and set
Fire to the Town of Mohatz, destroying all the subsistence round the Country;
and intending to do the like by Siklos and Quinque Ecclesiae, Letters were
dispatched by a certain Captain to the Governors of those places to convey
away all the Provision, and Ammunition they were able from those parts, and
afterward to consume the Towns, and remaining Goods with Fire: But by the
Providence and direction of God Almighty, it so happened, that this Captain
being taken, and his Letters intercepted; he was brought to be examined before
the Grand Vizier, and his Papers being read and considered at a Council of War
called for that purpose; It was unanimously concluded, that this Resolution to
burn those Towns was a certain evidence of the weakness of the Christian Army;
and therefore that not to omit, The Turks resolve to Fight.
and pass by so favorable an opportunity of gaining an entire Victory, it was
resolved to come to a Battle with the Christians; and to that end the whole
Turkish Army marched toward Siklos, and pitched in an open Country not far
distant from the Town through which the Imperial Army was of necessity to pass,
and there they opened some new Trenches, and raised Works of some considerable
defense.

After that Mohatz was burnt; the Imperialists in order of Battle took their
March toward Siklos, not without some loss sustained by the Foragers, who
wandered at too far a distance, without due caution, or regard had to the near
encampment of the Enemy: The Imperialists likewise continued their March. The
day following Count Stirum advanced before with his Guards, and Scouts, as did
all the Quarter Masters and Foragers, between whom and some Troops of Tartars a
furious Skirmish happened within Trees and Boscage, which continued a long time
with mutual loss on both sides, which fell most severly on the Regiment of
Lodron. The Duke of Loraine finding himself to draw near to the Enemy, caused
the right Wing, commanded by himself, to make a Halt under the Mount of
Arschan, and the left Wing commanded by the Elector of Bavaria to make a stand
on a rising Ground near Baraniovar, not more than an hour's March from the
Enemy, Several Skirmishes.
where Six thousand of the Enemies Horse made an attack on some of the Imperial
Troops, as others of them did on the Rear-guard commanded by the Elector of
Bavaria, which Skirmishes took up some hours time: The same day the Prince of
Comercy with Twelve hundred Horse, was commanded out to cover the Foragers; but
he was not far advanced before he returned with advice, that the Enemy with the
gross of their Army both of Horse and Foot had raised their Camp, and had
posted themselves in a nearer and more advantageous place: This News was
confirmed by a Grecian youth of Retimo taken Captive by the Turks in Candia,
August.
who having made his escape reported, That the Turkish Army consisted of Eighty
thousand fighting Men, The Turkish Army appears.
of which there were Twenty five thousand Janisaries, and with the Attendants
and Servants, they might make up in all the Number of One hundred and twenty
thousand persons: And accordingly that Evening, three Encampments appeared,
consisting of three very great Bodies.

The next day being the 12th of August, the Duke of Lorain having disposed his
Affairs in a Military posture, against all accidents and contingences from the
Enemy whatsoever, began his March toward Siklos with the right Wing, being
then about an hour's March distant from Siklos. Scarce had he opened the Plain,
when the Elector of Bavaria with his left Wing was attacked by Eight thousand
of the Enemies Horse, sustained by Six thousand Janisaries, A Battle began at
Harscham.
who had the night before entrenched themselves on the side of a Hill, from
whence they fired many Vollies of Shot on the three Regiments of Cavalry, viz.
Arco, Magni and Soyer.

Prince Lewis of Baden having observed, that there was a very advantageous
place on the side of the Hill near to the Janisaries, which, if possessed,
might very much annoy the Turks; immediately advertised the Dukes of Loraine
and Bavaria thereof, who having in the first place reinforced the Rear-guards
with four Regiments under the conduct of Piccolomini, gave it in charge to
Prince Lewis, to take the Post he had denoted on the side of the Hill; which
accordingly he performed with admirable Success; for the Janisaries having
fired three Vollies, and the Spahees having furiously charged the Rear-guard as
often; the Elector encouraging his Men settled them firm and steady against the
frequent and forcible Shocks and Charges of the Enemy; who not being able to
endure the Fire, and the unshaken order of the Christians, betook themselves to
a disorderly and precipitate Flight, in which the Turkish Horse broke in upon
their Foot, and trampling down the Janisaries under foot, drove them back into
their Trenches, The Turks routed.
into which entering at the same time with the Enemy, they put the whole Army to
the Rout, and to a shameful Flight, leaving their Camp, Tents and all their
Baggage for a Prey to the Christians.

On this memorable day, which is to be celebrated to all Posterity, the two
Dukes, who were Generals, signalized themselves by their admirable Conduct, and
undaunted Bravery, to all the World. The valor of the Christian Commanders.
Prince Lewis of Baden in like manner, with his Sword in his Hand, applying
himself at all places to direct, and encourage the Soldiery by his Presence and
Voice, demonstrated and evidenced himself to be a great Captain and Champion;
in imitation of whom, and of all other the Commanders, the inferior Officers
and Soldiers gave marks to the World of their bravery and zeal in the Successes
of that glorious day.

The Prince Eugenie of Savoy was the first, who with the Regiments of his
Brigade entered the Trenches of the Enemy; The Prince of Savoy carries the News
of Victory. His bravery.
and for that reason had the honor to be the first Messenger of this happy
News unto the Emperor. Count Sinzendorf, a Cavalier of great Courage, and Hope,
adventuring his Person amidst the thickest of his Enemies, had Two Horses
killed under him that day, and Two wounded, together with his Page, who fought
on his Left Hand; and by a great Shot had his Leg broke: Howsoever he pursued
the Enemy beyond their Trenches for the space of an hour, as did the rest of
the Army, until the Close of the Evening, when it was thought fit to desist
from the pursuit, and return to the Camp, that they might give Refreshment both
to Man, and Horse, who had for two days greatly suffered for want both of
Victuals, and Forage. The Prince of Commercy, who Commanded the Troops of
Volontiers, deserved also his due Praise, being one of the most forward to
attack the Enemy, of which he gave undeniable Proofs, the Sargeant Major of his
Regiment, and One hundred and Sixty of his Soldiers being slain at the
beginning of the Battle. The whole Number killed and wounded on the Christian
side, The Numbers killed and wounded.
were not much above One thousand, Three Captains, Twelve subaltern Officers,
and Four Trumpeters; which indeed was very strange, and almost miraculous, if
we consider the great loss which the Turks sustained; for there were Eight
thousand Janisaries with their Aga, or General, killed on the place, all choice
and select Soldiers, Two thousand were made Prisoners, and about Three thousand
Drowned, and the whole Army scattered and dispersed in the Woods, Marshes, and
Boggs of that Country.

Strange and wonderful indeed was the Success of this day, and ought wholly to
be ascribed to the Almighty Hand of the God of Hosts: For the Turkish Army was
much more numerous than the Christian, consisting in all of One hundred and
twenty thousand, of which Eighty thousand were Fighting men, encouraged by late
Successes, and grown proud, and confident of their Strength, by the Retreat
which the Christians made. But what is still more strange, is that this
formidable Army was Defeated, and put to Flight by Ten thousand men only of the
Left-wing of the Rear-Guard, Commanded by the Elector of Bavaria; for the
Right-wing under the Duke of Loraine, and Led by Count Caprara, had not time to
come up, before the Turks were put to a Rout, and a Hasty Flight, which had
they delayed and stood until the other Forces had come up, it might, in all
probability, have proved so bloody a loss to the Turks, as could never more
have been recovered, and which might have proved the total Ruin and Downfall of
the Ottoman Empire.

Thus since it was the Fortune of the Elector of Bavaria to Fight that day with
Victorious Success, The Vizier's Tent allotted to the Elector of Bavaria.
the Magnificent Tent of the Grand Vizier, like opima spolia, were by Lot the
just Reward of his Labor, and Valou. It is said, That that Tent was the most
sumptuous and rich of any, that had, during this whole War, been brought by any
preceding General into the Field; therein was taken all the Cash, or
Ready-Money brought for the Use of the Army, all the Books and Accounts
belonging to the Militia, the Horse-tails or Tugh carried before the Vizier;
The spoils taken.
besides Fifty thousand Crowns, which some principal Officers, as is said,
appropriated to their own Use.

Besides this stately Tent, there were great Numbers of other Tents taken, in
which the Turks show most of their Grandeur, making more Ostentation by their
Tents, in the Camp, than they do by their Houses, and Edifices in the City.
Moreover there were taken Sixty seven Pieces of Canon, Four of which were of an
extraordinary bigness; of Powder there was a Thousand Kintals, of Match Four
hundred, about Eight thousand Cannon-Bullets, Three thousand Bombs and
Carcasses, Ten thousand Grenades, Arms of all sorts in great Numbers, Two
thousand Oxen, Five hundred Horse, Mules, Asses, and Camels about Two hundred,
Buffoloes Four hundred, which were appointed and fitted to the Yoke, for
drawing Carriages, and Cannon; Sheep, and other Cattle innumerable.

Besides all this, there were found great quantities of Coffee, Chocolate,
Sugar, Sherbet, and Honey, with Carpets, and Beds of Wool, and Cotton: Also
Oats, Rice, Barley, Flower, Oil, Bread, and Salt; in short, all things
necessary and convenient for Man and Beast; with which the Christian Soldiers
refreshed themselves after a long Battle, tedious and tiresome Marches, in
great Want, and Scarcity of all Necessaries for Support and sustenance of an
Army. After which great and signal Victory, August. 1687.
Te Deum was on the 13th of August Sung in the Tent of the Grand Vizier; and
Triumphs made by exposing the Horse-tails, Te Deum Sung in the Vizier's Tent.
and great Numbers of Banners and Ensigns before the Door of the Tent, with
Vollies of small Shot, and Discharge of Four hundred Pieces of Cannon, giving
Thanks to God for this so remarkable a Success, which was the more observable,
because this Victory was obtained in that very Ground, where Lodowick, the last
of the Hungarian Kings was Slain, and his Army Routed by Sultan Soliman the
Magnificent, who in Memory thereof, caused a Mosch of Wood to be Erected, and
Endowed it with Eight hundred Crowns Yearly Rent, that Dervises, who are a sort
of Turkish Friars, might solemnize their daily Devotions and Prayers in that
place.

The Turkish Army being thus totally Routed, and Dispersed, some in the Woods,
and others in the Marshes, where many of them dyed of their Wounds, or fainted
for want of Food, or Refreshments; others of them, or as many, as could,
Traveling a Day and a Night, came at length faint and weary to lodge
themselves under the Walls and Cannon of Esseck, without Provision to comfort
them, or Tents to cover them; where being sad and disconsolate, had the
Mortification to hear the Triumphs which the Christians were making in their
Camp for their Victorious Successes.

This News affected the Inhabitants of Agria to the last extremity of Despair:
Agria surrenders.
They had lived for a long time in hope of Relief; and feeding on that, and on
Horseflesh, and Dogs, and Herbs growing under the Walls, and by making
sometimes Excursions near hand to gain a little sustenance; but now by this
last blow being put beyond all hopes, the People had thoughts privately to
abandon the Town, and fly to other Quarters; but the Town being closely blocked
up by Marquess Doria, was forced soon afterward to surrender at discretion,
without any farther Effusion of Blood.

The Suceess of this Battle, near Harscham, happened very seasonable to the
Christian Cause, and of great Comfort and Joy to the Court of Vienna, where
they had lately received no very good News in reference to the State of their
Army, which, as Reported, Fears at Vienna.
was very much weakened by late Skirmishes, Sicknesses, and want of Provisions,
and much harassed by long Marches, bad Weather, and dirty deep Ways: Of which
the Enemy being sensible, was grown bold and daring, and often pressed them to
a Battle: The Emperor being informed hereof, was very doubtful and anxious for
the Success; and Prayers, Supplications and Penance were ordered to be made in
all Churches to implore the Divine Assistance and Blessing; when the Prince
Eugene of Savoy arrived at Vienna with the News of the Battle, and the
Particulars of the Victory, which filled all the Court and City with Joy and
Triumph: Joy at the News of Victory.
To render which the more complete and full, Advices were come the Night before
from the Senate of Venice, to give an Account to his Imperial Majesty of the
Defeat which the Arms of St. Mark had given the Turks in the Morea; which had
produced such a Terror and Consternation amongst them, that in little more than
Four and twenty Hours time, Four places had surrendered to the Venetians. With
these happy Advices, Expresses being dispatched to all Courts of Christian
Princes, were the Cause and Subject of common Joy and Jubilee, in the Courts of
all, the most Christian Kings only excepted.

The Grand Vizier with his scattered Troops rallied near Esseck; where taking
an account of the Numbers lost, he found his Army diminished about Twenty
thousand men; for besides those which were killed, taken, and drowned, many had
deserted, and withdrawn from the Field. The Face of the whole Camp was sad and
disconsolate; and tho the Vizier did all he could to comfort and cheer them;
yet they being not only melancholy, but angry, and ashamed of their
dishonorable Flight, began to blame and cast the fault on each other. The
Janisaries with good reason upbraided the Spahees, Dissentions amongst the
Turkish Militia.
as the Authors of their Rout; for that they cowardly retiring, broke in upon
their Ranks, and put them into disorder; which the Enemy observing, pressed so
hard upon them, that they were forced to give way, and with them the whole Army
was laid open, and exposed to the Enemy. The Dispute grew so hot between the
Two Ranks, and Orders of Soldiers, who were always emulous of each other, that
at length they came to Blows, and to a Civil War, in which about Seven hundred
were killed upon the place.

The Grand Vizier, and Officers had no sooner with much pain and labor parted
the Fray, but the tumultuous Soldiery joined together to accuse the Vizier
himself, and to cry out, that the loss of the day was to be charged on him, and
the Myrmidons about him, who were the most forward to show an Example to the
Soldiery of a base and fearful Flight; the which Clamor caused such a Mutiny
in the Camp, as had put the Life of the Vizier, Appeased with Money.
and many great Officers into extreme danger, had not the Vizier with Money and
fair words mollified their Anger. But this accommodation continued not long,
before the Grand Vizier was forced to give way to the irresistible fury and
sedition of the Soldiery, as we shall presently have occasion to declare.

In the mean time the Duke of Loraine, not to lose the benefit and advantage of
so glorious a Victory, designed a farther Conquest, and to conclude the
Campaigne, with some other memorable Enterprise. It was the common Talk at
Vienna amongst the Courtiers, at the Emperor's Palaces, and amongst the
Religious men in their Convents and Monasteries; that the Duke of Loraine was
to prosecute his Victory without delay as far as Belgrade, and thence to pass
to Adrianople, and make that City his Head Quarters for this Winter; but these
men, who had reposed themselves quietly at home, had not the Thoughts, nor
Consideration of the great Generals, to know the Sufferings and Hardship which
the Cavalry had sustained this Summer in passing Boggs and Marshes, by want of
Forage, and long Marches; nor the difficulty of passing the River of Drove,
defended by the strong Fortress of Esseck, nor the Season of the Year too far
spent to undertake any great Enterprise: All which being considered by the Two
Great Captains, the Duke of Loraine, and the Elector of Bavaria; Forces sent
under Dunewalt.
they resolved only to send a detachment of Ten thousand men, under Command of
General Dunewalt, to pass the Drove at Turanovitz, and there to undertake such
designs, as should be thought most facile and feasible, without overmuch
hazard to be put in Execution.

Dunewalt accordingly began his March on the 17th toward Siklos, where he was
furnished with 18 Pieces of heavy Cannon, and Four Mortars taken lately from
the Enemy, of which he was to make use in case of a Siege, or other occasion;
and was there reinforced with a considerable Body of Croats, under Command of
their Bano. The Duke of Loraine in the mean time took his march with the
remainder of his Army toward Mohatz, with design to pass the Danube, and on
that side to refresh his Army, and allot out to them Quarters for the Winter in
Transylvania, Moldavia, and Valachia, obliging those Hospodars, or Princes to
yield Obedience to his Imperial Majesty, and pay Contributions, by which means
not only the Hereditary Countries of the Emperor, but the wasted and consumed
Provinces of Hungary would be eased, and relieved of their long burdens and
distresses. The Duke of Loraine passes the Danube.
Some Leagues above Mohatz, the Duke of Loraine passed the Danube with all his
Baggage, and Train of Artillery, at a place, where he had the advantage of an
Island in the midst of the River, to lay more easily their Bridges. The Army
having passed the Water with all their Artillery and Baggage, it was expected
by some, and so made the common Discourse, that a farther Enterprise would be
undertaken, and that the Army would march toward Peter-Waradin, and thence
proceed to the Siege of Esseck; but this design after mature consultation,
appeared too difficult in this present Season: For that great Floods of Rain
had fallen, and so filled the Rivers that the Waters could not be contained
within their Channel, but overflowed all the Fields and Meadows bordering on
the River; and afterward when the Water abated, they had yet covered the
Grounds with so much Mire and Sand, that it was impossible to march near to the
Brink of the River, so as to have the benefit or use of their Boats for
Carriage of their Forage and Provisions: Wherefore it was resolved to Lade the
Provisions and Baggage on Carts, Provisions laden on Carts.
and take their march with the whole Army toward Segedin: The Boats being
emptied and discharged, were all burnt, as needless and cumbersome; and the
greater Barges on which the Cannon and Ammunition were laden, were drawn up the
River by Horses and Oxen, attended with a Convoy of three Regiments of Horse
and Dragoons: And in this manner Loraine took his March toward the Tibiscus;
but the Elector of Bavaria judging that the Campaign was so far spent, that no
great Enterprise was more to be achieved, having committed his Troops to the
care and conduct of the Duke of Loraine, he together with Prince Lewis of Baden
took his way toward the City of Vienna.

But this March proved much more difficult than was imagined or expected; for
the Ways and Fields by the continual Rains were so deep and rotten, and full of
Water, The difficulty of marching.
that the Army instead of being relieved, and eased of their late Fatigues and
Suffering, seemed to be engaged and engolfed in greater; for their March was in
Mire and Dirt to the Mid-leg, the Weather very Raw and Cold, without Wood or
other Fuel to dry and warm them at the end of their day's March; and without
any other Sustenance, than dry Biscuit softened with bad Water, such as was found
in the Ditches and the Ways; so that it was not strange that the Army should
grow Sickly, and weakened with so many and so long sufferings. Some Troops of
the Turks, who had fled to Peter Waradin having notice hereof, ordered a
Detachment of some Forces belonging to Tekeli, joined to a strong party of
Turks and Tartars, Sickly and infirm attacked by the Turks.
to fall in upon the Rear of the Imperialists, which oftentimes happened to the
great loss and hurt of the sickly and infirm, who were miserably cut to pieces,
and slain by the Enemy. Nor was the Cavalry in a much better Condition, for
traveling over Marshes and Wet-grounds, their Horses died for want of Forage.

The Duke of Loraine with his principal Commanders considering hereof, The Foot
carried in Carts.
ordered that all Officers having Carts should apply them to the use of the
sickly and weak Infantry; and to give a good Example herein to others, he was
the first to proffer his own Wagons, which all other Officers observing,
generously afforded their Carriages to the use of the Foot, by which the Army
was wonderfully relieved, and after many hardships were brought near to the
Quarters of Segedin, where the Air and Waters being more wholesome, The Sick
recover at Segedin.
and the Forage and Provisions more plentiful, the Sick began to recover, and
after some few days of rest and refreshment, the whole Army was in a great
measure restcr'd to perfect Health and strong Condition: After which they
marched to Zolnock, where they found plenty of all Provisions and Forage, And
Zolnock.
provided and gathered by the abundant care, and industry of Count Caraffa
chief Governor of the upper Hungary: And thence they marched to Debrezin, from
whence the Duke of Loraine detached the Regiment of Cuirassiers commanded by
Count Palfi, with the Regiment of Foot belonging to Count Staremberg, with
Orders to march unto Possonium or Presburg, there to assist at the Coronation
of the Archduke Joseph, Son of the Emperor, then created King of the Romans.

But to return now to the Turkish Camp, where we may believe, that after so
fatal a Rout there was great Confusion: The Grand Vizier retired from Esseck to
Peter Waradin, where he intended to muster up his Forces, Sedition in the Tu
kish Camp.
and to recount his loss, and make the best stand he could against the farthe^
Progress of the Christian Arms; but the Turkish Troops instead of yielding
obedience to their Commanders, publicly arose against the Vizier, boldly
demanding of him five Months pay, and the surrender of Mahomet's Colors or
Standard: Upon which Insolence the Grand Vizier fled to Belgrade, sending
before him Fourteen Mules laden with Money; at which the Militia being more
enraged, proposed to Elect Osman Pasha, Ogli or Sciaus Pasha for their Leader:
For with both these the Vizier had a Quarrel before the Battle, and after it
upon his Complaints made against them to the Grand Seignior, for not having
done their Duty in the Fight, had obtained a Haste sheriff, or a Royal command
to Strangle or Banish them, as he judged most for Service of the Sultan; but
Soliman the Vizier being averse to Blood, laid the Command by him, without
Execution of it, which coming to the knowledge of these two turbulent Men, they
raised the Militia against him; who offered to acknowledge Osman Pasha for
their General, provided he would undertake to kill the Vizier; which Enterprise
he readily accepted, and entered the Vizier's Tents, where he killed several of
his Servants and Pages; as he did also the Vizier's Kahya or Deputy, Sciaus
Pasha made General.
who sent to appease the Mutiny; but the Vizier himself escaped in a Boat down
the Danube, accompanied with the Tefterdar or Lord Treasurer, and Reis Effendi
or Secretary of State, upon notice of which the Soldiery elected Sciaus Pasha
for their General, laying Osman Pasha aside, notwithstanding his late Service,
having been a Rebel and Robber in Asia.

Thus the Sedition being begun, a great Revolution followed in the Empire;
which was not so much caused by the defeat of the Turkish Army, as by the
natural Temper of the Vizier, and the Poverty of the Treasury which could not
furnish Money sufficient for payment of the Soldiery. For tho Solomon was a Man
of dexterity in Negotiations, and well qualified for a Court; A Character of
the Vizier.
yet being of a mild Nature was not so proper to command a Camp, wanting that
Vigor, and Martial Spirit which should make him severe, so as to be feared and
respected: Besides, having little experience in War, and of an open and free
Humor, lent his Ear to every Adviser, so that amongst diversity of Opinions he
became confused and unresolved, and instead of governing was governed, and
sometimes made to act against his own Judgment. It Is true, the Vizier had by his
care and industry gathered a powerful Army and good Troops for this Campaign;
for he had summoned all the Otoracks, or Soldiers who had formerly been freed
and exempted from the War, and had long lived at ease, and with convenience at
their own Houses, to return again to the Camp, and to the severities of Martial
Discipline; many of which had been Spectators or Actors in the Munities, during
the Minority of Sultan Mahomet, and wanting now pay, and their accustomed ease,
were soon incited to Sedition on the first occasion, which now happened upon
these Misfortunes, and the Flight of the Vizier.

The Sedition being thus begun, we will leave the Mutiniers for a while and
return to the Exploits of General Dunewalt, and then relate at large the great
Revolution which after this ensued at the Port. Dunewalt had continued his
March for several days from Siklos, and at length without any considerable
Encounter, he came to Turnovitz, where he laid a Bridge and passed the Drove;
and being there relieved with Provisions, he proceeded to the attack of
Wuching, a Castle well fortified, and the Garrison lately reinforced with a
Thousand Tartars: And tho the Ways were deep and bad, and the Weather rainy and
wet, yet nothing was impossible for a victorious Army, which marched along the
side of some Hills, where the Ways were more hard and dry. Count Lodron with
his Regiment, and Count Budiani with some hundreds of Hussars, and a Sargent
Major with Two hundred Dragoons, were commanded to advance before to Invest
Wuchin, and to hinder all Succors which might be sent for its Relief, until
the Mortars and Cannon, and the rest of the Army could come up. At length the
Bombs, and Train of Artillery being with much labor and difficulty arrived;
Batteries were raised, and the place summoned to Surrender; to which at first a
haughty and an obstinate Answer was returned, but the Cannon being mounted and
fired, in the space of one day had made such a Breach, that the Turks
considering the Resolution of the Christians, and the imposibility of being
relieved, displaid a white Flag, and desired to Capitulate. Wuchin taken by
Dunewalt:
At first they demanded liberty to March out like Soldiers with Arms and
Baggage, but that being denied them, with all other Conditions, excepting only
to yield at Discretion, they were forced to submit to the Will of the
Conqueror, and lose their Freedom and Estates, to save their Lives. In the
Garrison were about Three hundred Soldiers, besides more than One hundred Women
and Children: The principal Prisoners of note, were shared amongst the
Generals, and chief Officers of Horse, and the others equally divided amongst
the Regiments of Foot.

After taking this Castle, which is Situate on a Rock, and in a pleasant and
plentiful Country, abounding with Trees and Fruit, and well planted with
Vine-yards; and after refreshment given to the Army for some few days, it was
resolved to March to Walpo, and there to remain in expectation of farther
Orders from the Imperial Court: Sept. 1687.
During which time certain Advice was brought, that the Grand Vizier with all
his Army and Equipage, was retired from Esseck to Peter Waradin, and thence to
Belgrade, with intention totally to abandon the Fortress of Esseck. Upon this
News Dunewalt having refreshed his Army near Walpo for some days, Hofkirchen
with a party make an Excursion as far as Esseck.
after a tedious March through a wasted and desolate Country full of Boggs and
Marshes, he ordered a party of Five hundred Horse, under command of Count
Hofkirchen, Lieutenant Colonel of that Regiment, to make an Excursion as far a
Esseck, and learn the State of that Garrison, and the Forces of the Enemy
thereabouts. Hofkirchen had been out two days, without any Discovery, or giving
advice of any thing to the General, whom he found encamped under Walpo, a place
defended by Five hundred Turks, who at first Summons seem-very resolute to
defend themselves, or at least, not to yield until they had first heard that
Esseck had submitted. Hereupon Batteries were mounted, Walpo Invested.
which with frequent firing at the Castle gave an Alarm to the Country round
about; but whilst these Matters were in agitation, intelligence was brought to
the Camp by a Country Fellow, that whilst Hofkirchen remained in the Woods to
make Discovery of the Enemy's Motion, the Garrison taking it to be the
Vanguard of the Army, were struck with such a fear, that they immediately
resolved to abandon the place; and having laden the best of their Movables and
Goods on Boats, the Garrison and all the Inhabitants forsook the place, and
fled to Peter Waradin.

General Dunewalt taking this Relation from the Countryman to be true,
commanded the three Regiments of Lodron, Count Kisel and Hofkirchen to March
unto Esseck, and take possession of the place, in case it were abandoned, as
before reported. Accordingly these Forces being come near Esseck; the day
following they were met by a Turk, and a Renegado Croat, who, having made
humble instances for their Lives, which were granted them; they confirmed the
intelligence of the Turks having abandoned Esseck, to be true, and likewise
informed them, that the Turks before they left the place, had formed five Mines
under the Walls, which they would discover to them; and accordingly Lodron
having appointed Thirty of his Men with some Rascians to uncharge the Mines, he
marched with his whole Body and took possession of that considerable and
important place of Esseck without any opposition, Esseck abandoned by the Turks.
before which (as we have related) two great Armies lately lay encamped. With
this advice Count Lodron immediately dispatched an Express to Dunewalt, giving
him an account that he had taken possession of Esseck, and had found therein
Fifty five Pieces of Cannon, two Mortar Pieces, two Petards, with a great
quantity of Ammunition and Provision of all sorts; Walpo Surrenders.
the Garrison of Walpo being also assured hereof, lost their Courage, and
surrendered forthwith at Discretion, submitting themselves, their Wives and
Children to Slavery. After which, October. 1687.
things being well secured and ordered at Walpo, Dunewalt marched toward
Esseck, and encamped his Army on the 2d of October in the same place, where the
Grand Vizier had lately entrenched: Where having sung Te Deum, and returned
Thanks to Almighty God for so many and great Successes, a Council of War was
called to consider what was the next great Enterprise which was to be
undertaken.

The Season of the Year being advanced toward Winter; it might well be judged
a convenient time to draw the Soldiers into Quarters, and give the Troops rest
and repose after the many Fatigues and Hardships sustained; but God still
favoring the Designs of the Christians against the Turks, who were in all
places possessed with fear and consternation; it was thought fit by the
Commanders to follow the Footsteps of Fortune, and not to give over the Game
with a lucky Hand; wherefore Count Appremont being left in the Government of
Esseck, with a Garrison of Eighteen Companies of Foot, and Sixteen Troops of
Horse, the General resolved to attack Possega, the Metropolis of all Sclavonia;
and in his March thither he summoned the Castle of Orovitza, Situate on a high
Hill, an the Foot of which is a Palancha, or small Redoubt; the Ground is
covered with Chesnut-Trees, and planted with Fruit Trees; the Garrison at first
returned an angry and resolute Answer, The Turks quit Orovitza.
but afterward thinking better with themselves, they packed up the best of
their Goods and Baggage, and in the night by secret and By-ways through the
Woods and Mountains privately stole away, every one shifting for himself in the
best manner he was able: So that in the morning the Christians entered the Town
and Castle without any opposition; being a place very Commodious, to which
several Villages paid Contribution, and which was necessary first to be taken,
in order to the more easy and safe attack of Possega. The very same day that
Dunewalt entered into Orovitza, intelligence was brought him, that the Turks
were possessed with such great Fear and Consternation at Possega, that there
was no doubt to be made, but that the place would Surrender at his first
appearance before it; which accordingly happened; for no sooner were the
Christian Forces descended into the Plains, but they espied a considerable body
of Turks, that ranged themselves under the Cannon of Possega. The Forces of
Dunewalt being come up, several Skirmishes passed between the Parties, but the
Turks finding themselves unable to engage with such an unequal Force, Possega
quitted by the Turks.
they betook themselves to flight into the Mountains, abandoning the City and
Castle to the possession of the Christians: Five Companies pursued them into
the Mountains, but without any effect, for having neither knowledge of the
Ways, nor Sustenance in that desolate Country, being also wearied and tired
with long Marches, were forced to return, and repose themselves in Possega.

Fortune thus favoring the Progress of the Christian Arms, Dunewalt resolved
to make use of this prosperous Gale; and having in order thereunto held a
Council of War, it was resolved to follow the Enemy to the River Save, where at
a place called Kobas they were Transporting themselves and Baggage to the other
side: In order unto which, It is garrisoned by the Germans.
and for better security of Possega, a Garrison of Sixteen hundred Germans were
left in the place, and orders given to Count Lodron, that being come thither
with the Infantry and Baggage, he should repose and refresh his Men there until
the return of Dunewalt; who losing no time came so opportunly to the Save,
Dunewalt Marches to Kobas.
as to surprise some Carts laden with Corn and Provisions, which the Enemy had
left there, not having time to Transport them to the other side; and in the
mean time Count Leoneda, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiments of Lodron, a brisk
and daring Gentleman, pursued a party of the Enemy's Horse, and skirmished with
them for the space of three hours, and put them to flight, returning back to
the Camp over against Kobas, with a Booty of Two hundred Head of Cattle. At
this place Dunewalt continued for the space of three days, endeavoring to pass
the River with design to burn and demolish that Castle; and tho on the other
side there appeared a Body of Eight hundred Turks, Horse and Foot; yet some
Germans endeavored to pass in small Boats, and to take a Post, or place of
Defense; but before they could be seconded by other Forces, they were attacked
by Two hundred Turks, A party of Germans cut off.
and after a valorous defense were most of them cut in pieces, or droven into
the River.

Dunewalt finding it very difficult to pass the River without the help of great
Boats, returned to Possega, where finding the Cannon and Infantry arrived, he
proceeded to Zerneck, about two Hungarian Leagues distant from Possega, which
the Turks having quitted, the Germans without opposition made their entrance
into it: The Turks quit Zerneck.
The day following Count Hofkirchen was detached from this place, with a party
of Five hundred Croats, to take a view of the Enemies State and Condition about
Gradisca; on his March whereunto, he was encountered by a strong party of Turks,
with whom entering into an Engagement, Hofkirchen was wounded by a Musket
Bullet in his Arm, and Count Harimberg in the right Hand with a Lance; two
Common Soldiers were killed, A Skirmish.
and some few others wounded: Howsoever Hofkirchen missed not of the
intelligence he designed; bringing an account at his return, that the City of
Gradisca was strong, garrisoned by Ten thousand Soldiers, covered by Five
thousand Horse which were quartered in parts adjacent; and that in the Way to
the City, the Passages were very Straight, besides many Woods, and three
Bridges which lay in the Road thither. Upon this Advice the design against
Gradisca was deferred; and a great part of the Militia was employed to fortify
Zerneck, and the Towns lately conquered; and to provide them with good
Garrisons, as also Valkowa: After which the Season being far spent, Dunewalts
Army lodged in Winter Quarters.
and Provisions and Forage beginning to want in the Camp, the remainder of the
Army were lodged and laid up in their Winter Quarters in Croatia.
Notwithstanding all which Successes, there were not such wanting, who blamed
these proceedings, and confidently affirmed, that in case Dunewalt had been
enforced with some Regiments, and had laid all other Designs aside, he might in
that great consternation of the Turks have passed the Save, and made himself
Master of Belgrade without much difficulty, and therewith have reduced all
Bosnia to the devotion of the Emperor. But this being an Oversight, and
matters succeeding as before related; let us return to the mutinous Army of the
Turks, whom we lately left raging against the Grand Vizier, the Grand Seignior
and all the Government.

The Grand Vizier, as we have said, having quitted the Army, to give way to the
Fury of the Soldiers, took a Boat at Belgrade and rowed down the Danube,
accompanied with the Tefterdar or Lord Treasurer, and the Reis Effendi or
Secretary of State; the Soldiers in the mean time chose (as is aforesaid)
Sciaus for their General; A Chiaus sent by the Army to the Sultan.
and immediately dispatched away Orta Chiaus, an Officer of the Janisaries, to
acquaint the Grand Seignior with what the Army had done. It was now no time to
expostulate with the Soldiers, or disapprove their Actions; but on the contrary
Orta was kindly received, and caressed by the Chimacan at Constantinople called
Regeb Pasha: And the Grand Seignior himself without any Hesistancy confirming
the Choice which the Army had made, The Grand Seignior approves of what they
had done.
dispatched Orta Chiaus immediately back with the Signals of Honor, which are
a Sword, and a Vest of Sables, declaring him General, and ordering him to take
care of the Frontiers. The Vizier having got out of the reach of the Army, took
Post and came to Adrianople, where he staid, and gave time for his Friends to
work in his behalf with the Grand Seignior; who of himself was well enough
inclined to Solomon; and therefore after the Rout, and Noise was a while
appeased, Regeb the Chimacam obtained his Pardon, and Permission for him to
come to Constantinople, and Mamout Aga his Friend, and a rich Man was sent for
the Messenger to invite him thither. But before Solomon arrived the Scene was
much changed by the coming of four Officers from the Army, The Army Petitions
against Solomon.
with Arz and Max-Arz, which is a Petition, and Certificate signed by the
principal Commanders in the Army, attesting that Solomon was a Person of no
Conduct, a Coward and a Liar, and one who took no care to pay the Army, and in
short that he was not fit for that Sublime Office of Grand Vizier, concluding
their Petition with a Prayer, that another might be placed in that Government:
Solomon having News hereof, as he was on the Road to Constantinople, and
thinking thereupon that, that place would be too hot for him at present; sent
the Seal and the Standard of the Prophet to the Sultan, committing them to the
care of the Tefterdar the Treasurer, and Reis Effendi the Secretary, He
delivers up the Seal and Standard.
his Friends and fellow Travelers, to be delivered by them, conveying himself
privately within the Walls of Constantinople; upon which, without delay the
Grand Seignior dispatched away the Seal and the Standard to Sciaus, declaring
him Grand Vizier in the place of Solomon. Regeb would have dissuaded the Grand
Seignior from sending the Standard, which is the Colors of their Prophet
Mahomet; and toward which the People bear a superstitious Devotion, alleging
that thereby he weakened himself, and armed a Company of Mutiniers with the
Charm of that holy Relick: Howsoever the Kuzlier Aga, who is the chief Eunuch
of the Women, was of a different Opinion, being of a nature timorous like that
of the Grand Seignior: His Council prevailed, and the Standard was sent by the
Hand of the Selictar or Sword bearer, that the Soldiery might not have cause to
believe, that the Sultan treated them with reserves, or with the least manner
of diffidence. But all this served not to appease, or mollify the madness of
the Soldiery, who now talked of nothing but marching to Constantinople, and
there to Depose the Grand Seignior, and reform the Government, setting up his
Brother Sultan Solomon, under whose Reign they hoped for the like Auspicious
Successes, as they had found in the fortunate Reigns of those Sultans, who had
formed the Ottoman Empire; and especially they had a singular Reverence for the
Name of Sultan Solomon, who, they hoped would prove as great and fortunate as
Solomon the Magnificent. Sciaus Pasha, who was in his Heart a cordial Friend to
the late Vizier Solomon, found now that he had conjured up a Devil he could not
lay, would gladly have dissuaded the Soldiery from their designed March to the
Port, and rather advised them to guard their Frontiers, and oppose the Enemy:
But this Council had cost him his Life, Sciaus unwilling to March.
had he not touched the Proposal very gently, and at the same time assured them
of his readiness to join with them in any Design they should contrive: And
accordingly marching away in a kind of a tumultuous, and disorderly manner
toward the River Save, great Numbers of them were actually passing the Bridge
near Belgrade, when the Chimacam or Governor General of the Janisaries of that
place, apprehending that they came to Plunder the Town, refused them Passage,
causing several Pieces of Cannon to be fired upon them; with which several
being killed they returned back: They shoot at the Soldiers from Belgrade.
Howsoever persisting still in their Resolution, the most wild and obstinate
party of them passed the River in Boats at some distance from the Town, leaving
Sciaus Pasha with the rest of the Militia on the other side, a good days March
behind them; by this slow Motion of Sciaus, the Soldiery guessing at his
backwardness to engage with them, like enraged Madmen they returned to him and
treated him with Menaces, vowing to kill him, in case he refused to be their
General and Leader in this good Cause of reforming the Government.

Whilst the Army was in this Commotion, great were the Confusions, Plots,
Stratagems and Contrivances at Constantinople, which Regeb the Chimacam
suspecting, that the Friends of the late Vizier Ibrahim exiled to Rhodes, did
foment, and also, T^oubles at Constantinople.
that the Mufti who was last year Banished to Prusa was too near; he procured a
Command from the Grand Seignior to remove that Mufti to Rhodes, and the
Kapugibashee or Messenger, who was employed on this Affair, and had the care
upon him to conduct this Mufti to Rhodes, carried also a Hatte-sheriff, or the
Command with him for the Head of Ibrahim Pasha, which we shall shortly find at
Constantinople, about the same time almost that Regeb's Head was laid with
others to augment the heap.

In the mean time the Tefterdar or Treasurer, and the Reis Effendi, or
Secretary, who were the Two Fellow-Travellers with Solomon the late Vizier,
were dispatched to the Army with soft Messages from the Grand Seignior,
approving all that they had done, and offering to perform all they did or could
desire: But we shall see presently how well these Two Mediators succeeded in
their Office of making Peace with a heady Multitude, which would hear no Reason
and endure no Government. The Soldiers take an Oath to reform the Government.
For Sciaus was now made only a Property to execute the Commands of the
Janisaries, and Spahees, who had entered into a solemn Covenant, and military
Oath to stand by each other for Reformation of the Government: In pursuance of
which design, they were to march directly to Constantinople, there to remove
all the Favorite Pages, and Idle Eunuchs in the Seraglio, with Solomon, Regeb,
the Chimacam, and all their Creatures, and Dependants, and now began to talk
openly of deposing Sultan Mahomet, and setting up Solomon his Brother in the
Throne. And yet for all this, Sultan Mahomet was so stupid, that without any
care or concernment he went every day a Hunting, and had continued his Sport
until the Mutiniers had surprised him in the Field, Septem. 1687.
had not Regeb the Chimacam, a man of great Courage and Capacity acquainted him
with his danger, advising him that the Storm was growing black round about him,
and therefore that he should retire into the Seraglio, Regeb gives Council, but
not taken.
and prepare for his defense; showing him now his Error, in sending away the
Prophet's Banner, which in such an extremity as this, had been his chief
Protection; but the Grand Seignior had neither Understanding to see his danger,
nor Courage to avoid it, or to embrace a bold and vigorous Council, which was
necessary in this emergency; but Regeb being qualified for both, and
sufficiently alarmed by the Chiohadar, an Officer of the Janisaries, newly
arrived from the Army, of the great Combustions amongst them, and of the true
state of things, without losing time, went the next day to the Mufti to desire
a Fetfa, or Sentence declaring them all Rebels and Infidels, (whom they call
Gaurs) who would not obey the Commands of the Grand Signior; but the Mufti
being either sick, or at least pretending to be so, the Fetfa could not be
obtained: Thence he went to the Segmenbashee, who was in the place of the Aga
of the Janisaries, whom he found well inclined; but the Kuzlir Aga, a timorous
Eunuch, The Kuzlir Aaga's Council against Regeb.
having information from his Spies of the Motions of Regeb, presently
represented them to the Grand Seignior, as if he were contriving his Peace with
the Army, intending to betray and sacrifice all others to their fury and
madness; and that therefore it would be better to be beforehand with him, and
send both his and the Head of Solomon to make an Atonement for the lives of
others. The Grand Seignior liking the Project extremely well, gave a Command
immediately to the Bostangibashee, who is a great man, and chief of the
Gardiners, to seize Regeb in his House, and carry him to Prison. The Command
being accordingly served, and showed to Regeb, Regeb seized.
he seemed not in the least surprised, but entertained the Bostangibashee
without any alteration in a free and facetious Discourse; giving Orders very
unconcernedly to have his Horse made ready: And going out with the
Bostangibashee, his Bostangees or Servants going down before him, he stopped
short at the Head of the Stairs, and turning about, said, Aga, It would not be
amiss, if I should take some Zechins into the Prison with me; come with me into
my Chamber for them: So turning quick about, he enters into a Room; the
Bostangibashee being surprised, followed him in; He escapes.
but Regeb passed nimbly into an inner Room through a kind of Cup-board Door,
and by a pair of back-stairs into the Garden, and so escaped at a Postern-door.

The Bostangibashee looking about for him, thought he was vanished, he knew not
how; and calling his Servants about him, put all the House into an uproar; but
there was no remedy, for the Prisoner was escaped and his Kahya, or Steward,
had time also to get out of the way, tho Two days afterward he surrendered
himself, and the Hasnadar or Treasurer, and Chiohadar, or Master of his
Wardrobe were also imprisoned: Others are seized, and Solomon the Vizier is
taken.
And about the same time also Shaban Aga, the Chief Customer, was seized and
carried Prisoner to the middle Gate of the Seraglio, where Solomon the late
Vizier was also committed, being taken at a House of his own on the Bosphorus;
and the same day the Segmenbashee was also imprisoned, all which was performed
by the special Command of the Grand Signior at the instigation of the Kuzlir
Aga, whose Councils now solely prevailed, and tended to the seizure of all
persons whatsoever of Office, and Riches, no matter why, or wherefore, provided
they might be a Sacrifice acceptable to the Soldiery, and atone for the Lives
of his Master and himself. All these seizures and imprisonments of the great
Officers caused such disturbances and fears amongst the Citizens at
Constantinople, that they all shut up their Shops, a thousand Reports flying
about the Town, of Dangers, and Enemies; and that the Grand Vizier with some
Soldiers were come to the City with bad intentions and designs: Amidst all
these Rumors, there were no Officers, or Governors; (they being all
imprisoned) to appease, or comfort the People, until the Grand Signior created
the Nisangi Pasha, (who puts the Grand Signior's Firm to public Writings) to
be Chimacam pro tempore, who came and published that there was no danger, and
that every man should open his Shop upon pain of Death: And that Night the
Grand Seignior went to the Grand Seraglio, where he had not Slept in Thirty
Years before, having an aversion to the place, as we have shown in other Books.
And this was done for one Point of Reformation intended against the coming of
the Army; for that it was one Article against this Sultan, that he had forsaken
his Royal Palace, or Seraglio, the Glorious Seat of his Ancestors.

In this want of great and wise Officers, and Ministers, Kuperlee Pasha ^s sent
for.
the Kuzlir Aga, whose Council was only heard, advised the Grand Signior to
order and appoint Mustapha Pasha, Son of the Old Kuperlee, and Brother to the
late Achmet Kupriogli, who then commanded at the Dardanelli to go to the Army,
and endeavor to appease, and direct them; for which Employment he was esteemed
the most proper person, being Brother-in-Law to Sciaus Pasha, who married his
Sister, and one who stood well in the good Opinion and Esteem of the Soldiery:
But upon farther Thoughts he was first commanded to come to Constantinople,
there to receive his Orders and Instructions.

In a few days Kuperlee Mustapha came to Constantinople, and was treated and
received by the Grand Seignior, with an unusual Respect and Kindness; Is kindly
received. October 1687.
he called him Lala, which is a Compellation given by the Grand Signiors to
their Great Vizier's, and signifies as much (as Father) telling him that as his
Father settled him in his Throne, so now he was to Inherit that Honor, and
confirm him thereon in despite of those powerful Machinations, which were
forming against him; and to enable him thereunto, he created him Chimacam,
Vested him, and what was very extraordinary, he caused him to Sup with him.
That very Night, whilst the Grand Seignior was at the Table, the Selictar Aga,
or Sword Bearer, who was sent with the Seal and Standard to Siaus Pasha, by
which he was created Grand Vizier, returned from the Army, which he met at
Nissa; and reported, That whilst he was there, News from the Army.
the Soldiers arose in a furious Tumult, and cut in pieces the Tefterdar, who
was sent to appease them; and Ali Effendi, who the last year had been in the
Treaty: But the Reis Effendi, who was sent on the same Errant, upon their first
stirring fled, being too wise to trust their Mercy; as did also, a chief
Commander of the Bostangees or Gardiners: But Ajemzadee a reverend Person of
about Eighty years of Age, advising them not to spill the Blood of Musselmen,
was pursued by them into the Vizier's Tent, Many Officers killed by them.
who covering him with his Vest endeavored to save him; but finding the danger
to which he exposed his own Life, he was forced to deliver him up to their
Fury: He had been Reis Effendi or Chief Secretary, but then had an Office in
the Treasury. They demanded also the two Teskaragees, or Chief Clerks to the
Reis Effendi, to be delivered up to their Justice; one of which had for many
years done all the English business in that Office; but they desiring to be
Strangled, rather than to have their Bodies mangled by the Soldiery, it was
accordingly performed behind the Vizier's Tent, and their Bodies exposed. Orta,
Chiaus of the Janisaries (of whom we have already made mention) being suspected
to have been corrupted by Regeb, the Chimacam of Constantinople, was cut in
pieces. Mustapha Pasha, who had been General of the Janisaries, and Seraskier
in the first Siege of Buda, was secured, and ran great danger of his Life; but
by the Mediation of the Vizier, he was only deposed, and sent to command at the
Dardanelli in the place of Mustapha Kuperlee, who was now Chimacam at
Constantinople.

And lastly, after this dismal Tragedy the Selictar coming to give an account
of himself, he declared, The Selictar returns from the Army.
That he was fearful of his own Life, notwithstanding the good Office he had
done in bringing the Seal and Standard to the Grand Vizier; for which whilst he
was expecting a great Present, as was accustomary; an Answer was given, That
the best Present could be given him was of his own Head, which had been taken
off, according to the List in which he was proscribed, but that he had merited
his Life, by this Office of bringing the Seal and Standard.

The Army having in this manner vented some part of their Fury at Nissa,
proceeded on their March toward Constantinople, doing little other harm on the
Way, The Army Marches to Constantinople.
than only displacing some few Officers of the Janisaries, and putting an old
Granatine, who had been one of those, who had been banished by the Spaniards
out of the Kingdom of Granada, a Person of Eighty years of Age, in the Office
of General of the Janisaries. As the Army approached, so the Fears and
Apprehensions of the great Men at Constantinople increased. Mustapha Kupriogli,
as we have said, being made Chimacam, he appeared publicly in the Divan, and
gave out the Pay to the Soldiers; and then went to the Grand Seignior, whom he
found at a Kiosk, or House of Pleasure by the Water side, A Council held.
and presently a Consultation was held, at which were present the two
Kadileskers, or chief Justices, the Nakib Effendi, who is chief of the
Green-heads of the Prophet (or Mahomet's Kindred) four Sheghs or Preachers, the
Stambol Effendi, or Mayor of the City, as also the Nisangi Pasha, who sets the
Firm of the Grand Seignior to Commissions; these after a Consultation and
Debate of about two hours time, resolved on several Points, not then divulged
to the World but by the execution of them; for they all went together to the
Chimacam's House, from whence in half an hours time afterward, the Chiefs of
the Chiauses, whith Thirty of his Men were sent to the Prison where Solomon the
late Vizier was confined; so soon as Solomon saw the Chiausbashee, he said, I
know for what you come, God's will be done; the Chiausbashee who had been his
Creature, and raised by him, Solomon the late Vizier strangled.
with Tears in his Eyes delivered unto him the Command for his Head. Solomon
taking it from him, kissed it and said, I have washed, but not as yet said my
Kindi, or Afternoon Prayers, (for it was about that time) let me perform those
my last Prayers, and then in the name of God execute your Office. Solomon
having finished his Prayers, called the Chiausbashee into an Inner Room, and
said, Execute your Orders; but first let me recommend two things to you. One
is, That you declare and be a Witness to the World; That I have given Freedom
to all my Slaves both Males and Females. His last Will.
And 2ly, That they do not torment my People to find out my Money, for I never
had any thing considerable; the little I had was with me in the Camp, where it
was lost, and made a Prey to the Enemy. In my House at Scutari there is some
Furniture, and some few Galanteries, which if the Grand Seignior will present
to my Son it is well, but if not he is Lord and Master of them: And if you,
said he, to the Chiausbashee, shall not declare this to the Grand Seignior, my
Hands shall be upon you at the Day of Judgment; And having said thus much he
kneeled, and turning his Face to the Wall, the Executioners performed their
Duty. So was Solomon strangled, a Person deserving to live in better times, and
worthy of a better Death; his Head was cut off and carried to the Chimacam,
where it was flead and stuffed with Cotton, and being put into a Box was sent
to the Grand Seignior; but his Body was consigned to his Friends, and buried at
Scutari. His Son a young Man of about 24 years of Age was sent for from
Adrianople, and imprisoned to discover his Father's Estate; but that being
known to be very little, the Chimacam by his own Authority set him at liberty.
The Wife of Solomon amidst her Fears, sent two Trunks filled with Sables, and
rich Habits, and Vestments to the House of a certain Friend to be there
secured, and were accordingly covered under a Pile of Wood: This matter being
observed by a crew of Rogues, they came that Night, pretending an Order from
the Chimacam to seize those Goods, naming the place where they were concealed;
at which the People of the House being affrighted, immediately delivered the
Trunks to the Hands of the Rogues: The next day the Wife of Solomon, full of
sorrow and anguish of Mind, came to the Chimacam to make complaint of this hard
Usage, declaring the Goods to be her own, and not her Husband's. The Chimacam
disavowing the matter, and denying to have given any such Orders, the Robbery
appeared, and Search being made after the Thieves, four of them were taken and
most of the Goods restored.

The next day Solyman's Head was sent for a Present to the Army, by two
Officers belonging to the New Vizier, with a Letter from the Chimacam,
accompanying an Imperial Command or Signature from the Sultan, declaring, that
if the Army would stay and Winter at Adrianople, Proposals sent to the Army;
he would give them full satisfaction in sending the Heads of all they should
demand, not sparing his own Sons or Brother, and would send them the Fifteen
Months Pay that they were in Arrear, with the same Donative as should have been
given, in case a new Grand Seignior had been created. But they would hearken to
no Conditions, for they had cast the Bridle out of their Mouths, and taken the
Power into their Hands; And refused.
and nothing could now make them safe but a total Subversion of the Government,
and a Change of the Grand Seignior.

But first, The way thereunto was to be made by the Death of many of the great
Men: Regeb Pasha, the late Chimacam, Regeb taken.
was about this time taken at a place called Visa near Chattalgee in Asia, his
Horse tired, and he almost famished with Hunger; and being brought to
Constantinople he was committed Prisoner to the same Chamber, in which his
Master Solomon had been lately executed; and was in a few days afterward
Strangled, as we shall see hereafter.

The same night that Regeb was imprisoned, the Kapugibashee, who was sent to
Conduct the Mufti from Prusa to Rhodes, returned with the Head of Ibrahim
Pasha, who had been Vizier before Solomon; being put to Death by the
contrivance of Regeb, as be-before mentioned. Ibrahim Pasha put to Death at
Rhodes.
The manner whereof was this: The Bey or Captain of the Gally, which carried
the Mufti to Rhodes being a Friend to Ibrahim Pasha, endeavored during the
Voyage to pump the Capugibashee to know of him, whether he had any other Orders
to perform at Rhodes, besides that of conducting the Mufti; but he could
discover nothing, so that so soon as he was arrived, he went directly to
Ibrahim Pasha to put him out of pain, by assuring him, that there were no
Orders come in relation unto him, and that their business was only to bring the
Mufti. Whilst they were thus discoursing, a noise was heard in the Street and
Ibrahim looking out of the Window, saw a multitude of People gathering about
the Door, which the Bey said, might be out of curiosity to see the Mufti their
new Guest. In a few minutes afterward, in came the Capugibashee; and kissing
Ibrahim's Vest sat down by him, and being asked what News, he said, all is
well; and then discoursing of general things, he drank his Coffee, and having
smoaked his Pipe, he put his Hand into his Breast; and drew out a Paper, which
he gave to his Hand; whilst he was reading of it, he showed some alteration in
his Countenance, for he soon found that it concerned his Life: He had a little
Child at that time playing upon his Knee, he kissed it with Tears in his Eyes,
and bid his Servants take it away: And then said, What have I done? They have
seized all my Estate, and not being contented therewith, they have sent for my
Life. Oh treacherous World! Whilst he was saying thus much, the Capugibashee's
Servants threw down the Cord on the Floar, which Ibrahim observing to be thick,
and rugged, he took it up, saying, This is a Cord one would not strangle a Dog
with, and bid his Man fetch him a Bow-string, which he soaped with the Soap, he
intended to use at his washing before Prayers, and made a Knot to it himself:
his Prayers being ended he was strangled; and his Head with his Women and
Children were brought to Constantinople. The Chimacam had no mind to see it,
for he had been his Friend, and had no Hand in his Blood, which lay wholly at
Regeb's Door, who was now in a fair way of incurring the same Fate himself: The
Money found about him was no more than Nine thousand Dollars.

It was now the Festival of their little Byram, when the Grand Seignior
according to the usual Custom received the Salutes of the Chimacam and all the
great Men, The little Byram.
sitting in his Kiosk, or House of pleasure by the Sea side, with Music and
firing of the Guns which lay at the point of the Seraglio.

And now the Fate of the Grand Seignior seemed to approach; for the Army drew
near, and had rejected all the fair Terms, and Propositions which the Sultan
had offered them, and yet he still continued to make such Sacrifices to them as
he thought might sweeten and appease them. The Army inflexible.
But Turks were never used to be overcome by gentle Terms and soft Promises,
but by the Topuz or Club, or by violent Remedies. For when the Head of Solomon
late Vizier was brought, they said, it was not that which they looked for, but
rather to have had him alive under Examination, to know how he had disposed of
the Money, which was given the last year to defray the Charges of the War:
Howsoever, the Grand Seignior still resolved to try them yet farther by such
Methods, The Grand Seignior still endavours to appease them.
which he thought might please them, and that was to Imprison, or put to Death
all Men indifferently, that were in Office and Power, whether they had deserved
well or evil: Accordingly the Kuzlir Aga (chief of the black Eunuchs) and
Bostangibashee were imprisoned in the Seraglio, and others put into their
places; and these two with Mahomet Effendi, Treasurer and Steward to the
Empress, the Moxur Aga to Regeb Pasha, who was Grandson to the famous Bectas,
who was Janisar Aga when the Kiosem Valide was cut off, Vanni Efendi Teskeragee
or Giver of the Writs, Kapan Cheleli, who belonged to the Arsenal; Omar the
Steward of Regeb late Chimacam, and Shafan Aga, who had been tormented to
discover his Money, were all sent to the Army to receive such Sentence and
Doom, as they should appoint for them: But as these were not demanded by the
Soldiery, so some of them were rather preferred than punished by them. For the
Moxur Aga was sent to command the Janisaries in Candia, the Bostangibashee and
Segmen-bashee, were set at liberty, and the former sent Pasha to Mytilene, and
the other to Command the Forces in the Morea against the Venetians; the others
were held under Examination, being obliged to render an Account of the public
Moneys, which had passed through their Hands; Fines laid and levied.
but none of them was acquitted without paying a Ransom. The Kuzlier Aga was
fined at Three hundred Purses, besides his Goods and Furniture, which were very
rich, he having Two hundred Sable Vests, which were never made up, all which
were seized, and he banished to Grand Cairo, the Asylum, or Receptacle of
unfortunate Eunuchs. The Grand Seignior finding himself now stripped of all his
faithful and old Friends, which he had imprudently destroyed or faintly
delivered up into the Hands of his Enemies; began to grow desperate; and as
such, resolved to play the last Game of Cowardice and Cruelty, which was by the
assistance of his Pages and Servants near his Person, to cut off his Sons and
two Brothers; that so none remaining alive of the Ottoman Line, the Soldiers
would be obliged to suffer him to Reign, and Propagate more of the Royal Race.
To execute this design with greater ease and security, The Grand Seignior
endeavors to cut off his Brothers and Sons.
He sent to the Eunuchs who kept his Brothers, telling them that he knowing his
Condition to be such, that he could Reign no longer, he desired he might come
and see them, and recommend himself and Children to them, for that as he had
been merciful to them, and not touched their Lives, so that they would prove
kind and compassionate to him and his. This design could not be executed
without entrusting it first to the Pages, who were to be Actors in the Tragedy;
and they not being all faithful alike, some, or one of them made it known to
the Chimacam, who immediately charged the New Kuzlir Aga, and Bostangibashee to
set Guards at the Doors of the Brother's Apartments; between whom and the Pages
there happened some Scuffle: The new Janisar Aga had also received Orders to
attend with his Janisaries before the Gate of the Seraglio; Is prevented.
and matters being in this manner secured, the Chimacam went himself to the
Grand Seignior, and admonished him not to precipitate, and engage himself in
such a rash and odious Attempt, which the Janisaries, who were attending at the
Gate would most certainly Revenge without any Regard, or Reverence to his
Person. The Grand Seignior had been a little Rough before with the Chimacam;
but the armed Force being near, so affrightned him, that he began to Treat the
Chimacam with milder Terms. Howsoever his Children were removed from the
Seraglio, and the Guards doubled, which were set upon his Brothers. From that
time the Grand Seignior lost all his Authority; for the Chimacam came no more
near him, The Grand Seignior loses his Authority.
and ordered the Bostangibashee not to suffer him to stir out of the Seraglio,
so that all the Liberty and Divertisement he had, was to pass his time in a
Kiosk, or House or Pleasure near the Sea. Howsoever, the Grand Seignior to make
Trial of his Authority sent a Hattesheriff, or Royal Command to displace the
Segmenbashee; but it proved of little effect, for the Chimacam received it, and
said it is very well, but laid it by him, and that was all.

portrait of Ottoman Sultan Suleiman II Solomon the fourteenth Emperor of the
Turks made sultan october ye 30. 1687. p 257
M. Vander Gucht Scul.


THE REIGN OF SOLOMON, The Fourteenth Emperor of the Turks.
Ponte Grande, which is about Twenty English Miles distant from Constantinople:
Oct. 28. 1687.
And about ten a Clock that Night, the Janisar-Aga entered the City, with ten
Chambers of Janisaries. And now did the hour fatal to Sultan Mahomet approach;
for about two a Clock in the Morning of the 29th of October, the
Bostangeebashi, Sultan Mahomet deposed.
and the Kuzlir Aga by Order of the Army came to Sequester and confine him to
his Chamber. He asked why, and what Hurt he had done? They told him, That he
had Reigned Forty years, which was the Life of a Man, and might content himself
with that, for that few of his Ancestors had ruled so long. Then did the
Chimacam, the Mufti, Nakib Effendi, who is principal of the Green-heads, or
Mahomet's Kindred, with the Kadeleskers or Chief Justices, with the Chief Men
of the Law meet together, and held a Council before Day at St. Sophia. This
Nakib Effendi had been a Kadelesker, but a few Days before; for the former
Nakib died of a Fright, taken at the appearance of some Janisaries before his
Door, which he apprehended came to seize him. After they had ended their
morning Prayer about break of Day, they went together from the Mosch to the
Seraglio, and entering in, they asked for Sultan Solomon, who was brought out to
them; and then the Nakib Effendi, whose Office it was, as being the Head of the
Race of the Prophet, placed him in the Throne, and prayed that he might be
prosperous, Sultan Solomon made Emperor.
and increase the Honor of the Empire, and kissed his Hand, as did also the
Mufti, the Chimacam and the others. The Sultan laying his Hand on his Breast
bowed and thanked them; after which Ceremony they all retired, and afterward
about nine a Clock Proclamation was made in the Streets, That Sultan Mahomet
being deposed for his ill Government, Sultan Solomon is made Emperor in his
place.

The next Day being the last Day of October, the Chimacam, the Chiausbashee,
Daout Passa, a place distant about two English Miles from Constantinople; but
the Chiausbashee was arrested, not that the Soldiers had any thing against him,
but only that they might make room for him, who officiated in that charge in
the Army.

The first of November the Grand Vizier made his Entrance into the City with a
Solemn Cavalcade, Mufti riding on his Left Hand, Siaus Pasha Grand Vizier makes
his Entry and ^lutes the Grand Seignior.
he went to the Seraglio, where he alighted, and taking the Standard of the
Prophet, he went with it to the Grand Seignior, who arising from his Throne
went three Steps to meet it, and took it from the Vizier, and gave it to the
Selictar; then the Vizier gave him up the Seal also, which being with his
Brother's Name, he kept, and returned him a new one, with his own Name. The
Solemnity being over, the Vizer went to a great Palace lately Ibrahim Pasha's,
near the Janisaries Chamber, which was provided for him; and the Chimacam
Kupriogli remained in that where his Brother and other Viziers had formerly
resided.

And now it might have been thought, that all Seditions and Mutinies amongst
the Soldiery would have ended at this Period But it seems the Storm was not
half over; for it remained, that the Authors of these Troubles who had been
guilty of so much Blood, and death of their Officers, should at length turn
their Fury against each others; and so it happened: For the Spahees meeting at
Atmeidan or the Hypodromo, and the Janisaries at Etmeidan, demanded their Pay,
and that Regeb Pasha, should be delivered to their Hands. The next Day being
the 4th af November, Nov. 1687. Regeb strangled.
Regeb Pasha was strangled, and his Body exposed before the Seraglio in the
Square of Santa Sophia, and laid on an old Matt for three Days: It is believed,
that tho the demand of his Life proceeded from the Soldiery, yet that it was a
contrivance of the Vizier, not only in Revenge for procuring the Command sent
to the late Solomon for his Head; but out of fear of his Person, who was known
to be a Subtle, and a stout Man. The same Day Cochiuck or little Mahomet, a
Pestilent Fellow, and chief Head of the Mutinous Spahees, with seven other
Ringleaders in all the Seditions, was lodged in the great Palace of the
Hypodromo; and when he went abroad was always attended with a numerous armed
Guard, whether out of State, or Fear, is not well known; having a confidence in
himself, and his Merits and good Services he had done for the Soldiery,
adventured to persuade them to a quiet, and an orderly behavior, and to
content themselves for the present with three Pays, and to have a little
patience for the rest, and for their Donative, until Money could be raised:
This admonition sounding not well in the Ears of some Soldiers, they presently
instilled into the Minds of their Comrades, that this Mahomet had been taken
off with Money, and was brought into the Association with those, whose business
it was to defraud them of their just Demands: Such a sinister Report as this,
was enough at that time to have destroyed half their Officers; as it quickly
did his business; for immediately they ran to his Palace to look for him there,
but missing him, they afterward met him in the Streets, and pulled him from
his Horse, saying, You that brought us hither, and should Speak for us, now
look to your self; you Lie in a Palace, Eat High, and are clad in Sables,
whilst we poor Fellows are Ragged, The chief of the Mutineers killed.
and Lie in the Yards of the Moschs, and Corners of the Streets; and with that
they rushed upon him, and with Clubs and Knives killed him, and Toar his Body
in Pieces. This was the busiest Man of any, feared by all, tho an ordinary
Spahee; he was presented and courted by all the great Men in Town; for no Man
was secure of his Head, if he would have instigated, and moved the Soldiers to
call for it: Having thus dispatched him, they ran to his Palace, and plundered
all he had there.

The Kuzlir-Aga, who had escaped, was pursued and taken at Nice, and brought
back and committed Prisoner to the seven Towers; Several Imprisoned.
then was Mahomet Effendi Tefterdar or Treasurer, Shaban Aga, Omar Kiah, Capan
Chelebi, and several others, were sent to the Common Prison: But Kupriogli was
declared Mosayp, or Favorite of the Grand Seignior.

All the care was now to pacify the Soldiers, which was only to be done with
Money; and the Art was, how to separate and divide the Spahees; as a means
whereunto they began to give pay to the Janisaries, and to serve them first:
This had likely to have begotten ill Blood; but the Spahees put them in mind of
the solemn Oath, they had made to stand by each other; and the Janisaries
refused their Pay, without the increase both of their Pay and Donative; The
Spahees and Janisaries unite.
but there being not as yet a sufficient Fund for all, the Tumults still
continued. This Artifice which was contrived for a Separation, tied the Knot of
Union more closely between the Janisaries and Spahees, so that many Spahees
came as Guests to the Janisaries Chambers, and lodged with them, declaring that
they would not touch an Asper of their Pay, until the Janisaries were fully
satisfied. This Friendship being made between these two Military Orders; the
Spahees as the more polite and ingenious Men took all the Government into their
own Hands, holding their Councils at Atmeidan, and what was there resolved, was
reported to the Vizier by four of their own Members, and the Vizier being
forced to assent unto all their Demands, The Vizier yields to all their demands.
gave them a Writing to approve of all that they should do, and liberty to use
such Methods for raising Money, as they should judge most convenient in this
exigence, both to satisfy the Donative, and the Arrears and Increase of Pay.

Notwithstanding all these Condescentions, and tho the means were put into
their Hands to pay themselves what they demanded, yet the Troubles and Embroils
still continued: For the Janisaries suspecting that their Aga or Commander in
Chief was not cordial to them, nor approving their Actions (for every one was
thought so, who did not run to the same height of Madness with them) they
turned him out of his Office, and would have none of their own Body to command
them, but one, as in former times, taken out of the Seraglio; and such an one
they pitched upon, called Mustapha Aga, a Surgeon by profession, The
Janisaries choose a new Aga.
who had been Twenty five years in the Seraglio, of which he had been eight
Tulbentgee or Turbant-folder to the late Grand Seignior, and Selictar to the
present Sultan; the true cause of this change was, that they would have a raw
unpractised Fellow over them, and one whom they could govern, and not one, who
knew how to govern them.

The Tumults still continued, and must so until Money could be found, which the
Soldiers were now themselves to raise; every Man that had Money must now bleed
his Coffers, and redeem his Life with his Riches. The manner of raising Money.
The Favorites of the Seraglio must pay their Shares, being taxed at vast Sums,
the particulars of which were not exactly known; but it was reported, That the
Selictar Aga to the late Grand Seignior, now made Pasha of Grand Cairo, paid
Six hundred Purses; the Chiohadar, or he who is Master of the Wardrobe, Two
hundred; the Pasha of Balsora, Two hundred; besides many others, who all paid
their Assesments, as the Soldiers were pleased to Rate and Tax them.

Then the Chief of the Spahees called before them several of the Rich men of
the City, and Taxed them each according to what they believed them worth; and
sent an Officer, with a certain Number of Soldiers, to go with them to their
respective Houses, and stay with them until the Money was paid, Rich Men taxed.
and then they carried it to the Treasurer, taking his Receipt for the same.
The Stambol Agasee, or Mayor of Constantinople, was Fined Five hundred Purses,
the Shahir Emin, or City Customer Forty, Sari Osman Aga Thirty, besides Ninety
which the Exchequer owed him, which he was to remit. Likewise the Grand
Signior's chief Physicians, Astrologers and Goldsmiths, and great Numbers more
of all sorts and conditions, were all Taxed, and most of them to the full of
what they were worth. Thus were vast Sums raised by Military Execution, with
which the Grand Vizier was well enough pleased; for the Soldiers had done his
business for him, without drawing an Odium upon himself; for there being a
scarcity, and yet an absolute necessity for Money, it could not be raised by
more compendious Methods, The Janisaries Assault their Officers.
than by armed Force. And yet for all this the Tumults continued; for the
Janisaries not knowing what they would have, assaulted their Officers at
Evening Prayer, in a Mosch near their Chambers; saying, That they were met
there in Council against them, with design to instill bad Principles into their
new Janisar Aga; but no hurt was more done than a few Blows, and an abundance
of bad Words.

Nov. 1687. The vouchsafe to take their pay.
And now about the middle of this Month, after many Complements and Courtships
made to the Janisaries, they condescended at length to take their Pay and
Donative, which were so kindly offered; and those, who had been imprisoned upon
paying their Ransom were set at Liberty. Mahomet Effendi, who had been
Treasurer, paid One hundred and twenty Purses; Shaban Aga One hundred and
fifty, besides Four hundred which had formerly been racked from him by
Torments; Capan Chelebi Sixty, Omar Kiak Thirty five, besides what had been
taken from him before: Mustapha Aga the Chiausbashee Forty, and Uziel a Jew was
made to pay eight Purses; and thus sufficient Money being found for payment of
all, and the same daily issuing, all things grew calm and quiet; so that on the
17th about eight a Clock in the Morning, The new Grand Seignior installed.
the new Grand Seignior went by Boat from the Seraglio to Eiub, where the Nakib
Effendi, or Chief of Mahomet's Kindred Girt him with the Sword, which is a
Ceremony answering to our Coronation; and having said Noon-Prayers at that
place, and all the Ceremonies ended, he rode from the Mosch in a Solemn
Cavalcade through the City back to the Seraglio, but not with such Splendour and
Magnificence, as had been done in the time of the Grand Seigniors his
Predecessors: All People crowded (as we may believe) to see the Features and
Fashion of their new Sultan, of whose Person and Abilities Reports had created
already a high Expectation. He was of a long, lean, pale Visage, but not of an
ungrateful Aspect; His person and qualities.
his Eyes were full and black, and his Beard was black, but somewhat grisly;
what his Qualications of Mind were, will be more evidently discovered
hereafter, and come then more properly to be described in their due place. But
in the mean time we may reflect, that the change of the person of the Prince,
could not be of much advantage to the Public: For what the other did out of a
remiss and voluptuous Humor, attending only to his Divertisements, and leaving
the Care and Management of all his Affairs to the Contrivance and Conduct of
his Ministers; this Grand Seignior must now do out of necessity, being wholly
unexperienced in the World, having all his Life been kept up in a Chamber,
without other Conversation, than that of a few Eunuchs, some old Women, and two
or three Hogiaes, or Masters to assist him in his Studies. As Books were his
Entertainment in his confined Life, so he seemed to have had an affection for
them, in the choice he made of Kupriogli for his Favorite, who was esteemed in
that Country a learned Man, and to have had the best Library of any in that
whole Empire. It was said, That he had promised his deposed Brother all
security of his Life, and that he should be kept in the same manner, as he was;
and that he might allow him what comfort he could in that manner of Life, he
suffered his Children to be with him for some Days; but they were afterward by
the Councils of others taken from him and lodged apart. He visits his Brother
Achment.
His other Brother Achmet, the Companion with him in his Imprisonment, he
visited, and promised to be kind to him; but he was not perfect Master of his
Senses; of which we shall speak more when we come to see him on the Throne
after the Death of Sultan Solomon. The Hazaki Sultana, or Empress of the
deposed Sultan, was sent to the old Seraglio there to remain until Death, or
some other Revolution of Fortune shall release her: In the place of her, the
Mother of the present Grand Seignior, who for some years was reported to be
dead, appeared alive, and removed from the old Seraglio to her Son, but she was
a little Maddish.

Thus were all things turned up-side down; all the great Officers of the
Empire, except the Captain Pasha or Admiral, being changed: Reflections on the
changes.
Which when a Man seriously considers, and that these Revolutions were carried
on by common Soldiers, one would admire that they should pass with so little
Confusion, or Bloodshed: For except those six which were killed in the Army,
and Cuchiuck Mahomet at Constantinople in a Military Fury, there was only
Solomon and Regeb cut off; for the Death of Ibrahim at Rhodes, did not proceed
from them, but from Regeb. As to the daily Insolences in the Streets, they were
not committed by the Spahees, but by poor Drunken Janisaries, who had neither
Money nor Cloths, and therewith would be supplied from Christians, and Jews,
and Turks too. But this was no new thing, but what had been formerly practiced
by the baser sort of the Soldiers, as often as they came from the War, or were
shortly going thither. And now since things were thus changed, some Reformation
was expected, and that was to begin in the Seraglio; where the first and most
plausible thing was the Retrenchment of the Expenses, Reformations in the
Government.
which during the time of the late Sultan had been excessive, the very Barley
for the Horses costing One thousand five hundred Dollars, or Three hundred
pounds Sterling a Day; the number of the Hawks and Dogs, with the People who
attended them was vast, all which were ordered to be reduced; for the present
Sultan took so little delight in these Divertisements, that he was to learn how
to Ride; and the Stables were to be reduced to a Hundred Horse, one Hundred and
fifty of the Pages were to be made Spahees, and the rest were to be changed,
and new ones put into their places. The same was to be performed in the Courts
and Chambers of the Women; so that the Retrenchments made were calculated to
amount unto Eight thousand Purses of Money a year, every Purse being Five
hundred Dollars, and may be accounted to be almost a Million of pounds
Sterling: The Greyhounds and Dogs, of which there were many Hundreds kept in
the Seraglio for the use of the late Sultan, were all let loose and suffered to
run about the Streets of Constantinople, where they might have starved, had not
the godly Men, whose Religion consists much in feeding Dogs and Cats, taken
Compassion on them, and fed them daily with Bread from the Bakers Shops.

These Retrenchments of expense in the Seraglio pleased the Soldiers
wonderfully, December. 1687.
hoping that thereby the more Money would be coming to them; and so they
continued very observant and quiet, during all the time that the Money was
paying out; but so soon as that began to fail and fall short, New Commotions.
they became as troublesome as ever, assembling with great Insolence at the
Vizier's House, threw Stones at his Windows, storming and raging like Madmen,
until such time as with fair words, and promises of Money within a few Days
they were for a while appeased.

Thus far had the Soldiery found the ways to raise Money; but now they being at
a stand, it was the Vizier's turn to set on foot some new invention, or
conjuration for more: But so empty and drained were all the great Banks, Money
wanting, but it found.
that no other way could be thought on, but only to go over the rich Men once
more, and to squeeze them to the last Dreggs of all their Estates; to perform
which they began with the old Kuzlir Aga, who obtained his Liberty upon payment
of Nine hundred Purses, in all, besides his Furniture, and Curiosities which
were taken from him to a great value; and after that he had the favor to be
Banished to Grand Cairo: The Hasnadar Aga, who (as we have said) succeeded him,
was displaced, and paid Two hundred Purses; and the Aga of the old Seraglio was
made Kuzlir Aga; which Promotion was according to the ancient Methods, that
every one should rise and succeed gradually, and savoured something of a
Reformation. But because this new Tax would not reach the entire Sum required
for the Soldiers Pay and Donative; they were forced to Coin out of Plate, and
Silver and Gold taken off from the Horses Furniture belonging to the Seraglio
Two hundred Purses in Gold, and Sixty in Silver; with which every one being
satisfied, The Spahees return home.
all was quiet and calm again, and the Spahees returned to their own Homes;
leaving six of the Chief Mutiniers to remain behind at Constantinople. That is
to say, one Chief, with two Assistants for the white Colors, and the like for
the red; and Four hundred Captains called Bolucbashees, Two hundred for each
Color or Ensign; and these were appointed to hold the power in their Hands,
which their Mutinies, and late Rebellions had gained for them.

About this time, the Turks proposed at the instigation of the French
Ambassador; to send a Chiaus into France, England and Holland, to acquaint
those Princes with the advancement of Sultan Solomon to the Throne of the
Ottoman Emperors. The which Embassy, tho little desired by the other Ministers,
being a Complement insignificant in it self, and which would only cost Money
and Trouble, was yet much pressed by the French, The French desire to engage
the Turks to them.
who were then contriving to do something extraordinary to engage the Turk in a
strict Alliance with them, being at that time resolved to disoblige, and enter
into a War against the Emperor, and all the Princes of Germany. But by Troubles
afterward amongst the Turks themselves, and by the revived Spirits of Mutiny
amongst the Soldiery, their thoughts were so taken up with their Seditions,
Foreign Enemies and other Misfortunes, that they thought it not so seasonable
to send such triumphant Messages in the declension of their Affairs, as might
have been in more happy and prosperous times. Howsoever the French Ambassador
and Merchants at Constantinople, to evidence their good Affection to the Port,
freely supplied the late Selictar Aga, now appointed Pasha of Grand Cairo, with
two Ships to Transport him and his Equipage to Alexandria; and farther to
oblige him, lent him in Money and Goods to the value of One hundred and fifty
Purses; for security of which, Pawns were given to remain aboard, until the
Debt was satisfied.

And now the Grand Vizier began to appear in public with the usual Pomp and
Equipage; he made his Visit with great State to the Mufti; and daily held the
Divans in the Seraglio, besides those at his own House.

The Vizier appears in public.
The new Sultan had been so little a while in the Government, that he could not
as yet give many Indications of his Temper; but as to what appeared of him at
first, he seemed very devout, a strict observer of his Law, and much addicted
to reading, The Charecter of the new Grand Seignior.
so that he could not shake off his habitual retiredness, nor enjoy the
pleasures of a Court, and of such a Throne as anciently cast off all the Cares
of it, on the Vizier and other Ministers; for he neither conversed with Women,
nor took any public Diversion. In the mean time his deposed Brother Sultan
Mahomet, who had always used much Exercise, began by an unaccustomed
Confinement to be tainted with the Scurvy; his Legs swelled, and gave Symptoms
of the Dropsy. Wherefore he sent to his Brother the present Sultan, desiring
that some Physicians might be permitted to come to him for his Cure. But grave
Solomon returned him answer, That in case he should allow that, and he
miscarry, the World would say, that he was an occasion of his Death; so that in
lieu of the Physicians he would pray to God for him, and he who sent the
Sickness could give him a Cure.

These civil Commotions and Mutinies amongst the Soldiers were more dangerous
to the Ottoman State, than all the Ruins, Defeats and Losses they had received
from the Enemy; and gave the Imperialists an opportunity to act, and succeed in
all their Enterprises in Hungary, and march and rove with their Parties through
the whole Country without opposition or control: But the Season of the year
being too much advanced, The Christian Army draws into Winter Quarters.
it was thought time to draw the Armies into Winter Quarters, and to lodge them
in the conquered Countries. Thus Count Dunewalt after he had fortified and
secured the Castles, and Places which he had taken, quartered his Army at
Possega, Valkovar, and other places bordering upon Croatia. Likewise the two
Regiments of Palfy and Staremberg, which had lately been detached from the Duke
of Lorain's Army, to attend the Emperor's service at Possonium, on occasion of
the Coronation of Joseph King of the Romans, joined with some other Hungarian
Troops near Buda, attacked in their way thither the Fortresses of Ciocca and
Palotta, and took them; by which the Garrison of Alba Regalis was much
straightened, and disabled from making Incursions so far as the Danube.

The Duke of Loraine marching (as we have said) toward Transylvania, resolved
to take Quarters for his Army in that fruitful Principality, as yet not much
wasted with the War; and the better to prepare them, Quarters ta^en in
Transylvania.
dispatched away the Baron Huntschin with full Commission to Prince Apafi to
Treat about the places, which might be assigned with most convenience for the
Soldiery, and ease to the People. Huntschin speedily returned with advice, that
he had been favorably received by Apafi, who having assembled several of his
Boyars, or Noblemen together, Apafi s nds Deputies to the Duke of Loraine.
had resolved to send Deputies to the Duke of Loraine, giving him to
understand, the great joy and satisfaction they had received by the happy
Successes of the Imperial Arms, by which they flattered themselves so far, as
to believe that they should now be freed from the Tyranny and oppression of the
Ottoman Yoke, and that as a Testimony thereof, they had readily consented to
afford all the succor and subsistence they were able to the maintenance of the
Christian Troops, during the whole Winter season. But as to assign them places
for Quarters within the Principality of Transylvania, they instantly desired to
be acquitted; in regard that such a Concession would greatly offend the Port,
and lay them open to the Incursions, and to the Fire and Sword both of the
Turks and Tartars. To this Message the Duke of Loraine made Answer in obliging,
but yet in general Terms; and in the mean time the Army still advanced without
farther Treaty, it being well known that neither the Turkish Troops, nor those
of the Country were in a capacity to Dispute their Passage; so that on the 11th
of October, Salone, the first Town of Transylvania, where after having without
many questions or complements, put a Garrison of about a Hundred Men into the
place, Offers made.
they marched forward toward Clausembourg: But on their way thither, the Duke
of Loraine was met by three Deputies from the Prince and States, who repeated
the same Offers, which had been related by Baron Huntschin touching the
Ammunition and Provisions, with which they would furnish the Troops; to which
they added also an offer of some Money; but as to assigning places for
Winter Quarters, it was a matter impossible, and of the most dangerous
consequence to them in the World; since that their Country lying open, and
without defense, would thereby be exposed to all the Hostilities, which the
most barbarous and cruel Enemy in the World could execute. The Duke of Loraine
finding that the Commission of these Deputies extended no farther, than what
they had declared; returned them back again with Count Scherffemberg and Baron
Falkenhem, who were orordered to let Prince Apafi know, A Message from Loraine.
that since he had refused to assign him Winter Quarters on fair Terms, he
himself should be constrained to point them out unto his Troops, and continue
his March into the Bowels of his Country. The States of the Principality
perceiving the Duke of Loraine to be in earnest, and resolved to obtain his
Demands; were contented to grant him Quarters for a certain number, but that
not suffising, he continued his March toward Clausembourg or Claudiopolis, the
chief City of that Country, and the place where the States of Transylvania did
usually Assemble. It is situate in a very fruitful Plain upon the little River
of Samos; it is encompassed with very thick Walls, and the Houses are very well
Built; Claudiopolis.
it is defended by an ancient Fortress; the Suburbs are so large and well
peopled, that it seems to be another Town; the Inhabitants are both Hungarians
and Saxons, who live in so good unity and correspondence together, that both
are equally capable of Offices and Places of Trust in the Government. The Duke
of Loraine so soon as he appeared before the Place, sent to the Governor to
provide Quarters in the Town for some of his Troops; but he excusing it, and
saying, that he could not do it without Orders from Prince Apafi, immediately
Count Caprara was sent to let him know, that his Answer was not satisfactory,
and that Orders were given to the Infantry to prepare all things necessary for
making an Attack on the Town. Whereupon the Governor considering better of the
matter, The Conditions with Claudiopolis.
entered into a Treaty with the Duke of Loraine, who condescended to grant unto
the Inhabitants these following Conditions.

That the Inhabitants should enjoy a free Exercise of their Religion.

That the Magistrates and Citizens should be maintained in their Liberties and
Privileges, and not be forced to pay any extraordinary Contributions.

That every Officer or Magistrate of the City, should be exempt from giving
Quarters to any Soldier in his own House.

That what Forage and Subsistence should be necessary for the Soldiery should
be furnished in Specie, and no Money exacted in lieu of the same: And that the
Soldiers be forbidden under severe Penalties to commit any Disorders, or Abuse
the People.

That those Citizens who were unwilling to continue their Abode in the City,
but were desirous to depart, might have Liberty so to do, and carry with them
all their Goods and Movables.

According to these Conditions the Garrison of Apafi, marched out at one Gate,
whilst Three thousand of the Imperialists entered in at the other with Drums
beating and Colors flying; and the Command of the Town was given to Count Guy
de Staremberg, whith a strict Charge to punish most severely all Insolences of
the Soldiers; the which was carefully observed, not only in that City, but also
in all parts of Transylvania since their entrance into it.

The Duke of Loraine having for one day refreshed the rest of his Army in
places without the Town, The Duke of Loraine at Alba Julia.
marched toward Turtembourg, which is another important Pass in that Country,
in which having left a Garrison, he proceeded to Weissembourg, otherwise called
Alba Julia, so named from the Empress Julia, Mother of Marcus Aurelius, and
entered into it without any resistance. The place is situate on the side of a
Hill, from whence a vast Plain discovers it self; it is reported to have been
the ultimate Limit of the Roman Conquests on that side. Prince Ragotzki erected
an University there, which was very flourishing and famous, considering the
Country.

Hermanstadt, alias Zeben, followed the Example of the aforesaid places: It is
the Metropolis of the whole Province of Savons, Zeben.
situate in a Plain full of Boggs and Marshes, and no Hills near to command it;
the Walls are very thick, and flanked with very great Bastions.

Bestrissa, and all the other considerable Towns opened in like manner their
Gates; so that now the whole Army being conveniently Quartered, And Bestrissa
surrender.
the Duke of Loraine entered into a Treaty with Prince Apafi, and the States of
Transylvania, and concluded on these following Articles. Articles agreed.


I. That the Prince of Transylvania, his Children, and all persons of his
Household, as also, all the Nobles, and in General, all the People of
Transylvania may have liberty according to their Will and Pleasure to go out of
Hermanstadt, or any other City or Town, and return again, as shall be most
agreeable and expedient to or for their Affairs.

II. That the Prince, and Michael Apafi, his Eldest Son, who is declared
Successor to his Father, shall both retain the same Power and Dignity with
which the Sultan had invested them, and that the Principality should be
governed by them, and the Estates according to the known Laws and Customs of
that Country.

III. That the Four Religions allowed in Transylvania, that is to say, the
Roman Catholics, the Lutherans, the Calvinists, and the Unitarians, or
Socinians, shall be permitted to exercise the Rites of their respective
Religions, and to have Liberty of Conscience equally indulged to them.

IV. That it shall not be permitted, on any pretense whatsoever, to molest the
Priests, or the Ministers of any of the aforesaid Religions in the due exercise
of their respective Rites and Ceremonies, nor disturb their Schools, or
Colleges, the which with all freedom and liberty shall be allowed, and
permitted, and defended by the Authority and Power of the Emperor.

V. That the Transilvanians shall be supported, and maintained in their Civil
Privileges, and Franchises.

VI. In case any Foreign Power shall invade, and attack the Country of
Transylvania, the Imperialists shall use all their power to drive them thence
and defend the Country: And the Transilvanians shall to that end enter into a
defensive alliance with them; the which shall by both Parties be confirmed upon
Oath.

VII. The Imperial Troops which have their Winter Quarters in Cities, Towns, or
Villages, shall remain no longer therein, than until the Spring; when they
shall be obliged to draw out of those Quarters into the Field, that so they may
be no longer a charge unto the several Cities and Countries.

VIII. That in case the Weather and Season should be such, or some other cause
intervene, that the Imperialists cannot conveniently draw out into the Field at
the beginning of the Spring; there shall be an Article expressly formed for this
case; that so an amicable understanding may be continued between the Emperor
and Prince Apafi.

IX. That a General Act of Amnesty, or Oblivion shall pass of all Outrages and
Hostilities which have been committed on one side or the other, wherein all
Strangers and Deserters shall be included.

X. That the Burghers and Citizens shall be continued in their Privileges of
guarding the Gates, and the Keys of the City shall be committed to the hands of
the Saxon Consuls; the which Gates notwithstanding are to be shut and opened at
all times when the Imperial Governor shall command.

These Articles being agreed, and concluded between the Duke of Loraine, and
the Prince and Estates of Transylvania, and afterward ratified by the Emperor,
the Troops marched into their Winter Quarters; and it was hoped, that Moldavia,
and Walachia being Neighboring Provinces, would follow the Example of the more
powerful Principality.

This Year's Campaigne being thus gloriously ended, to the great and lasting
Honor of the Emperor, and to the Welfare and Safety of the Empire, and of all
Germany, and as we may justly say of all Christendom; The Imperial Court goes
to Possonium.
The Emperor, the Empress, the Archduke, and the Arch-Duchess Elizabeth his
Sister on the 26th of October left Vienna, attended only with their ordinary
Guards and Ministers, and Officers of their Court, and began their Journey
toward Possonium, at which place against this time, circular Letters had been
sent to convene a General Diet of the Nobles and States of Hungary.

This August Family were met on their way near that City by Two thousand of the
Hungarian Nobility, all well mounted, with a splendid Equipage in the Plains of
Chitze, not far from Possonium; as also by two Imperial Regiments, which
attended their Majesty's to the Gates of the City, where the Recorder met them;
and having Complimented their Majesty's with a most florid Oration, offered the
Keys of the City to the Emperor, in the Name of the People, who with loud
Acclamations, and firing all the Cannon on the Walls, testified the Joy they
conceived for the appearance of the most August and Illustrious Family.

The day following, after the Mass was Celebrated, Crown of Hungary settled.
the Assembly of the States of Hungary were convened, where after diverse Points
were debated, all Difficulties were overcome, and agreed to the common
satisfaction, and with the general consent, That the Hereditary Succession of
that Kingdom should descend to the Eldest Son of his Cesarean Majesty, and from
him to all those who shall spring, or be derived from him; and for default of
Issue, in case that Line should come to fail, (which God forbid) then the Crown
should descend unto the Family of the King of Spain.

The day appointed for the Coronation being come, the Emperor and Empress,
attended with a Noble and an Illustrious Train came to the Temple of St.
Martin, The Ceremonies of Crowning the King of Hungary.
where the Ceremony was to be performed, and at the Gate thereof were met by
the Archbishop of Strigonium, Primate of that Kingdom, assisted by all the
Bishops, who were Twelve in Number, besides Fourteen Priors, and Abbots,
clothed in their Pontifical and Canonical Habits, who with the Sound of all
sorts of Musical Instruments, conducted their Imperial Majesty's, habited in
their sacred Garments, wearing their Crowns, attended with a most pompous
Train, and with all the Signals of Empire unto the Altar, and there seated them
on their Thrones.

After which the Bishops and other Prelates returned to receive the new King;
before whom first marched the Heralds of the Kingdom of Hungary in their Coats:
After them followed the Guards, next went the Lacquies and Pages, all clothed
in new Liveries; these were followed by the Bishops and Chief Officers of that
Kingdom, with Ten Hungarian Knights, each carrying a Standard in his hand,
representing the Ten Kingdoms anciently appertaining to the vast Dominion of
Hungary.

After all which came the King clothed in the Hungarian Habit accompanied with
Prince Esterhasy the Palatine, and the Counts Stephen Ciaky, Lord Chief Justice
Nicholas Erdeody Ban or Prince of the Kingdom of Croatia, John Drascoviz,
Steward of the Royal Household, and Adam Zrini, Marshal of the Kingdom; the King
himself being between Two Bishops, was conducted to the Throne prepared for
him, not far from the High Altar, at which Mass was Celebrated by the
Archbishop of Strigonium, Lord Primate of Hungary; the which being ended, all
the Nobility did Homage to the King; who having made profession of his Faith
before the Altar, he was Blessed and Consecrated by the Archbishop, and
Anointed in the Palm of his Right Hand, on his Arm, and Shoulders; and then the
Palatine holding up the Crown in his hand, asked them with a loud Voice,
saying, Coronabimus Josephum Archiducem Austriae in Regem Hungariae? which is,
Shall we Crown Joseph Archduke of Austria King of the Romans? which being done
Three times, and answer made as often Coronetur, or let him be Crowned; the
Crown was delivered by the Palatine to the Archbishop, who set it on his Head,
and was clothed by him with the Royal Mantle of St. Stephen: Then was the Sword
delivered to one Hand, and the Scepter to the other; and thus being adorned
with all the Ensigns of Majesty, he was Proclaimed King with the sound of
Drums, Trumpets, Acclamations of the People, and all sorts of Music, the
Cannon being at the same time Fired round the Walls, and in the Fortresses.
Then was the King conducted again to his Throne, and Te Deum sung: In the mean
time the Mass was continued by the Archbishop, who being come to the Gospel,
the Emperor himself arose, and taking the Scepter in his Right Hand, and the
Globe in his Left, he held the same in that manner, until the Gospel was ended,
and then the Young King received the Sacrament.

All the Ceremonies being ended, the King descended from his Throne, and walked
in Procession, habited in his Royal Garments, the Bishops, and all the Orders
of State marching before him, to the Church of the Franciscans discalced, all
the Streets being hung with White, and Red, and Green Cloth, and crowded with
an infinite Number of Spectators. Being come into the Monastery, several
Ceremonies were performed, and the King having conferred the Honor of
Knighthood on diverse Gentlemen, he was entertained with a Dinner, and some
Refreshments, after the Solemnities of Four hours, in the Refectory of the
Convent. After which the King mounted on Horseback, and being attended with a
Noble Cavalcade of most of the Nobility of the Kingdom, and always accompanied
by the Prince of Salm, his Tutor, under Title of Lord High Steward of his
Household; he was conducted through the Gate of St. Michael, to a Theater
erected against the Monastery called the Brothers of Mercy, on which the King
ascended; and being Seated under a Canopy, all the Guns from the Walls of the
City and Fortresses were Fired; and then the King in the face of all the
People, took an Oath to conserve all the Privileges of that Kingdom, as lately
agreed by the Estates in several particulars. After which the Palatine turning
to the People, cried with a loud Voice, Vivat Rex Hungariae. Then the King
descended, and went in like manner as before, to another Theater raised on a
little Hill near the Fishgate; where unsheathing his Sword, he therewith made
Four Crosses toward the Four Quarters of the World, as a Signal that therewith
he would Fight against all the Enemies of that Kingdom, and of the most August
House of Austria. After which the King descended, followed by the Lord High
Chamberlain of the Mountain Cities; and Baron Viechter, of the Emperor's
Privy Council, who scattered Money amongst the People; and being entered within
the Castle, all the Canon were Fired; and the King dismounting from his Horse,
was attended to the Emperor's Apartments with a splendid Train of the Nobility
and Gentry; and being thence conducted to the Imperial Hall, he was entertained
there with incomparable Music both Vocal and Instrumental, and with a
Sumptuous and Royal Banquet; where also all the Prelates, Grandees, and
Strangers were treated at Eighty several Magnificent Tables: After which the
Solemnities and Triumphs of the day were ended with great Joy, Honor, and
Satisfaction. And now in this place it is worthy our Observation, that whilst
the Germans were employed in the Exaltation of Joseph, the Archduke, to the
Throne of the Kingdom of Hungary; the Turks were on the other side busy in
pulling down, and deposing Mahomet their Sultan, and in his place, raising and
setting up his Brother Solomon to be their Lord and Emperor.

Whilst these things were in agitation, the Blocade of Agria continued, and the
place greatly straightened by Marquess Doria. And the Duke of Loraine having
agreed all things with the Prince and Estates of Transylvania, and settled and
secured his Army in their Winter Quarters, found a vacancy to absent himself
from the Camp, and ease his mind after the troubles of a long and hazardous
Campaigne: Accordingly the Duke in company with the Marquess of Baden Durlach,
took his Journey toward the Imperial Court, and in his way visited Marquess
Doria; and taking a survey of the Blocade of Agria, gave such Orders therein,
as were most convenient to force a speedy surrender of the place; and thence
proceeding to Possonium, he was there received by his Imperial Majesty, with
such Honors and gracious Expressions, as befitted the Worth and Merit of so
brave and fortunate a General. And having remained some few days at this place,
he took his leave of the Emperor, and his Journey to Insprug, being all the way
honored with the Praises, Acclamations, and Blessings of the People.

In the mean time Agria being miserably straightened for want of Victuals, many
died, and others to avoid Famine, abandoned the Town, and fled privately to
other places: Those which remained within, grew desperate of all relief: For
Tekely had promised them Succors, and in pursuance thereof intended to pass
the Tibiscus; but meeting there with some Forces under Count Sarau, was forced
to retire, leaving Agria to its own Fate: Of which the People having
Information, they all arose, and with one consent laying before the Pasha their
miseries, in which they must (if not prevented) in a short time inevitably
perish, they constrained him to propose a Treaty, and send Two Hostages to the
Imperial Camp; which being accordingly done, the Marquess of Doria accepted
them, and in exchange thereof sent Two others to the City. The Articles were
easily agreed, but not so soon executed; for the Pasha out of an unnecessary
caution, required that the Capitulations should be confirmed by the Hand of the
Emperor; in compliance with which demand, Marquess Doria dispatched Count
Anthony of Lamberg, a Carinthian Gentleman, with an Aga, to make tender of the
Articles to the Emperor; the which having been examined, were Approved,
Confirmed, and Signed by his Imperial Majesty.

The Articles being returned with their Confirmation, and the Writings of
Treaty exchanged, Count Marsigli with a Commissary of the Artillery, was sent
into the Town, that with his usual Zeal, and dexterous Management of Affairs,
which he had evidenced in several occasions in the Emperor's Service, he might
take notice of the state of the place, and the Provisions belonging to it. The
Count being entered into the Gates, was received kindly by the People, and with
much faithfulness was showed all the Magazines, Stores, and Ammunition of the
place. We must not expect to receive any account of Victuals, for those were
long since consumed; but as to Ammunition, there were Twenty thousand
Cannon-Bullets remaining, of which Four Thousand were for Whole Cannon; One
Thousand hundred Weight of Powder, Twenty thousand Hand-Granadoes, besides
great quantities of Bombs and Carcasses, many thousands of Match, One hundred
and Ten Pieces of Cannon, five Mortar Pieces, and nine Mines and Countermines;
notwithstanding all which, Famine being a stronger Enemy within, than all the
Troops and Forces were without; on the 16th of December the City was
surrendered, Russan the Pasha delivered up the Keys of the City, Castle and
Magazines, to the Hand of General Caraffa, who at the Head of the Imperial
Troops ranged in good order, stood ready to receive them. General Caraffa
trea^s the Pasha of Agria.
Then the General conducted the Pasha to his Tent, and there treated him with a
very sumptuous Dinner; after which he presented him with several fine Horses,
and two Carts laden with Refreshments. Various discourses having passed between
them, at length Russan Pasha taking his leave, said these words, Into your
Hands, as Commissioner for the Emperor of the Romans I surrender this City
without Blood; for having endured a Famine of seven Months without Bread, I
could hold it out no longer, but am forced to give up a place, which one of my
Emperor^ took with his own Hands; wherefore do you give God thanks; for this
and all other Successes are from the appointment, and disposition of the most
High.

All the Garrison, with Men, Women and Children, which marched out, were Three
thousand five hundred; about Six hundred remained in the place and submitted to
the Imperial Sovereignty. It was sad to hear the Miseries of those People
recounted, who had for several Months lived on nothing but boiled Herbs; and if
a piece of Horseflesh could have been purchased with Gold, to dress and put in
the Pot with them, it would have been a Feast for several Days. The constancy
of this People in their sufferings cannot be sufficiently expressed; so that as
the Blocade it self was the most famous of any in our Age, so the Surrender of
the place was of high importance; for Thirteen Counties depended thereon, The
advantage of taking Agria.
and the Emperor thereby became absolute Master of all that Country, which lies
between the Danube and the Tibiscus; and laid Mongatz open and exposed to
greater danger, which was already blocked up by Forces quartered round the
place. Thus having finished the relation of this year's Wars in Hungary, it
will be pertinent to our History to pass over into the Morea, and there take a
Survey of that Country, and recount the Exploits and Achievements, performed
there this year by the Venetian Arms.

Prayers at Venice for Success.
and with many Vows and Prayers of the People. So soon as the Season became
Ripe and fit for Action, it was resolved by the Captain General, the Cavalier
Francis Morosini, with the Universal consent of all the Commanders at a Council
of War held the 21st of July, to enter the River of Patras, and accordingly the
whole Fleet, with the Vessels which transported the Land Forces, Provisions and
Ammunition loosed from Glimino on the 20th of July, and made a glorious
appearance in those Seas, being composed of Twenty six Galleys, six Galeasses,
besides Eighty seven Vessels of other sorts; The Venetian Armado Sail to Patras.
that is to say, Ships, Pinks, Petaches and such like, who were all Commanded
by the Governor Zaguri. This Fleet Sailing all that Night with a prosperous
Gale, on the 21st in the Morning came in sight of the Castles and Fortress of
Patras; at appearance of which the Turks being much alarmed came down in great
numbers, and pitched their Tents, some on the Top of a Hill, and others on the
side of the main Castle. The better to discover the State and Condition of the
Turkish Camp, the lighter Vessels were Commanded to Coast along the Shore, by
which and by some Spies it was known, and advised in what manner their whole
Camp was disposed; a Detachment of which under shelter of a Trench, which they
had thrown up, fired many Vollies of Small-shot against the Vessels which
coasted along the Shore; but proceeded no farther to annoy their Enemies than
unto the end of their Line; The Turks Trenches.
which when the Captain General observed, and the difficulty of Landing near
those places, he entered into the River of Rumelia, which in like manner he
found to be guarded by great numbers of Turks, and a Trench like the former
cast up near the Castle. The General Konismark (of whom with due Honor we have
made mention in the Transactions of the last year, was embarked on the Admiral
Gally with the Captain General, to have the better convenience to consult and
confer together) was of Opinion, that notwithstanding all the Preparations the
Turks had made near the Castle, and that the Seraskier of the Morea was
encamped near the Town of Patras, and two other Pashas not far distant from
thence, and the Banks along Guarded by Parapets or Breast-works; yet, that the
most fit and commodious place to Land, was in the River of Patras it self;
which being agreed, the Troops were disposed in an extraordinary manner of
Military Discipline, and ordered speedily to Land, which was done with great
Resolution: The first to set Foot on the Shore were the Germans, who were (...)
followed by all the other Troops, without any hindrance, The Christians land.
or obstruction from the Enemy at their Landing; because the place being in
some manner guarded and defended by a Morass, or Wet-ground, the Turks thought
themselves on some kind of disadvantage, in case of an Attack.

The Troops being landed, and drawn up in Battalia, the Germans led the Van,
and marching with great bravery to the Right, were charged by a strong
Detachment of the Turks; whom they received with such Vigor, The Turks Retreat.
that they caused them to Retreat, and afterward betake themselves to a
shameful Flight. This first step being thus fortunately begun, gave Courage to
the Christians, and Resolution to the Captain General Morosini, to fall on the
Seraskier in his Camp before he was reinforced by more Troops, which daily
joined with him. At first landing all the Venetian Army consisted of no more
than Nine thousand Foot, and Thirteen hundred Horse; those Forces having been
much diminished by the Fatigues of the last year, and the Sickness of their
Winter Quarters, but now being recruited by great numbers of Levents and
Greeks, who as Volontiers came over from Zant and Cefalonia, the Army became
numerous and capable to undertake any Enterprise. But to facilitate the
Designs; it was adjudged necessary to cut off all Communication between the
Castles; the which was no sooner ordered than put in Execution, Some Galleys
pass the Castles.
by the entrance of diverse Galleys, which by favor of the Night adventured to
pass the Dardanelli, or narrow Passages into the bottom of the Gulf, without
any other hurt or loss, than of four or five Men at the Oars by a Cannon-shot;
the which Galleys were followed by a Galleot and three Felucas, Commanded by
Magnar, a Knight of Malta. This unexpected appearance of the Venetian Colors
within the Dardanelli, as it struck a great Terror and Amazement to the Turks,
being a Straight which they thought impossible to be passed by any Vessel
whatsoever; so it gave the Christians a Resolution to Attack the Seraskier, who
according to a Report of certain Prisoners taken in a Boat passing from the
Morea to Rumelia side, lay not far off encamped with an Army of 10.000 Foot,
and 4000 Horse; and that a Reserve of 5000 Foot more, and 1000 Horse lay
quartered about five Italian Miles from thence. The Galleys within the Gulf
made great Triumph with their Flags and Streamers; and made themselves Masters
of Fourteen Galiots or Brigantines, which had long served for Capers or
Picaroons, to Rob and Plunder in those Seas. This Success enlivening the
Spirits of the Christians, it was resolved at a Council of War, to March by the
side of the Hill to attempt the Seraskier's Camp, as a way the least incommoded
by the Enemy's Cannon; and where was place sufficient to draw up the Battalions
in good order.

In pursuance of this Resolution on the 24th of July by break of day, General
Konismark drew up the Army, and disposed them in order of Battle, and advanced
boldly on the Enemy, who consisted of Ten thousand Foot and Four thousand
Horse: And in the mean time the Captain General with some light Vessels
directed the Galeasses, Konismark draws up the Army.
to destroy a Battery of the Enemy erected near the Seaside; and to drive out
of a Trench two Troops of Turkish Horse, a Marine Regiment was landed under
Command of Captain Negro, who in a short time made themselves Masters of the
Battery, on which were diverse Pieces of Cannon, two whereof were of Brass.

The Seraskier enraged at the loss of these places, and seeing the Enemies
Troops advance upon him, feared to be assaulted in the Rear, or surprised in
their Trenches; to prevent which, he made a Detachment of some of his best
Troops to meet the Enemy and Skirmish with them; in which Action tho the Turks
seemingly showed Resolution; yet they did it in that loose manner, running at
first as it were on the Face of the Enemy, and then turning their Backs, as if
they designed thereby to disturb the good Order of the Christians; who still
maintained and kept their Ranks with a Regular steddiness, and still advanced
forward to come unto their desired Engagement. At length about three a Clock in
the Afternoon the Turks began to Skirmish with a Battalion Commanded by
Colonel Ceclina, A Fight.
who so well behaved themselves, that they put the Enemy to Flight: Which when
the Seraskier observed, he gave out the Signal for the whole Army to Engage,
and to Charge the Christians both in the Front and in the Flank, trusting to
his Troops, which were much Superior in number to their Enemies. Their first
attack was with the usual Cry of Alah, Alah, accompanied with the Vollies of
all their Small-shot, after which they fell furiously on with their Scemyters
in their Hands. The first Fire was received and sustained by the Germans,
flanked by the Croatian Cavalry of the left Wing, without moving the least Step
backwards, and particularly by the old Veterane Regiments of Brunswick, who
according to their usual Bravery, repulsed the Enemy with continued Vollies of
Shot; and the Cavalry under Command of that renowned Captain the Marquis of
Corbon, so vigorously seconded the Foot, that the Turks began to give Way and
Retreat, and soon afterward to betake themselves to a shameful Flight. The
Christians were very eager to pursue the flying Enemy, The Turks defeated.
but the General Konismark suspecting some treacherous Ambuscade, gave a stop
to the Valiant Heat of his Army.

At the same time, the Captain General took this opportunity to Command Captain
Negro with his Battalions to advance to the bottom of the Gulf of Lepanto, from
whence all the Forces both of the Fleet, and the Land Soldiers giving a loud
Shout, put the Turks into such a Consternation, that they abandoned all their
Works raised at the bottom of the Gulf; and giving Fire first to their Magazine
of Powder and Ammunition, they followed the Example of their flying Seraskier
or General.

In this manner by the Blessing of the Divine Providence, this strong Fortress
of Patras fell into the Hands of the Venetians, Patras taken.
which in former times had withstood numerous Armies of the Turks. In ancient
days Emanuel Emperor of the Greeks, finding himself not in a Condition to
defend this place against the prosperous, and the then successful Arms of the
Turks, resigned it into the Hands of the Venetians to be defended by them, who
so well fortified the place with such Works and Cannon, that the Turks laying
Siege thereunto in the year 1465, were able to avail nothing; but afterward
returning with a more powerful and invincible Army in the year 1496, and laying
Siege to the place; after a long and valorous defense was forced to yield it
self to the power of the Turk, in whose Hands it has ever remained, until this
year of 1687, when it yielded it self to the Victorious Arms of the Evangelist
St. Mark.

So soon as the News hereof came to the knowledge of the Captain General, he
immediately weighed Anchor, and by break of Day in the Morning, Sailed with his
whole Fleet under the Castle of Rumelia, where he found Mahomet Pasha Encamped
with Six thousand Men. This Surprise was so sudden, that the Turks having no
time to consult, or send for other Succors or Auxiliaries, with great
Precipitation betook themselves to a shameful Flight, giving Fire in the first
place to all their Magazine of Powder, Mahoment Pasha put to Flight.
the force of which shook down a great part of that Wall which looks toward
the Sea. Upon these Successes, the Captain General following the Air of his
good Fortune, Commanded all the Fleet to bring their Chase-guns on the Head of
their Ships and Galleys, to bear on the Fortress of Lepanto, which was a most
admirable Structure, and so strong, that in ancient times it had ruined those
Armies and Fleets, which had made Attacks upon it: The Fort of Lepanto battered.
But now the Fortune of the Turks being changed; and therewith their Spirits
sunk and grown low, they were not able to sustain the shot of the Venetians;
but taking whatsoever with them, that they could carry on their Backs and
Shoulders, they abandoned the place, leaving a free access and entrance
thereinto at the pleasure and will of their Enemies: Thus did the Venetians in
less than Twenty four hours time, erect their Flag on four several strong
Fortresses, with little damage on their side, The Seraskier Flies to Corinth.
but with considerable slaughter of the Turks, and loss of the greatest part of
the Baggage, Ammunition and Tents in their Camp; from whence the Seraskier
marched with great fear and have to Corinth. In these four places the Venetians
took Sixty Pieces of Cannon, most of them of Brass, with eight Pieces in the
Camp of the Seraskier, and other six from the Camp of Mustapha Pasha, with
great Stores of Provisions of all sorts. The News of this happy Success was
dispatched to Venice with all diligence by Sergeant Major Nicolo Rossi, who
embarked on a Feluca belonging to the State, and happily arrived at that City
on a Sunday, whilst the Grand Counsel of ten were actually Sitting; The Letters
from the Captain General being opened and Read, giving a distinct Account of
the Blessings of Heaven on the Venetian Arms, it pleased the Senate to give
immediate Order, that solemn Thanks should be rendered to God Almighty in all
places of public Devotion, for his Benedictions and gracious Deliverances: And
accordingly his Serene Highness the Doge, assisted by all the Ambassadors and
Senators, Rejoycings at Venice.
and Magistrates in their purple Robes, descended into the Ducal Chapel of St.
Mark, where Te Deum was solemnly Sung with most excellent Harmony, and Music
of all sorts of Instruments, with firing the Guns, ringing of Bells, and
several other Expressions of Joy and Triumph; the which Festival of Joy
continued for the space of three Days.

These Demonstrations of public Joy being concluded, the Senate which has
been always munificent in their Gifts and Honors unto those, who have rendered
Services to their Republic, were pleased in the High Counsel of the Pregadi,
to ordain, Rewards given to the Generals.
that to the eternal Memory of the glorious Triumphs of the Captain General
Francesco Morosini, that the Horse-tails and Standards, which are the Opima
Spolia, or Royal Spoils, taken from the Seraskier or Turkish General in the
Field, should be placed in the Senatorian Chamber: And that a Statue of Brass
representing the Person of Morosini should be erected, with such an Inscription
as might conserve the Glory of his Name to all Ages. The term of time in which
Count Konismark was to exercise the Office of General, was enlarged for seven
years, beyond the time specified in his Patent, with an Augmentation of Six
thousand Ducats to his ordinary Stipend, so that for the seven years to come,
he was to receive Twenty four thousand Ducats a year; To the Prince of
Brunswick a Jewel was ordained of Four thousand Ducats; To the Prince of Savoy
a Sword was appointed, with a Hilt set with precious Stones, to the value of
Twenty four hundred Ducats; To Marquis Corbon Eight hundred Ducats a year were
allotted, as an Addition to his former Salary: All, or most of the other
General Officers were gratified with Presents, agreeable to their quality; and
such as were Venetians were promoted to Offices, and places of Trust in the
State, and some to the Patrician Dignity.

Thus whilst all things were Triumphant at Venice, the Morea was filled with
Slaughter and Consternation of the Turks, who terrified with the entire Defeat
and Flight of the Seraskier, The Turks Fly out of the Morea.
and the Surrender of Lepanto, Patras, and two other Castles of considerable
Force, resolved to give way to Fortune, and to quit and abandon the Kingdom of
Morea. For indeed, the loss which the Turks had sustained, was far greater than
it was computed at first; for besides those which were Slain in the Field of
Battle, above Two thousand were found dead in the Highways, in Ditches and
under Rocks: And diverse Soldiers Adventurers, who to get many Slaves, were so
bold as to Rove about in the Country, reported, that in the Fields and
Villages, every where they met with dead Bodies and wounded Men. To pursue this
Victory, and follow the Footsteps of Fortune, which so fairly presented it
self, the Captain General leaving the great Vessels of his Fleet at the two
Castles of Rumelia and Lepanto, entered farther into the Gulf of Lepanto with
his lighter Galleys, and coasting along by the Land-side, he so affrighted the
Turks, that carrying away with them what Goods were portable, they followed the
Footsteps of their flying Army. And being mad and enraged to leave their
native Soil, they carried away with them whole Families of Christians into
Slavery: But the Peasants or Country People alarumed hereat, and encouraged by
the Successes of the Christians, arose in Arms against them, and recovered back
the greatest part of their Wives and Children, as they were leading them into
Captivity, killing and taking many of the Fugitives. The Noise hereof served
still to amaze and confound the Turks; Mustapha Pasha Flies to Salona.
so that Mustapha Pasha fled with all Precipitation without so much as being
pursued by the Enemy, taking his March toward Salona, not far from which place
he encountered with Ishmael Pasha, who had with him a Thousand Soldiers, which
he brought from Salonica, alias Thessalonica. These two Commanders with fear,
and uncertainty what to act, remained some days at Salona; for considering that
in case they should remain there, they should lie exposed to the Attack of the
Enemy; and then in case they should march and join with the Seraskier at
Corinth, they were in danger of being strangled by him, for having been so
tardy in their March, and so backward in coming to his assistance, wherefore
they took a Resolution to become a Convoy to those Families of Turks, who in
great numbers with Women and Children had quitted the Morea, and were going to
plant themselves in the upper parts of Greece.

In the mean time the Captain General Sailing with Victorious Arms, and a
prosperous Gale by the Shore of the Gulf of Lepanto, The Venetians Anchor
before Corinth.
came in a short time to take a full view and prospect of the ancient City of
Corinth; in the Road of which they came to an Anchor with all their Fleet of
Galleys and Galeots: But because that Gulf is commonly subject to bad and
tempestuous Weather, and the Navigation in those Seas very dangerous, there
being no Port on the Morea side within a Hundred Miles; and on the other, no
shelter besides a small Nook or Creek, which is narrow and not capable to
receive many Vessels, and the Water shallow; therefore the Captain General
proceeding with due caution according to Military discipline, dispeeded some of
his lighter Vessels to Fathom the depth of the Waters, and to take a survey of
the State, and Condition of the Enemies Camp.

The affrighted Turks seeing the Venetian Fleet in the Road of Corinth, did of
their own accord set Fire to all the Villages and Houses round about, The Turks
burn and abandon Corinth.
and also to the Town it self, blowing up all the Ammunition, and destroying
the Provisions which they could not carry with them; and so quitted and
abandoned that anciently famous City, leaving it a Prey to their Enemies at a
cheep rate, without the least drop of Blood; and thence possessed with a Panick
fear marched away to Thebes, there to make their place of Rendezvous for their
scattered Troops to unite.

The Captain General being informed that the Turks had deserted the City, or
Village rather (as it now remains) and reduced as much as they could of it unto
Ashes, returned with all speed imaginable to the Castles of Rumelia and Morea,
where he had left the most considerable part of his Forces encamped, as also
some Galleys and Vessels belonging to his Fleet: And there taking aboard the
greatest part of the Infantry, whilst the Cavalry marched by Land, with some
Regiments of Foot under the Command of Count Konismark, they all came to join
near the Town of Corinth; The Christians take possession of the place.
and thence in order of Battle took possession of the place, where they scarce
found a House, or Lodging wherein to cover or shelter themselves; such havoc
and destruction had the Turks made of every thing besides the Walls: The Gates
also of the Fortress were found open, and an easy entrance thereinto; which
being possessed by the Companies of Colonel Bonetti, and Count Vertoua, the
Standard of St. Mark was displaid on the Walls. The City of Corinth was
anciently the Metropolis of all Achaia; and therefore called by Lucius Florus
Achaiae Caput, and Greciae Decus: After it had fallen under the Government of
the Roman Commonwealth, many Battles were fought near the Walls of that City, A
description of Corinth.
under the Command of several Generals, such as Critolzus, Metellus and
Mummius. The Corinthian Brass is famous over all the World, for the admirable
mixture of it with diverse other Mettles, amongst which there was some
proportion of Gold which entered into the Composition. The Art of making this
Brass is now entirely lost, and the quantity thereof not much at present in the
World; for all the ancient Statues of famous Men of Greece, erected at Corinth
of this sort of Brass, were by Wars and Alterations in the State melted down
and carried to Rome, which afterward being worked into Plates, served to cover
the Roof of the Pantheon, now called the Rotondo at Rome; and thence by order
of the Barberini were ripped off, and an Altar made thereof consecrated to St.
Peter and St. Paul, in the great Basilicon of St. Peter; the Overplus of which
was turned into a Cannon, and placed in the Castle of St. Angelo; which gave
occasion to that saying, Quod non fecerunt Babari, fecerunt Barberini.

The Situation of Corinth is in a rich and fertile Country, and in a sweet Air,
and so near the Sea, that it enjoyed the benefit and use of all the Elements,
rendering it a place of Plenty and Luxury, which gave occasion to that saying,
Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum. Near this place is the Mount
Parnassus, and the Fountain of Helicon. From the Romans Corinth descended to
the Grecian Emperors, one of which called Emanuel, over-threw Roger King of
Naples, who invaded the Countries near Corinth. Not long afterward the Despots
of Greece yielded it up to the Republic of Venice, who defended it for some
years, until overpowred with the force and numbers of Mahomet the Second, were
at length compelled to give it up to his Tyranny: Since which time it has ever
remained in the Hands of the Turks, until this year of 1687, when God favoring
the Christian Arms in this, as well, as in other parts, was pleased to restore
this City to the Venetians, the ancient Lords and Possessors of it.

The Albanians encouraged with these Successes, and the Flight of the Turks,
The Alban^ans fall on the Turks.
pursued after them, and falling on their Rear seized on their Baggage, and all
their Beasts of Burden, such as Horses, Camels, Mules and Asses; carrying away
Men, Women and Children Captives, with great Droves of Cattle to the City of
Megara.

These happy events were followed by the Surrender of Castle Tornese, Castle
Tornese Surrenders.
at the first Summons made by Captain Negro, upon no other Conditions than that
they should save their Lives, and have License to carry away all their Goods
and Baggage, which was freely granted to them, with Vessels to Transport them
to Smyrna. But before their departure, about an Hundred and fifty Turks,
Inhabitants of that Castle, voluntarily declared themselves Christians, and
were desirous of being Baptized; amongst these were many Families of the
Gastuni, who having a Territory of their own, containing some Hundred of Houses
and Cottages, desired all to be received into the Bosom of the Christian
Church; all which were in a Solemn manner Baptized together; to the great
Confusion and Displeasure of the Mohammedan Professors.

The Report of these Successes, Corinth, struck all the Inhabitants of the
Morea with such Terror and Consternation, that they voluntarily submitted
themselves to the Venetian Government; as namely Misitra, Saritenea,
Idrapolica, all which places were abandoned by the Turks: Only Salona, Several
other Towns submit.
a Town well peopled, and Situate in a rich Soil, which lies within a small
Gulf so called, sent two Turks to the Captain General to offer a Tribute to
him, provided they might live under their own Laws and Government; but this
seeming a ridiculous Proposition under their present Circumstances, it was
absolutely rejected: Whereupon the rich and ruling Turks of the City, As also
Salona.
with fear and precipitation removed their Goods and Families and Fled; and the
City yielded it self to the power, and under the subjection of the Conqueror:
And so successfully had all things proceeded through the course of this
Campain, that besides the Cities gained with very little Blood, as before
related, Three hundred Pieces of Cannon, most of Brass were added to the
public Stock; besides Thousands of Slaves, Ammunition and Provisions. All
things thus falling at the Feet of the Venetians, the Land Army both of Horse
and Foot encamped near Corinth, under Command of Count Conismark, whilst the
Captain General with the greatest part of the Armado coasted round the Morea,
to visit, and strengthen the places newly reduced, and especially those parts
which are bordering on the Gulf of Egena. In the mean time many Families of
Greece, which had for a long time been oppressed by the Tyranny of the Turkish
Government, made their Petition to the Captain General, that they might be
transported to some Country under the Venetian Dominion, where they might enjoy
Freedom and Security, Several Greek Families transported to the Morea.
both in their Religion and Estates. Morosini considering well that the
multitude of People is the Riches and strength of a Country; and that the Morea
being almost emptied of People, and desolate by the Flight and Desertion of the
Turks, easily condescended to their request, and accordingly dispeeded the
Proveditor Pisani with four Galleys, and some other Transport Vessels to carry
away the People, of which many Thousands with their Baggage and Cattle were
Embarked, and Landed in diverse parts of the Morea, where those Families are at
present settled. The Successes of the Venetian Arms had now gained such
Reputation in all parts, Mitra Surrenders.
that Mitra, a strong and considerable place submitted, and followed the
Fortune of other places; for the Turks therein, at the first appearance only of
Polani the Proveditor of Sarnata, with some Marine Forces displaying their
white Flag, entered into a Treaty and gave Hostages for performance of
Articles; the which was soon performed, and the place yielded to the Conqueror.
The Surrender of this City produced many other happy consequences, one of
which, was, that thereby Napoli di Malvasia became greatly straightened, and all
hopes of Relief and Succor cut off, when on any occasion it should happen to
be distressed: And now to terrify and amuse that Garrison, Venier (who was
newly returned from blocking up the Turkish Fleet at Rhodes, many of which
Ships were come from Egypt laden with Rice, Malvasia alarumed.
and other Provisons for Constantinople) was ordered to appear before the Town
with his Squadron of Ships, and some Corsairs, whom he had accidentally met
with in the Seas; to which the Capt. General joining some of the lighter
Galleys, caused such an appearance to be made, something terrible to the People
of Malvasia, as might give them an Alarm, and Prepare and dispose them to a
Surrender.

The Venetians Sailing with a prosperous Gale of Fortune, resolved, if
possible, to Crown the Achievements of this Campain, with the glorious
Conquest of that ancient City of Athens, in order to which design (tho the
Season of the year was far spent) yet the Captain General leaving a strong
detachment at Corinth, gave Orders to the remainder of his Fleet to Sail to the
other side of the Isthmus, which is the full compass and circle of the Morea;
and in his way coming before the Walls of Malvasia, he sent a Summons to the
Turks, who maintained the Peninsula of that strong Fortress; but they returning
a proud Answer, and showing a resolution to defend themselves, the Captain
General was pleased to bestow certain Bombs and Cannon upon them, And is Bombed.
which ruined a part of the Town, and did some damage to the Castle; but having
a design upon Athens, he thought not fit to Land his Men, but to proceed
forward to Port Leon, Sept. both Horse and Foot were immediately Landed, A
design upon Athens.
and took their March in an orderly manner to the Walls of Athens. Port Leon is
so called from the Image of a Lion, erected on a Pedestal at the bottom of the
Port, and may be about six or seven English Miles distant from Athens. So soon
as the Turks of that place had the News of the descent, or landing of the
Venetinn Troops, they abandoned the City and Houses thereabouts, and full of
fear and amazement fled into the Castle: Which is Summoned.
Which according to the usual Custom being summoned to Surrender on fair and
gentle Terms, an Answer was returned with proud expressions, evidencing a
resolution to defend the place to the utmost extremity. Whereupon General
Konismark entrenched round the Town, The Castle battered.
raised a Battery of six Pieces of Cannon and four Mortar-pieces, with which he
began to Batter the Castle, which was Situate on a high Rock, that on three
sides of it was inaccessible; and because that part which lay open was all
Rock, without Earth to cover the Men, it was very difficult to make nearer
Approaches; so that for the space of eight days, all that could be done, was to
shoot fiery Bullets and Bombs into the place, which had so good effect, that
one falling into their Magazine of Powder, Blew up a great part of the Castle
into the Air, burying most of the People in the Ruins.

The Seraskier having gathered some of his dispersed Troops into a Body, took
his March toward Athens, as if he had intended to relieve the place: The
Seraskier dares not Fight.
Upon advice of which General Konismark drew off a strong party both of Horse
and Foot, and marched away to meet the Seraskier; whose Spirit being cowed by
the late ill Successes in the Morea, durst not stand the Shock, or try his
Fortune in another Battle, but retreated, and fled with his Forces to strong
Holds in the Mountains.

This shameful Flight of the Seraskier, gave sufficient evidence and proof to
the Besieged of the weak and low Condition of the Seraskier, the which being
joined to the late unhappy Accident of blowing up the Magazine of Ammunition,
so dispirited the Defendants, that finding themselves without all probable
hopes of Relief, they displaied a white Flag, The Castle of Athens surrenders.
to show their desires to Capitulate; and accordingly a Treaty was entered into
and concluded in few Articles.

The Articles of Treaty.
That the Soldiers should march forth without Arms, and with no more Goods than
what they could at one time carry on their Shoulders. And 2dly, That in the
space of Five days they should quit the place; which was accordingly performed
at the expiration thereof; about Three thousand Souls in all going out, of
which not above Six hundred men were capable to bear Arms: To which, License
was given to take so much Provision with them, as might serve to sustain them
as far as Smyrna, or any other place, to which they were desirous to be
Transported. But many of the Greeks being not willing to leave their Dwellings
and their Native Soil, remained still in the City; and amongst the Turks about
Three hundred professing the Christian Faith, were received to Baptism, Some
Turks turn Christians.
of which we find very few Examples amongst the Turks in other places, who are
as firm and constant to their Mohammedan Principles, as any Sect in the World
are to theirs. Only I observe that the Turks in Greece are more easily
persuaded to embrace the Christian Faith, than they are in other Countries;
perhaps because they are for the most part sprung from Christian Parents, and
are married to Christian Wives, and have most of their Conversation with them;
so that it is no wonder if the Rites and Services of the Christian Religion,
which are become familiar to them, should be more easily embraced by these than
other Turks who are Educated with a detestation and abhorrence to Christianity.

In the Castle were found Eighteen Pieces of Cannon of diverse sorts and metals;
the City it self remained entire with little damage, The description of Athens.
tho ruined, and grievously destroyed by other Wars. It was anciently the
capital City of all Attica, the Walls of which are about Three miles in
compass; within which are the Ruins of many stately Edifices, which by Time and
Wars have lost their Names and Memory of what they were. There is one
Magnificent Palace supported by Pillars of Marble, upon one of which is
Engraven in Greek Characters, This is Athens, the Ancient Seat of Theseus:
There is also the Pantheon, on the Walls of which are Engraven the Figures of
the Grecian Champions; there are also Two Horses to be seen cut in Stone, which
are said to be the Workmanship of Praxiteles: Moreover there are many other
Antiquities there to be seen, which are not the Subject of this History. Only
it is observable, That in this place is the best Air of the World, which served
to quicken the Wits, and clear the Understandings of Young Students, who were
sent to that University to have their Education. This City being thus fallen
into the hands of the Venetians, the Government thereof was committed to the
charge of Daniel Delfin, a Nobleman of Venice.

The News of the taking of Athens flying into all the Towns and Countries round
about, so terrified the People of Megara, Megara burnt.
that not attending the Assault or Approach of the Enemy, they with fearful
Consternation abandoned the place, and carrying with them what in such a
precipitate haste was portable, they left the rest to the disposal of the
Venetians; who considering it as a place rather troublesome than useful,
delivered it up to the Mercy of the Flames.

As the Venetian Arms were prosperous in the Morea, and other parts of Greece,
Francesco Morosini; so were they not less successful in Dalmatia, and Albania,
under the Valorous Guidance of that worthy General Gerolemo Cornaro Procurator
of St. Mark.

On the First of September a Squadron of the Venetian Armado (distinct from
that which was commanded by General Morosini) consisting of some Galleys,
Galiot Ships, Castle Nuovo attacked.
and other Transport Vessels, appearing before the Town of Castle Nuovo,
greatly alarmed the Garrison, and People therein; of which they conceived the
greater Dread and Apprehensions; because they had observed that the Auxiliary
Galleys, which had long been hovering about the Coast of Dalmatia were come in,
and had joined the Armado, attended with great Numbers of Vessels laden with
Ammunition and Provisions; and reinforced by certain Veterane Troops belonging
to the G. Duke of Toscany.

On the Second of September, Septem. 1687.
Girolamo Cornaro Proveditor-General of the Venetian Forces in Dalmatia and
Albania, endeavored to Land the Militia, with all necessary Appurtenances of
War at a place called Comburt, which was a Port environed round with Hills and
Rocks, and had been a place very proper for Landing, had not the Turks
pre-possessed the important Passes of it, The Venetians Land.
and encompassed it about with a strong Trench; howsoever the Venetians
resolving to make a descent at that place, drove the Turks out of their
Trenches, and landed all their Men, and Train of Artillery, with their
Provisions and Instruments for War.

The first thing there to be done was to discover the face of the Enemy, which
Calbo, the Proveditor Extraordinary, undertook, and with a Detatched Party
brought News, that the Garrison of Castle Nuovo had lately been reinforced by
the Neighboring places, which the Turks were fortifying round about with
Trenches, and Redoubts. In consideration of which, it was resolved by common
consent that another Descent should be made at a place called Zelenica; and
accordingly that was performed by the Auxiliaries, assisted by Two Battalions,
under the Command of that undaunted General St. Paul, who began a Fight with
the Enemy; A Fight begun.
in which after Five hours time, the Venetians became Masters of the first
Trenches, and soon afterward drove the Turks out of the second, and proceeded
to gain the Hill called Santa Veneranda, which commands the place: Where having
raised a small Platform, and fortified it with Two small Guns, with which they
shot red-hot Bullets into the Town, they soon made it too hot for the
Inhabitants to abide, or the Soldiers in their Trenches to maintain: And tho
the Pasha of Bosna came with all his Forces to their assistance, yet Two
thousand Soldiers being seasonably landed by the Auxiliary Galleys on the East
part of the Town toward the side of Ragusi, gave such an effectual Repulse to
the Troops of that Pasha, The Pasha of Bosna endeavors to relieve the Turks,
that they betaking themselves to a most shameful Flight, left the Besieged in
great Terror and Consternation. In the mean time the Morlachs, who are Thieves
and Robbers by Nature, and Profession, entered the Town, and fell on the
Plunder, which occasioned some Disorder, until the Proveditor General by his
Troops, and the Authority of his Person quieted the Tumult arisen about the
Booty. After which the Militia of Malta advanced according to agreement, with
so much courage to the very Muzzle of the Enemy's Muskets, and the false Bray
of the Upper-Castle, that Four Cavaliers of Malta, and many of their Soldiers
lost their Lives in this Action: Howsoever the Post was maintained with so much
resolution against the Ottoman Fury, that Marquess Borro Sergeant-Major, And is
repulsed.
flanked with some other Troops, coming timely to their assistance, the Enemy
was forced to a Retreat, and shelter themselves under the Cannon of the lower
Fortress, leaving slain on the place, the Captain of the Castle, Two Agas, with
several principal Officers, and a great Number of the common Soldiers. Thus the
Turks being droven from all their Posts, and Outworks, which encompassed the
Fortress; and the same possessed by the Venetian Arms, the Siege became totally
formed on all parts; every principal Commander having his respective Post
allotted unto him to guard and defend.

The Turks observing themselves to be environed on all sides by a well-formed
and close Siege, made a vigorous Sally with a Detachment of their Bravest and
best Selected Soldiers; but were as courageously received, and forced to
retreat. Whilst things remained in this posture, Intelligence being brought to
the Leaguer, Another Pasha endeavors to give succor.
that the Pasha of Herzegovina was on his march for to succor and relieve the
Town, a Detachment was immediately formed out of the Morlach and Perattine
Troops to oppose him. This Pasha having lately served in Hungary under one
Atlee-gick (which is as much as to say the little Horseman) was upon his Death
promoted to the Government of Bosna, in the place of the other Pasha lately
defeated; and with that Preferment being a little elevated with Pride, marched
forward with confidence of Victory, and Contempt of the Christian Camp; Topgee
(or the Gunner) he furiously made a descent on the Quarter of Perini, who upon
the first Charge received a Wound, in his own person; A part of the Venetians
put to the rout.
but the Body of his men stood firm and immovable, whilst the Battalion of
Sergeant Major Galli was put to the Rout, and Fled without looking behind them
to the Seacoast: To remedy this disorder, Major General Grimini, and the
Proveditor-General, with the General of Malta, and all the chief Officers of
the Army came in to their assistance, and caused the Run-aways to make a stand,
and rally again, and make Head upon the Enemy. And then the Colonel of the
General's Guards, with several other Captains coming up, with a Body of
Granadiers, they mingled themselves with the Turks, The Turks defeated.
and fighting with their Swords amidst the thickest of them, gave them such a
repulse, that at first they began to give way, and afterward to betake
themselves to a shameful Flight, leaving the Field with the Glory of the day to
the Arms of the victorious Christians.

In this Conflict Seven hundred of the Turks lay dead on the Ground; of which
the principal men were Zambeg, a famous and stout Commander, with many Agas,
Bulluckbashees, and one Cadi or Judge; whose Heads being cut off from their
Bodies to the Number of Three hundred, were fixed on Half-pikes, and ranged in
order, before the Walls of the Town to be a Spectacle to the Besieged of
Terror, and an Evidence of the Victory. Likewise Twelve Colors were taken,
together with much Spoil and Booty, which was given as a Reward to the
conquering Soldiers.

Upon this Success another Summons was sent to the Town, inviting them to a
Surrender, Summons sent to the Town.
upon consideration that the Forces being defeated, which came to their
assistance, there remained no other hope of safety than only, by yielding
themselves on such Articles as should be offered on reasonable terms. The
Besieged in Answer thereunto, having returned a plain and flat refusal of
coming to any Conditions, Are refused.
all acts of Hostility were renewed, and the Cannon began continually to play,
which beat down one of the Towers, and made a large Breach on the Curtain, so
that (notwithstanding the bad weather which gave some hindrance) great
Advancement was made, to the damage of the Besieged: In like manner another
Battery of Four Guns continually plied the City, and such valorous Attempts
were made by the Venetians, that in despite of all the Enemy's Fire, and
frequent Sallies, they made themselves Masters of the Counterscarp; amidst all
which Action the Florentine Troops came seasonably to their assistance.

Whilst these things were, in agitation, Advices were brought that Two Pashas
were on their march with numerous Troops for relief of the Town: The Turks
march to relieve the Town.
And that the Pasha of Albania being come as far as Podgoriza, was hastening
with all expedition possible to join the other Troops, for the same intent of
giving succor to the languishing City. Upon this Advice the Proveditor-General
Cornaro, finding that the Breach made was of Six and thirty Paces in Breadth,
and that by the fall of a Bomb into the great Tower toward the Seaside,
directed by the skilful Art of a Florentine Engenier, their great Magazine of
Powder was blown up, by which many Families were buried in the Ruins, together
with diverse Officers and Soldiers to the Number of Three hundred Persons: On
this advantage, An Assault resolved.
I say, the Proveditor resolved to make a speedy Assault, before the Pashas
with their Forces could come to their assistance. Accordingly the Marquess
Borro, with such Bravery began the Assault, that in despite of the resistance
made by the Defendants, he mounted the Breach, and made himself Master of one
of the Redoubts, and thereby opened a free passage to many Troops to enter the
Town; in which place also they found an obstinate resistance; for the Men fired
out of the Windows, and the Women threw Stones from the Tops of the Houses; and
all the Streets were barricadoed up by Carts and Timber laid in the way, which
together with bad and rainy Weather, damaged the Assailants in such manner,
that they were forced to retreat, and give way to their Adverse Fortune. The
Assailants forced to retreat.
In this Conflict a Cavalier of Malta, a Lieutenant Colonel called Julio, a
Florentine Captain, with many brave Soldiers of diverse Nations were Slain, and
in all to the Number of Five hundred were killed and wounded. Howsoever in
despite of Misfortune, those who had possessed the Redoubt, and Breach on the
Curtain, maintained their Post, having under obscurity of the Night, covered
themselves with Faggots, and Sacks of Wool.

The next Morning being the Nine and twentieth of September, the Morlachs
resolving to give some proofs of their Valor, 1687. The Morlachs renew the
Assault.
prepared themselves to give a fresh Assault; which they performed with such
vigor, that notwithstanding the stout defense of the Besieged, and by
continual Thundrings of the Bombs and Cannon, they made themselves Masters of a
fortified House at the Foot of the Wall, and soon after on the Thirtieth of
September, Forty Segmen, or Foot-Soldiers, who were placed for Guard of a Tower
toward the Sea, The Tower yields.
and had the defense of a long part of the Wall, came to Capitulations, and
offered to deliver the same up into the hands of the Christians, provided they
might have liberty to depart with their Families, and necessary Baggage, and
might be Transported into Albania.

The General consenting hereunto, the Tower and Wall were surrendered, and the
People civilly treated, according to the Convention: The Defendants of the
middle Castle, seeing the lower Fortification in the hands of the Enemy,
despaired of all means longer to defend themselves; and so entering into
Capitulations, desired Six days time, Also the middle Tower.
that in case the Succors came not to them within that Term, that then they
would yield unto the Conditions of the Conqueror. But that being denied, and
nothing but a sudden Surrender satisfying, the Defendants yielded on the same
Conditions as the lower Fortress had done, marching out only with a single
Burden on the Shoulders of each person.

There remained now nothing to be subdued after these Two lower Fortresses,
besides the higher Castle of all, The main Castle surrenders.
the Garrison of which finding themselves divested of their Two main Bulwarks,
resolved also upon a Surrender, the Articles of which were soon agreed upon the
basis or foot of those Conditions, which had been granted unto the Two other
Fortresses. Accordingly the People of the Castle marched out, to the Number of
about Two thousand Two hundred Souls, of which Seven hundred only were capable
to bear Arms; the Place was found to have been well provided of all sorts of
Ammunition and Provisions, with Seventy two Pieces of Cannon, besides a good
Booty for the Soldiers. There were also Six light Frigates seized in the Port,
which had been Corsars or Capers, having formerly done great mischief at Sea,
by their Piracies and Robberies.

Thus did Castle Nuovo fall into the hands of the Venetians, being the more
remarkable, because it happened at a time, when Three Pashas, with very
numerous Troops, were in the Neighborhood, and as we may say, in sight of the
place, with intention to succor and relieve it by force of Arms.

Nor was this Noble Proveditor-General the Cavalier Girolamo Cornaro, less
successful, and renowned in taking the considerable Fortress of Castle Nuovo,
than he was in relieving and raising the Siege which the Turks had formed
against Singh; the which place this same Cornaro had in the Year 1676, taken
from the Turks, being the first of his Government of Dalmatia and Albania, and
had now in this Year of 1687, the good fortune to preserve and maintain it from
returning into the hands of its late barbarous Masters. In which Action this
Noble person deserves as much Honor, as he purchased in the Conquest of it: It
being no less a Virtue to defend and conserve, than to gain or win; according
to that old saying, Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri. Turks to
see Singh, their own Native Habitation, in the hands of the Christians, they
were moved with indignation, and with a passionate desire to recover it again
into their own possession. In pursuance whereof Atleegick lately made Pasha of
Bosna, drew out his Army in sight of Singh, The Turks endeavor to take Singh.
and encamped in the Plan of Clivino, where he pitched many Tents; and his Army
being increased by great Numbers of Albanians, and the choicest Soldiery of the
Provinces round about, and provided with all sorts of Ammunition and Victuals
both for Man and Horse, and with a considerable Train of Artillery, they
thought upon their first appearance to affright the Garrison of Singh into a
surrender. But the place having before been well provided with all things
necessary, and defended by a valorous Garrison, they contemned the Summons of
their Enemies, resolving to maintain the place to the last extremity.

Whereupon the Turks having raised their Batteries, began to play upon it with
their Cannon, but without any damage to the Besieged. Hereupon the Turks
changed their Attack from that, to another part, where their Horse and Foot
were drawn up in Military Order, with resolution to Storm the place, which they
attempted by break of day in the Morning, falling on with great fury, Singh
assaulted by Turks.
and with their Scemyters in their hands thought immediately by force of Arms
to carry the place: But the besieged so bravely defended themselves, that they
gave them such repulse, as caused them to sound a Retreat, leaving behind them
many of their Soldiers dead on the place, to the number of about Two hundred,
of which the greatest part were Albanians. In the Town the loss was very
inconsiderable, They are repulsed.
there being only the chief Engineer killed, and some few persons wounded.

In the mean time the Proveditor-General Cornaro being informed of these
successes, resolved to give effectual relief to the Town; and accordingly he
detached several Parties of Morlachs to infest the Enemy on all sides; which
they performed so successfully, that they returned with the Heads of many
Turks, with Prisoners in Chains, and with a considerable booty, and Numbers of
Cattle, having had the fortune to defeat a Convoy which was sent with
Ammunition and Provisions to the Turkish Camp.

Howsoever the Turks still continuing the Siege which had now lasted Seventeen
days, to which they had called all the Netferee, which are the Trained-Bands of
the Country, and brought thereunto all the Cannon which remained in the
fortified places round about; they did not doubt in a short time of the success
they desired. The Siege raised.
But all these hopes vanished away so soon as News came to Atleegick, that the
Venetian Army was on their march to relieve the Town, with which they were so
alarmed and affrighted, that raising their Camp, Tents, and Baggage, they
quitted the Siege, and ran away with a shameful and precipitate Cowardice. And
thus ended the Successes of this Year 1687, to the Glory of God, Hungary gained
by the Imperial Arms, were almost miraculous, as is before related; the
successes in the Morea, with the subjection of Patras, Athens, and other places
of Greece, were wonderful, and the relief given to Singh, and taking of Castle
Nuovo, were all works of the Divine Providence. And when we farther consider
the Tumults, Seditions, and Mutinies amongst the Turks themselves, to the
deposing of their Sultan himself, and destruction of their Chief and Principal
Officers by the madness and fury of the Soldiers, even almost to to the total
destruction of their Empire; we may believe, that the Hand of God was lifted up
against this People, to bring them to the brink of Ruin, and Misery, and cause
them to cease, and be no longer a People. Let us therefore proceed to the
Ensuing Year, and therein relate the sequel of the wonderful works of God, in
whose hands are the disposal of Empires and Kingdoms.

ANNO 1688.
THE Emperor, who had from the time of the Incoronation of the King of Hungary
remained at Presburg, (otherwise called Possonium) with all the Imperial Court,
returned now at the beginning of this year to Vienna, and arrived there on the
26th of January. The Emperor prepares for the next Campaign.
The Season was now come for making Preparations for the next Campaign against
the Turks; and Consultations were held, not only to secure the new Conquests,
but to advance farther, and to enlarge the Imperial Dominions; at all which his
Cesarean Majesty was pleased to assist in Person. But in regard the Work was
great, and the Charges immense to Recruit the old Regiments, and raise new, to
provide Ammunition, Provisions and Forage, for that vast Army which was
designed for Hungary; His Imperial Majesty was pleased to convene all the
States of Austria, and of his Hereditary Dominions; who accordingly meeting and
forming an August Assembly, The States of Austria convened.
the Chancellor in the name of the Emperor declared unto them in a Florid
Oration, the neccessity that there was for a large supply of Money, whereby to
carry on the War against the Turks, not only on the defensive part, but also to
advance forward in that way, which God had opened, and to enlarge the Dominions
and extent of Christendom.

They promise Money.
At the Conclusion of the Speech, the States of Austria having with most
profound Reverence and Respect, returned their most humble Thanks to his
Imperial Majesty for his gracious Clemency, they promised in the most
submissive Terms imaginable, to answer the just Demands of his Majesty to the
utmost of their Power. The like was done by the States of Stiria, the Governor
of which Province called Stubemberg, having offered to his Majesty the Sum of
Three hundred thousand Florins, As do also the States of Stiria.
besides the One hundred and Sixty thousand, which those States annually pay
for Maintenance of their own Charges, both Civil and Military; and of the
Militia which is quartered on the Confines of Sclavonia.

Moreover, Messages were sent to the several Princes of the Empire, to send
their respective Quotas and Contingents, and numbers of Soldiers, according to
the ancient Constitutions of the Empire: And in the mean time the Imperial
Chamber took such due means, and measures in order to the preparations of all
things necessary; that Recruits were made, the Artillery mounted, the Magazines
filled with Ammunition and Provisions; and all sorts of Carriages, Pontons,
Boats, Barges, and all other appointments for War were provided in great
abundance. In the mean time the Garrison of Alba Regalis being reduced to great
Extremities, by Famine, Alba Regalis in distress.
and want of all necessaries, dispatched away a certain Aga called Achmet, with
some few Attendants to Belgrade, there to expose to the Governors of that
place, the Miseries of their languishing City. Achmet privately conveying
himself out of the Town with his Servants, found by chance a small Boat tied on
the Banks of the Danube, into which being entered, Messengers sent to Belgrade.
they quietly passed for some Days down the Stream, until they came near to a
place called Erdeody, which had not long before been possessed by the
Christians: The Heydukes perceiving the Boat from the Walls, immediately
suspected, that the People therein were Fugitives, then making their Escape; to
prevent which, they privately went on Board a Saick or Turkish Vessel, and
crossing upon them cut them off in their way; and firing on them with their
Muskets, forced them to Steer and Row to the other side; but they following
them, made them all Prisoners ( Achmet only excepted) who being very nimble and
active, Are taken.
and a kind of a Bog-trotter, escaped over a Marsh with all his Letters; and
fetching a compass out of the way, he came over against Valkowar, which he
supposing to be still a Garrison of the Turks, Valkowar.
made a Sign for a Boat to Ferry him over the River; the Boat passing over,
rowed and manned by Heydukes, seized Achmet, who being surprised to see himself
made a Prisoner, and thinking, that they were Turks and not Enemies, cried out;
I am a Turk, sent by the Pasha and Garrison of Alba Regalis, with a Verbal
Commission only to the Port, denying to have any Letters about him; but they
rifling him, found near Three hundred Letters, which were afterward sent to
Vienna, and translated by the Emperor's Interpreter. And now Achmet finding it
no time longer to conceal his Business, openly declared with Tears in his Eyes,
That he was the more troubled for this misfortune, because that thereby he
could not answer the expectation of his Friends at Alba Regalis, Confession of
Achmet
who had dispeeded him for Belgrade to give an Account to those Governors of
their distressed Condition, and according to such Answers, as they should
receive from thence, to take a Resolution either to Defend or Surrender the
Town. He farther added, That tho sometimes certain Hungarian Friends conveyed
into the Town some Flour, Pease, Beans and Butter, yet it was in such small
Quantities, that all was devoured, and the People therein reduced to such
Extremites, that in case a small number of Germans should appear with Cannon
before the City, the Bodies of the Garrison, and Inhabitants were become so
enfeebled by Famine, and their Spirits so low, that without all doubt, they
would upon the first Summons Surrender at Discretion: But to give the Reader a
more evident Narration of the Misery of that place, it will not be from our
purpose to insert one of the Letters which were taken about Achmet, subscribed
by the three Pashas from Alba Regalis to the Grand Vizier, in these Terms.
After the Complements and Ceremonious words premised, which are commonly long,
and full of Bombastick Expressions according to the Turkish Style, they began
in this manner:

Most happy Lord,
IF you enquire after the State of this City, and of the Turkish Soldiers
therein, and in the Parts adjacent, all that we can say is, That we recommend
theirs and our Condition to the most High God, and to the Pious Compassion of
your Excellency; for that after all our Stores of Provision, as well new, as
old were consumed, there remained a small quantity of Millet, which though it
were so old and corrupted, as if it had been laid in, at the first Foundation
of the City, yet it was delivered out and distributed amongst the Soldiers; the
which being also consumed, there remains not one Grane of any Corn amongst us;
so that we are reduced to a most extreme, and incredible Extremity: And what is
worse, we cannot expect any Relief from the neighboring parts; for that the
Villages round about are revolted to the Enemy, who in the last Summer burnt
all our Corn upon the Ground; and in the Autumn made themselves Masters of the
bordering Palancaes, or Forts, namely Palotta, Chiocca and Bacchian; so that at
present being environed on all sides by Enemies, we dare not stir abroad, but
are forced to contain our selves within the compass of four Walls. And indeed
to speak the Truth, we are in that starving Condition, that many have deserted,
and above Eight hundred of the Servants of God, have rather chosen to yield
themselves Slaves to the Christians, than to die by Hunger; and many of these
have renounced our Holy Faith; nor is it possible for us to hinder those, who
do daily desert us. Surely, most Pious Lord, The Compassion of our Sovereign is
such, as will not permit his innocent People to perish, or to be trampled under
the Feet of our Enemies.

Most happy Lord, The Giaurs or Infidels, since the taking of Agria, are come
to take Winter Quarters in the Castles, and Villages of our Neighborhood, and
appear every Day in sight of our Gates; and being puffed up with Pride, since
the subjection of Agria and Ossech, they daily send us Letters and Summons to
Surrender; and now lately the third time, we received a most insolent Letter
from a certain Captain, who says he belongs to the Religious at Vienna,
inviting us to a Surrender, promising to Conduct us in safety with our Goods
and Families to such places, as we shall desire; Threatening upon our refusal to
give us no Quarter, but to put us all to the Sword. And now at last another
Messenger is come to us from the Commander of Palotta, whom out of pure Zeal to
our Religion, we put to Death with Thousands of Torments: The next Day after
which we made a Sally, in which the Giaurs (that is, the Christians) gained the
advantage, killing and taking Prisoners, One hundred and fifty of our Zaims and
Timariots, putting to Death afterward all those which they had taken; in
Revenge of what we had committed on the Messenger, which they had sent to us;
and with these, many of our Servants became Martyrs for our Holy Faith; which
struck such a terror into the Minds of our Citizens, Spahees and Janisaries,
that above Two hundred of them conveyed themselves away in one Night.

Most valiant Lord, Besides those Letters, which we have sent by diverse
Conveyances to give a Relation of our most miserable Condition, we have yet
farther to add, that our Soldiers finding themselves desperate, and out of all
hopes of Relief and Succor, have sometimes arisen in a Mutiny upon us. For
after they had eaten up all the Cattle and Oxen, and Flesh which was in the
Magazine, so that an Oak (which is two pounds and a half) of Salt, is sold at
four Dollars, and a Bushel of Millet at Twenty four Dollars; in which necessity
and Famine, the Soldiers came upon us demanding Pay and Subsistence; saying,
That they were obliged to remain only one year in the Town, and that then they
should be relieved; but instead thereof, they had been continued a year and a
half in Famine, Nakedness, and perpetual danger of their Lives; so that the
Janisaries, who are to the number of Three hundred, have rent asunder all the
Linings of the Tents for Cloth, and Linen to cover and defend themselves
against the Cold. Wherefore most Honored, and most Dread Lord; To quiet and
appease the just Complaints and Demands of our Soldiery, we have promised that
in the space of a Month, they shall receive both Pay and Subsistence: To which
purpose, we have dispatched away the Bearer hereof, with some Camerades of his,
to present, and expose our Grievances, Wants and Miseries, at the happy and
sacred Feet of your Excellency, praying unto God, to Conduct him safe to your
most revered Presence.

But if notwithstanding all we have said, delay should be made to Succor us
with a formidable Army, with Money and Provisions, God knows what will become
of us; for in a short time our Business must have an end. If the General of the
Emperor should come upon us, both We, and this City must fall into his Hands.
And then neither your Excellency, nor the Port can excuse your selves in
saying, That you were not timely advised of our Miseries: For if in the space
of a few Weeks we are not relieved, considering the People we have lost, and
those which die daily, God knows, you will never see more of our Letters: All
depends on your Excellency.

Given at Alba Regalis, in the Month of January, 1688. Subscribed, Your Servant
Sechoghy Achmet Pasha, called Vizier of Buda: Your Servant Achmet Pasha,
Governor of Alba Regalis: Your Servant Osman Zagargi Pasha, Commander of the
Janisaries.



Besides this, and several other Letters, which were found about Achmet, the
Kadi or Judge of the City, had secretly conveyed into his Hands a certain Arz,
or Memorial, faithfully representing the Abuses of the Officers, and which was
to this effect.

OUr most gracious Emperor having supplied our City of Alba Regalis, with
plenty of Provisions for Subsistence of the People, one half of them is already
consumed and devoured, and the other half has been fraudulently divided
between this our Honorable Vizier, and the Zagargibashee, who is Commander of
the Garrison, and which they have sold abroad, and put the Money into their own
Purses, by Reason of which the poor People are constrained either to perish
with Famine, or to Desert, and Fly into the Hands of the Infidels, who are our
Enemies: Besides which, to the great Diminution of our Garrison, many of our
People have been miserably destroyed in the frequent Sallies which they have
made. And because by such Miscarriages as these, the Mussulmin Cause (or Cause
of the Believers) does greatly suffer; I am obliged in Conscience to make known
these false, and treacherous dealings, which are the natural effects of Tyranny
and Oppression; for as the Alchoran says, Allanettulach Alla Zelimin, which
is, let the Curse of God fall upon the Head of Tyrants.

This Honorable Vizier by his evil Management of Affairs, and by the
insupportable Taxes, which he has laid upon the Subjects, has been the cause,
why so many of the Servants of God have been trampled under Foot, and so many
Villages laid Wast, and why so many Entire Families, have been necessitated to
retire for Protection into the Christian Dominions. In short, his Tyranny and
Negligence in the Government has exterminated the People, and reduced this
Garrison to utter Ruin, where at present are scarce Three hundred Persons to be
found: And in fine, he is a Tyrant and unfit to Govern with an absolute
Authority. One day I adventured to Begin a free Discourse with Achmet Aga, the
Bearer hereof, touching all these Miscarriages, in presence of Osman the
Zagargibashee Governor of this place; who therewith was so offended, that he
laid his Hand upon his Dagger, and would have killed me. I know not more what
to say, since it is the Will of God: And I hope, That what I have here declared
will be kindly, and graciously interpreted: And so referring all to your
Prudence, I remain;

Mustapha Kadi of Alba Regalis.
Given at Alba Regalis, in the Month of January, 1688.

The truth of these Matters was confirmed by a Christian, who had lately made
an Escape out of Alba Regalis; with this farther Addition, That the Commanders
of that Town were so grievously importuned by the Garrison and Inhabitants,
that they were resolved to dispatch another party of Turks, amongst which was
one Ali Aga, a subtle and dexterous Person, who had been often a Prisoner, and
with one Wribech a Renegado, with Instructions to represent the State of their
Affairs at Belgrade, and to hasten the desired, and long expected Succors.
Besides which, the Turks were not wanting with all Diligence, Subtlety, and
Money to provide what Sustenance they were able, an occasion for which in a
short time offered unto them: For Colonel Bisterzi Commander of Palotta,
designing to furnish Zioccha with some necessary Provisions; laded four Carts
therewith, The Turks of Alba Regalis Seize four Wagons with Provisons.
and dispeeded them away under the Guard, and Conduct of Twenty four
Musketeers; of which the Turks being informed by a treacherous Person,
detached that very Night a Party of Two hundred Men, to lie in wait in a
Neighboring Wood, attending the passage of the Wagons, which so fortunately
succeeded, that they surprised them, and brought them with Twelve Musketeers
of their Convoy into Alba Regalis.

About this time another Regenado arrived safely in the Town from Belgrade, who
gave new Encouragement to the Commanders to hold out, with assurance, that
before he came away the Seraskier had already provided great abundance of
Victuals and Money, under a strong Guard, They are encouraged
which was on their way toward the City. And moreover he reported, That there
were other Succors coming to them from Constantinople, under such a powerful
Convoy as needed not to fear the German Troops, who being sensible of their own
Weakness, had abandoned part of their Conquests; as Illoch, Peter Waradin and
other Villages, both upon the Save and Danube; so that the Turks having a free
Passage, had laid their Bridges over the Save and Drove, designing not only to
relieve Alba Regalis, but likewise Sigeth and Canisa.

The News which this Messenger had brought, was soon afterward verified, by an
Incursion which some Troops detached from the Regiment of Norcheim had made
into the Neighboring Woods; Turks, who cut off the Heads of diverse of those,
who were too far advanced; howsoever the rest made their Retreat good by the
Assistance of the Governor of Possega, who came in to their assistance; at
which time also Seven thousand Turks passed the Save, who rifled all the
Villages round, and carried away the People.

Means taken to hinder the Succors from Alba Regalis.
The Imperial Court being seasonably advised hereof, took immediate Counsels to
prevent and obstruct the Succors designed for Alba Regalis, and to secure the
new Conquests from returning again into the Power and Dominion of the Enemy: To
which end, Orders were dispeeded from the Counsel of War, to the Regiments
quarted in all the adjacent parts about Pesth, to prepare themselves for a
March; the like Orders were given to the Regiments of Palfi and Staremberg, as
also to some of the Bavarian Troops quartered in the Counties of Strana and
Liptona: Moreover Marshal Caprara received the like Orders, to cause all the
Regiments under his Command to March, which lay on the Confines of Croatia: And
the like positive Commands were dispatched to the Governors of Croatia; And to
all of them Orders were sent to make their Rendezvous in, and about Oseck, so
as to be in a readiness to oppose any Attempt of the Turks, and to obstruct
their passage over the Drove; and prevent their making Semblin a place and
Magazine of Arms: by which means all the designs of relieving Alba Regalis,
Sigeth and Kanisia were disappointed.

Tekeli writes to his Princess.
In the mean time Tekeli not being informed of the Surrender of Mongatz, but
supposing it to be much straightened, and in a Condition not to hold out much
longer, wrote a Letter to his Princess (which was intercepted) wherein he
directs her to provide in the Articles of Surrender, Febr. 1688.
that his Goods and princely Coronet, with those Writings and Commissions given
by the Sultan in his favor might be preserved, and permitted to be carried
with her; and that for her self and Family, she would do well to dispose of her
self and them in Poland, but by no means to commit her Person into the Hands of
the Germans, or to abide in any part of the Upper Hungary. But Tekeli hearing
that these Orders came too late, and that the Place was already yielded, being
full of Anger and Rage, he studied all ways possible to Revenge himself, He
wastes the Countries.
wasting and consuming all those fruitful Fields and Countries, in the parts
adjacent as far as Great Waradin; near unto which he had fortified himself with
some Thousands of Men, in a certain Village called Thelegh, where General
Heusler had some times beaten up his Quarters: February, Tekeli defeated.
passing the River Kerez over the Ice with a strong party of Horse, he fell
upon him in his very Trenches, with such Bravery and Success, that Tekeli was
put to Flight, leaving Six hundred of his Men dead in the Field; and Four
hundred Prisoners taken, amongst which was one Genay a Chief Captain, and
second in Command to Tekeli himself, together with Twenty other Officers.

This Success was followed by another of the like nature: For Tekeli having
detached a Party into the County of Zatmar to gather Contributions, and forcing
the same with Fire and Sword, put the poor People into a most miserable Terror
and Consternation, flying from place to place for Refuge and Protection. Upon
advice of which, General Heusler hastened with a Party of Horse, encouraged and
flushed with the late Victory, happily encountered the Tekelites, as they were
carrying away the Spoil, which they had distrained for Non-payment of
Contribution; but they not daring to make a stand, quitted their Horses and
their Booty, and saved themselves in the Thickets of a neighboring Wood.
General Carafa a^ Hermanstadt.
At the same time General Carafa was by order of the Emperor dispatched into
Transylvania to settle matters in a better state then before: And being come to
Hermanstadt, he was informed that the German Troops were not provided, and
accommodated according to Agreement; whereupon he dispatched a resolute Message
to Apafi, and the States of the Country, giving them to understand, that in
case better Provisions were not made for the necessary Quarters of the
Soldiers, he should be forced to take such Measures, as were most adequate to
the present occasion. Apafi, considering that Carafa was resolute, and not to
be opposed in his Demands, made a virtue of necessity, and sent his Chief
Minister Telecky, the most esteemed and most honored Person of the States and
Nobility, unto him, to make him a Complement, with all the high Expressions of
Submission and Compliance. In pursuance whereof the General took into his
consideration the particulars of the several Quarters, The Soldiers Allowance
in Winter Quarters increased.
and thought fit to advance the Allowance one Third more, than what has been
agreed in the former Treaties. And having made some alterations amongst the
Officers, belonging to certain Imperial Garrisons, he fixed his own
Headquarters at Hermanstadt, as being not only the strongest Garrison, but the
most proper and convenient place, from whence he might most easily succor and
relieve the other Quarters, as occasion served.

Halmet yielded.
The Name of the Germans was become now so dreadful over all Hungary, that many
strong Fortresses at the first appearance of the Imperial Forces surrendered
themselves; as did Halmet, a Castle on the Frontiers of Transylvania,
encompassed with a deep and broad Ditch, and furnished with Draw-Bridges, and
Garrisoned by Turks, yield up it self to General Magni; who proceeding forwards
in his March, took in the Fortress of Felsiat with as much ease and facility,
Felsiat surrenders.
as he had done that of Halmet; by which means he brought above Two hundred
Villages under Contribution, and excluded the Turks from all Communication with
the parts of Transylvania.

All things being settled in Transylvania to the satisfaction of the Emperor;
Baron de Pace was detached with Three Regiments, and reinforced with some other
Troops under General Saurau, with Orders to march toward Stephanopolis, a
Frontier Garrison of Valachia; to prevent the designs of that Despot in case he
should attempt anything to the prejudice of the Emperor: But the Imperial Court
being sufficiently satisfied that the Despot had no other but sincere
intentions to preserve his own Dominion, March. The Despot of Valachia submits.
and benefit Christendom, His Imperial Majesty was pleased to send the Bishop
of Nicopolis unto him, giving him to understand that he should receive his
gracious Assistance in all his designs, and that he would cause the Succession
of that Principality to descend upon his Son, acknowledging only that Homage,
which from ancient times was paid to the King of Hungary. Whereupon the Despot
sent an Envoy to General Carafa at Hermanstadt, to receive Orders and
Instructions in what manner to behave and govern his Affairs.

In the mean time the Turks in Alba Regalis, finding themselves without all
relief, and no returns made to those Messages, which they had dispatched by
various ways, began again to be very mutinous, Alba Regalis in Mutiny,
and unruly toward their Governors; howsoever they still held out, resolving
as yet to hearken unto no terms, which should be offered them by the Enemy.
Notwithstanding which, the Marquess of Baden, who was President of the Council
of War for his Imperial Majesty, being commanded to pass from his Government of
Javarin, or Rab, unto Ratisbon, there to reside as Plenipotentiary for his
Imperial Majesty at that Diet; did think fit, before his departure, to regulate
some Affairs within his Jurisdiction; and particularly to appoint Count
Ricceardi, accompanied with an Interpreter, and a party of Hungarian Horse, to
view and observe the State of Alba Regalis, and to try if he could incline and
persuade the Turks to surrender; but they being quite of another humor, not
being reduced as yet to the utmost point and extremity of Famine, cried out
with a loud Voice, Denies to surrender.
that they would maintain their City to the last drop of Blood; and even to
more violent necessities than those of Agria. Ricceardi returning with this
report to Giavarin, the Marquess of Baden issued out new Orders to straiten the
Town with more rigor and closeness, The Blocade closely watched.
than before; and not only reinforced the Castles of Palotta, Zioccha, and
Schambegh, warning them to be more diligent and watchful for the future to
prevent all Communication between Alba Regalis, and the Neighboring Villages;
and to make the Blocade more formal, General Batthiani was not only commanded
to march into those Quarters with his Hungarian Troops, but likewise caused
them to be reinforced by some of the Militia belonging to the Circles of
Franconia, and other Troops under the Command of Count Erdeodi,
Lieutenant General at that time of Giavarin: Moreover the Marquess of Baden
before his departure, disposed the March of the Militia, and ordered their
several Quarters in parts adjacent to Oseck, there to oppose the passage of the
Enemy over the Drove: After which, all matters being well ordered, with
excellent Methods and Rules of Government, the Marquess took Post for Vienna;
where having received Instructions from the Emperor for better Government of
his Presidency at Ratisbon, he proceeded thither, Marquess of Baden at Ratisbon.
and there he held several public and private Conferences, for the better
Regulation of the Military Affairs for the Ensuing Campaigne.

In the mean time Recruits were made, and Horses provided to Remount such as
wanted them; and whilst it was doubted, Whether the Elector of Bavaria could be
present in Person to conduct his Army this Year into Hungary, upon a jealousy,
that the French would fall into the Palatinate; yet the Treaty was concluded
for the Bavarian Troops to continue in Hungary, and serve with their best
assistance to forward the Progress of the Imperial Arms.

Marshall Caprara commanding now in Chief in Hungary, provided Oseck with all
things necessary for their Subsistence; and gave Orders to those Captains, C.
Caprara commands in Hungary.
who commanded upon the Save to provide great Numbers of Boats, and Barges, and
Floats, for making Bridges over that River, and as occasion served therewith to
Transport Provisions and Materials for War. The Turks on the other side had
also Erected another Bridge for the better security of Bosnia, and assembled at
Costanovitz, on the River Unna, with design to make Incursions into the
Confines of Croatia; but that Country was so well guarded and defended by the
vigilance of Count Erdeody the Banno, or Chief Governor thereof, that all
attempts of the Turks on that side were wholly disappointed, and defeated: And
farther to render the Actions of the Turks fruitless and ineffectual in
Sclavonia, where they had made Provisions of Victuals and Ammunition, and had
laided therewith Lighters and Barges, to supply their smaller Garrisons on the
River Save, The designs of the Turks defeated in Sclavonia.
Baron de Tunkel was dispeeded with a Detachment of Two hundred Horse, and a
Regiment of Dragoons, with some Haiducks to oppose the intentions of the Enemy;
and being come as far as Valkovar, the Scouts brought word, that Rustan Pasha,
the late Governor of Agria, with about One thousand Horse and Foot, had
conducted into Illoch a very great Convoy of about Two hundred Wagons laden
with Provisions; and that afterward he himself was returned unto Belgrade.
Tunkel being disappointed of this Design, was more successful in another
Attempt, which he made on a place called Ratza, situate on this side of the
Save, defended by some Spahees and Janisaries; to which privately marching in
the Night, he surprised the place about Two hours after Midnight, with the
Death of about Three hundred Turks, and Seventy Slaves, and set at liberty
Fifty Christians, and took Sixty Horses, with great Numbers of Cattle, and
Three Ensigns; Ratza taken from the Turks and burnt
and having set Fire to the City, he returned in Safety and Triumph to Oseck,
laden with Honor and Spoils.

On the other side the Pasha of Gradisca having advice that Count Caprara was
upon his march toward Oseck with a strong Party to Conduct and Convoy many
Wagons laden with Ammunition and Provisions in order to some extraordinary
Enterprise; the Pasha apprehending that his Design might be upon Belgrade,
resolved to pass the Bridges which he had laid over the Save, with design to
surprise Possega, and Zernech, and thereby to divert the Attack intended upon
Belgrade: In pursuance of which the Pasha marched with a Body of Three thousand
Five hundred men toward Zernech, but not with that Privacy as Tunkel had
lately done; for in their way they set Fire to all the Villages round, and
killed the People, which gave such an Alarm to that Garrison, by the
affrighted Peasants which had escaped, that they immediately put themselves
into a posture of defense: And Colonel Baron Amanzaga having also News thereof,
hastened with a Body of Horse, and some Foot, and came so seasonably to the
succor of the Town, that they encountered the Turks in their march, and charged
them with so much bravery, that they not only put the Cavalry to Flight, but
also forced them to abandon the Janisaries, Baron Amanzaga defeats the Pas^a of
Gradisca.
and to expose them to the Sword of their Enemies: The greatest part of which,
to the Number of about Five hundred, were Slain upon the place, and Two hundred
made Prisoners, amongst which was the Commander in Chief of the Janisaries,
Four Aga's, and the Son of the Pasha of Gradisca, with several Colors, and
Drums: The News of which Baron Amanzaga dispatched to General Caprara with all
Expedition.

About the same time, or the Day before, another Party detached from the main
Body made an Attack upon the Out-guards of Possega, which being over-matched in
numbers, retreated under the Gates of the City: The Lieutenant Governor, to
whom at that time with some veterane Soldiers, and subaltern Officers, the
Command of the Town was committed, took the Alarm; but not being cautious
enough to be informed of the Strength, and Numbers of the Enemy by the Report
of the Out-guards, he advanced too far from the Town; which when the Turks
observed, they made a feigned Flight, with design to bring their Enemy into an
Ambuscade, which they had prepared for them, in which they had all miscarried,
had not Count Truxes, The Gar^rison of Possega seasonably relieved.
Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Holstein, and Count Bizzaro, Lieutenant
Colonel of the Regiment of Lodron, who (were accidentally marching to relieve
the Out-guards,) come seasonably into their Succor and Rescue; who so
vigorously charged the Enemy, that they put them to Flight, and forced them to
take Refuge in the Woods and Mountains, whilst the Christians, the Night
approaching, retired orderly into Possega.

There being in the mean time various Reports at the Imperial Court concerning
the State and Condition of the City of Alba Regalis; which holding out so long
beyond all expectation, it was conjectured, that the Blocade was not strict, or
at least not sufficiently guarded and watchfully attended as it ought to have
been, which obliged the Counsel of War to dispatch Orders to Colonel Riccardi,
that he with his Regiment should March to Vesprimio, Palotta, and other
Neighboring places, to make enquiry into the State, and Condition of that City
and Garrison. Riccardi according to his Orders marched out of Giavarino or Rab;
Colonel Ri^cardi made enquiry into the State of Alba Regalis.
and taking with him a Company of Croats, and a Party from Schomberg, he came
to Quarter for one Night at a Village called Brin, about a League distant from
Alba Regalis; and early in the Morning by break of day sounding to Horse, in
pursuance of his March he detached Ten Croats, and as many Hungarians to
advance before, with directions to seize and surprise what Turks they should
meet near the City, that by them they might be informed of the State of the
place. But they meeting with none on the way, came up to the very Gates of the
Town, which they found shut and unguarded: But soon afterward they were
opened, to give Passage to the Sally of a Party both of Horse and Foot; the
latter of which remained within their Palisadoes; but the first Sallied out
into the Field, having the Renegado Wrebeck at the head of them, who coming
near, frankly discoursed with the Christians in this manner: Soldiers what is
it you demand? May a Man trust to your Word? To which Answer was made, That he
might; whereupon he came up boldly to them, and touched the Hand of an
Hungarian Ensign, Colonel Riccardi desires a parley with the Pasha.
and a Rascian: By which time Wrebeck perceiving the numbers of the Enemies to
increase, and to approach within Cannon-shot of the Town, he Demanded, what
those Troops were? To which Answer was made, That they were the Troops of a
certain Croatian Colonel, who desired to have conference with the Pasha, or
with some other of the principal Officers. Wrebeck promised to carry that
Message, and accordingly returned to the City, where at the Gates thereof he
met the Pasha of that Country, Janisaries, and with two or three other of the
principal Officers of that place; to whom he made a Report, that the Troops
without were Commanded by a certain Croatian Colonel, who desired to enter into
a Conference with the Pasha: To which the Pasha suddenly replied in these
words; It is well, he is welcome, I will go and speak with him. These words
being overheard by the Chief Commander, or Aga of the Janisaries, he arose up
in a Fury, and throwing down his Turbant with a Rage upon the Ground, cried out
Treachery, and that the Pasha had a Design to betray them into the Hands of the
Christians: And Roaring out Treachery, Treachery, he ran to advise the Vizier
thereof, whom he found on one of the Bastions, taking a view of the Enemie's
Troops in the Field. Jealousies in the Town.
The Vizer having heard this saying, Commanded that the Business should be
examined, and in case the Pasha should be found Guilty, he should be stoned to
Death, and his Body thrown over the Walls. The Pasha being highly incensed upon
this so unjust an occasion, took up his Topuss, or Mace into his Hand, and
holding it over the Head of the Aga of the Janisaries; said aloud, What is the
matter? And what Noise is this thou make? Thou old Fool? Think thou, that
thou art more brave, or more faithful than I am? Hold thy peace, or by the
living God, I will beat thy Brains out with this Topuss. For what Reason is it,
that I am not permitted to speak with that Captain? Will he alone take this
City? Let us hear and see what it is that he will say: If his Offers are good,
we may receive them, and if bad we may reject them. It was never denied in any
part of the World to hear Ambassadors.

In the mean time a great Noise, and Tumult arose amongst the Soldiers at the
Gate, and above a dozen Cannon-shot were fired at the Imperial Horse, A
Skirmish near the Gates.
which stood drawn up within Musket Shot of the Gates; and some of the Turks
mounted on Horseback made a Sally, and began a Skirmish, which continued
almost two Hours, without any other hurt than of some few Turks, who were
wounded. Colonel Riccardi all this time could not discover the true State and
Condition of the Town; and therefore he gave freedom to two Turks, provided
that they would procure entrance into the Town, and return with certain advice
of the true state thereof: An Uproar in the Town.
But the Confusion was so great before the Gates, that they were neither
permitted to enter, or speak: Whereupon the Colonel seeing little good was to
be done, at that present made a Retreat, and was on his return with his
Soldiers to Palotta; when they espied Wrebeck, with some other Turks running
full speed toward them, as if they intended another Skirmish; but they stopped
their Horses and returned back to the Town, and so did the Colonel toward
Palotta: And having passed a certain Bog or Morass, and the River Sarowitz, he
gave Command to a Turk who was his Prisoner, to go that Night to Alba Regalis;
and having there understood the true State of the place, that he should the
next day early return with some certain Report thereof: Turk desired to be
excused, for that in case he were discovered, he should most certainly be
Empaled. But the Colonel fiercely commanded him to go, with promise to give him
his Liberty at his return: The poor Fellow obeyed out of fear, and out of
Religion to the Faith of his Promise and Oath, he faithfully performed the
Service enjoined him.

For the next Day being the 30th of March, this Turk with Sixteen others well
clothed and armed, with four Turkish Women, Wives to some of them, and Children
escaped out of the Town, and fled to the Christians. The Colonel soon entered
into discourse with them, and by their Answers to several Interrogatories he
put to them, he understood, that amongst those Sixteen there were two of them,
which in the late Tumult in the City had been principal Ringleaders of the
Sedition, the first called Hadgi Ali, and the other Kara Hassan, both of them
Officers amongst the Spahees, and of the number of those, who had broken the
Vizier's Windows, and given some Stabs to the Governor of the Castle. And to
satisfy the Colonel's Questions more particularly, Hadgi Ali gave this
following Account of the late Uproar, which had happened in the Town.

A Relation of the Mutiny in the Town of Alba Regalis.
On the 27th said he, of this Month of March, some Janisaries and Spahees of
the Garrison came to me; and said, Friends and Brethren, what are we to do?
These our Commanders will neither Surrender up the City to the Christians, nor
yet give us Provisions wherewith to live: Come let us go to these Tyrants, and
require an Account from them, for what reason they treat us in this inhuman
manner. The Day following, the Spahees and Janisaries, to the number of Four or
Five hundred, went with me to the Vizier, with whom we found the Pasha of the
City then present; and I, as their chief Speaker, began in sharp and resenting
Terms, to lay before them our miserable and starving Condition and
Aggrievances. The Vizier and Pasha with gentle, and most obliging words
endeavored to pacify us, and to lay the blame of all upon the Aga of the
Janisaries, advising us to cite him before the Kadi, or Judge, then sitting in
the chief Mosch of the City; where being convicted by Justice, they would leave
him to our Mercy, to inflict Punishment on him according to our own free Will
and Pleasure: And that their intentions might appear more real and manifest,
they gave into my Hands an Order directed to the Judge, to give ear unto the
Aggrievances of the People, and to those Accusations which they had to charge
on the Aga of the Janisaries. The People herewith went to the House of the
Judge, whom finding not at home, they proceeded directly to the Aga of the
Janisaries, who being well preadvised of the Business, called me to himself and
began to speak to me in very kind words. I know, my dear Hadgi, you desire that
the place be yielded up; and for my part I am contented; and if you will let me
go to the Vizier and the Pasha, we will soon agree upon Articles for the
Surrender. The which we having permitted him to do, he immediately mounted on
his Horse; but the enraged People fell upon him, and had killed him, had he not
retired back into the Yard of his House, and shut his Gates upon them; and to
save himself from farther Outrage, he barred up himself in a secret place of
his House, resolving not to come forth, until he had received assurances for
the security of his Life; the which, when I had given him, with consent and
approbation of the People, on Condition that he should concur with the Vizier
and Pasha in their Resolutions for Surrender of the place, he then went to the
Vizier and the Pasha; and being all three together, they jointly agreed to call
me to their Presence, and caused me, which was a thing unusual, to sit down
amongst them, and demanded of me what it was I desired. I immediately answered:
Sirs, My Companions have entrusted me to tell you, That if you do not Surrender
up the City, but suffer them miserably to Perish, they resolve to Kill you, and
to do the Business themselves, and to depart from hence with their Families to
Belgrade.

These words being uttered with some fierceness, and accompanied with some
other Menaces; they expressed great tenderness for the People, repeating their
promises to yield unto all their desires: But I was scarce got out from their
presence, before the Gates were with despite shut upon us; and the Commanders
showed themselves armed with all their Attendants at the Windows; and the Aga
of the Janisaries, who was more resolute than any, and averse to the Surrender,
holding his Bow and Arrows in his Hand, told the People plainly, that he would
not consent to the Surrender of the City, but would defend and maintain it to
the last drop of his Blood.

The People enraged hereat, drew up into a Body before the Vizier's House; and
some of them ran upon the Walls, and drew from thence two Pieces of Cannon,
intending therewith to batter down the Vizier's Palace; which was ready for
Execution, when the Renegado Wrebeck, a Fellow very dear to the People, came
with Tears in his Eyes, to dissuade them from so violent an Attempt; and having
used many very pungent Arguments to them, he prevailed so far, that the Tumult
was appeased.

During this interval or suspension of Arms, I, who was as it were the Tribune
of the People, was called again, and desired to appease the Multitude,
promising to answer their desires: But they having been so often deluded,
refused to give any Credit to their Words, unless they would solemnly swear on
the Alchoran to yield the City; nor yet would they draw off, and return the
Cannon unto the Walls, until such time as they had begun to make some steps
toward the execution of their desires.

Hereupon the three Commanders, with some of the Citizens assembled in the
great Mosch, as if they intended to agree upon the Propositions, which were to
be offered to the Enemies; but in reality they intended nothing less, laboring
all that Day to appease the Tumults with Money and Provisions: The Vizier made
large distributions to the Spahees, and the Aga to the Janisaries, and the
Pasha to the Citizens and Soldiers of the Country; and by these means they took
an Oath of the People patiently to endure, until St. George's Day, being the
23d of April, which is a Day regardby the Turks: But howsoever they would
esteem themselves absolved from this Oath, in case an Enemy should in the mean
time appear before their Walls, and streighten them yet farther by a Siege.

Colonel Riccardi having by this Relation been rightly informed of the true
State of the Town, he thought fit to make Trial of another Appearance before
the Walls, and came with more than One hundred Horse within Cannon-shot of the
place, which had he done the preceding Day, before the People had taken an
Oath to hold out until St. George's Day, the City had most certainly been
yielded: But now instead thereof, they made several Shots from the Bastions,
and sallied out both Horse and Foot, without any other execution on either
side, than the taking of one Turk, whose Head they cut off in sight of his
Companions.

Thus the Colonel having sufficiently been informed of the State of the matter,
on which he was employed, he departed from Palotta with his Troops on the 31st
of March, Alba Regalis, Colonel Riccardi leaves Alba Regalis.
a certain Janisary well armed and clothed came to them in the Morning, and
gave an Account that he was fled from the City with some other Companions,
amongst which was an Odabashee, or Captain of the Janisaries, who having been
over active and forward in the late Mutiny, feared in cooler Blood to be called
to question by the angered Officers. After which, Colonel Riccardi finding
little farther to be done, marched back to Buda, as Colonel Bisterzi did with
his Forces to Palotta.

The obstinate Defense which Alba Regalis made, gave some trouble to the Court
at Vienna; both because it was necessary to have it subjected before the
beginning of the Campaign; and because the Captive Turks and Deserters were so
numerous in those parts, and in the Towns and Redoubts over all those Qarters,
as might give just occasion of Jealousy and fear of Danger, in case any design
of Massacre, or Assassination should be plotted by them: But so vile and mean
were the Turks esteemed, and their price and value so low, that a lusty Fellow
was sold for a Dollar, and a Woman for a quarter.

But we must here take our leave of Alba Regalis for a while, and return to
Constantinople, where we shall find the Seditions and Military Mutinies broken
out again with more Fury and Danger, even to the very shaking of the
Foundations of the Empire, than at the latter end of the last year: For the
Cabals daily increased amongst the mutinous Soldiers: They had lately received
their pay, and were satisfied in all they could demand; their Officers had some
of them been displaced, and others strangled, as they were pleased to bestow
their Heads and Offices, but not being herewith contented, unless every one of
them could be made a Vizier or Pasha, Mutinies begin again at Constantinople.
they were emboldned to proceed to farther Outrages. There had been a kind of a
cessation of these intestine Troubles, for about the space of two Months;
during which time the new Sultan was persuaded as a thing accustomary, to send
an Ambassador to France, England and Holland, to give notice of his happy
exaltation to the Sublime Throne of his Ancestors; but whilst this was
meditating, and preparations making for carrying on the Wars of the ensuing
Summer, which was designed most vigorously to be acted in the Morea, and in a
defensive manner only in Hungary, the Thoughts of sending an Ambassador into
Christendom, (as lately designed) were laid aside, which was not unpleasing
either to Sir William Trumbal, who was then Ambassador for his Majesty of Great
Britain at Constantinople, nor yet to the English Company of Merchants at
London trading into the Levant Seas, who could expect to reap nothing but
trouble, and expense from such an Embassy. And indeed all things were at a
stand by the Insolences of the Soldiers; the Officers both Civil and Military
being discouraged, and at a stop and full Period in the Grand Seignior's
Service, had work enough to contrive, how to guard their own Persons against
the violence of the Soldiers, and provide for the safety of their own Lives.

The daily Cabals of Mutinous Soldiers having been held in several places of
the City, were adjourned at length to the Vizier's own House, where with
Menaces and greater Insolences than formerly, they demanded the removal of
Kuperlee the Chimacam from his Office; saying, Kuperlee laid aside.
That he was as bad a Man as his Father, who had spilt Rivers of Blood, and
ruined the Empire. It was an unusual Piece of Favor and Mercy in this People
to deal thus gently with him, who were accustomed formerly to be Executioners
of their own Sentence, upon those, whom they suspected to be no good Wishers to
their Side, and Faction. To oppose them herein had been to no purpose, and to
expostulate with them had been equally dangerous; wherefore the Vizier being
sensible of their Outrageous and Irrational Humor, not patient of the least
Contradiction, seemed to concur with them in all they asked, and ordered a
Gally immediately to Transport Kuperlee to the Castles, on the Hellespont or
Dardanelli: He is sent in a Gally to the Castles.
There was no need of Commands, or Force to drive Kuperlee away, for he was
affrighted and readily leapt into the Gally, thinking it a happy occasion to
save his Life, and escape out of their Hands. The Vizier also at their instance
discharged several Officers, which they had nominated, putting the Chief of
these Rebels into their places, and renewed a solemn Oath with them to stand by
them, and never to be their Enemy; and the Spahees and Janisaries took the same
Oath to stand by each other.

The Vizier, as a means to amuse the Mutiniers, and to divert their Thoughts to
more orderly and lawful designs, set forth the (Tugh) or Horse's Tail, with a
Signal of the Vizier's March into the Field within the space of Forty days; but
having been forced in this manner to put out Kuperlee his Brother-in-Law (in
whom he much confided) from his Office of Chimacam; he knew not any, whom he
could more safely trust with the Government of the City, during his absence
than Shaban Aga, his own Kaiah, or Deputy in his Business; and to supply his
place Zulsicar Effendi was nominated to be Kajah; but very unseasonably, for he
was Obnoxious to the Mutiniers, having been Chiausbashee, and turned out by
them; which when one Tesfugee understood (the ablest and activest Head amongst
them) he came to the Vizier, and insolently told him, that if he made that Man
his Kaiah, he would kill him before his Face. The Vizier forced to dissemble.
The Vizier still dissembled this Affront, as well as many others; letting
these Rebels run on in their mad and tyrannical Government, until they had
rendered themselves universally Odious to the People, which they soon did by
their Arbitrary and unequal proceedings; for they framed a Project of raising
Chimny-Money, A Zechin is about 9 s. 6 d.
of a Zechin yearly on every Chimney; (tho for Popularity it was contrived,
that the Rich should pay for the Poor) they also gave out Rules for quartering
Soldiers, and for levying Money by extraordinary Ways, besides innumerable
other Violences and Outrages they committed; all which served to the Vizier's
purpose, and hastened the execution of the Designs, which had been contrived
between him and Kuperlee, to bring them to destruction; but this could not be
completed without the consent of the new Aga of the Janisaries, with whom the
Vizier had prevailed to join, and concur with him.

February, a Hatte-sheriff (which is a Royal Command under the Sultan's own
Hand writing) was sent to the Janisar-Aga, who assembling the Chief Officers,
read it to them, the Contents whereof were thus; That whereas the Soldiers
having lien under many Grievances, and long Arrears of pay, The Grand
Seignior's Command read to the Soldiers.
had chosen some of their Body to obtain a redress; which having been granted
unto them, and they fully satisfied in all their just Demands, their Duty was
now to be Obedient to the Sultan, and to all such as he should appoint to be
their Officers, and not to mix in Affairs relating to the Government; and that
whosoever should be Refractory should be punished as a Rebel. The
Hattee-sheriff being read, the Janisar-Aga asked them, whether they would be
obedient to the Royal Command? To which the Officers (for none but the
inferior Soldiers joined with the Mutiniers) answered, Yes. Tesfagee refuses
to obey;
But Tesfagee cried out, That he was a Villain, and a Rascal who obeyed that
Order. Whereupon the Janisar-Aga calling him Traitor and Infidel, caused him to
be carried into an Inner-room, where he was killed, And is killed.
and his Body thrown out before the Gate. After this, the Janisar-Aga went to
the Vizier to give him an account of this Action and Success, with which the
Vizier could not but be well pleased, thinking the Business to be ended: And
indeed it was a good step to it, for this Tesfagee was the principal Instrument
to keep the Spahees and Janisaries united, and the boldest, and most
understanding Villain amongst them. And now as if the Game had been sure, the
Vizier sent the Tefterdar to Seal up his House in order to a Confiscation of
his Estate, and also the Houses of several others of the Chief Mutiniers: But
herein the Vizier made a false step, for he should have secured their Persons,
before he had sealed their Houses.

For hereupon Hadgi Ali (who was an intimate Companion of him who was killed)
fearing the same Fate, presently advised the rest of the Mutiniers hereof, and
stirred up the Janisaries, by minding them of the many Oaths they had taken
with the Spahees to stand by each other: They assembled at Atmeidan, or rather
Okmeidan, Hadgi Ali another Mutinous Fellow.
which is a Field without the City, where they used to Shoot with Bows and
Arrows. The Janisar-Aga hearing of the Assembly, and thinking by his Authority
to disperse, and appease it, entered boldly into the Field; whom when Hadgi Ali
espied, he made up to him, and told him, Kills the Aga of the Janisaries.
You have Murdered our Companion, and endeavored to sow Dissentions amongst
us; and striking him on the Head with his Scymeter, he was immediately cut to
pieces. This Man was an Armenian Renegado; and as it is said, he was after his
Death found to be uncircumcised. After this the Tumult increased; and then they
went to the Tefterdar's House, and ransacked it, taking away a considerable Sum
of Money, The Tumult increases.
which was prepared and laid up for the Soldiers Pay: From thence they went,
and assaulted the Vizier in his own House, where he defended himself valiantly;
for having got to himself the Tefterdar, the Captain Pasha, and a considerable
number of Friends and Servants all well armed, he repulsed them thence. At
last, thinking to pacify them by the Resignation of his Office (which was a
very great Error) he sent for the Mufti, who out of fear was joined with the
Mutiniers. The Vizier gives up the Seals.
He gave up the Seals into his Hands, desiring him to carry them to the Grand
Seignior, that he might constitute another Vizier more pleasing, and more
capable to Rule his People. This false step disheartened all his Friends and
Associats, finding him divested of all his Authority and Power; the Tefterdar
and Captain Pasha gave way also to the Fury of the Soldiery, and made their
Escapes: And the Mutiniers being hereby encouraged, and not in the least
softened by this Resignation, fell on more fiercely, and broke into the House of
the Vizier, who retiring by a Back-stairs, was pursued by Hadgi Ali, and shot
with a Pistol, and by others wounded in the Belly, so that his Guts came out:
He is killed.
He had fought courageously, having slain several with his own Hand: His
Friends would have persuaded him to withdraw himself; But they could not
prevail upon him, saying, That he could not live long, and that during his
short life, he would not abandon his Wife, and Children to the Fury of these
Miscreants. Above Fifty Soldiers were killed before they entered the House,
which they spoiled even to the Windows and Doors. His Wife (the Daughter of Old
Kuperlee) gave them all her Jewels; but they treated her inhumanly, and wounded
her; upon which, as then reported, she Miscarried of a Child and died: His
Wife, House, etc. ransacked.
The eldest Daughter not delivering her Pendants soon enough, they cut off her
Ears with them; and a younger Daughter with a Slave, they took away, and sold
for six Dollars.

This Tumult lasted three or four Days, when the Rebels seemed to be absolute
Masters; for there was now no Vizier, no Janisar-Aga, Great confusion.
nor any surviving, who had any Authority over them; when a small Accident
ruined these Men, and over-turned their Anarchy, which was impossible to last:
For after they had domineered for the space of five Months, Pardoning or
Killing, Raising or Destroying whom they pleased; it happened, that in some of
the Shops of the City, four of these Janisaries in the Morning had taken away
some Embroidered Handkerchiefs, and other small Commodities which remained
there to be Sold; upon which a great Cry, and Clamor being raised amongst the
Shopkeepers, by the Encouragement of an Emir they all arose, The ruin of the
Mutiniers from whence.
fell on them, and killed two of them; and then the Emir putting a Linen Cloth
on a Stick, and lifting it up cried out, Let all true Musselmen come to the
Seraglio, and pray the Grand Seignior to put out the Prophet's Standard and
destroy these Rebels: Upon this, great numbers of the Citizens, who had been
highly incensed by their Robberies and Insolence, got in a Body together and
went to the Seraglio, which so encouraged the Sultan and those within, that the
Standard was set forth about Noon, and Proclamation made in the Streets, for
all People to come and Fight under it. Mahomet's Standard spread.
The Reverence paid to this Standard, brought an incredible concourse of People
of all Conditions and Ages, under the Walls of the Seraglio; from whence a
Shegh, or Preacher called to them thrice, and asked them, Whether they were
contented with their present Emperor? To which, Answer was made in the
Affirmative, with three great Shouts; but that they would have the Giurbaes, or
Captains, or Ringleaders of the Mutinous Militia destroyed: Upon which, Orders
were given to seize them: Accordingly Thirteen of them were taken and cut to
pieces; the rest fled or absconded. The Mufti also, who had sided with the
Giurbaes, was deprived of his Office, and Tabac Effendi put into his place, who
had formerly been deposed by the unruly Soldiers: All that night a strong Watch
was set about the Seraglio, and the next day all was quieted, as if none of
these Disturbances had happened: The Sedition suppressed.
Only Proclamation was made to Search for the Rebels, of which, as many as were
found, were immediately executed. Upon this Revolution, and Turn of Affairs all
the great Officers were changed: The Nisangi-Pasha who was an old Man, and for
many years had done nothing else, but make the Grand Seignior's Firm on
Commands, was created Grand Vizier: And a very young Man, Aga of the
Janisaries: Several Armenians, who dressed in the Habit of Soldiers, had mixed
with the Tumults, and plundered the Houses of the late Grand Vizier, and Aga of
the Janisaries, Diverse punished.
were taken and hanged, and several others were Imprisoned upon Suspicion of
confederacy with the Rebels. In fine, upon Proclamation made, that whosoever
had plundered any thing from any of the aforesaid Houses, and should restore
the same again in the space of three days, should obtain his Pardon; which had
so good effect, that several Sums of Money, were either brought to the new
Vizier, or in the night time laid in the Streets, and next morning restored.
And now from this day only may we begin to account the Reign of this new
Sultan: Who in the first place to exercise his Authority, by a strict
reformation of things, he suppressed Taverns, and prohibited the taking of
Tobacco: And to observe what effect his Authority had taken; he walked one day
Incognito in the Streets, with about eight Servants at a short distance from
him, The Sultan takes upon him to govern.
and finding two poor Fellows selling Tobacco, he caused them immediately to be
executed. The suppression of this dreadful Mutiny and Rebellion, produced a
general Joy and Jubily over the whole City, and served to bring the Soldiery
again into their Wits, who had for some Months, like so many Wild and Ravenous
Beasts, getting the Bridle out of their Mouths, acted without Reason or
Common-Sense. For one would have thought that Men, so lately mortified by the
Victories and Successes, which their Enemies had gained over them, should not
thereby grow, or become more insolent; or that they who fled before their
Enemies, should blush to abandon their Frontiers, and leave them naked and
exposed, whilst they marched Five or Six hundred Miles homewards, to reak their
Anger on their Commanders, and exercise the little Courage which was left them,
against their Citizens and Countrymen. But many times we read, that such
Turbulences as these, which are like Fevers in the Body Politic, have served
to render the whole Composition afterward more healthful, being thereby purged
of many corrupt and malignant Humors.

And so it happened in this case; for after the Death of Sciaus Pasha, and the
destruction of the Giurbas, it hapened fortunately for the present Vizier
Ismael, that there was no Pasha then in view, on whom to confer this Sublime
Office. After which no eminent Men appearing, and of years fitter to support
the weight of so great a Charge, then Ismael, Ismael mad^ Vizierr by Chance.
who was almost arrived to the Age of Fourscore; it was proposed, that he
should descend to the Trust of Chimacam: But Ismael rejected that employment,
saying, That in such turbulent Times he could not act with Vigor and
Authority, requisite for composing the present distractions, and securing the
Peace and Quiet of the Empire, unless he were invested with the Supreme Power
and the Seal of Vizier, which in that present Exigency was granted to him: But
he having never made any Figure in the World before, and this advancement to so
high a Dignity being very accidental, it was really believed, that it could not
be of any long continuance, and that he was rather designed to supply the
Vacancy, than possess the Office. But in a few days Ismael discovered to the
World, March 1688.
that his intentions were not to keep the place warm for another, but to settle
himself; and for his own greater security and quiet of the City, he immediately
fell to purge with great severity the dregs of those ill Humors, which had
disturbed the Government. And so he caused all the chief Servants of the
Giurbas, and several of the Spahees, and Janisaries (who had sided with them)
every Night to be cut off and thrown into the Sea, to the Number of about a
Thousand, by which the rest being terrified, the Soldiers were reduced to as
exact an Obedience, as formerly.

To proceed farther in this Work, the Tefterdar, or Lord-Treasurer, who was
first put in by the Giurbas (tho afterward they would have killed him) was
imprisoned in the Middle-gate of the Seraglio, and all his Estate seized: Then
was the Kia bei, or Lieutenant General of the Janisaries s^nt for, and vested
by the Vizier as a Pasha; The Vizier end^avours to settle himself.
but so soon as he was gone out, he was seized, imprisoned, and privately
conveyed away in a Boat, and banished to Mytilene. The reason why the Grand
Vizier made him a Pasha, was because that according to the Constitution of the
Janisaries, and that Ancient Cannon, no Kia-bei, whilst so, can be put to
Death, or Banished, until he is first divested of that Office.

And now Kuperlee, who, as formerly mentioned, was sent away to the Castles at
the Dardanelli, began to come into remembrance, Kuperles sent to Canea.
and to be looked on by the Vizier as his Rival, and a dangerous Competitor,
and as such, to be too near the Port: Wherefore to remove him farther off, a
Gally was ordered to Transport him to Canea, and the same Gally in her return
to take Mustapha Pasha, the late Janisar-Aga, who was not long since banished
to Canea, and bring him back to the Dardanelli.

And farther to purge the Army of all Mutiniers, and punish them for their late
Sedition, several of the chief Giurbas were taken, strangled, and their Bodies
thrown out before the Gate of the Seraglio. Shaban Aga, the Kaiah, or Deputy of
Siaus Pasha, late Vizier, and his Hafnadar, or Treasurer, were imprisoned to
make a discovery of the Estate belonging to Siaus Pasha, their Master; in
Composition for which, upon payment of One hundred and twenty Purses, Several
Imprisoned, and Fined.
they were set at liberty. Shaban Aga the Customer was also seized, and Three
hundred Purses demanded of him; but he having been so often fleeced, and
squeezed in all Turns, declared himself unable, and so was continued in his
Imprisonment.

In the mean Yeghen, the famous Robber in Asia, who having the last Year
brought with him Fifteen hundred men into Hungaria, was for that reason made a
Pasha, by Solomon then Vizier; and for want of better Officers, Yeghen Bei
commits some outrages.
the Command of the Turkish Forces on the Frontiers of Hungaria were now
committed to his Conduct: But being a Man always used to Rapine, and Violence,
he could not cast off the Trade to which he was accustomed, but fell in upon
the Country of one Zeni the Pasha of Albania, which he plundered, and pillaged
on all sides where he came, raising great Sums with all manner of Oppression,
by the Force and Violence of his Soldiers; which Zeni not enduring, opposed and
beat them away. Whereupon Yeghen made great Complaints to the Port; and Zeni
not knowing what impressions they might make in the minds of the Great Men,
Pasha of Bosnia strangled.
appeared in Person at Constantinople to make his defense; but so low-spirited
were the Ministers at that time, that for fear of Yeghen, they gave up Zeni to
be strangled by him. This Zeni was an Albanian by Birth, and of good interest
in his Country, and always bred up to the Wars, and esteemed a brave Soldier;
and being now sentenced to Dye, he made it his earnest desire, that he might be
sent against the Grand Seignior's Enemies, that he might Dye in the midst of
them with his Sword in his Hand; but he was to be Sacrificed to the base and
rapacious Spirit of a Robber; for to so vile and mean a Degree was the
Greatness and Authority of this Empire fallen.

It being now the Month of March, when it was high time to form an Army with
all Provisions of War for the Campaigne, frequent Consultations were held
thereupon in the Divan. The New Vizier, as to himself, was for several reasons
unwilling to remove from the Court to the Camp; For he was very poor when he
came first to that Office: And tho the Conjuncture was favorable, when he was
at first advanced to it, all Offices being then new Farmed, and let out through
the whole Empire, which brought him at least a Thousand Purses of Money; yet
the Equipage of a Grand Vizier for the War was vast, and to one in his
condition wholly disfurnished of Tents, The Grand Vizier makes excuse for not
going to the War.
Horses, Camels, Mules, etc. would be unsupportable: And this gave him a fair
pretense to excuse himself from going this Year to the Wars: Nor indeed was it
his interest so soon to absent himself from the Grand Seignior's Presence,
until he had settled himself in his Favor and Acquaintance, and introduced his
own Creatures. Moreover his Age was great, and his Experience in the War
little; the Preparations for the War, by reason of the late Distractions, and
Intestine Troubles, Divisions, and all kinds of ill-management, were become
very inconsiderable; so that it was not without favor to the Vizier given out,
that it was not for the Reputation of the Grand Seignior's Seal, and the Safety
and Honor of the Prophet's Standard to be so meanly attended. Whereupon it was
concluded to make Yeghen a Vizier of the Bench, Yeghen entrusted with the Army.
to send him Three Horse-tails, and constitute him Sardar, or Major General in
Hungary.

All this while Yeghen had not been idle, but had pursued his point of raising
Moneys by all manner of Extortions, and at last very confidently wrote a Letter
to the Vizier; importing, That in case any Letters should have been wrote to
the Port, containing Complaints of his having raised great Sums upon the
People; he desired the Vizier to peruse the Account, whereby he would find that
the Sums he had raised, did almost amount unto One thousand Purses, which he
had employed to the payment of his Soldiers, He demands Money.
desiring that One thousand Purses more might be forthwith sent him to pay off
the remaining Arrears of the Army, which would serve to keep the Soldiers in
Order, and Obedience, and put both himself and them in a convenient posture for
the War.

But the Vizier was not very forward to send him supplies of Money, having
taken a jealousy, that by his various motions he intended to set up for
himself; for many of his Ancient Comrades came daily flocking over to him, and
some privately from Asia; The Vizier answers not.
and therefore designed to remove him as far off from him, as he could, and
give him his Hands full of business with the Germans.

Soon after which, this Yeghen sent his Steward or Kaiah, named Kara Mustapha,
with Letters to the Grand Vizier, recommending the Kaiah to be made Pasha of
Caramania, and that he might have Orders to forward the Asiatick Levies for the
War. Kaiah was preparing an Equipage for his Government, other Letters came
from Yeghen, demanding more Money and Soldiers, with the Standard of Mahomet,
and a power to dispose of all the Offices, and Pashalucks, Yeghen demands the
Grand Seignior's Seals.
or Government of Pashas in those parts, adding that it was very fit the Grand
Seignior's Seals should be in the Army, as necessary to uphold the Authority of
a General, and keep the Soldiers in due obedience. This spoke so plain his
intention of setting up for Grand Vizier, That a Great Council was convened,
where it was agreed to take from him even the Office and Title of Sardar; and
bestowing on him the Title only of Pasha of Temiswar, But is degraded.
Hasnadar, or Treasurer, Hassan Pasha was again made Seraskier in the Room of
Yeghen. To execute this resolution with more Authority, Five Kapigibashees were
dispatched, with Orders and Instructions, That in case Yeghen would not accept
of the Government of Temiswar, and refuse quietly to repair thither; then they
were by virtue of a Royal Command under Signature of the Grand Seignior,
directed to the Bostangibashees at Adrianople, and in all parts of Romelia to
raise the Nefiran, or Trained-Bands of those Countries upon him. And to prevent
the passage of Yeghen into Asia, where by joining with a Body of Thieves, and
Robbers, and Malcontents of his Party, he might cause great Commotions, the
Ways were all laid with Forces to prevent and obstruct his Passage: And that
his Kaiah neither, might not be permitted to pass into Asia to prepare
Commotions against the coming of his Master; the Gates of Constantinople were
shut, and Guards set, not to suffer any to go out of the City. But the Kaiah,
upon the Rumor hereof, surrendered himself that Evening to the Grand Vizier,
and had immediately been strangled, had not the Mufti vigorously interposed in
his behalf, alleging, That it would appear more just and reasonable to secure
his person for the present, and to stay, and to see what effects the Grand
Seignior's Orders would have upon Yeghen his Master.

These Rumors raised once again new fears and distractions at Constantinople;
for Reports flew about, New fears in the City from Yeghen.
that Yeghen was on his march toward the City, where he had a strong Party
amongst the Giurbas, and others, giving out that he came to restore Sultan
Mahomet, or his Son, to the Throne, all which being Forerunners of a New Civil
War, moved many rich Turks to leave the City, and some of them to retire to
Grand Cairo, the Sanctuary of Rich and Opulent Turks. The Vizier in the mean
time to obstruct his March, sent Ten or Twelve Chambers of Janisaries, with
several Pieces of Cannon to guard an important Pass, called Mustapha Pasha's
Bridge, upon a River in the Marshes, about Six Hours Journey from Adrianople:
And lest he should have another design in his Head of passing over into Asia,
at the narrow Straight of the Hellespont, Merza Pasha was sent with other
Janisaries to Gallipoli, where it was probable he might attempt a passage, it
being reported, that he had already sent Four hundred Purses, with many of his
People by that way. All his Force was reported to consist only of Four thousand
Horse; and it was hoped by the Grand Vizier, and other Chief Commanders, that
many of these would desert also; and that all the Country of Romelia, which had
miserably been harassed by him, and that the Great Men, who mortally hated him,
would unanimously rise to suppress, and reduce him to Subjection.

During all these intestine Embroils,

Still did the Apprehensions, and intestine Disturbances from Yeghen daily
increase; Ismael the Vizier undermined.
and Ismael the Vizier being found to be a Person of ill Qualities, Proud,
Obstinate, and extremely Avaritious, besides his small practice in Affairs; the
Mufti, together with the Chief Men of the Law and Sword, gave privately by the
hands of the Kuzlir-Aga, an Arz, or Memorial to the Grand Seignior,
representing that they thought themselves obliged in Duty, humbly to make known
unto him, that Ismael Pasha was not a fit man to continue Vizier: That such
difficult times, as these, required one of the greatest Abilities, and
Experience; and that none was better qualified to contend with the dangerous
Troubles and Commotions, than Mustapha Pasha, at present an Exile at the
Castles of the Dardanelli. The Grand Seignior presently agreed to the Counsel,
and dispatched a Hatte-Sheriff, or Royal Command to Mustapha Pasha, to repair
to his presence; which he accordingly did; and the next Morning after his
Arrival, Mustapha Pas^a sent for.
who being informed that Mustapha was sent for to be made Vizier of the Bench,
and to be an Assistant to him in his Counsels, for the better Composure of the
disturbed Estate of the Empire, he vested him with a Vest of Sables, as a
Vizier of the Bench, and Companion with him, to bear a share of the heavy
burden of the Government. The Vizier also designed to move the Grand Seignior
to employ him in the Command of the Army, in the place of Teghen; for which
Office he was very proper, being well beloved in the Army, and in high
Reputation both of the Spahees and Janisaries.

But the Vizier had but flattered himself with all these Measures; for coming
one Morning from the Divan, and being sat down at his Table to Eat, in came
the Baltagee Kiasei, or Lieutenant of the Guard of the Battle-axes, and
delivered a Hatte-Sheriff, or Royal Command from the Sultan, to deliver up the
Seals, which he immediately did; Mustapha ma^e Vizier.
and the same being carried to the Grand Seignior, he sent for Mustapha, and
gave them to him, vesting him with the Ceremonies usual at the Creation of a
Grand Vizier.

After which, the first thing which Mustapha did, was to dispatch away several
Couriers to Yeghen, and to the Pashas in those parts to countermand the Orders
formerly sent; but before those Advices could arrive, a Messenger came with
Letters from Yeghen to Ismael, Yeghen writes to Ismael and the Mufti.
and the Mufti, acquainting them, That since the Nef^ran, or Trained-Bands had
by their Orders been raised upon him, and encompassed him round on all sides in
the Plains near Sophia, where he lay Encamped, but durst not attack him; (for
if they did, he resolved to sell his Life dear, as he had declared to those,
who came to take him) therefore he protested against the Vizier, and Mufti for
all the Musselman Blood, which should be spilt in that quarrel. He also desired
the Pashas, who came against him, to have patience only until an Answer was
returned to those Letters which he was then sending to the Port, and to give
them free passage. In his Letters he seemed to wonder much, what should be the
cause of this Commotion, he for his part having done nothing contrary to his
Duty, or his Allegiance to his Prince; and therefore could not believe, that it
was the Grand Seignior's Will and Pleasure that these Arms should be raised
upon him; but if it were, he would go, and lay his Head at his Feet, who might
take it, if he pleased, but he would deliver it no other person.

Mustapha, now Vizier, having received the Letters, read them, and said to the
Messenger, who brought them, Cursed be he who was the cause of this
disturbance: But howsoever he said that all should end well; for that he had
already dispatched Orders for pacifying and composing all things, and would
next day return him back with a Confirmation of the former dispatch. Ismael
being now laid aside, Mustapha Vizier answers Yeghens Letter. Ismael blamed.
and out of Power and Office, was to bear the Burden of all the Misfortunes;
for that Yeghen Writing, in case he had not more Men and Money, he could not
advance farther against the Enemy, but should be forced to return to
Constantinople. Ismael had taken the Alarm, and raised the Country upon him
without just or reasonable Apprehensions of any danger from a force so small
and inconsiderable, as that of Yeghen's, they consisting of no greater a
Number, than that of Four thousand men. But the Truth was, Ismael had great
reason to apprehend the danger of the approach of Yeghen to the Port; for he
was a dangerous Villain; and tho his Numbers were not great, yet they might be
formidable when joined to the Faction and Friends of the Giurbas, and the
Male-contented Party which lay concealed, and under Covert in the City of
Constantinople.

But now new Masters, new Measures; and Yeghen was to be Courted by Letters
from the Vizier, declaring that the Sultan highly esteemed his Fidelity and
Bravery; and had pardoned him; and that now he should return to the Frontiers,
and cheerfully attend the Service of the Sultan: As to his Kaiah he was
continued in the Office, with the Title of Pasha of Caramania; but was ordered
to supply his Government with a Musselim, or Deputy, but he himself was ordered
to serve in the War.

And now after these dispatches, Ismael was called upon to Refund the Moneys,
Ismael Fined.
which he had raised from Pashas, and other Officers for their places; which
were valued to amount unto One thousand Purses; but he made his Composition,
and paid to the Tefterdar or Treasurer Five hundred only.

Thus had the Civil Dissentions taken up all their time, and obstructed the due
Preparations for a War so pressing and heavy upon them; so that little could be
expected of great Action in Hungary, the Season of the Year (which was now
April) being far advanced: Howsoever great things were expected from the Wise
and Valorous Conduct of this New Vizier Mustapha, May
He had been Janisar-Aga at the Siege of Vienna, and afterward Seraskier at
the first Siege of Buda, and was for a while in great Reputation with all
People, both Civil and Military.

But this favorable Air of the People did not continue long; for Mustapha by
his Indisposition of Body, and the continual Distractions and Difficulties of
the Times, seemed not to answer the great expectation which was at first
conceived of him; and indeed the Confusions and Fears of the People, grew
always higher and greater as Dangers approached nearer; to increase which,
there wanted not evil Spirits to possess and affect the minds of the Vulgar
with hideous Stories and Reports; Fears and terrible Reports at Constantinople.
and indeed as for some of them, there wanted not probable Reasons, or
substantial Foundation. The News of the Revolutions at Grand Cairo took up a
greatpart of the Discourse; the Truth of which came afterward to Light, and
known to be no other, but a discontent of the People raised upon a Belief, that
the Vizier intended to change the Pasha, which had but four Months before been
entered into his Office: Upon which Report, after many Consultations held at
Grand Cairo, they resolved to send several of their Beys, or Lords, as Deputies
to represent unto the Vizier, that besides the great Tax laid upon the Country
at the entrance of every new Pasha, it was contrary to the Privileges, and
Constitutions of Egypt, Deputies sent from Grand Cairo.
that their Pasha should be changed before the expiration of three years; the
which they supplicated the Vizier to consider, and to lay these their Desires
and Reasons before the Grand Seignior. The Vizier at first answered them very
roughly, and with Anger, telling them that this Message which they brought
arose from Humors and Seeds of Mutiny and Sedition, and the Contagion they had
received from the Rebellious Giurbas; That they undertook to meddle in matters,
which did not concern them; that they were the Grand Seignior's Subjects, and
therefore ought quietly to submit, to whom soever it was his Imperial pleasure
to set over them. But in a few days afterward, upon cooler Thoughts, and
Reflections on the present disorder of the Government, it not being judged
convenient to discontent or provoke this People; They are dispatched back again.
he called again for the Deputies, and dismissed them with a confirmation of the
same Pasha, and so dispatched them back again to Grand Cairo with full
satisfaction.

But that which gave most trouble, was certain Advice, that in Asia great
numbers of Thieves and Robbers infested the Country, and that a Body of about
Four thousand Men had appeared before Angora; the Head, or Chief Commander of
which was one Yedic, Robbers in Asia trouble the Country.
under whom Yeghen had served as a Captain, before he came into the Grand
Seignior's Service; he was a bold and an old Robber, who had long lived on
Rapine and Spoil, and now commanding so considerable a Body of Horse, he
ravaged all the Country, commanding free Quarters every where, and raising
Contributions and Taxes in all places according to his own Lust and Pleasure;
and hearing what success Yeghen his Under-Officer had gained, he was willing to
put in for a share with the rest; offering himself and Forces to come over into
Europe, and serve the Grand Seignior in the Wars of Hungary.

About the same time also there happened a Combustion in Candia, where the
Soldiers mutined for want of Pay, and killed their Pasha, with the Aga of the
Janisaries, and some others, Mutinies in Candia.
seizing on the Pasha's Estate, which was accounted to amount unto so much
Money, as would pay the Soldiers all that was due to them. Whereupon the Grand
Vizier created Kuperlee-Ogle, lately banished thither (as we have mentioned)
Pasha of that Country, and the Moxur Aga or Major General of the Janisaries, to
be Aga of the Janisaries in the places of those, who were lately killed in the
Tumult, and likewise dispatched from Constantinople Ali Pasha, who was once a
Creature of Kara Mustapha Pasha late Vizier, to be Pasha of Canea; by which
means the Vizier freed himself of two dangerous Competitors.

In the mean time Ismael Pasha the late Vizier was sent on a Gally to guard
Cavalla, Ismael banished.
a Castle near Salonica, which in effect was no other than an Honorable
Banishment: And because the Grand Seignior was not pleased to accept the offer
made to him by Yedic, a Teftirgee Pasha, with some other ordinary Pashas, Yedic
was to be suppressed.
were dispatched into Anatolia, to settle and secure the Country, and to reduce
Yedic, and the Thieves his Accomplices to Obedience.

The Grand Vizier now according to the Custom of all his Predecessors, that he
might settle himself more firm, began to make several changes in the Officers;
amongst others, he put out Ramadam Effendi, Lord Treasurer in the late time of
Ismael, placing in his stead Mahomet Effendi, Treasurer in the time, when the
Giurbaes governed; an ill Man, and of a bad Reputation.

Nor could the Vizier think himself secure whilst Yeghen Command his Forces, so
near as Sophia, and was disobedient to all Commands, aspiring to no less, than
to be Seraskier or General of the Army; nor could it be thought, he would stop
there, or at any other point until he came to be Grand Vizier: Wherefore
Mustapha Vizier, dispatched private Orders to have Yeghen strangled; who
remained hovering about, between Belgrade and Sophia, keeping all Strangers
from any near approach, so that the execution of those Orders were respited,
until a more opportune conjuncture: Yeghen continues in Rebellion.
For he continued still in Rebellion, having refused to go to Bosna, declaring
that he would not give up the Command of Seraskier of the Army in Hungary, to
Hassan Pasha, or any other.

Whilst these things were in Agitation, an Envoy arrived at Constantinople from
the Emperor of Morocco, with Letters of Complement to the Grand Seignior upon
his Exaltion to the Throne, and with Offers, Christians were united together
against the Musulmen, so he was ready to give his Assistance to the Grand
Seignior in defense of the Mohammedan Faith.

It being now the Spring time, when the Turks always put their Horses out to
Grass and Soil: The Imbrahor, or Master of the Horse, invited the Grand
Seignior into the Fields, to see in what order his Horses were governed at
their Pasture; and there gave him a very Splendid Entertainment. The Grand
Seignior was so pleased with the Dinner, the Air, and the Fields, that in two
or three days afterward he went again to the Meadows at Cat-Hanah, The People
displeased with the New Sultan.
about, two English Miles at farthest from Pera; where he was again feasted,
not without the Censure and Murmuring, of the People; who said, That in a short
time he would follow the Example of the late Sultan in his Diversions, and
Negligence in the Government, so they should have changed (as indeed they had)
to little purpose.

It began now plainly to appear, That the Turks by reason of their intestine
Divisions, had made very inconsiderable Preparations either by Land or Sea:
Black Sea against the Cosacks, who (as was reported) were preparing to make
Incursions into the Parts near Constantinople, as they had usually done in
former times.

The Turks make small Preparations.
But their chief Apprehensions and Fears were raised from a Report, that the
Imperialists were marching toward Belgrade: And indeed they had great Reasons
for it; for they had nothing of Force on the Frontiers, nor nothing to oppose
them in case the Emperor should think fit to push forward his Conquests, which
nothing could obstruct, besides Famine and Hunger in a March through a ruined,
and a desert Country.

The Turks in these extremities, finding no safety or success, and protection
in their Arms, had recourse to their last refuge, which was, if possible to
obtain a Peace with the Emperor, They seek for Peace.
a Method, which they had never practiced before since they were an Empire, to
be the first to Sue for a Peace. But now Necessity pressing them, they were for
dispatching an Ambassador to the Kings of France, An Ambassador designed for
England.
England, and the States of Holland, whose design, substance and main drift of
his Embassy was only pretended to give notice unto those Powers of the
Exaltation of Sultan Solomon to the Throne of the Ottoman Empire: But with
private Instructions to insinuate unto those Princes severally to interpose in
a Mediation of Peace, and to use their endeavors to give a stop to the Career
of the Imperial Arms; which good Offices, in order to a Peace might reasonably
be expected from Kings and Princes, who had for many years maintained a happy
Peace, and Correspondence with the Ottoman Port; where their Ambassadors had
been treated with Friendship, and their Merchants with Security, and their
Trade flourished on all sides with Profit and Advantage. One Achmet Aga being
proposed for this Embassy, he was severally treated and feasted by the three
Ambassadors, who by the Discourses they had entertained with him, observed him
to be a Person discreet, and better practiced in Affairs of Countries different
to their own, than commonly Turks are, who think it an Indignity to them,
Ottoman Empire overlooked, as unworthy their Consideration: To Transport this
Ambassador a French-ship was appointed, and his Equipage prepared; The Embassy
put off.
but by the Conduct of Sir William Trumbal, English Ambassador then at
Constantinople, and the confused Affairs of the Turks, this Embassy did not
succeed: And indeed the Turkey Company could not expect to Reap any thing from
thence, but trouble and expense, and perhaps displeasure at the Port, in case
his Entertainment had not equalled, that which he had received at Paris.

Howsoever, the Turks were better resolved in the Point of that Embassy,
designed to the Emperor. And to that end, they chose Hamedi Effendi, one who
had been bred up a Clerk, Ambassadors designed to the Emperor.
and afterward came to be first Accountant in the Treasury; and Mauvro
Cordato, a Greek by Nation, a Man of Intrigue and Business, having for many
years been employed for Interpreter to the Grand Vizier, ever since the Death
of Panaioti. The Turks being ashamed, as a thing below the Dignity of their
Empire to Sue for Peace, thought it might prove a certain consequence in Answer
to a civil Letter, written by the Grand Seignior to the Emperor, giving notice
of his Exaltation to the Ottoman Throne (much after the same Tenor with that
which was written to the other Powers) with this Addition and Alteration: June,
toward whose expenses the Grand Seignior intended to allow Six thousand
Dollars; which was esteemed a sufficient Provision for them, until they came to
the Confines, whence according to the ancient Canon, they are to be conducted
by the Emperor's Guards, and defrayed at his Expense: Their Retinue consisted
of 60 persons, half of which was habited in the Turkish, and half after the
Grecian Fashion. As yet they had received no Passports for them; but in
assurance, that they would be granted, the Ambassadors were posted away to
Belgrade, there to remain in expectation of them.

The New Grand Seignior during all these Combustions and Negotiations minded
little, or nothing of Business; nor indeed was he capable of any; for when any
thing was propounded to him, The Humor of Sultan Solomon.
He answered, Yes or No, or with some very short Reply, after the manner of
Laconick brevity, and then presently turned away to read the Alchoran. He was
at first reputed after the manner of his Father, to be impotent as to Women;
but afterward taking five or six into his Embraces, he gave the World cause to
conceive another Opinion of him. He sat as aukwardly on Horseback as his
Father, that Exercise being uneasy to him; his chief Divertisements were his
Books, (which we may believe he ill understood) and sometimes taking the Air on
the Water, and in Chiosks, or Garden Houses on the side of the Bosphorus, he
passed his pleasant time.

Yeghen still continued to Ravage the Country between Sophia and Belgrade, as
his Comrade Yedic that Arch-robber did in Anatolia: And the Government being
too weak to suppress two such Thieves or Highway-Men, how much less was it able
to contend with the German Troops? They were forced to dissemble, and give way
to the present Extremities; Yeghen made Seraskier.
by making Yeghen Seraskier in Hungary, whilst Hassan Pasha was forced to give
way, and fly privately out of the reach of his Competitor. The News hereof flew
with great have to the Thieves in Anatolia, who being encouraged with the
Success of Yeghen, His Accomplices on couraged.
under whose Government they all fancied to be made Pashas or Grandees, came
over in great numbers to join with him: Amongst which one Temac Boluckbashee, a
leading Man, with Four hundred of his Robbers passed boldly over from Asia to
Constantinople; and Yedic their General was not only pardoned, but made a Pasha.

To this hard Plight and Extremity was the Ottoman Empire reduced; when the
Turks placing their greatest hopes in the Tartars, An Aga sent to Transylvania.
dispatched away an Aga to Apafi Prince of Transylvania, with a Patent to
confirm him in his Principality; and with Orders to demand of him in
consideration thereof a round Sum of ready Money, wherewith to Succor, and pay
the Garrisons on the Boristhenes; and to provide for the Maintenance of
Caminiec, which was in want of Ammunition, and all things necessary. And to
persuade Apafi hereunto, he told Stories very improper and unfit to compass his
ends; for he rehearsed all the Tumults of the Zorbas at Constantinople, and that
the Grand Seignior was forced to create Yeghen, who was their Chief and Leader,
to be Seraskier in Hungary. That in Constantinople there was want of every
thing, even to a Famine, caused by the Seditions and Mutinies of the Soldiers;
and that for the appeasing these Tumults, and for the Donative unto the
Soldiers, which is usually given by the Sultans at their Inauguration, the
Exchequer had been drained of Twenty Millions of Dollars; wherefore he urged
the States of Transylvania to grant him his Demands; in failure of which he
threatened them with the Incursions of the Tartars, who had already passed the
River Prut, and were entered into the Neighboring Provinces, where they had
left sad Marks of their cruel and miserable Devastations: And that Sultan
Galga, and Noradin with a mighty Army were marching to oppose the Emperors
designs upon Belgrade.

General Carafa having notice of these Practices upon Transylvania, went with
all have thither; and in a short time not only defeated this Aga in his
Negotiations, but also so well disposed Apafi, and the States of Transylvania
with entire Devotion to the Emperor, that in despite of the Message brought by
the Aga; they absolutely renounced all Obedience, and Duty to the Ottoman Port:
The which Renuntiation follows in this manner.

We Michael Teleky de Szek General, George and Alexius de Bethlem, Laodislaus
Szekel of Boroszeno, Valentine Frank one of the Judges, Christian Zato Consul
of the City of Hermanstadt, Counselors to the Illustrious Prince of
Transylvania: As also Nicholas of Bethlem, Stephen Appor, Peter Alvinzy, and
John Starosy Principal and public Notaries, Michael Filstrick Judge of the
City of Braslavia, Plenipotentiaries deputed by the Prince aforesaid, and by
the States of the Kingdom of Transylvania; do hereby declare and make known
unto all the World, desiring that these Presents may remain upon Record, for a
lasting Testimony unto all Ages.

With great Reason may this present Age remain astonished, and envious Eyes
become dazzled with the Splendour of the Divine Clemency; which not suffering its
beloved Christendom to Groan longer under the Yoke of Barbarous Pride, nor
remain in Bonds to Tyrannical Servitude, nor longer to be overwhelmed, and
drowned after so many Wars in a Sea of Innocent Blood; has at length out of
his great Compassion, been pleased to exert the strong Power of his Omnipotent
Arm, to Rescue so many Kingdoms and Provinces, from an unsupportable Slavery
under the Turks, who transported with senseless Fury had rendered themselves
formidable to the World, ruinous to their Neighbors, and Despisers of all
People, besides their own. But behold! How the God of Hosts, being justly
displeassed with these vain Boastings, has thrown his Thunderbolts amongst
them, and dispersed them, making the most August Emperor Leopold the First an
Instrument of his Vengeance, and having showred Floods of Blessings on his
Glorious and Triumphant Arms, has encompassed his Royal Head with Wreaths of
Victorious Laurel; whilst the Ottoman Throne is dressed up with Mournful
Cipress.

Such were the astonishing operations of the Divine Power, made manifest to all
the World. For when the barbarous Tyranny was in its full Career, and was in
the Trail of a hot Scent after Christian Blood; then was God pleased to stop
them in their Course; and reduce their unstable and depressed Fortune to the
doubtful Terms of Hope and Fear.

It is now near an Age, that unhappy Transylvania has been depressed by the
unsupportable Ottoman Yoke, and bewailed the loss of her lawful King and Lord:
And after having been Turmoiled, tossed with Storms of War, with Fire and
Sword, and Civil Dissentions, all things have been so confused and defaced,
that scarce any thing has remained on the Registers of it is ancient Glory;
only since the Dominion of the Turk gained by the intestine differences of it is
own Princes, some Memorials are written, and reserved to represent to the World
a History of a most direful Tragedy. But now the malign Influence of the Stars
being either abated, or entirely exhausted; and the Ambitious Pride, and
Designs of private Men defeated, Transylvania embraces the Paternal, and
Powerful Protection of the most August Emperor of the Romans, Leopold the
First, and Hereditary King of Hungary, and of all his Successors, and
particularly of the most Serene Prince Joseph King of Hungary, (whose Life may
God long continue) and of his Heirs after him, according as it has been
concluded and agreed in the year 1687, at the last Diet at Possonium with full
Consent, Approbation and Concurrence of all the States of Hungary, who have for
a long time poured out their Prayers and Tears, and Sighs before God, that at
length through the Divine Mercy, they might obtain the Enjoyment of this long
wished Felicity. Be it therefore Enacted, Established, and made known to this
present, and to future Ages; That to the Glory of the Omnipotent God, and for
the more quiet, and prosperous State of this Principality, both in this, and in
Ages to come; We the said Plenipotentiaries deputed by the Illustrious Prince,
and States of this Kingdom, do with our free Will and Christian Zeal, Renounce
all Protection from the Turk; declaring that for the future, We will send him
no Presents, nor pay him Tribute; Nor will we maintain any Correspondence with
the Ottoman Port, their Adherents or Dependants, whether Turks or Christians;
or with any others, who are Enemies to the Majesty of the Roman Emperor our
gracious Lord, or to his lawful Successors, and Hereditary Kings of Hungary;
upon Penalty of High Treason, to be punished according to the Laws of this
Country, after due Conviction of the Crime. And in lieu of that Power which we
have now renounced, We do with all Sincerity, and Purity of Heart Enter, and
List our selves under the Protection of the most August Emperor; and engage not
only our selves, but our Posterity of this Kingdom of Transylvania. And for an
Evidence of this our Submission and Agreement, by virtue of the power we have
received from his Highness the Prince, and the States of the Country, We do
admit, and receive the Imperial Forces, into the Fortress of Kovar, Huss,
Georgim and Braslavia, besides other places already garrisoned by German
Soldiers. Moreover we declare, That we shall be ready at all times, to take up
Arms against the Common Enemy of Christendom, and against all others, as we
shall be commanded by our most gracious Lord; whom with all Humility, We Pray
and Beseech, that he would be graciously pleased to confirm our Privileges,
and the free Exercise of our Religion, as we have hither to enjoyed: And also,
that he would Protect, and Defend our Posterity, and Successors in the said
Liberty and Privileges: And in the mean time that the Teaty and Convention
made with the Duke of Loraine may remain in full Force and Virtue; We have in
Testimony thereof and for greater Evidence and Manifestation to all the World,
ratified and confirmed this our Abjuration, and Renuntiation of the Ottoman
Protection under the Seal of the three Nations of the Kingdom of Transylvania.

Given at Hermanstadt the 9th of May, 1688.

These happy Successes made way for the Surrender of Alba Regalis, which all
this time held out, supplying themselves sometimes with Provisions by Sallies
and Excursions, which they often made even to the Walls of Buda. Wherefore it
being wisely considered, that this Garrison might still defend it self for a
long time, Alba Regalis straightned.
unless the Blocade were more straightly watched; and such Forces disposed on
all sides, as might suffer none either to go in, or come out of the City;
Prince Herman of Baden President of the Counsel of War, projected a formal
Blocade, Germans and Hungarians, within the Jurisdiction of his own Government,
together with some Militia of General Count Bathyani, Commanded by himself; and
the former Conducted by Colonel Baron Areyzaga May.
Governor of Leopolstadt, and these were enjoined to make an actual Attack
upon the place, in case they understood, that a Blocade was not likely to
succeed.

About the beginning of May these Forces appeared in view of Alba Regalis; and
a strict Blocade was formed on all sides of the Town. Howsoever, the Defendants
seemed not to lose Courage, but on the contrary, made a stout Sally both with
Horse and Foot; the Issue of which was of no greater Importance, than only the
taking off the Heads of some unfortunate Soldiers on one side and the other.
And now at length to make their last effort, the Turks made another Sally on
the Germans, but soon retired again without any Action; The Turks make a Sally.
which gave opportunity to the Vanguard, to advance within Cannon-shot of the
Town; with which the Defendants became so terrified, that the three Chief
Commanders sent forth a Turk well clothed and mounted, to make some motion for
a Treaty: The Turk approaching near the Vanguard, desired to speak with some of
the Chief Captains, letting them know, that he had Offers to make of a
Surrender; which whilst he was uttering, several other Turks Sallied out with a
kind of cheerful Air and Briskness, They Capitulate.
one of which advancing before, demanded of the Christian Soldiers, what it was
they required? To which Answer being made: The Town. Reply was made; But we
must know first on what Conditions; may we not, said they, expect to receive
the same Articles, that were given to Agria? And may not we obtain the Favor
to have our Treaty Signed at Vienna, by the great Emperor of the Romans: To
which Answer was made, That tho they had no Power, nor Authority to give them
any assurance of the latter, yet they would endeavor to give them satisfaction
in that point, as well, as in others.

Divan, and by common consent agreed unto, were Signed by the three Pashas, and
Chief Commanders of the Garrison; the Sum of all which being this: That the
same Conditions should be given in all Points, The Articles are agreed, and
Messengers sent to Vienna.
as to Agria. And as to the Confirmation of these Articles by the Emperor, that
the Turks might be satisfied therein, an Express was dispatched to Prince
Herman of Baden, that he might send Advice to the Emperor of this Success, and
withal to intimate the Desires of the Turks to have their Articles confirmed
by the Imperial Signature. The which being granted, Ali Aga, and Ali Beg were
commissioned by the Garrison to carry the Articles to Vienna; and being come
near to the City, an Officer was sent to meet them with a Coach, by whom with a
Guard they were conducted to the chief Inn of the City, where they were Lodged,
and provided with all things necessary for their Entertainment. The Emperor not
being in the City, but at his Country House at Luxemburg, the Turks lost the
curiosity of their Desires; and Honor of Kissing the Hem of the Emperor's
Garment: Howsoever, after having been courteously treated, they were with much
expedition dispatched away, that the Surrender of the Town might not be
delaied; for in War are many Hazards: And perhaps the Commanders of the Town
might have projected this pretense for a delay, not knowing what might happen
in the interim by Succors from Belgrade; which were promised, and daily
expected to relieve them. In consideration of which the Marquis Herman of
Baden, President of the Council of War, procured the Imperial Signature to
their Capitulations with all have imaginable, and having made a Present to each
of them of a Watch, they were Conducted back to Alba Regalis by Count Zicchy,
Alba Regalis, with the Articles of Surrender signed and confirmed, they entered
into the Divan with the Pashas, and other Commanders, and after some Debate and
Consultation, they resolved on an immediate Surrender, and without other pause
or delay, they began to laid their Goods and Movables on Carts and Wagons:
And on the next day being the 19th of May, May.
they quitted the City, and went out by the Gates, to the number in all of
about Eight thousand Souls, amongst which there were not above Three hundred
Soldiers. The Articles on which the Town was Surrendered were these.

First, That the Castle, and City with all the Ammunition, Cannon and Arms,
with the Bells, Clocks, and all things of public use, shall without Fraud, or
Design be delivered up; and what Mines that are, either in the Castle or Town,
shall be discovered, and made known.

Secondly, That permission shall be given without let or hindrance, or
molestation whatsoever to the Garrison and Inhabitants freely to leave the City
with their Arms, Horses, Beasts, Goods and Movables.

Thirdly, That the Sons of Christian Women, who are Slaves, and do not pass the
Age of Eighteen, shall remain in the Power, and under the Government of their
Fathers, who were Turks. But those who are of riper Years, and past that Age,
shall be left to their own free Will, to choose which side, or party they will
take. And as to those who were Born Christians, and are under Age, as well
Males, as Females shall be delivered faithfully into the Hands of the
Christians; and in case amongst the Turks, any Person shall be desirous to turn
Christian, no Person shall dare to hinder, or pervert him.

Fourthly, That Three hundred Wagons shall be provided for carrying their
Goods and Movables, as far as Gian Curtaran upon the Danube; where Seventy
Boats or more (in case Seventy be not sufficient) shall be furnished for
Transport of the People and their Goods to such Places, as they shall desire;
and in the mean while whilst the Wagons are providing, and the Garrison is
issuing forth, the principal Turks of the City shall remain for Hostages.

Fifthly, That some German and Hungarian Officers shall go with the Convoy,
which Conducts the People to the Danube, where being Embarked, they shall
Accompany and Protect them to the next Garrisoned Town of the Turks; and for
security of the safe return of such Officers, some principul Turks shall be
given for Hostages, to remain at Oseck until all Conditions are executed, and
then afterward they shall have free liberty to depart.

Sixthly, All Christian Captives, as well young as old, shall be set at liberty.


Thus Alba Regalis being Surrendered on the 19th of May, as we have said, Te
Deum was Sung in the principal Moschs, and on the 20th the Turks began to take
their way toward Gian Curtaran; 1688. The Garrison of Aloa Regalis Marches out.
and a sufficient Garrison of Imperialists entered the City, to the number of
Five hundred Germans, and about One thousand Hussars Horse and Foot, under the
Command of Colonel Areizaga, there to remain until farther Orders from the
Emperor. Some few days afterward Count Stephen Zicchy, Lieutenant General of
Giavarin, who by Order of the Counsel of War had with a Guard of Five hundred
Hussars, Three hundred Musketeers of the Regiment of Wech, and Three hundred
Horse of the Circle of Suabia, convoyed the Turks to the place appointed,
returned back to Alba Regalis, where he reported, the great Sense the Turks had
of the faithful observance, which was given to the Articles; concerning which
they had made many Expressions of Satisfaction; saying that it was no wonder,
That the Christians gather so many Laurels of Victory, since they knew so well
with Sincerity, and Religion to observe, and comply with the Faith they had
given: The which may more evidently appear by the Letter here following,
Written to the Marquis of Baden.

MOst Happy, most Honorable and Gentle Prince, Vizier of the Emperor of the
Romans, Friend, and dear Brother, after these our sincere Salutations shall be
come to your Hands, Be it made known unto you, That in that happy Hour, when
the Imperial Decree of your most Gracious, and Glorious Emperor, and our Lord,
and also your obliging Letter filled with courteous Expressions, and
Demonstrations of Civility used toward our Messenger Ali Aga, and Ali Bei came
to Hand, we were greatly comforted, to have found favor, by means of your
intercession, in the Eyes of your Gracious Emperor, whom the High God reward,
and recompense with his Divine Grace. For that in pursuance of the Sacred
Command Signed by your Emperor, the Honorable General Bathyani, and his other
Officers have carefully protected us, not only when we quitted the Town, but
during all our March toward the Danube; so that by the regular Discipline and
watchful Eye of the Germans, and Hungarians toward us, we are safely arrived
at Gian Curtaran. And so much we have thought fit to acknowledge, and expose at
the Feet of your Highness; that it may be made manifest to the World, with how
much Sincerity and Faith, this Treaty has been Executed. As to other Matters,
we find the Boats and Vessels all in a readiness, so that we Design to Embark
and depart early to Morrow Morning; for all which good and punctual
performance, we beseech God to succeed, and prosper you.

Dated the 23d of the Moon of Regeb 1099. That is, the 22d of May 1688.
Subscribed by the Servants of God. Achmet Vizier Commander in Chief, Aga of the
Janisaries, Zagargee Pasha.


Besides this Letter the same Persons wrote another to Count Bathyani of the
like Tenure; acknowledging the due Observance and Execution of the Treaty.

When the People, and Garrison of this City, to the number of about Eight
thousand Souls, passed down the River by Towns belonging to the Turks, great
was the Confusion and Consternation amongst them, but more was the shame to the
principal Officers, who had either by their Negligence or Cowardice, or ill
Coduct, not relieved so important a City, but suffered it to be reduced to the
utmost Extremities of Famine, without hopes of Succor: And at the same time,
that the Fortresses of Sigeth and Canisia, were in no better Condition, being
reduced almost to the like Extremity with Alba Regalis, which being well known
to the Imperial Counsel of War, Orders were given to streighten those places by
a more close, and strict Blocade.

Loraine arrived at Vienna, Counsels of War at Vienna.
where several Conferences and Counsels were held, by the great Captains and
Generals, than which, never did any Age produce more Brave, Valiant and Wise of
Conduct, than appeared in this present year. There are many things concur to
form and complete a General of Renown; toward which nothing does more
contribute, than Fortune and Success in War; of which the Imperialists had for
some years had a happy Run, and played long with a lucky Hand. The Turks on the
contrary had lost the most part of their bravest Officers, and Soldiers; and
those which had escaped out of the Battles, became a Sacrifice to the Rage, and
Fury of Mutinous and Dissolute Soldiers, who having thrown off the Bridle of
all Discipline, turned their Swords from their Enemies upon their own
Commanders and Generals; and this was not the least Misfortune of the Turks,
that the most captived People, and such as formerly served with the most blind
Obedience, had forgot to obey, or revere their Sultans. But now if we should
compare these obscure Commanders of the Turks, Men started from nothing,
unexperienced in War, Thieves and Robbers, The Commanders on either side
compared.
such as Yeghen, and his Master Yedic, who for some Years had lived on Spoils
in the lesser Asia, with the Redoubted, and Valiant Generals of the Imperial
Armies, we may without the help of ancient Prophesies, Prognosticate the
continued Successes of the Imperial Arms: The Names of which Generals are
these, worthy to be Recorded for ever in History.

The Duke of Loraine. The Elector of Bavaria. Prince Lewis of Baden. The
Christian Generals and Officers.
Count Caraffa. Count de Staremberg, Marshal of the Field to the Emperor. The
Prince of Salm, a Field Marshal, to whom the Education of the young King of
Hungary was committed. Count de Rebata, Commissary General of the Emperor's
Armies. Count Dunewald, General of the Emperor's Horse. Count Palfi, another
General of Horse. Count de Sereni, General of the Bavarian Horse. Prince de
Croy, General of the Artillery Gondola, Chief Lieutenant General of Horse, and
a very ancient Officer. Count Taff, another Lieutenant General of Horse. Count
Scheffenburg, a Lieutenant General of Foot. The Prince of Neubourg, Great
Master of the Teutonick Order. The Prince of Savoy. Veterani, a brave General,
full of Courage. Piccolimini the like. The Prince of Lommercey, Rabutin,
Negrelli and Esterhasi, Apremont and Wallis, all Major Generals, were Persons
of great Reputation and Bravery, Fit, and Proper to Lead, Conduct, and Command
an Army.
To give all these Generals a Character agreeable to their Worth and Merit,
would be too great a Talk, and savor, something of Flattery, which is
disagreeable to the Sincerity of an Historian. Howsoever, we may adventure to
draw some few Lines, in describing the Complexion of those Heroes, to whose
Valor and Conduct Christendom is so much obliged for it is Defense and Safety.

The Duke of Loraine was a Prince Naturally Valiant, Character of the Duke of
Loraine.
and unconcerned in Dangers, exposing himself without Ostentation or Vanity,
into Perils, where he judged, that his forwardness was requisite to animate his
Soldiers, and to give them an Example to imitate his Valor. And as his
Temperament was incapable of Fear, so amidst the most hazardous Condition he
was always settled and composed, and capable to give and receive Counsel; and
willingly hearkened to the Advices of any, that pretended to have an insight
into Matters: Howsoever, tho he was not esteemed to have a large Prospect into
Matters, or to draw a Scheme for a whole Campaign; yet in the Management of a
Battle, or taking all the Advantages, no General in the World was ever more
capable. Howsoever it was objected against him, That he was over loose in his
Marches, and acted with little Order therein; that he was not careful to
strengthen his Convoys, nor to secure his Forages, by which, and a thousand
other Oversights of this nature, we read in History, that whole Armies have
been confounded, and mouldred to nothing: There is no Man, without his Faults
and Defects; of, as we say, without his blind side: Yet the World must avouch,
that he was a great Captain, and a Person of most excellent Qualifications; for
it is not little to his Honor that he was not Ambitious, or transported with
vain Glory; but firm and zealous for the Interest of the Emperor, tho he little
regarded his own, by endeavoring to form and project strong Leagues against
France.

Character of the the Elector of Bavaria.
The Elector of Bavaria was another General of great Renown; than whom no person
in the World was endued with more natural Valor; indefatigable in War, and
would never be wearied or faint, tho he should be constrained to fight every
day. Skirmishes were his divertisements; and tho he was a General, yet he could
condescend to the degree of an inferior Officer, in giving Orders, where they
were necessary. At this time he was Young, and consequently had not as yet seen
many Campaigns; but no Prince was ever more capable, and of greater hopes,
which some Years afterward were brought to all Perfection. He loved Battles;
and to put the Troops of his Enemies to Flight, and to make himself Master of
the Field, and to gain Victories, were his great pleasures; but as to the
Plunder of the Field, and the great Booties obtained therein, he left all to
his Officers and Soldiers, never demanding any share, or account of them.
Howsoever he was esteemed also to have his Defects; for it is said, That he
looked not with due attention to the care of his Troops; and that as he was
very diligent and vigilant in the time of action; yet afterward he indulged
himself too much to his Pleasures in the times of Vacation and Ease from his
Labors; and it may be said of him as was of a Roman General, That he was
Patiens Laboris, indefessus in bello, sed ubi vacuerit, nimiae voluptatis.

Prince Lewis of Baden was a true Man of War, Character of Prince Lewis of
Baden.
cut out for a Soldier from his Infancy; in which Trade being Educated, he soon
arrived to a singular Perfection, being naturally addicted to Arms. He was full
of Courage, Heat, and Bravery; Active, Vigilant, and a Man of Order in
disposing of his Troops; always on Horseback, and capable of doing great
Actions; as we shall see verified Two or Three Years afterward: Howsoever he
was not without some allays, by a too obstinate adherence to his own Opinion,
and Councils; which if at any time he was forced to retract or change, so as to
follow the Advices and Counsels of others, yet he would do it with an ill Grace
and Will, and not without some mixture of his own contrivance. He was more fit
for an Army than a Court; giving his Tongue too much liberty to Speak and
Discourse freely of the Faults and Defects of the chief Ministers of State;
which begot him some Enemies, but his Greatness of Mind, and Success in War,
carried him above all.

Count Caraffa was advanced by the favor of Count Montecuculi his Uncle; Count
Caraffa.
to which his own Merits contributed very much; for being a Soldier of Fortune,
he resolved to rise by that way; and being endued with a natural Courage, he
signalized himself on several occasions. His Enterprises were always performed
with great moderation, and Phlegm, watching his opportunities of advantage upon
the Enemy, and seldom inclined to hazard any thing; his Counsels were full of
prudent Caution, which made his Performances suspected by the Enemy, fearing
some Turn which they did not foresee. He was also a Courtier as well as a
Soldier, and knew how to comport himself toward the chief Ministers of State
in the Court; as he did also to the Generals, and Officers, and Soldiers in the
Camp.

Count Staremberg, Count Staremberg.
one of the Emperor's Field-Marshals, a Person Renowned through the World for
the defense of Vienna, was a person of admirable Courage and much Fire in his
Temper, and endued with all Qualities fit for a Soldier, tho not so proper for
a General, being naturally violent and transported with Passion. He is, as we
find him, more celebrated amongst Foreigners and Strangers for defending
Vienna, than amongst the Germans, who served in the Garrison with him,
alleging that he exposed his Soldiers too frequently to unnecessary Sallies,
and was too prodigal of spilling their Blood.

The Prince of Salm was another Field-Marshal, The Prince of Salm.
to whom the Education of the Young King of Hungary was committed. It is said,
That he has served long, and gained great Experience in the War: But his
Valor, Wisdom, and Nobility, have endued him with such Virtues, as serve not
only to render him esteemed and honored for himself, but capable also to
inspire Learning, and Royal Thoughts into the Mind of that Young King.

Count Rabata, another Field-Marshal, and Commissary-General of the Imperial
Army, Count Rabata.
was esteemed more capable of the latter, than of the first Office. For as to
the providing for the subsistence of an Army, no man was ever reputed more
intelligent and industrious, being endued with an admirable Faculty to draw out
a Scheme for Winter Quarters; and the manner how to regulate Troops with such
Discipline, as might tend to the Conservation of the Provisions of a Country,
which Soldiers are apt to consume unnecessarily; especially the German Armies,
which love Plenty and Excess; and do commonly, (if not prevented by good
Management) ruin those Countries in Two Months, which might otherwise
conveniently maintain an Army for the whole Year.

Dunewald.
Count Dunewald, General of the Imperial Cavalry, was esteemed very capable of
that Charge; and with all the Reason and Justice in the World, may be numbered
amongst the best of those Officers, who are esteemed, to be Courageous, Wise,
and Experienced in War.

Count Palfi.
Count Palfi, General of the Hungarian Horse, was a man of great Understanding;
but because he has not served in any other Wars, than those of Hungary, he is
not much esteemed for a Soldier; howsoever being descended from one of the most
Ancient and Noble Families in Hungary, the Court of Vienna judged it policy, to
give in his Person an Example and Proof of the Emperor's Favor and good Will
toward the Hungarian Nobility: By reason of which he made a speedier advance
into Preferments in the War, than could reasonably be expected from his
Services, and Actions.

Count Serien.
Count de Serien, General of the Bavarian Troops, besides his other Qualities,
has but too much of Wit and good Management, by which he seldom fails of
arriving at the end of his designs, having by his Conduct and good Fortune, got
into the Command of the Bavarian Troops: And so insinuated himself into the
Court of Vienna, that they seem to say, that they are obliged to him, for the
strict Alliance which the Elector has made with the House of Austria. In
short, he was esteemed for a Person of admirable dexterity in avoiding
invidious matters, without being either suspected or perceived.

P. of Croy.
The Prince of Croy, General of the Artillery, was a person of undoubted Valor.

Gondola.
Gondola, first Lieutenant General of the Horse, was a very Ancient Officer;
much beloved by his own Soldiers; in short he is a man without Vice, Vivacity
of Spirit, or Ambition, being of a Conversation easy, and inoffensive to all
the World.

Count Taff.
Count Taff, a Lieutenant General of the Horse, was a very Gallant man, having
in all occasions of danger acquitted himself with great Courage; and yet he is
not so much to be commended for his Military performances, as for the Character
he has acquired of a just, civil, and an honest Gentleman. He was of great
Understanding, pleasant Conversation, good Literature, and well studied,
accomplished in all his Exercises, doing every thing with a good Grace. In
fine, he would be supereminent in every thing, did he not prefer those
Qualities which rendered him useful before those which made him acceptable. I
had once the honor to see him at Vienna, and have some acquaintance with him
in the Year 1666.

Count Souches, chief Lieutenant General of the Infantry, Souches.
was greatly advanced by those Employments which his Father had bequeathed to
him.

Count Schaffenberg, Schaffenberg.
Lieutenant General of the Foot, was a person of great Courage, but something
tenacious.

The Prince of Neuburg, Neuburg.
Great Master of the Teutonick Order, was a very good Man, but heavy and
unactive; bold in danger, but without much Application to business.

The Prince of Savoy, P. of Savoy.
a Gentleman of great Courage, of more solid Judgment, than quickness of Fancy.
He was a Man of good Learning, and in his studies had applied his mind to that
part of the Mathematics, which treats of Fortifications; by which, and by
practice in War, there was great hope, that with time, he would arrive at those
eminent degrees of Honor and Preferment, of which the greatness of his Birth,
and his own Virtues made him capable.

Veterani was as Brave and Valiant as any, Veterani.
having signalized himself in the last War by an extraordinary Action, worthy
for ever to be remembered. He was an Italian by Birth, but so plain and
unaffected in his Speech and Behavior, that he seemed to have contracted
nothing of the Air of that Nation, but the Name only.

Heusler was a Soldier of Fortune, Heusler.
as stout and brave as Hercules himself; no man more Valiant, and none more
Active and Vigilant, and by his Merits only arrived to the highest Commands in
the Army; his Comportment, Motions, and way of Speaking savoured of a man of
Quality.

Piccolomini, Piccolomini.
was not only endued with Courage, which is the first Principle of a Soldier;
but was a Master in the Trade of War: Though he has been maliciously traduced,
as wanting both; but his own Actions, Conduct, and Success in many Battles,
have evinced the contrary.

To these we might add the Prince of Lommercy, Rabbatin, Nigrelli, Esterhasi,
Apremont, and Wallis, all Major-Generals of Renown, and Famous Reputation,
besides many other Field-Commanders, Captains and subaltern Officers; so that,
as we have said, no Age could ever boast of more brave and undaunted Spirits.
On the contrary, the Turks had in several Battles, unfortunate to themselves,
lost the best of their brave Soldiers, Pashas, and Timariots, and what remained
were cut off by the Chiurbas, and the rebellious Soldiers, (as fore-related;)
so that now there scarce survived one person fit, and of sufficient Experience
to conduct an Army, as will appear in the sequel of this present Year.

But to return now to the Councils of War held at Vienna for hastening the
Campaigne, Result of the Counsels of War at Vienna.
and forwarding the Troops, and drawing a Scheme for managing the War of this
Year; many and various were the Opinions. At length strict Orders were given to
Marshall Caprara, immediately to go to Oseck; and there consult with Count
Apremont, Governor of that place, on such methods, as might best contribute to
the Service of his Imperial Majesty, both as to the Enlargement of the
Conquests, and Subsistence of the Soldiery: In order unto which, great Numbers
of Boats were laden with all sorts of Provision and Ammunition, and dispeeded
down the Rivers of Danube, Vagus, Tibiscus, and Drove, for undertaking some
considerable Enterprise.

Orders were also dispatched from the Council of War to General Caraffa in
Transylvania; That having committed the command of the Upper- Hungaria to
Nigrelli, and of Transylvania to General Veterani; and having also satisfied
the Quarters of his own Militia, he should forthwith march along the Banks of
the Danube, but with such Caution and Vigilance, as might secure him and his
Forces from the Surprizals of Tekely; who since the surrender of Agria and
Mongatz, had made frequent incursions from Temeswar, as far as Lippa, Julia,
and sometimes from Jeno to Waradin.

It being judged almost impossible to conserve Peter Waradin, by reason of the
nearness thereunto of Illock, where the Enemy maintained a numerous Garrison,
it was resolved to draw forth the Troops and Provisions from thence. Howsoever
Caprara being desirous first to take a view of Illock, he conveyed himself
privately before the place with some Horse of the Regiment of Palfi, and about
Two hundred Dragoons on Foot, Mosch before the Gate; but being discovered by
the Turks, they Fired such a Volly of Shot upon him, that several of his
Dragoons were killed, and he received Two Musquet-shots through the Folds of
his loose Coat, with which he retired without other hurt or loss.

But of more concernment it was to General Caprara to defeat the Camp of the
Turks, which they were forming in the open Plains of Salankement; to which end
he prepared Boats and Barges, and Bridges to Transport over the Drove the
Forces which were on their march from the Upper- Hungary. But the Waters by
excessive Rains, had so swollen the Rivers beyond the Banks of their right
Channel, that both Horse and Foot were constrained to make a stop at Darda, to
which place the General passed over in a Boat, and there remained until the
Waters were fallen; as did also some Bavarian Troops designed to repass the
Danube near Buda, on their march to Erdeodi; where having raised a Bridge over
the Danube, and Six more over the Moors and Fenns, they joined with other
Forces, and marched in a Body toward Illock.

In the mean time, Luxemburg, the Duke of Loraine falling sick, The Duke of
Loraine Sick.
put the Court into some discomposure; for that the Season of the Year being
now ripe for Action, the want of the General's presence, would be a necessary
retardment to the Proceedings of the Campaigne; howsoever that was happily
supplied by the coming of P. Lewis of Baden, who every day entered into
consultation with the D. of Loraine, in what manner they might best carry on
the War on the other side of the Save; which being agreed, P. Lewis proceeded
to the Camp, where, with Marshall Caprara, the Imperial Forces were for that
time commanded, and with them it was concluded to pass the Save.

But now some of the Transilvanians being allured by Succors, The City of
Stephanopolis refuses to receive a German Garrison.
and great Assistance promised them by the Tartars, to renounce their sworn
Allegiance to the Emperor; the City of Stephanopolis refused to receive a
German Garrison, which Design was chiefly carried on at the persuasion of the
Valachians, who considering that by the Submission of Transylvania, their
Province lay open to the Germans, and through that an easy passage into
Tartary; they both joynned to persuade the People of Stephanopolis, to refuse
to take in a Garrison of Germans. But General Veterani immediately marched to
the City with the Regiments of Pace, Taff and Stirum, and by surprise Attacked
the Suburbs in three places, and being come within Pistol-shot of the Walls,
the Dragoons dismounting from their Horses, and raising some Barricadoes to
cover them from the Enemies Cannon, they began to throw Bombs into the Castle,
by which, and by help of the Regiments of Baden and Schaffemberg, who brought
with them two Pieces of great Cannon, and four of small, they battered the
Town, to the Terror and Consternation of the Inhabitants; The City Surrendered.
so that with common consent they cried out for Quarter; which was granted to
them by General Caraffa, at Discretion; and the City yielded, as also the
Castle, into which five Companies of the Regiment of Baden were admitted. In
the mean time General Caraffa with like diligence, Marched with a Body of an
Army to Lippa; and having Summoned the City, he was answered by their great and
Small-shot from the Walls: Upon which the General without any delay raised two
Batteries, by which beating down part of the Wall, he made an Attack on the
Breach; Lippa attacked.
from whence, tho he was repulsed at the first time by the Bravery of the
Defendants; yet renewing the Assault again with grater Force and Resolution,
they entered the Town by Storm, with the Death of Five hundred Turks; the rest
giving Fire to their Houses and Magazines retired into the Castle, which they
maintained a while with good Resolution. But Caraffa raising two new Batteries,
fired incessantly from them, and threw Bombs into it with such good effect,
that the Defendants terrified therewith, displayed a white Flag, Lippa yielded.
and submitted unto Terms of being made Prisoners, to the number of Six
thousand Persons, Two thousand of which being Men capable to bear Arms were
made Slaves; but the Women and Children were freed, and with a Convoy were sent
in safety to Temeswar: Lippa was of great consequence to the Germans, having
thereby opened all the Country between the River Maros, and the Tibiscus.

This Success was soon followed by the Surrender of Lagos, a Castle four
Leagues distant from Lippa, which after a small resistance yielded to Colonel
Pace on Articles, according to which about Two hundred Soldiers, with One
hundred and Eighty Rascians and Valachians marched out, Lagos yielded.
together with the Inhabitants of the lower City, and about Six hundred Women
and Children. Within was only one Mortar-piece, and eight Pieces of Cannon; but
no Victuals or Ammunition. The like Fortune had succeeded at the great Castle
of Caranzebes, had not the Attacks been disappointed by an excessive Rain of
four or five days; which forced Colonel Pace to return back to General Carafa,
who remained still in expectation of his coming to Lippa.

The Indisposition of the Duke of Loraine increasing, and little hopes of his
Recovery to such a state of Health, as was requisite to Conduct an Army during
the present Campaign; the Elector Maximilian Emanuel Duke of Bavaria, The
Elector of Bavaria made General.
yet for his time, of that vast experience, and of that Disposition and
Courage, naturally inclined to War, that he seemed not to come behind any of
those renowned Generals, famed for Heroic Actions in past Ages; wherefore
being elected by the consent of all the General Officers, for Commander in
Chief of the whole Army, the Count Kaunitz was dispatched with the Imperial
Letters to the Elector at Monaco, inviting him to accept of this important
Charge. But because the Season of the year was far advanced, and that no time
was to be lost, Prince Lewis of Baden was dispatched to the Army to join with
Marshal Caprara, both for Conservation of the new Conquests, and to dispose
Matters in order to farther Victories.

Nor were the Turks only vexed with the ill Successes of War, but were also
afflicted with Earthquakes, Mutinies, Conspiracies, amongst their Soldiers,
with Robberies and Disordes over all Asia.

On the 30th of June, Smyrna, which in a few Moments over-threw almost all the
Houses in the City, with the Death (as is computed) of Five thousand of the
Inhabitants, many of which were drawn out half Dead from the Ruins. This
terrible Judgment, by the good Providence of God happening to be on a Saturday,
An Earthquake at Smyrna.
(which commonly the Consul, and Factors of the English Nation make a Day of
divertisement without any business) most of them were abroad, either in the
Country, or on board some Ships in the Port, from whence they easily heard the
lamentable Noise, and Cries of the falling City, not now to be seen, or
discerned through the vast and thick Dust which covered all the Ruins; those
who were in the Ships were sensible of the Shake; for the Seas lifted up the
Ships, the Guns leaped in the Carriages, and the Seamen on the Deck were as
unsteddy on their Feet, as in a Storm at Sea. Some who were on the Shore, felt
the Earth trembling under them, Staggered, and were thrown to the Ground. In
the Houses of our Merchants, three only of the English Nation perished, namely,
Mr. Samuel Bernardiston, Mr. Henry Stephens and Mr. Richard Pierce, all killed
by the falling of a main Beam, as they were sitting at Dinner: Several others
which remained at Home, are still alive to recount their wonderful Escape,
whilst the Tops, Tiles and Rafters of the Houses fell round about them without
any Wound, or touch on their Bodies. But had it so pleased God, that this
Earthquake should have happened on any other Day in the Week besides Saturday; it
is more than probable, that many more of the English Factory would have
perished in the Ruins. Of the Jews Four hundred were killed, and amongst them
one of their most famous Rabbis of the East, called Aron Ibben Haim. The
Metropolite of Smyrna with many of his Papasses, who went into their Church to
Pray, were killed by the fall of the Roof. The like Fate befell the Patriarch of
Alexandria, who with his People was overwhelmed with the Ruins. Of the French
Nation the Consul only was killed; and of the Dutch only one Merchant. About
three or four Hours after this dismal Shake, an Irruption of Fire appeared in
the Frank Street, (which is a Row of Houses along the Sea side, A Fire breaks
out.
inhabited by the Frank Nations) for so the Turks call all the Western People:
This Fire perhaps might at first have been extinguished, but that smaller
Shakes happening now and then after the greater Earthquake, so terrified the
People by the falling of Walls and Tops of Houses, that none daring to come
near, suffered the Fire to prevail; which consumed much of the Merchants Cloth,
melted their Tin, Lead and Money; and burnt up their Papers and Books of
Account: So that it cannot be said, whether the Earthquake, or the the Fire did
the greatest Damage and Devastation: But this is certain, that the English
Merchants were very considerable sufferers, some having computed the loss to a
Hundred thousand pounds Sterling. It is a great Question from whence this Fire
should proceed, some will have it from the Fires in the Kitchins, which were
kindled about that time of the Day, for the use and purpose of dressing Meat
and other Services; but that seems unlikely; for the Kitchen Fires at that time
of the Year and of the Day, being not great, might have been more easily
extinguished, and smothered by the fall of so much Brick and Rubbish, rather
than kindled by the Beams and Rafters; wherefore I believe, that this
Incendiation did proceed from an Irruption of Subterranean Fires, which are the
cause of Earthquakes: Thus was it, when the Mount Vesuvius was blown up, and so
it was, and is when Mongibello Vomits out it is Flames, making all the Countries
tremble round the Island of Sicily; and so it was in the Year 1666, when Ragusi
was destroyed with an Earthquake, the Subterranean Fires destroying whatsoever
remained under the Ruins: And so it was at Lima in the West Indies, Smyrna.

In the Army were great Discontents, as it always happens in times of
Misfortune. Yeghen (as we have said) had forced himself upon the Vizier to be
made Seraskier or General; Seditions in the Army.
whilst many better Men than he, were laid aside: The Force being so
inconsiderable on the Frontiers, it was judged beneath the Dignity of a Vizier,
to appear at the Head of so weak an Army; wherefore remaining that year at
Constantinople, where several of the discontented Giurbas had concealed them; a
Conspiracy was by them formed against the Grand Vizier and the Government,
which had in a few hours taken effect, A Conspiracy against the Vizier plotted
and discovered.
had it not been discovered by some of their false Brethren; to prepare which,
several Libels were thrown about in the Mosques, condemning the removal of the
Grand Seignior, and his Court to Adrianople, to the great Ruin and Detriment of
the ancient Seat of the Sultans at Constantinople, and prejudicial to the
Empire by such an unnecessary expense: These Libels were seconded by an Arz, or
Memorial from the Soldiers to the Vizier himself, importing, that they would
not suffer the Sultan to remove from Constantinople; but in case the Vizier
would go in Person to the Wars, and first pay them their Arrears, they would
accompany him, when the Season was fit for so long a March; but to go and
Winter at Adrianople, would discommode them and their Families, and prove of no
benefit to the grand Design of War against the Common Enemy the Christians.
This bold Memorial gave Encouragement to the Inferior Janisaries to commit
daily Insolences in the Streets; which being connived at by their Officers
concerned in the Conspiracy, which was to have been executed on the 23d day of
July, gave Fears and Jealousies to the Government, that the same Tragedy was
acting over again, as had been in the time of the late Giurbas. For the Plot
was laid, that the Gebegees, should in a Tumultuous manner go to the Vizier's
House to demand their Arrears of Pay; then were the Janisaries upon the Noise
hereof to join with them, and Assault the Vizier, and take the Government into
their own Hands, The Methods of the Plot.
as had lately been practiced by the Giurbas. But on the Vigil before the
Execution, the whole Plot was discovered, and those who were to be the
principal Actors therein were made known to the Vizier: Who immediately
thereupon Summoned such Guards, as he could confide in; and with Five hundred
Men went about the City all that Night, Janisar-Aga was displaced, and made
Pasha of Van, a City on the Borders of Persia, and one Mahomet Aga (the Segme
Bashee, Colonel of a sort of Militia so called) was advanced to his Office; he
was a Man of above Eighty years of Age, very lame by reason of a Wound he had
received at the Siege of Candia by a Cannon Bullet, which shot off one of his
Buttocks; But yet he was Vigorous, and of a severe Temper, fit to keep such
Mutiniers in Discipline and Subjection: The Kiahbei, or Lieutenant General of
the Janisaries was also Cashiered, and tho they both pleaded Innocence and
Ignorance; yet the want of knowledge to discover such a Contrivance hatching
amongst their Soldiers, was Crime sufficient to ease them of their Commands.
For two Nights following, How prevented.
three Parties of armed Men took their Rounds about the City: The first led by
the Vizier, The second by the new Janisar-Aga, and the third by the new
Kia-bei; these meeting together in the Morning, and conferring Notes, found
that they had cut off about Fifty Persons, most of them Janisaries: And several
Nights afterward some Executions were done, and all acted with such Secrecy,
and Silence in the dead of the Night, that no Noise or Disturbance followed
thereupon; for there was no Man of great Vogue or Repute put to Death, the
highest being only in degree a Chiurbagee or Captain; all which were put into
Sacks and thrown into the Sea, according to the punishment by ancient
Constitution to be inflicted on Janisaries. Amongst those, who were put to
Death was one Hamedi Effendi, who was at first appointed with others to carry
the Grand Seignior's Letter for Peace to the Emperor: Several others being too
free in their Tongues against the Vizier, Dogangee Shuban, Pasha of Nicopolis,
on the Danube, was brought to Town; he had been one of the Giurbas, and Kiah to
Siaus Pasha, and once named by him to have been left Chimacam, when the Vizier
was at the War: This Report, with the Fame of being designed by the
Conspirators to be set up for Vizier, was fatal to him, and procured the
Handwriting or Sentence for his Death. Yeghen Bei was also suspected to have
had a Hand in promoting, and projecting the Conspiracy; but he was too great,
as yet to be reached by the waining Power of the Vizier: Yeghen suspected to
have been in the Conspiracy.
This Suspicion had some Foundation from the Counsels, which Yeghen had
formerly given, concerning the removal of the Grand Seignior to Adrianople,
which as he said could not be done without Hurt, and Damage to the Empire;
declaring in like manner by a second Letter, that in case they should, contrary
to his Mind and Opinion, remove the Grand Seignior, he would in the Autumn come
personally to Adrianople to demand their Reasons for the same. Howsoever this
Vizier was willing to overlook all the extravagant, and insolent Speeches of
Yeghen Bei, out of Gratitude, as was said, of sparing his Life; when after the
loss of the late Battle, (he then being Janisar-Aga) the Soldiers would have
cut him to pieces, The Viziers respect to Yeghen.
had not the Authority and Interest of Yeghen with the Militia, spared and
secured his Life: In Consideration, and Remembrance of which, he was no sooner
created Vizier, than he discharged the Nefran, or Trained Bands of the Country,
which the late Ishmael Pasha had raised to suppress Yeghen, then lying with his
Forces near to Sophia.

Howsoever, this Conspiracy against the Vizier would scarce have passed over so
easily, had not a lucky hit of Two thousand and six hundred Purses (being the
Estate of two rich Kuzlir-Agas cut off, Money come from Grand Cairo.
and brought from Grand Cairo in Egypt) been seasonably brought to the
Exchequer, which served a little to pacify the Soldiery, which was now nine
Months in Arrear. The Vizier also not thinking himself secure from the Plots
and Conspiracies which might still be framed against him, removed Ishmael the
late Vizier from Cavalla, a place near Salonica, where he had been Imprisoned,
to the Castle at Rhodes, the famous place for disgraced and banished Officers:
He removed also several from their places of Trust, putting Creatures of his
into their Offices; and amongst the rest he made four new Viziers of the Bench;
one of which was Hali Aga, Hasnadar or Treasurer to the Vizier Kupri-oglee,
called from Trapezond, Four new Viziers of the Bench made.
where he was Pasha; another was Omer Pasha, Tefterdar or Treasurer, who last
year in the beginning of the Troubles was Segmen Bashee, or General of that
Militia, and had been pulled off from his Horse by the Giurbas in the Streets,
and turned out of Office; a third was the Nisangi Bashee, a young Man taken out
of the Seraglio, where he was a Page: And a fourth was one of the Vizier's
ancient Servants.

But notwithstanding the dislike which the Soldiers showed to the Grand
Seignior's removal to Adrianople, the Vizier and his Counselors resolved to
pursue their Design; esteeming it a place more secure and safe for the
Government (according to the Maxim of old Kuperlee) where the Milita could be
more under their Eye; and Plots not so easily contrived as at Constantinople,
where the numbers and Riches of the People were capable at all times to move
Disturbances. So in the Month of July, Adrianople, with his deposed Brother,
his Son, and the other Brother Sultan Achmet, with the Valide Sultana or Queen
Mother.

The Court being come to Adrianople, at the first Consult a Peace was proposed,
and Ambassadors named to go to Vienna, viz. Zulficar Aga, and Mavrocordato, who
was a Christian, and Interpreter to the Vizier; the Dispatch of these
Ambassadors was the more earnestly hastened, by reason of the News then come to
the Court, that the Germans were on their March to Invest Belgrade. Yeghen
Pasha was then at Nissa, where the Differences between him, and Hassan Pasha
grew to that Heat, that their Parties falling to Blows, Two hundred were killed
in the Fray; which Hassan, being the Wiser, and more temperate Commander,
interpreted for a bad Omen of Success in the following Campaign. The Court took
little Notice of all this Matter; but still continued to encourage Yeghen with
Promises of Additional Forces, and new Supplies, ordering him to oppose all the
Designs, and Attempts of the Christians to the utmost of his Power; giving him
also a Commission to enter into a Treaty of Peace with the Christian General,
in case any Overture should fairly offer its self. But Yeghen not having with
these Commands received the Prophet's Standard, Yeghen in Mutiny.
nor the Imperial Seal, which are the Badges and proper Signals of the Office
of Grand Vizier, became Angry and Sullen; for though he was made General, yet
that seemed not sufficient without the Title of Supreme Governor: And whereas
before, he was on his March toward Belgrade, he returned back again to Sophia,
declaring that without those powerful Instruments, it was impossible for him to
Govern the Army, and Rule them with such strict Obedience, as was necessary
against so powerful an Enemy, and so formidable as the Christians: And as to
the Overtures of Peace he was resolved to make none, nor suffer the Ambassadors
to pass until such time, as he had tried the Fortune of the Ottoman Sword once
more in the Field. To this pitch of Insolence was this Yeghen arisen, that he
was ready to Sacrifice the whole concernment of the Empire to his own Pride and
Vanity: But Express after Express coming from Belgrade with News, that the
Germans were Marching toward the Save, with a Resolution to pass that River,
so soon, as the Elector of Bavaria should Arrive in the Camp, Yeghen began to
grow a little ashamed; and fearing that all the Misfortunes impending over
Belgrade, He returns to Belgrade.
would be attributed to his ill Government and Sedition, he Marched away from
Sophia, and being come to Belgrade, he made public Declaration, that the
Sultan had created him General of all Hungary, upon which the Forces Encamped
in the Parts adjacent to the City submitted to his Command; and being now
invested with the sole Power, he vented his Spleen against his old Competitor,
Hassan Pasha, with whom formerly (as we have said) he had a Quarrel in Bosnia,
and having now an opportunity to show his farther Resentments, he seized on his
Tents, Seizes on Hassan Pasha.
Horses and Money, and would have strangled him, had he not been prevented by
the Aga of the Janisaries, and the Son of the Han of Tartary, who was there
present with a small Body of Tartars.

But the Turks had now something more to do, than to quarrel amongst
themselves; for the Christians came pouring upon them on all sides; and how to
resist them was the present Incumbence, and grand Concernment; so that laying
aside all Intestine differences, Yeghen with Ten thousand Soldiers, joined to
the Troops of Tekeli, resolved to pass the Save, and Encamp near Semblin on the
other side of the River. But that design was laid aside, so soon as News was
brought to Belgrade that P. Lewis of Baden was Decamped from Valkovar, and
that, together with Caprara, he had taken his march toward Illock; with which,
Yeghen and the Turks fainting in their Courage, The Turks seek for Peace.
were inclined rather to Proposals of Peace, than to a continuance of the War;
and to try whether any reasonable offers of that nature would be accepted. Two
ordinary Peasants were dispatched to Oseck, with Letters to Marquess Herman of
Baden, and Marshal Caprara, desiring them to interceed with his Imperial
Majesty to put an end to this bloody War, which had already cost the lives of
many innocent People, and laid waste and desolate vast and large Countries, and
Provinces: But such a Message as this being brought by Peasants, Their
Messengers are suspected.
who are improper Instruments to be employed in so eminent an Action, gave just
cause to the Generals to take and esteem them for no other than Spies: Upon
which suspicion they were imprisoned, and Advice sent thereof to the Imperial
Court; which not judging fit to take notice of any Offers of Peace proposed in
such Form, gave new Orders and Instructions to Caprara to pursue with all
vigor imaginable the Rules chalked out, and designed for carrying on the Work
of this Campaigne.

In the mean time the Troops of Bavaria arrived in the Camp under the Command
of General Serini, an experienced Captain; and therewith the main Army being
reinforced, Illock abandoned by the Turks.
Caprara took his march toward Illock, of which so soon as the Turks had
received intelligence, they were put into such consternation, that they
abandoned the place; and having packed up what Movables the shortness of time
would permit, they set Fire to the City, and retired in a precipitate and
disorderly Flight. The Smoke being descryed at a distance, Caprara detached a
Body of Germans, and Hungarians, to advance toward the Town, to observe the
face of the Enemy, Germans were employed to extinguish the Fire, and the
Hungarians to pursue the flying Enemy; which they performed so effectually,
that they seized a great part of the Goods which were then carrying away, and
brought them to the Camp. The News hereof so affrighted the Garrison of
Peter-Waradin, that with like Terror and Precipitation they abandoned their
City, and fled to Belgrade.

These Successes gave great encouragement to the whole Army, and to the
Imperial Court at Vienna, where the Duke of Mantoua about this time arrived,
with intention to pass forward to the Camp, and signalize himself and his
Followers in a War against the common Enemy; his Equipage was very splendid,
and agreeable to the Spirit of so generous a Prince.

1688. July.
In like manner the Elector of Bavaria, Maximilian Emanuel the Third arrived at
Vienna, being called by the Emperor to command the Army in Hungary in the place
of the Duke of Loraine, who was become so weak by his Indisposition and want of
Health, that he judged himself unable to command the Army with such vigor, as
was required in so active a War. The Elector was so intent upon this
Expedition, The E. of Bavaria at Vienna, and hastens to the Camp.
that the very day he arrived at Vienna with his most Serene Consort, he had
departed, and proceeded to the Camp, had he not been forcibly detained by the
obliging invitation of the Emperor, and persuaded to stay until the Evening of
the following day.

In the mean time a design was formed to block up Great Waradin; but the
Garrison being strong within, the Turks made frequent Excursions with Two
hundred Horse, and a Thousand Janisaries at a time, and frequently brought
Provisions into the Town, the which was so managed by the Pasha and other
Commanders, that the Castle held out until the Year 1692. Howsoever the Blocade
of Sigeth and Canisia was greatly straightened; Sigeth and Kanisia straightened.
the first by General Gabriel, Count of Vecchia, and the other by Bathyani, and
Zicchy, Lieutenant Governor of Giavarin, or Rabb; who appearing before Canisia
in order of Battle, the Turks displayed their Colors of defiance, showing a
courageous resolution to defend themselves and their Fortress. Howsoever the
Hussars and Heyducks came under command of the Cannon, and in despite of their
shot, set Fire to the Corn and Fruits growing near the City. At which the Turks
cried out with lamentable Voice, saying, Set the fear of God before your Eyes,
and do not commit these grievous sins, for which we have been punished by God;
for the time was, when we did the like outrages, and disorders, destroying
without cause the Christian Churches, for which we have worthily deserved the
Divine Vengeance, and are now justly punished for these Offenses. In this Fear
and Amazement were the Turks, finding themselves blocked up, and environed
round, having Five thousand Women and Children within, without hopes of being
ever relieved, or succored; so that their Courage began to fail, and Thoughts
arise amongst them, how they might yield up their City on the most advantageous
Terms.

In the mean time, P. Lewis of Baden continued his march with all expedition
toward Possega; Consultations to pass the Save.
where meeting the Count of Hoffkirchen, they consulted together in what manner
they might best offend the Enemy on the other side of the Save; but because the
Turks kept the Banks of the River well guarded, the Passage over seemed very
difficult, especially wanting Boats to Transport their men: At length, whilst
they were considering hereof, News was brought by some of the Heyducks, that
about Two Leagues above on the River near Proot, Three Boats lay hid amongst
the Flags, and Boughs, of which the Turks had no knowledge; each of which was
capable to Ferry Fifteen or Twenty men at a time over to the other side; upon
which intelligence, it was resolved, that Hoffkirchen and Serini should in the
Nightime pass Eight hundred Heyducks over to the other side; the which were
followed by Eight hundred Horse, and Two hundred German Foot, under command of
Hoffkirchen; but the Nights were so short, and the Boats so little, Five
hundred pass the River.
that by Break of day in the Morning, not above Five hundred of the Heyducks
had passed; who finding themselves cut off, Turks taking these Heyducks to be
their Friends, were easily surprised and cut to pieces; and two very great
Barges were seized and brought over to the other side, on which Hoffkirchen and
Zerini embarking themselves with Three hundred Dragoons, passed the River, and
joined the Heyducks, who were far engaged in a pursuit of the Enemy; who being
surprised, had abandoned Proot, together with the Works and Trenches which they
had made; of which taking possession, made a speedy passage for the remaining
Party of the Germans, and Heyducks. In the Heat of this Action, Two hundred of
the Enemy, who were Two thousand strong, were cut in pieces, and many Women and
Children were made Prisoners; the Christian Soldiers gained a considerable
Booty in this Action; for the Turks being surprised, had not time to save any
thing of their Movables and Riches; and with them they had the Fortune to set
Two hundred Christians at liberty, amongst which was a Lieutenant of the
Regiment of the Upper Rhine, with several other subaltern Officers.

Count Hoffkirchen looking on this place to be an advantageous Post for raising
a Bridge of Communication between that side and Sclavonia, and that in Four
days they could at any time be carried down the Stream to Belgrade; It was
resolved to maintain that Post until other Orders should come from P. Lewis, to
whom an Express was sent to know his pleasure: And in the mean time, they
repaired the Trenches, and improved the Works with better Fortifications than
those which the Turks had made; whereby they put themselves into a condition to
resist any force, which the Turks could bring against them in a short time;
H^ffkirchen att^cked by Topal Pasha,
and hereof in two or three days afterward they had an occasion to make some
Trial; for Topal Pasha having joined himself with Two other Pashas lately come
from Adrianople, came upon them with an Army to the Number of Eight thousand
men; and having entrenched himself at the distance of about Three hundred Paces
from the Palancha, Who is repulsed.
he assaulted that, and the Trenches about Midnight; but were bravely repulsed
by the continual Fire, which the Christians made upon them; so that drawing off
at some little distance, they brought Two Guns about Break of day in the
Morning, with design to batter the place; in which were no more than Three
hundred Germans, Horse and Foot, and about One thousand Heyducks; because that
Hoffkirchen had detached a great part of his Forces toward Possega, to Convoy
some Wagons of Provisions and Ammunition, of which they stood in need. The
Enemy being well advised hereof, and of the weakness of the Garrison within,
returned to make a new Attack, covering their approach with Boards, Wagons,
and Barrels of Earth. In the mean time the Attachment sent to Possega
returning, were observed by the Turk; The Turks endeavor to be at Hoffkirchen
out of Proot.
who resolving to hinder their Union, furiously made another Assault, with Two
thousand brave Janisaries, and as many Spahees; who having filled up the
shallow Ditch with Bushes, Topal Pasha, near to Three of the Imperial Ensigns:
Whereupon began a very furious Fight, with Swords and Scymeters at handy blows;
and the Imperialists mixing with the Turks, threw them headlong into the Ditch
and Trenches, killing in this Action with very little loss on their side above
Five hundred Turks, Are repulsed.
and taking Three Ensigns. After which a Sally was made with so much vigor and
bravery, that the Turks were repulsed, and droven out of their new Works, which
they had made near the Banks of the River.

In the mean time the Detachment which had lately been made, returned and
passed the Water; with which the Forces in the Palancha being reinforced, With
great loss.
made a Sally upon the Enemy, both with Horse and Foot; and entirely beat them
out of all their Approaches and Retrenchments, with the loss of their Baggage
and Wagons: This Action continued for the space of Four and twenty Hours; in
which, and other Attacks before, the Turks lost above Twelve hundred men.

This Post was maintained for several days, Lewis of Baden sent Orders to
Hoffkirchen to withdraw his Troops; it not being advisable to hazard such brave
men in a Post, which could not easily be maintained; and at so far a distance,
as Four days Journey from the main Body of the Army, Proot demolished.
C. Hoffkirchen abandoned the place accordingly; and having sacked it, set Fire
to it, and passed the River with a very rich Booty.

The particulars of this Retreat not being well understood, July.
caused some Disturbance at Possega, where it was reported, that the Turks in a
Body of Fifteen hundred Men, had passed the Save; and having defeated
Hoff-kirchen, intended to dispute the Passage with Prince Lewis of Baden: Who
being in great Concernment for Hoff-kirchen, was come as far as Possega to
enquire after him; and to receive true Information, Piccolomini sent in quest
of Hoffkirchen.
he dispatched General Piccolomini with Three hundred Horse, to look after him;
but they Marching by different Ways, missed of each other: When the General
came to Proot, where he discovered some Parties of the Enemy, which covered
themselves within those Ruins, having first broken down all the Bridges near to
that Palanca, he passed the Water, and boldly attempted the Turks, imagining
their numbers to be less than they were. The Turks guessing on the other side,
that these Forces were some advanced Troops of the main Body of the Army,
retired themselves into the old Fort over against Proot, He retreats.
where having no Cannon, they plied their Small-shot very plentifully upon the
Imperialists, by which it being discovered, that the Turks were at least Two
thousand in number; Piccolomini made a very skilful Retreat, He Retreats with
much Art, and good Conduct.
according to the Military Order, and returned toward Possega, where he found
Hoff-kirchen, Prince Lewis, and all the other other Troops happily joined.

The Troops having refreshed themselves one day in Possega, and being provided
with all things requisite for their Subsistence, Prince Lewis Marches toward
Gradiska.
Prince Lewis began his March thence toward Gradiska on the 24th of July,
carrying with him four Demy-culverins, and some Field Pieces; resolving to pass
the Save at Sisseck in Croatia, and join there with a Body of Croats, and
endeavor to Attack the Enemy, if possible: And here we will leave him for a
while on this Expedition, and return to the great Camp, where the Elector of
Bavaria was Arrived, to the great Joy and Triumph of the whole Army.

The Elector of Bavaria prepares his March for Belgrade.
The same Evening that the Elector entered the Camp at Tiska, he resolved next
Morning to proceed toward Belgrade, and accordingly he made a strong
Detachment under the Command of Count Dunewalt to Advance, and discover the
Countenance of the Enemy, who (as it was reported) with a Body of Twenty
thousand Men, had fortified the Banks of the Save all along the Shore, as far
as to the Danube, with Timbers, and Ditches, and Palisadoes, in the same manner
as they had done the yeat before under Esseck; besides which, Tekely had formed
a Camp with such Advantage, as that he could in a very short time come in to
their Assistance.

August. 1688.
The Army having the 5th of August Encamped at Tiska, continued their March next
day toward the Save, and made a Halt at Bagliutz, about half a League distant
from the River; The Cannon, etc. joins the Army.
where the Artillery lately brought by Water from Buda, together with the
Baggage, and the Boats on Wheels, with other Materials necessary for making a
Bridge, joined the Army that Evening under a Good Convoy of Horse and Foot.
About the same time a Prisoner was brought to the Camp, who upon Examination
declared, That the Ottoman Army was composed of about Twenty five thousand Men,
of which Twenty five Chambers of Janisaries, consisting of about Four or five
hundred each, were employed to finish the Intrenchments they had made on the
other side of the Save, to hinder the Passage of the Christian Army: Resolved
to pass the River.
A Counsel of War being held thereupon, it was resolved to force the Passage;
and to send a good Body of Men to burn the Bridge, which the Turks had Built
near Belgrade: But in case that Design succeeded not, then they were to Post
themselves as near the Bridge as they could, both to give the Alarm on that
side, and also to secure the Convoys which were coming to the Army from Peter
Waradin; for security of which, the Detachment of Four thousand Men, under
Dunewalt was also appointed: In the mean time the gross Body of the Army moved
toward the Save, directing their March toward the Island of Zingar or
Swallows, which the Turks had possessed, but fled, Attempts to pass the Save.
and quitted it upon a Report, of the near Approach of the Christian Army, so
that the Imperialists without any Opposition possessed themselves of that
Island; the Foot passed over in Boats, but the Horse forded the Water: But the
great difficulty lay on the other side, where the Water was not only deeper;
but the opposite Banks defended so well by the Enemies Cannon and Small-shot,
that there seemed an impossibility almost to pass; and the more, because that
Tekely lay Encamped on the other side, joined to a strong Body of Turks, who
lay ready to receive them at their landing, and to give them an unpleasing
Welcome. All which being considered; it was resolved to Alarm the Turks that
Night in diverse places, whilst Count Serini General of the Bavarian Forces,
assisted with the Generals Stirum and Aspremont, should with Six thousand Men
endeavor to pass the River at a good distance from the place, where the chief
Alarm was made; which was executed with that Care and Conduct, that the
Success proved answerable thereunto; for the Six thousand Men having safely
passed without any Opposition, posted themselves with the Chevaux de Frise
chained and linked together, which served like a Turn-pike against the Enemies
Horse and Foot, until the rest of the Army could follow. But so soon as it was
clear Day, they were furiously attacked by Eight thousand Janisaries, who were
as warmly received, The Christian Army passes the Save.
and forced to Retreat, leaving Six hundred of their Men dead upon the place,
with the loss only of One hundred and twenty Men on the Christian side; during
this Engagement which lasted about two Hours, a Bridge was laid over the River
with such Expedition, that the whole Army passed that Day, except only the
Cannon, and the Heavy Baggage; which were also Transported over without any
delay. The most difficult Point of the whole Campaign being now overcome, the
Elector of Bavaria distributed Two thousand Ducats amongst those who had
signalized themselves in this Action; and without any demur marched toward
Belgrade, from whence he was not distant above three days March. Had the Turks
been Men of Courage or Conduct, they might easily have hindered the Christian
Army from passing the River; but indeed to speak the Truth, they had lost all
that Bravery and Spirit, by which they had gained so many Kingdoms in the East,
and advanced so far into the Dominions of Europe: The Turks discouraged.
But being now dispirited by unfortunate losses of their Cities and strong
Holds, and by Over-throws and Defeats in Battle, and more especially by their
own intestine Mutinies and Dissentions, in which most of their brave Men
perished; they became so sunk in their Spirits, that they were not half the
Men, that they formerly had been; but being struck with a Consternation, as
their Enemies were raised and flushed with Victory and Triumph, Belgrade; and
to raise his Camp with the rising of the Moon, then entering into the last
Quarter; when he was hindered by a violent Storm of Wind and Rain, with Thunder
and Lightning which endangered the Bridge, and lasted until break of Day of the
10th in the Morning: August.
The Turks interpreting this Storm, as a bad Omen unto themselves, abandoned
their Camp, leaving many Thousand Heads of Cattle dispersed in the Fields, The
Turks Fly.
with all their Instruments for Intrenching; and fled with such Precipitation
and Have, that the Christian Generals judging it impossible to overtake them,
directed their Course by the nearest way to Belgrade. Prince Eugeny of Savoy
was Commanded by his Electoral Highness, to advance with his Regiment and some
Guards, toward the City, to take a view of the Enemy, and discover in what
order they were lodged in their Trenches: The Inhabitants of the City having
received the affrighting News of the near Approach of the Christian Army, had
the time of three or four days, to Embark their useless People, with the best
of their Movables, and richest Goods on a Thousand Boats; with which they
sailed down the Stream of the River, The Citizens of Belgrade abandon their
Dwellings.
landing afterward at several places, where Friends or Relations, or other
Coveniencies invited them: And in the mean time the remaining Garrison set Fire
to the Suburbs, and reduced all to Ashes. Notwithstanding which, the Flight was
so confused and hasty, that many of the Inhabitants with their Wives and
Children, had not time to Convey themselves away; of which some were killed,
and many made Captives: Jews and Rascians remained behind, who being habited in
the Turkish fashion, had been exposed to the Fury of the Soldiery, had not the
Generosity of the Prince restrained the Heat of their Martial Fury. Soon
afterward the whole Army came up, August.
and Sacked and Plundered the Suburbs, A Fire consumes the Suburbs.
sparing neither Mosque nor House: And tho the Fire, and Flames were very
terrible; yet the Soldiers gained more Plunder and Booty in those Suburbs, than
they had done in all Buda; because they had the fortune to surprise whole Bales
of Goods, and Movables ready Packed up, which the Owners in their Flight had
not time to carry away. Howsoever, some of these Plunderers being over-intent
on their Prey, were surprised by a Party of the Enemy, and either killed, or
made Captives.

No time was lost in opening the Trenches, into which Major General Steinau,
and Count Ottingen entered on the 21st of August, and Commanded there that
Night, but could not advance much by reason of the continual Rains. Howsoever,
The Trenches opened.
in two or three days the Trenches were finished, and three Batteries were
raised, and furnished with the Heavy Cannon, which on the 25th arrived in the
Camp. August. 1688.
Twenty six Pieces were immediately mounted, and began to play upon the Castle;
and tho they had raised their Batteries, as high as was possible; yet the Ruins
of the Suburbs lay so much in the way, that the Shot could not reach the bottom
of the Wall, till the Way was cleared by the Pioniers; and then two new
Batteries more being raised, Batteries raise^
and all the remaining Artillery planted thereon, they plied incessantly on the
Walls of the Castle with great Shot and Bombs, in the mean time the Enemy was
not idle, but returned the like into the Christian Camp, making frequent
Sallies with much Bravery; in which the Germans lost more Men than the Turks,
amongst which was the Count of Ligneville, Colonel of Foot, and Adjutant
General, who by a Shot received in the Trenches died immediately.

The Town, and Castle of Belgrade being in this manner formally invested, it
was believed, That it could not hold out long, by reason of the Weakness of the
Garrison, which consisted of no more than Three thousand and five hundred Men,
Commanded by Ibrahim late Pasha of Bagdat or Babylon, who being a Brave and
Valiant Soldier, resolved to maintain the place to the last Extremity, giving
out for Encouragement of his Garrison, that powerful Succors were coming to
their Relief, under the Command of Osman Pasha of Aleppo; but this Report,
grounded on some straggling Troops belonging to Tekeli, seen in the
Neighborhood of Semandria, gave some hopes to the fainting Garrison; but
General Dunewalt being sent against Tekeli, with a strong Detachment of Horse,
soon drove him from those Quarters. The chief Force of the Turks being no more
than Twenty five thousand Men, under Command of Osman Pasha of Aleppo, lay
Encamped near Nissa, whilst Yeghen was retired with his Horse (for his Foot had
deserted him) near to Sophia, destroying and consuming the Forage round the
Country.

The Turks Sue for Peace.
The Turks finding themselves in this low and helpless Condition, inclined to
Counsels tending to Peace, and reassumed their former Resolution of sending
their two forementioned Ambassadors, Zulficar Effendi, and the Interpreter
Mauro-cordato to beg a Peace (to whom as we have said, Yeghen gave lately a
stop) a Method never before practiced by the Ottoman Emperors, since the
beginning of their Empire: But the Misfortunes of War, and the Miseries of
their own intestine Dissentions had bowed their Hearts, and Haughty Thoughts to
submissive and humble Prayers for Peace; in order to which Osman Pasha of
Aleppo wrote this following Letter to the Elector of Bavaria, brought to him by
the Hand of a Chiaus.

TO him, who is Dear to God, and ranked in chief Degree amongst the Princes of
Germany, powerful in People and Government, Famous and Renowned in all Parts,
Duke Maximilian Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, and General of the Army of the
Emperor of the Romans, unto whom may God grant that Health, which I wish unto
him.

After Salutations premised. Be it known unto you, That one of the Chief
Officers of our Emperor of the Turks, who now Reigns, is dispatched with an
important Letter to your most powerful Emperor: This Ambassador is a Person
highly esteemed amongst us, both for his Wisdom and Virtue, whose name is
Zulficar Effendi; with whom goes also joined in the same Commission Alexander
Mauro-cordato, Interpreter to the Port for secret Affairs, a Person of singular
Reputation and Fame, and a Christian by Profession. These two Persons are
arrived at this place from Constantinople with design to proceed farther to
your Camp; in case they may be received with the same Honorable, Safe and
Courteous Entertainment, as has by ancient Custom, and laudable Practice been
shown to those of their Character: They have with them about One hundred
Persons belonging to their Retinue, for whom that safe Convoy and Pasports may
be dispatched, I have sent you this Letter, to request such Security for them
as is necessary: When they draw near to your Camp, they will send again to you,
to the end, that a Convoy may come from your Army to meet and receive them from
the Pasha, who is sent with Troops from hence: That so the Respect, and Safety
of Ambassadors observed by all Nations, as is fit and necessary may remain in
it is ancient Luster. For you know how careful both sides ought to be of their
safe Passage. Prosperity to those, who follow the true Direction.

Signed, Osman Pasha of Aleppo.
Given in the Army near Nissa.

The Elector of Bavaria's Answer.

To Osman Pasha of Aleppo. Greeting, etc.
WE have received your Letter from the Camp at Nissa, wherein you give us to
understand, That an Ambassador by name Zulficar Effendi, and the first
Interpreter, have Orders from your Emperor to come to our Army: Now although we
being inclined to Military Actions, might well refuse to receive them here;
which none could take amiss in this present heat of Affairs, or might put off
their Reception until another time, since We judge that their Proposals will
little agree with our present Intentions: Yet being moved by a Christian
Compassion, We do Grant that they may come to the Army: And We will favorably
hear, what your Emperor has Commanded them to propose unto us. To which end We
have Commanded that a Pasport shall be prepared for their Security and
delivered to the Persons, who brought your Letter. We have also given Orders to
the Governor of Semandria, that in the manner directed him, and with a
sufficient number of Troops, he Conduct them safe to our Army. Upon which they
may firmly Rely.

Given at our Camp before Belgrade. August 23d 1688.

In pursance of this Letter, Orders were given to General Caraffa to go to
Titul, and receive the Ambassadors; but in the mean time the Siege proceeded,
and Attacks were made with all the Fury and Vigor imaginable; many Pieces of
the Cannon, which came from Buda, being cast in have, burst one after another;
so that to supply their defect, the Elector sent for most of the Cannon from
Semandria; which being raised, and planted, did great Execution; and throwing
Bombs and Carcasses from Fifteen Mortars at a time, struck Terror into the
Defendants, and set Fire to diverse parts of the Fortress. Howsoever, The Turks
throw Bombs and Carcasses.
the Turks manfully applied themselves to quench the Flames, and returned the
Cannon-shot and Bombs, with other artificial Fires made with Pitch, and Sulfur
upon the Besiegers, in the same manner, as they had practiced in the defense of
Buda. They Sprang also one Mine, which venting about eight or ten Paces
backwards, did no farther mischief, than the killing of one Man; but this being
followed by a Storm of Bombs, one of which falling into a Magazine, where some
Hundreds of Weights of Powder, it blew all into the Air, without other Mischief
than the Death of eight Common Soldiers.

The Turks believing that this Blow, and Springing of the last Mine, had caused
some disorder in the Trenches, made a violent Sally, They make a sally, and are
beaten back.
with their Scemyters in their Hands into the Approaches; but being strongly
opposed by a Captain who Commanded a Hundred Men, reinforced also by some
Parties of Strasser's Regiment, they were repulsed with the loss of Forty of
their Men, eight Imperialists only being killed. The Fury of the Turks being
hereby much abated; Differences, as is usual, arose between the Commanders and
the Soldiers; the first seemed resolved to defend the Fortress to the last
extremity, and last drop of their Blood, knowing that they could not long
outlive any Surrender made upon Composition: But the Soldiers, who could save
their Lives on easier Terms, were desirous to be freed from the Showers of
Fire, which being continually poured upon them, did in the Night resemble the
dreadful Flames of Vesuvius or Mongibello.

The Elector of Bavaria being well assured in the mean time, that the Conquest
of that Castle would shortly be added to the Triumphs of Caesar, The Duke of
Loraine comes to the Camp.
had time, with much quiet of mind, and without any distraction to give a
Magnificent Reception to the Duke of Loraine; who being now in some measure
recovered from his late Sickness, could not absent himself from Martial
Exercises, at least from being a Spectator, or bearing some share in this
Heroic Enterprise.

News being come, that the Duke of Loraine, having left his Royal Consort the
Queen at Buda, was not far distant, the Elector accompanied with the Duke of
Mantoua, and several of the General Officers, went to him at the Foot of the
Bridge, which was made over the Save, and there received him with the joyful
Salutation of all the Cannon which were planted in the Lines of
Circumvallation, Is received by the Elector of Bavaria.
and by the Soldiery drawn up in several Battalions; and having walked over all
the Lines, and observed the disposition of the Siege; all which being well
approved, he was conducted to the Bavarian Tents, where he was sumptuously
treated by the Elector. After which, whilst these Noble Generals were viewing
the approaches, the Turks sprang a second Mine under the main Battery; not far
from the persons of these great Commanders; who being reserved by the
Providence of God to reap more Laurels, remained untouched amidst that danger.
Howsoever the Turks thinking thereby to have gained some great advantage, made
a brisk Sally, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, drawn up in posture of
Battle: The Turks spring another Mine, and make a sally.
The Swedes and Franconians having then that place allotted them to Guard, gave
way upon the first attack of the Enemy, and abandoned their Post, leaving their
Officers to the mercy of the Enemy, who were miserably slaughtered by them.

After which the Turks advancing to the Left, were so warmly received, August.
1688.
that they were repulsed with the loss of many of their Soldiers: Soon after
which these Illustrious Dukes entered the approaches from whence the Turks had
been beaten, and bestowed due Praises on those Soldiers, who so bravely and
valiantly had behaved themselves to the Reproach of those, who cowardly
retreated. After which the Duke of Loraine retired to the Quarters of his own
Regiment of Horse, than which he had at that time no other Command in the Army,
the whole conduct and General direction being entirely in the power of the
Elector of Bavaria.

The Breaches being now made, some wider than others, the 5th of September was
appointed for a day of a General Assault; which being come, Septem. 1688.
the whole Army remained in a readiness to make the onset, and execute the
last Orders of their Generals; An Attack intended.
when unexpectedly a Bomb from the Enemies Works fell amongst certain Barrels
of Powder; which blowing up, over-turned the Works which belonged to Mines then
preparing; and burned in a furious manner all things near it, killing diverse
Soldiers; and amongst the rest was Count Guido of Staremberg, and Count
Berzetti, Chief Director of the Mines. This Fire was followed by such a
terrible Rain, which continued all that day, and part of the Night following,
that it was impossible to execute the intended Attack; but afterward the
Weather clearing up, the Mines were repaired again in such manner, that at
break of day in the Morning, Fire was given to them with so good success, that
the Ditch was filled up, and as it were, levelled as much as was needful.

The Attack was ordered to be made in Four several Quarters, that in the Front
was commanded by the Elector himself: That on the Right Hand by the Prince of
Commercy, on the Left by the Dragoons of General Heusler, and that next the
Water by Pini Sergeant Major of the Regiment of Loraine.

All things being in this manner disposed in order for a general Assault, about
Nine a Clock in the Morning the Signal was given to make the Attack, by Firing
a Piece of Cannon in the Front of the Line of Circumvallation, which was
answered by a Shot to the Right, and soon afterward by Two others to the Left;
which being the Signal to make the Attack, the Assailants entered the Ditch,
where they were receiceived by infinite Vollies of Shot pouring upon them from
all sides; Belgrade Stormed.
which giving no stop to the Bravery and Courage of the Soldiers, they mounted
to the top of the Breach, tho the Earth was become soft and slippery by the
late Rains.

From the height of this Breach, they took a Prospect of greater difficulties
still to overcome; for they were now to descend into another Ditch, which the
Turks had dug at the Foot of the inside of the Wall; and there to wrench up
or beat down the Palisadoes, which were planted on the top of the Ditch; and
this was to be executed in Contempt and Despite of all the Shot, which the
Besieged shower'd from all sides upon them; the which was sufficient to
intimidate and cool the Courage of the most valiant Heroes, Count Scherffemberg
killed.
especially when at the beginning of this danger they saw their Leader Count
Scherffemberg, and soon afterward their Colonel Count Emanuel de Furstemburg,
who entered into his place, both killed before them, as was also Count Henric of
Staremberg: And indeed the German Soldiers beginning a little to give Ground,
were in danger totally to lose all the advantage which they had gained, had not
the Elector himself exposed his own Person to all the Shot of the Enemy; The
Elector stands on the Breach.
and standing upon the Breach with his Sword drawn, threatened the Life of any
one who should dare to retire; and accordingly some were killed for the Terror
of others.

The Soldiers animated by the Example of their General, and touched with a
sense of Honor, descended with new resolution into the Ditch; and being well
seconded by others, they mounted to the Top, where the Palisadoes were Planted.

The Turks terrified with so bold and surprising an Attempt, The Turks
Capitulate.
fled trembling from the face of their Enemies, and crowded into the Castle,
between which and the Town, there was only a single Bridge; where displaying a
White Flag, they demanded to Capitulate for their Lives: But some of the more
desperate Assailants having no regard to Flags, or Colors, or what was acting,
ascended to the Tops of the Houses, and into Windows, and entered in at the
Port-holes made for the Guns, where they made a most horrible Massacre of all
that stood before them, without regard to Age or Sex.

This Success was in a great measure obtained by the other Attack, The P. of
Commercy enters on the other side.
commanded by the Prince of Commercy; who tho wounded in the Shoulder by a
Musquet-Bullet, did yet overcome all difficulties, and enter victoriously
within the Walls.

On that side howsoever, where General Heusler commanded with his Dragoons, the
opposition was not so great; so that laying aside the Ladders which they had
prepared for Scaling the Walls, they went directly to the Gate, G. Heusler
forces a Gate.
and in spite of all their Shot fixed a Petard thereunto, which entirely forced
it from its Bolts and Hinges, and laid all open to the entrance of the
Soldiers; howsoever at some little distance from the first, another Wall
presented it self, well guarded, and defended with Soldiers, who made continual
Vollies upon the Assailants; to which there was an Iron-gate to pass, before
entrance could be made; and that so strong, that it was judged almost
impossible to be overthrown, during the Heat of this Action.

Howsoever the Dragoons of Savoy being encouraged by their Prince, (who but
some days before had been wounded in the Knee) leaped on the Wall, which was
not very high, and desperately threw themselves into the City; by which means
becoming Masters of the Gate, they opened it, and let in a whole Torrent of the
German Forces, who in a short time covered all the Streets with the Bodies of
their Enemies: Howsoever this Action cost the Lives of above One hundred
Dragoons of Savoy, Massacre and Slaughter of the Turks.
with some of their principal Officers, amongst which was the Count of Massel;
and General Heusler had his Thumb struck off with a Musquet-Bullet, which
hindered nothing in prosecution of this Victory.

Many Turks endeavoring to escape the fury of the Soldiers by passing the
River in Boats, fell into the hands of the Germans, who gave them no better
Quarter, than they had done to those who defended the Breach.

All being now subdued, and subjected to Victorious Arms of the Christians, no
place stood out, but only a small Trench behind the Castle, to which the Pasha
or Commander in Chief, with the Aga of the Janisaries, and some Officers had
retired themselves; and with them they took those Slaves which they had
maintained for their Service in the Castle: The Soldiers in their fury, not
being satiated with the Blood they had already spilt, were disposed to bathe
their Swords yet farther in the Bodies of this small remainder of their
Enemies, The Pasha and other Officers made Prisoners.
and were ready to have executed, and wreak their final Rage on the Pasha, and
Officers, when the Clemency of the most Serene Elector, being moved by the
Cries and Tears of the Christian Captives, at their Petitions and Prayers,
spared the Lives of the Turks; being contented to see the Turks bound in the
same Chains which they had newly taken from the Christians: And yet the
horrible Massacre of the Sword did not cease in other parts of the City, all
being filled with Confusion and Cruelty; when on a sudden a terrible Fire broke
out in the lower Town, which burned with so much Violence, that the Conquerors
as well as the Conquered were willing to escape out at the Gates.

The Cruelty of the Soldiers.
It was grievous to see poor Old men made Prisoners, dragged by their Beards,
and Women and Maidens covered with Blood and,

In Fine, the Fire being extinguished, Slaughter ceased, and about Noon the
City and Castle were entirely subdued.

On the 6th of September when His Electoral Highness, and the other Generals
rode Triumphantly into the City, beholding the dead Bodies, which filled the
Streets, the Ruins of the Houses, and the Destruction which the Bombs had made;
And considering these Successes to have proceeded entirely from the Blessing,
and Divine assistance of the God of Hosts; His Electoral Highness on the 7th of
September, Sept. 7. Te Deum sung.
caused Te Deum to be sung in one of the Pleasure-houses belonging to the Grand
Seignior, situate on the Declivity of a Hill, where the Elector thought fit to
take up his Lodgings. And a Capuchin after saying Mass, was ordered by a short
and devout Sermon to move the minds of the Soldiery to return Thanks unto God,
who was the Giver of Victory; and to implore the Divine Benediction on the
farther progress of their Arms. After which, all the Cannon of the Fortress,
and of the Camp were Fired Three times, with loud Vive's resounding the Fame of
Leopold, and Maximilian Emanuel.

The day following the Elector invited all the Generals, and Chief Officers of
the Army to a sumptuous Banquet, at which also the Turkish Ambassadors happened
to be present; for whom, and his Retinue, (as we mentioned before) the Pasha of
Aleppo had desired a Pass.

When this Ambassador approached near the Camp, he was strangely surprised to
hear all things so quiet, The Turkish Ambassador comes to the Camp.
no Noise of Guns or other Instruments of War; but coming yet nearer, his Eyes
convinced him (when he saw the Imperial Eagles advanced on the Walls) that the
Town was taken.

News being brought to the Elector, that the Ambassador was come, he was
conducted with his Interpreter Mauro-cordato, and his Followers on Horseback
into the Courtyard, of the House where the Elector was lodged; and there being
alighted, he was conducted up Stairs by Two Gentlemen, to the Chamber where the
Elector was seated, with whom at his first Entrance, he passed some Complements
of Thanks, for the Passport and Convoy which he had so obligingly bestowed upon
him.

After which he was led into a large Hall, Is Feasted with the Generals.
where a sumptuous Table was spread. The Elector took the Upper-end, at his
Right Hand was placed the Duke of Mantoua, on his Left the Ottoman Ambassador;
and by his side the Interpreter was seated.

By the Duke were placed the Generals Caprara, Dunewalt, Heusler, Rabattin;
Prince Charles, Philip of Hannover, the Vice-Commissary Falchenhan, Count of
Oetting, Sauran, Stirum, Gronsfelt, Montecucoli, Palfi, and Sereni; which
filled and crowned the Table with cheerful Countenances, whilst the Ambassador
drooping in his Spirits, could not hide and suppress his Sorrow from appearing
in his looks: The jollity of these Victorious Officers, was a Poniard to his
Heart, which very ill agreed with so much Festivity and Mirth of his Enemies;
and of the principal Officers, who in very rich Habits encircled the Table.
Howsoever being constrained to say something, which might not betray his
dejection of mind; casting his Eyes round upon the Company, he said to the
Elector, That he was astonished at the appearance of so many handsome and
accomplished Personages: But one thing he observed, That the Emperor of the
Romans was served by Young Generals; at which he could not much wonder; for
when he considered, how they daily exposed themselves to the most desperate
dangers, there seemed an impossibility almost for them to survive till old Age:
Thus far it had been well, if he had stopped at this period of Complement.

But pursuing his Discourse farther, he told them, that the Year before he had
been at the Battle of Hatschan. To which the Elector Replied, That certainly he
must have had a good Horse, meaning to escape and run away; which caused some
Laughter.

During the time of Dinner, the Trumpets, Haut-boys, and other Instruments were
sounded; and Healths drank round in full Cups of Wine; to the Emperor; to the
continuance of prosperous Successes to his Arms; and the Third to the Health of
the Ottoman Emperor; To all which the Ambassador did reason in Sherbet of
Lemmons Wine, being both against his Religion and his Custom to Drink. The
Fourth Health was to the Elector; the Fifth to the Duke of Mantoua; the Sixth
to the Ambassador, and then to all brave Soldiers; and after many other
Glasses, they concluded all with a Health to a Good Peace, or a Glorious War,
with which, breaking their Glasses, the Feast ended with the Day.

The taking of the Town, and City of Belgrade, was of a most fatal Importance
to the Turks; for thereby the Way was laid opened to Adrianople, and
Constantinople, no Garrisons lay between them and Belgrade, nor Forces to
oppose the March of the Imperial Arms; unless Scarcity and want of Provisions
through a desolate Country, in many places full of Rocks and Mountains, to be
passed, should bring more difficulty to the progress of a Victorious Army, than
the Troops of their Enemies.

Nor did this Campaigne end as yet with the Conquest of Belgrade, being
seconded by others of equal advantage in Bosnia, under the auspicious Conduct
of that Renowned and Fortunate General, Topal signify Lume.
Prince Lewis of Baden, whom we left lately at Possega, with design to attack
Topal, Pasha of Bosnia, who had Encamped himself under Tervat or Terwent, near
the River of Ucraine, about Five Miles distant from Proot, which Prince Lewis
had fortified, to facilitate his passage more easily into Bosnia, and to secure
the Communication between the Neighboring Forts: And there also passed a
Bridge over the Save; which being finished, 1688. Septem.
on the Third of September, he caused his Baggage to pass over, and the next
day followed with his whole Army, in hopes to have drawn the Pasha from his
Encampment; of whose Number the Prince had no very good Account; P. Lewis
passes the Save.
but being reported to be much less than they were, the Prince marched the
Fourth Instant in the Evening silently, and without Noise to assault the Enemy
in the Camp; and having passed that Night through many strait and difficult
Ways, they arrived next Morning by break of day within sight of the advanced
Guards of the Enemy, who gave the first Alarm; upon which the Pashas was the
first to Mount on Horseback, and immediately drew forth his Troops, placing
them in order of Battle; the Horse into Two Wings, and the Foot in the middle.
The Turks assault the Germans.
The Force conducted by Prince Lewis, was no stronger in all than Three
thousand Horse, and Three hundred Croats; but the Turks by several Recruits
which had lately joined them, were in all Fifteen thousand Fighting-men; by
which inequality of Numbers, the Turks judging themselves secure of Victory,
furiously attacked the Prince, who had also divided his Squadrons of Horse into
Two Wings, the Right Commanded by Piccolomini, and the Left by Count Castelli,
both Generals of Battalia.

The Turks at first falling in with all their power, and Numbers on the
Left-wing, were Three times bravely repulsed by Castelli; when Piccolamini
coming in to their Assistance, the Fight became so hot and fierce, that the
Christians and the Turks remained for half an Hour so mixed together, that
having not time to Re-Charge their Firearms, they fought only at handy blows,
opening the way with their Swords.

At length the Turks being overcome by the unparalled Valor of the
Imperialists, the Turkish Horse began to retire, The Turkish Horse put to
Flight, And the Foot exposed to danger.
leaving their Infantry naked, and exposed to the Fury of the Enemy, of whom
the greatest Slaughter was made, that ever was known, between Two such small
Bodies.

And indeed, Reflection being made on the Numbers of the Imperialists, it will
appear a Miracle that Three thousand three hundred men should defeat Fifteen
thousand, killing Five thousand on the place, amongst which was the General
Topal Pasha, Two Agas, and the Kahya to the Pasha: The Foot made a brave
defense for some time; but at length were dispersed: About Two hundred of them
were drowned in the River, and lost in the Bogs, and such as escaped the Sword,
submitted to Quarter. The Imperialists had the advantage to be covered by the
side of a Hill, when the Enemy attacked them.

In this great Action the Imperialists lost not more than One hundred and fifty
men, amongst which was Captain Maraville, and Two Lieutenants; the Prince
August of Hannover was slightly Wounded in the Hand by a Lance, and the Count
de Cronsfelt, Sergeant-Major of the Regiment of Holstein in the Neck.

Prince August was Colonel of a Regiment of Curassiers, and conducted a
Detachment of Two thousand men, with which he was commanded to march from
Peter-Waradin, and join with Prince Lewis of Baden; the which he performed, and
behaved himself with incomparable Valor, which is natural to that Illustrious
Family.

P. Lewis returns to Proot.
In this manner Prince Lewis Exalted with Glory, and laden with Spoils, returned
with many Standards and Colors taken from the Enemy, to his former Camp at
Proot; where Dedicating the Day following to the Repose and Refreshment of his
Soldiery, he returned Thanks to the God of Hosts, for so signal a Victory,
which happened to fall out on the very same day, that the Elector of Bavaria
sang the Te Deum at Belgrade for the Conquest and Subjection of that place.

News sent to Vienna.
These Two great and signal Actions being performed so near to each other in
time, filled all Vienna and Christendom, (France only excepted) with
extraordinary Joy and Triumph.

Prince Charles of Vaudemont was chosen by the Elector to be the joyful
Messenger of this Glorious Action of taking Belgrade, Schlick, dispatched by
the Prince of Baden, with Advice of that wonderful Victory obtained over Topal
the Pasha of Bosnia.

The French K. obstructs the Wars against the Turks.
In this glorious manner did the Campaigne end in Hungary, which might have been
farther improved, and a progress made by the Imperial Arms to the utmost extent
of those Dominions which the Turks possess in Europe, had not the most
Christian King, being displeased at the prosperous Course of the Imperial Arms
against the Turk, thought it time to make a diversion by waging War upon
Germany.

And indeed it had been no wonder to have seen the Imperial Eagles, as a
consequence of the present Consternation, Erected on the Walls of
Constantinople, and the Turks driven over the Bosphorus to possess their more
Ancient possessions in Asia, had not the Menaces of the French King recalled
the Elector of Bavaria from his intended Enterprise, which was very probable
and likely to have succeeded: The Rascians in Arms against the Turks.
For the Rascians were got into a Body of Eight thousand men between Semandria
and Nissa, being, besides their old Feuds, lately exasperated by the burning of
their Houses, and destroying of their Fields by Yeghen Pasha, which he did to
hinder the Imperialists from following him in his late Flight from Belgrade: In
revenge of which, they desired the Germans to furnish them with experienced
Commanders, to direct and discipline them; not questioning but to become
Masters of all that Country, and to possess Sophia it self; promising also to
bring the Bulgarians and Greeks into the Interest of the Emperor.

But the Elector of Bavaria, as we have said, being obliged to return, The
Elector of Bavaria returns to Vienna.
he arrived at Vienna the 18th day of September, and Three days afterward was
followed by the Duke of Loraine, who by reason of his late indisposition, could
not move so vigorously as the Elector.

The arrival of the Elector at Vienna, happened on the Day of Thanksgiving for
the late Successes; A Solemn Day of Thanksgiving.
where nothing was omitted to render that Day solemn and full of Joy and
Triumph. The Procession came forth from the Royal Church of the Augustines
discalced, and proceeded to the Cathedral of St. Stephen's, being followed by
all the Clergy, Gentry, Nobility, and Ministers of the Court; and last of all
with Exemplary Devotion and Piety, came the Young King of Hungary, and their
Imperial Majesty's, attended with the Queen of Poland, and the Electress of
Bavaria.

This most August Train being entered the Church, an Eloquent Sermon was
Preached before them, agreeable to the present occasion; after which, Te Deum
was Sung, and Mass Celebrated by the Bishop of Vienna, with the Harmony of the
most exquisite Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, that Human Art could arrive
unto. All which Jubilee and Triumph was much augmented by the appearance of his
Electoral Highness, whom the Fatigues and weariness of his Journey could not
hinder from bearing part in the Festival of this day; and indeed the People
beheld him with such Admiration, that their Eyes had scarce time to fix on any
other Object than his person, who had achieved Two such memorable Actions that
Year; namely, in passing the Save, and subduing Belgrade, as may compare with
the most memorable and Heroic Acts of Alexander, or the Caesar's.

Whilst these Triumphs were celebrating in Austria, and over all Germany, and
Messengers dispatched to all Courts of Christendom to carry the happy News of
so many Victories, the Ottoman Dominions lay disconsolate and low, and exposed
to the Incursions of their Enemies, had the Imperialists been inclined to push
forward their Victories, even to the Walls of Constantinople.

But the Councils of France judging it necessary to support the Turk, resolved
to break into Germany; which was accordingly performed, The French obstructs
the War against the Turk.
and such a diversion made thereby, as protracted the War for several Years
afterward: Wherefore tho it be my purpose only to relate the Wars between the
Emperor, and the Turks, carried on in the famous Kingdom of Hungary; yet
considering that by the French Machinations and Contrivances a stop was put to
the free Course of the Imperial Arms, it may not be from our purpose to make a
small digression; and describe the Original of that War, which afterward
involved all Christendom to the great Advantage and Conservation of the Turks.

We must therefore understand, that King Lewis the 14th had, on Account of
Madam d' Orleans, and a pretended Title arising from her, swallowed in his mind
a right to the whole Palatinate; and nourished for a long time a hatred to that
most August Family, watching all Opportunities to seize on those Lands and
Cities, which he thought were unjustly detained from him: Howsoever his Enmity
burst not into open Violence, so long as the Cardinal of Furstemburg was joined
in a Coadjutorial power with the Elector of Cologne.

But that Bishop being dead, and Fustemburg disappointed of his Election by the
Choice of Prince Joseph Clement of Bavaria; the King passing the bounds of all
moderation, breaks with the Emperor, and writes this following Letter to the
Pope.

Most Holy Father,
WE have resolved to Write with our own Hand unto your Holiness, desiring you
to do justice to Cardinal de Fustemburg, who has been chosen Archbishop and
Elector of Cologne, on the 19th Current of this Month of September, by such
plurality of Voices, that this Cardinal does not doubt, but to obtain the
Approbation and Confirmation of your Holiness in this Election, which has been
performed according to the strict Rules of the Cannon; especially since amongst
all those who stood Candidates for this sublime Office, none is or can be so
capable to govern, and worthy the Dignity of an Archbishop, as this Cardinal.

What therefore I desire of your Holiness is but a mere Act of Justice: But
since we could never as yet obtain the least point of favor from you; we find
our selves obliged to lay before your Holiness, that in case your denial of
Constituting the Cardinal of Fustemburg Elector by your Bull, should be the
Cause and Original of a War, which cannot be other than bloody and miserable;
we protest before God that your Holiness is liable to answer for all those
wretched and fatal Accidents which shall trouble and disquiet the repose of
Christendom, which you, as the common Father, are obliged to prevent.

And lest it should be Objected, That the Bishopric of Argentina (with which
the Cardinal of Furstemburg is invited) is incompatible with the Archbishopric
of Cologne; We declare, That the said Cardinal shall readily quit that See; for
which we Present one of the most considerable Subjects of our Kingdom, who is
the Bishop of Metz, against whom your Holiness can have no Objection,
considering that your Holiness once gave him the Character of being the Scourge
of the Heretics. Which being the only Occasion and Sum of this Letter, we
crave, Holy Father, the Apostolical Benediction.

Given at Versailes September 22. 1688. Subscribed Lewis King of France, the
Eldest Son of the Church.


This Letter being delivered to Pope Innocent 11th by Cardinal de' Estrees,
received not the Answer which the King expected; for this Pope being a person
of Courage, just and severe in Observance of the Canonical Cannons and
Constitutions, would not be induced out of fear or dread of those Menaces
pronounced in the Letter, to disannul or make void the Lawful Election of
Prince Joseph Clement of Bavaria, to the Archbishopric and Electorate of
Cologne. Whereupon the King being highly displeased, made a solemn Protest
against the Validity of that Election; with which he dispatched Messengers and
Curriers with a thousand Menaces into all parts of Germany, as also into
Holland; enjoining them not to intermeddle, or concern themselves in the
Electorate of Cologne, declaring that he was resolved to vindicate the cause of
the Cardinal of Furstemburg by force of Arms; and at the same time commanded
his Troops to march into the Eccleasiastical State near Avignon, and into
Germany; upon which Philipsburg was attacked and taken: Some Manifestos, were
likewise published at the Diet at Ratisbon, and other places, declaring, That
the King did not design to act any thing against the Truce made at Nimeguen,
but rather intended to Convert it into a perpetual Peace, in case the Cardinal
of Fustemburg might be established in the Electorate: Offering also to demolish
Philipsburg, and restore it to the Bishopric of Spire; and Freibourg to the
Emperor, it being first demolished. But then as to the pretensions of Madam d'
Orleans, relating to her Demands upon the Palatinate, the same should be
amicably debated; which not being agreed, in the space of one year, they should
then be referred to the impartial Mediation of the King of England, Venice.

But no sooner was this Declaration published, than the French by Force of Arms
made themselves Masters of several Cities, seizing, and fortifying Castles,
miserably burning and destroying the Palatinate; The Cruelty of the French in
Germany.
and exacting Contributions in Suevia, Franconia, and other places upon pain of
military Execution, raging over all those Countries with such barbarous
Inhumanity, as if men had laid aside all sense of Bowels, or Compassion to each
other, waging War in a manner unknown to Tartars, Scythians, or other more
salvage People of former Ages.

This surprising Irruption of the French into Germany being carried by an
Express to his Electoral Highness at Belgrade gave (as we have said) a stop to
the progress of his Victorious Arms against the Turk; so that having committed
the Command of the Imperial Forces to the auspicious Conduct and Care of
General Caprara; he returned with all Expedition to Vienna, commanding his own
Forces to follow him.

At Vienna having passed some few days and diverted himself with his most
Serene Consort, at the Imperial Court of his most August Father in Law, he
hasted with all expedition to Monaco, the place of his Electoral Residence;
there to take such Measures as might secure his Brother in the Electorate of
Cologne, The Elector returns to Monaco.
to which he had been fairly chosen, and confirmed therein, by the concurrence
of Pope Innocent the Eleventh: And likewise guard his own Countries from the
Incursions of the French, who now like a Torrent carried all before them,
burning and laying all places desolate, even to the very Borders of the
Bavarian Dominions.

Thus were the Ottoman Dominions in Europe rescued from the fatal Blow of an
entire Conquest: Bavarian Troops recalled; but the French pressing hard upon
the Upper- Germany, The German Troops recalled from Hungary.
the Emperor was forced to give License to the Militia of the Circles to return
home, and to remand back from Hungary some of his own Regiments, for security
of the Empire, and of the Electors, and other Princes; who now judged it time
to unite themselves against the common Enemy; which though once esteemed to be
the Turk only, yet now the French being become more formidable, more cruel, and
bloody, than the Turks themselves, when they came first from Scythia, it became
the common Interest of all Germany to unite in a Body in opposition to the
dreadful power of their mighty Foe. So the Elector of Saxony joining with the
Princes of Lunenburg, Brunswick, Hanover, and Hesse-cassel, they vigorously
made Head, resolving to oppose all the Attempts, which the French made upon the
Empire.

In this manner the Turks being relieved from imminent destruction, by a stop
given to the Current of the Christian Arms, they had time to take some breath,
and respite, and recover themselves a little, as will appear in the course of
the following Year.

The Pasha of Belgrade taken Prisoner, as we have said, was carried to Vienna,
where he was treated with Respect, and permitted the liberty of the City, The
Pasha of Belgrade Prisoner.
under the care of Cavagre Marc Anto the Empeperor's principal Interpreter,
because he was a man of Years, a great Soldier, and one chosen for his Valor
and Bravery for the defense of Belgrade, Belgrade, which he had maintained to
the last extremity.

The Government of the City of Belgrade being (as we have said) committed to
the Care and Command of Marshall Caprara; Caprara commands at Belgrade.
His first Employment was to purge and cleanse the City of the noisome and
fetulent smell of Dead Corpse, which lay scattered in the Streets, under the
Walls, and upon the Breaches; the same were laden upon Wagons, to the Number
of about Eight thousand, and thrown into the Current of the Danube; which being
carried down the Stream, found their Graves, or Resting-places, where the Winds
and Torrent carried them.

The Garrison appointed for Defense of the Town consisted of Four thousand
Foot, and a Regiment of Horse, under the Command of Count Guido de Staremberg;
the rest of the Militia being drawn out into Quarters near Peter-Waradin, some
care was taken to repair the Breaches by the Art and Industry of the Ingenier
Andrea Cornaro; howsoever there was so much neglect in the progress of this
work, as tended to the advantage of the Turks, who Two Years afterward retook
the Town again to the disreputation, as well as to the loss of the Christian
Arms.

But whilst the Ingenier was at work to repair the Breaches, The Works about
Belgrade negligently repaired.
on a sudden a Fire burst forth in the House, or Palace, called the Grand
Seignior's Favorite, which consumed it entirely to Ashes, no man knowing how,
nor by what means those Flames were kindled.

After so many happy Successes, Labors, and Travels of the Soldiery, it might
now be judged time to put an end to this glorious Campaigne, Caprara seizes on
Semandria.
and refresh the Soldiery already wearied with Toils and Dangers.

But General Caprara willing to make use of the Air of Fortune, resolved to
visit the City of Semandria, which, as he was informed, was abandoned by the
Turks: Being come thither, he was carried with a desire to proceed yet farther
into the Conquered Countries, and advanced as far as Posskarovert, an open Town
consisting of about Three hundred Houses, which the Turks also had abandoned,
leaving all their Chans, or public Inns filled with Victuals, and Provisions
of all sorts for a Booty to their Enemies.

These fortunate Successes induced the Rascians to submit unto the Emperor; The
Rascians submit to the Emperor.
so that the Inhabitants of Semandria, having for their Leader Paul Diach, were
the first to pay Homage unto his Caesarean Majesty; and in process of time
performed great Services against the Turk.

These being animated by General Caprara increased speedily into a Body of Two
thousand men, who surprised a place called VVaolva on the River Drine, and
another Town on the same River called Zolkolova, where engaging with a Body of
the Turks, they killed a Thousand of them on the place, and put the rest to
Flight, of which very few of them had the fortune to escape with their Lives.
They take two places and defeat the Turks.
But because the Turks made great Spoils and Devastations on the Banks of the
River Morava, carrying away many Greeks as well as Rascians into Slavery,
General Caprara sent Orders to Heusler to hasten to their help with Five
Regiments of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, Heusler being arrived on the River
Morava; where hearing of the Exploits which the Rascians had performed, and how
that they had taken Three other Castles upon that River about Twenty Leagues
distant from Belgrade; he passed the River and Lodged at Pazziarovitz, an open
place, well situated, and easily defended, being guarded in the Front by the
Three Castles, and in the Rear by Semandria.

All things meeting the desired Success, Count Caprara returned to Belgrade,
from whence he reinforced Heusler with Fifteen hundred Foot to give a stop to
the Incursions of the Turks, Caprara returns to Belgrade.
who with a Body of Twelve thousand Men ranged all along the River Morava; but
consisting for the most part of a sort of Rabble, rather than formed Troops,
they were soon dispersed, and came to nothing, Disbanding or Deserting of
themselves: Or at least served only for Plunder and Spoil, rather than to
oppose or make a Stand against a formidable Enemy; and in this manner they made
Slaves of their own Christian Subjects, and destroyed their Country, until such
time as that some Parties of them moved with indignation for the unjust
outrages which the Turks used against them, took up Arms, and seized the City
of Ussiza, a place though open, yet rich; killing Five hundred Turks on the
place, and taking Two thousand Prisoners.

This Town was considered as a very important Pass and Inlet into Bosnia; but
because the Ways were so narrow and rocky, that Cannon could not be drawn
thither, it was judged fit not to put a Garrison of Germans into it; but rather
to commit it to the Custody and Defense of the Rascians.

These ill Successes falling in this manner one on the Neck of another, so
dispirited the Turks, that the only way left them to quiet the minds both of
the Soldiers and People, was to possess them with the hopes of Peace by the
Negotiation of those Ambassadors which were lately dispatched from the Sultan
to the Emperor, who were now arrived at the Castle of Puffendorf, about Five
Leagues distant from Vienna, where they were ordered to remain, until the
Plenipotentiaries from Poland and Venice should meet at Vienna, furnished with
Commissions and Instructions from their respective Powers in order to a Treaty.

And that this pretense might appear more plausible, the Grand Seignior passed
to Adrianople; from whence he dispatched very urgent and positive Orders to
Yeghen Pasha, that he should forward an Express to the Ambassadors, to press
with all earnestness the Conclusion of a Peace, as the sole means remaining to
save the Ottoman Empire; which in case he could not effect, he was then to take
care that the Frontiers might be defended.

Yeghen taking this Message and Commission as an Evidence of the Grand
Seignior's Favor, and Re-establishment into his Grace, he readily applied
himself to an undertaking, Yeghen Pasha commits great Spoils.
which in appearance might look like Obedience to Command; and though he knew it
was not possible to withstand the Power and Progress of the Imperial Arms,
animated with so many Victories; yet considering himself strong enough to do
mischief, and spoil, and pillage, he marched from Nissa toward Dobravitz,
where he committed all the Outrages imaginable on the miserable Inhabitants of
that place; giving liberty to a licentious Soldiery to destroy an Ancient
Monastery of Greeks, to which many poor Christians being fled for Sanctuary,
they stained the Pavements with the Blood of a thousand persons; carrying away
the Old Monks, Women, and Children into distressed Captivity.

Tekeli also being reinforced with a party of Turks, and Tartars, committed
great Spoils on the Confines of Valachia, and Transylvania; but soon was forced
to retire, upon the News that the Rascians with a Body of Four thousand men
were marching against them: And thus laying aside much of his confidence in
Arms, he resolved to try what effect his persuasions might have with his
Transilvanian Friends, and those of his Faction, inviting them to cast off the
Yoke of Germany from their Necks, and reassume their Ancient Liberties; and to
that end he wrote this following Letter.

Ad Capitaneos, Directores, and Magistratus Inclyti Regni Transilvaniae.
Omnia bona det Deus Regno Transilvaniae, vigile Ingenium and oculos Incolis
ejus opto. Nolim Ingratitudinem vestram qua Caesaream amplexi fuistis
protectionem respicere; imo potius certiores vos facere, and commune facere
velim vehementer volens Regnum Transilvaniae, in tantis afflictionibus, and
exactionibus versari. Non dubito quin satis perspexeritis, hucusque iniquas
Germanorum Machinationes. Volunt se in regnum intrudere, ut vos ex regno
expellant: Vos peribitis, illi manebunt; Pellite itaque and corrigite
ceaecitatem vestram: Ad Arma currite omnes Nobiles, Libertini and Subditi; pro
felici Patria certate, certe vos libertatem consecuturos, quam turpiter
perdidistis ad Comam usque: Nisi omnes audacter insurrexeritis, peribitis vos,
and filii vestri, and Nobilissimum Regnum in manibus barbarorum manebit.
Valete, et vigiliate vobis, and Patriae vestrae. Datas trans Danubium proxime
ad Transalpinas.


And to leave no Stone unturned, he solicited the Ottoman Port for new
Succors, promising mighty Successes in case the Tartars would invade
Transylvania; the which accordingly was designed, and had taken effect, had not
the Cosacks made an unexpected Irruption into Tartary, and thereby obliged
those Barbarians to quit their design, that they might attend to the safeguard
of their own Country.

All places in Bosnia being now subdued, and brought under the power of the
Emperor ( Bertzka only excepted) situate on the Save; Prince Lewis after he had
fortified Proot, and Gradisca, marched against it, being a place of such
importance as secured all the River from thence to Belgrade: The Turks having
advice of the approach of Prince Lewis, with Terror and terrible Consternation
abandoned that vast City, pleasant for its Situation in a delicious Country,
abounding with all sorts of Provisions and Fruits, both for the sustenance and
delight of the Inhabitants; into this Commodious Dwelling made void by the
flight of the Turks, a Garrison of Two thousand Germans was lodged; which
served them for Winter Quarters, wherein to refresh themselves after all the
fatigues, dangers, and tedious Marches of the passed Campaigne; and to secure
this City so plentiful of all sorts of Provisions, a regular Fortification was
Erected on the rising of a Hill, which served to cover, and very much to
strengthen the City. Now in regard Advices were brought to Bertzka, that the
Pasha of Bosnia was making Levies of men, and recruiting his Forces in the
Neighboring parts; Piccolomini dispatched to Vienna.
General Piccolomini was dispatched to Vienna, to render an Account of the
State of that Country, and to press for Forces immediately to be dispeeded for
security thereof; it being a Province inhabited by many Christians, who with
encouragement and protection would be ready to submit and do Homage to the
Emperor.

Piccolomini so well Negotiated his Affairs at Vienna, that he soon procured
Orders directed to the General at Belgrade to reinforce Prince Lewis with a
considerable Body of men.

But because the French were now in motion, P. Lewis recalled to Vienna.
and had already entered Germany with a formidable Army; to oppose which, there
was need of the Counsel and Direction of the best and most Experienced
Captains, who had lately with such auspicious Fortune conducted the Imperial
Forces against the Turks; it was resolved to recall Prince Lewis of Baden to
Vienna; Bosnia to the Courage and Conduct of Piccolomini.

So soon as Piccolomini was returned to Gradisca, Prince Lewis took Post for
Vienna, having some few days before his departure, taken possession of Oliva,
and Sbornich, or Swornich, a City and Castle of considerable importance; of the
latter of which, the Charge was committed to Major Thomas Stracharta, a Scotch
Gentleman, who bravely maintained it against Two Assaults of the Turks: These
places were situate on the River Drine.

After which this Valiant Prince departed, leaving most manifest Evidences and
Proofs behind him of his Courage assisted with Fortune; for that in the space
of about Nine Weeks, he had subdued all the Province of Bosnia, defeated the
Pasha with double Numbers, taken Proot, Gradisca, Bertzka, and diverse Castles,
with no more than Eight thousand Germans, Hungarians, and Croatians.

Though it was now time to end this Campaigne, yet still the Blocades of Sigeth,
Canisa, and Grand-Waradin were continued; the Defendants, though reduced very
low, remained howsoever very obstinate and resolute to maintain the Garrisons
to the last extremity, in hopes rather that their Ambassadors would succeed in
the Conclusion of a Peace, The Turks desire Peace.
than in any apparent probability there was of rescuing themselves by their own
force, or other expected Succors. And indeed the Turks might then on very good
Grounds have hoped for a peace, since that they readily offered to have quitted
all pretensions to the Conquered places, and suffered the Emperor to remain in
quiet possession of all whereof he had made himself Master; which had been a
vast advantage to the Empire at that time, when the French were entered into
Germany with a formidable Army, burning, laying waste, and destroying all the
Palatinate; threatening War on the Empire, which continued for several Years
with such fury, that had not King William of England, joined with Spain,
Holland, and some of the Princes of Germany opposed this terrible Foe, The
Emperor unhappily refuses it.
all the Empire and other Countries had sunk under the weight of the Arms of
France. But God knows by what Fate the Emperor refused to hearken to those fair
Propositions of Peace; which that they might not be urged or pressed on his
Counselors, the Turkish Ambassadors were committed Prisoners to the Castle of
Puffendorf, where they passed some Years under a tedious restraint and loss of
Liberty, The Turkish Ambassadors in Prison.
contrary to the Law of Nations: And though the Turks may be much blamed for this
kind of Violation of the Law of Nations, and disrespect to the persons of
Ambassadors, which in all Countries have been esteemed sacred, yet it is a new
thing to be so practiced by Christian Princes, especially by the Austrian
Family, which is Renowned over all the World for their Piety, Justice, and
Clemency. As there was at that time no Reason or Sense for not closing with the
Turks in a Peace, so afterward the Folly and Misfortune was so apparent, that
the Court of Vienna has often lamented the unhappy Consequences of that evil
Counsel, which the Ministers of State to throw off from themselves have cast on
the prevailing Faction of the Jesuits, and Clergy, which have ever carried a
great sway in that Counsel.

And thus having by God's Assistance finished the Wars in Hungary by a full and
ample Relation of all that passed in that miserable Country during the Course
of the last Year of 1688. Let us now proceed to the Martial Actions, which
passed in the same Year between the Venetians and the Turks.

THE Venetian Successes In Their WAR against the TURKS, In the Year 1688.
Venice Dying about the End of the last Year, the Senate knew not any Subject
on whom they could more worthily confer that Dignity, than on the
Captain General Francisco Morosini, a Person not only of an ancient Patritian
Family, but one who had signalized himself both in Peace and War, and
Sacrificed all his Time and Interest to the Service of the Republic.

Had he not merited more than by his great Achievements in this present War,
the Ducal Dignity could not have been bestowed on any more deserving than
himself, of which the Senate was so sensible; that though it was a new thing to
Elect a Doge who was absent, F. Morosini Elected Doge.
which some, envious of his Virtues, and growing Greatness, did object; yet the
Majority of Voices carried the Election, and accordingly the Ducal Bonnet was,
by order, sent to Morosini, by the Secretary Zuccato, who found his Serenity
aboard the Admiral Gally in Porto Poro, a Port in the Morea; where he offered
in the Name of the Senate, expressed in a most Eloquent Oration, the Ensigns of
the Principality; all the other Ceremonies being solemnly performed at Venice.

Before this Happy Inauguration, the Pestilence had greatly infested the
Venetian Armata; but by God's Blessing, it was now ceased, and Prattick given
at Venice to those who came from thence; for which the Doge having returned
Thanks in a devout manner to Almighty God, aboard the Fleet, he began to
entertain thoughts of undertaking some Enterprise worthy his new Dignity, and
which might serve for a Fortunate Omen of what was to succeed in all the
Progress of his Auspicious Government, which at the beginning looked fair, and
prosperous in all the Circumstances thereof.

For from Candia Advices were brought to the Armata, of great Revolutions, and
Mutinies in Candia, which ended with the Death and Destruction of that Vizier,
and the principal Pasha's and Bey's of that place: Troubles amongst the Turks
in Candia.
In Canea the Disorders were not less, the Soldiery following the Example of
those Seditions, and Tragedies acted at Constantinople, would govern
themselves; and whilst they knew not what Government to set up, there was a
Rumor amongst them amidst their Confusion, That they would deliver up those
Places into the Hands of the Venetians; but their Army being at some distance,
and not near enough to meet the heat of this Popular Insurrection, these Hopes
vanished, the Turks returning to more sober, and cooler Counsels.

The Captain Pasha was now ready to come forth with the Ottoman Fleet, which
consisted of so few Galleys, as were in no condition to deal with the Naval
Forces of the Venetians, The Turkish Fle t very weak.
and yet were of some use for Transporting Soldiers and Relief to Negropont, or
other Parts, according to the Motion of the Enemy.

But the Venetian Armata increased daily by the Union of several Convoys
dis-speeded to join with the main Body under Command of the Doge.

The first Convoy was composed of several Ships, Marsilians, and light Galleys,
under the Command of his Excellency Pisani, with whom also two Noble Venetians
called Lorenzo Donato, and Girolamo Grimani, were Embarked, The Venetian A mata
joined.
appointed by the Senate to assist as Counselors unto his Serene Highness the
Doge; whom four other Noble Venetians accompanied to supply Places, and Offices
of Trust, as occasions should offer.

On another Convoy the first Regiment of Wirtemberg, and the Prince himself,
who Commanded them, was Embarked with several Nobles, and Gentlemen of that
Nation, all of them Brave and Experienced Soldiers, attended with many Ships,
and Vessels laden with Ammunition, Provisions, and all sorts of Instruments and
Utensils for War. And with them also were dispatched the Syndicks and Officers
for better government of the Morea.

A third Convoy was also prepared, and dispatched with the Second Regiment of
Wirtemberg, under the Command and Conduct of the Prince Landgrave of Armstadt,
and whilst these Forces were on their Voyage toward Porto Poro, there to join
with the main Body of the Venetian Fleet, in order to some great Enterprise,
his Excellency Cornaro Proveditor-General in Dalmatia, Cornaro in Dalmatia.
was giving all the Assistance he was able, to the Christians of that Country;
who upon the Rumor of the Misfortunes of the Turks, had taken Arms to recover
their Freedom.

The Commander in Chief of the Turks in those Countries, was called Solomon
Pasha, who by ill Successes having lately been droven into the Castle of
Podgorizza, which he had plentifully provided with all sorts of Provisions and
Ammunition, he gathered unto him all the Soldiers that were in Scutari, Solomon
Pasha troubles the Christians
Antivari, Dolcigno, Alessio, Drino, Croia, Durazzo, Ofrida, and Terra Nova;
with which, and with the Auxiliaries of 4000 Turks joined thereunto by Verlaz
Pasha Sangiack of Valona, he had formed an Army of 10000 Fighting Men, with
which he resolved according to Commands received from the Port, to destroy the
Cutzi, Montegrini, and Nixichi, Inhabitants of the Mountains, who having cast
off the Mohammedan Yoke, had devoted themselves to the Venetian Republic.

At the first beginning Solomon Pasha sent kind Messages to them, Exhorting,
and Inviting them to return to their former Obedience; but they trusting to
their strong Holds in the Mountains, and to the Assurances given by the
Proveditor-General Cornaro, to relieve and succor them on all Occasions, they
rejected all the fair Words and Propositions made to them by the Turks.

Whereupon Solomon Pasha Detached about 3000 Men under the Command of Ahmethis
Kaja, or Deputy, to fall upon their Rear in the Mountains; His Kaja beaten by
the Cutzi.
but the Cutzi so bravely received their Attack, and with such Constancy, that
after a Bloody Fight, which continued for several Hours, the Kaja was totally
Routed, and Defeated, and forced to betake himself to a shameful Flight: Whilst
on the other side Solomon Pasha Burned some Villages, and cut up the Vines, and
ruined the Vineyards of the Cutzi; who thereupon were so highly Enraged, that
pursuing their late Victory with Courage and Indignation, they fell upon the
Pasha, and forced him to take Refuge in his Castle of Podgorizza.

The News hereof being brought to the Proveditor-General, he dis-speeded Orders
to the Cavalier John Antonio Polizza, that with the Borderers on the Channel of
Cattaro, and to the Super-Intendent Perini, that with a Battalion of Italians,
and 600 of those called Oltramarini, who are Albaneses, and other People living
on the Coasts of Friuli and Dalmatia; Succors sent to the Cutzi.
they should march to the Succor and Assistance of the Cutzi: And in the mean
time to give the Turks an Alarm in diverse Places, some Galleys and Galeasses
were commanded to pass along the Coast of Albania, under the Conduct of that
Noble Venetian called Francisco Grimani, Nephew to Cornaro: This Appearance on
the Coast, sometimes at St. John de Medua, then again near Dolcigno, and soon
afterward on the Shore of Boiaria, and Antivari, the Turks were so confounded
thereby, that they knew not where to apply themselves; until at length some
Venetians Landing near Antivari, were Attacked by one Ahmet Aga, the Son of the
Governor of that place, whom they repulsed with much Vigor, and killed Ahmet
upon the Place; and stranded a Brigantine belonging to Castle Nuovo on the
Shore.

But the grand Design and Enterprise of this Year, being the Siege of
Negropont, the whole Venetian Fleet with the Galleys of the Pope, and Malta,
having made their general Rendezvous in Porto Poro, on the 19th of June, Old
Style, weighed Anchor, directing their Course toward the Archipelago. The
Fleet was divided into three Squadrons; one Commanded by his Excellency
Veniero, Part of the Venetian Fleet s^nt to the Dardanelli.
Captain Extraordinary of the Ships; another Squadron consisted of Galleys,
under Command of the Governor of the Condannata, or of such who are Condemned
to the Oar, whose Post was to keep to Windward of the Fleet. The third Squadron
was Commanded by the Doge himself, who with the remaining part of the
Galleasses, Galleys, Galleots and Ships, were to take their Station to
Lee-ward; besides which, a Squadron of Ships with 13 Christian Corsairs, making
in all 26 Sail, were dispatched before with Orders to advance as far as the
Dardanelli, and give a stop to the Captain Pasha; who upon the News of this
powerful Fleet, durst not adventure Abroad, but kept within the Reach and
Covert of the Castles: For indeed the Turkish Fleet, which for many Years past
had not been of equal force to engage the Venetians, They stop the Captain
Pasha from coming out.
was this Year also much weakened by the want of Eight Galleys, which the
Captain Pasha had dispatched to the Black Sea for relief of their Saicks
against the Cossacks, who much infested that Coast, and for want of forty
Galleots, which were remaining on the Stocks in the Arsenal at Constantinople,
having neither Slaves for the Oar, nor Soldiers for Fight and Defense, nor
Seamen to Sail and direct them. Nor was the Captain Pasha of sufficient force
to give Convoy to the Fleet expected from Egypt, consisting of nine great
Soltanaes, and diverse Saicks laden with Ammunition and Provisions, of which,
though the Grand Seignior had great want, and had dispatched diverse Commands unto
Alexandria, to hasten their Voyage; yet the fear they had of being intercepted
by the Venetians, was a sufficient Defense for them against the reiterated
Commands of the Port.

This Squadron of Ships coming to Anchor before the Mouth of the Dardanelli,
kept the Turkish Fleet within the Castles, whilst the Doge advanced with the
main Fleet toward the Island of Negropont, in the Form and Manner before
described.

The Island of Negropont is the most considerable of all the Isles in the
Archipelago; the ancient Name of it amongst the Greeks and Latins was Eubaea;
The Description of the City of Negropont.
it had also other Names, as Macris from the narrowness of the Channel which
passes between the Island, and the Main Land; Abantias and the People
Abantiades; the chief Town was Chalcis, now named after the Denomination of the
Country; Pliny calls the Island Asopis, and Strabo Ocha; it had also the Name
of Ellopia, from Ellope the Son of Jupiter. This Island, as believed, was once
joined to the Main Land, but separated from thence by some Earthquake, and now
adjoined by a Bridge; it is 365 Italian Miles in compass, 90 Miles in length,
and 40 in breadth. The City of Negropont anciently Chalcis, is situated on the
Euripus, which is a narrow Channel, that in a wonderful manner Ebbs and Flows
seven times in 24 Hours: The Walls of the City are about two Miles in compass,
but the Suburbs are much larger, and more Populous, by reason of the many
Greeks and Jews which Inhabit therein. The Captain Pasha is the Chief Commander
thereof; but commonly governs by his Deputy: There is a Bey also belonging to
it, a Man of great Power, by reason that he draws from thence a Yearly Revenue
for Maintenance of a Gally.

Negropont when taken by the Turks.
This Island of Negropont formerly belonged to the Venetians, and to this Day
the Arms of St. Mark remain over one of the Gates of the City; when Pietro Zani
was Doge, it was given by the Emperor of Constantinople to the Venetians in
recompense and reward of some good Services performed by that Republic toward
him; or rather because he could not defend it, he gave it over into the Hands
of a good Ally.

But in the Year 1469, Sultan Mahomet being desirous to join that Pleasant Isle
to his other Conquests, endeavored to make a Bridge for the more easy
Transportation of his Troops into the Land; but being repulsed by the
Inhabitants, and the Bridge overthrown, the Turks were forced to betake
themselves unto their Boats, and Vessels: Howsoever in less than a Month
afterward, the Turks returned before the Place with 300 Sail, and then having
formed the Bridge, as was intended, Mahomet himself came with an Army of 120000
Men, and Attacked the City, which was Fortified after the manner of those
Times, and defended by a Garrison of 24000 Men, under the Command of Giovanni
Bondulmiero, Ludovico Calvo, and Paolo Erizzo.

The Turks raised several Batteries in different Places against it, by which
they made such large Breaches, that they made four terrible Assaults thereon,
in which above 40000 Turks were Slain, and the Enemies bravely repulsed, but at
length being overwhelmed with Numbers, and tired with a long Siege, the Guards
which defended the Porta Bureliana, conveyed themselves secretly away, and
abandoning their Post, they entered the Gate without much opposition, killing
all the People who passed the Age of 20 Years. Calvo was killed on the Place,
and Bondulmiero in his House: Erizzo having Entrenched himself in some fast
place, defended himself Valiantly, and at length surrendered on Conditions of
Life; but the Turks maintained them not, but caused him to be Sawn in two: His
Fair Daughter chose rather to die by her own Dagger, than to give up her
Chastity to the Lust of the Turks.

The Turks having remained Masters of this City ever since the Year 1469; it
came at length to be Attacked in hopes of Recovery in this Year 1688;
Preparations in order to the Siege of Negropont.
in order unto which, the Captain Extraordinary Veniero, was appointed with
nine Ships belonging to the Republic, a Fire-ship, and a Palandra to guard the
Channel of Negropont, and to hinder the Turks from bringing Succors to the
City; to which also seven Galleys were added under Proveditor Pisani. At the
same time also, several light Galleys were ordered to scower the Channel of
Volo, and hinder all Succors from passing on that side.

All the Land Forces being Embarked upon the Ships, Galleys, Galleasses,
Galleots, Palandras, and other Vessels; the Venetian Fleet weighed Anchor on
the 7th of July from Porto Poro, The Venetian Fleet Sails toward Negropont.
and Sailed with a fair Wind, directing their Course toward the Island of
Negropont; but by what Misfortune not known, a great Ship called the Smyrna
Merchant, ran upon a Rock, which being high, July.
and easily seen, it was suspected, to have been done on purpose by Treachery
of the Captain; the which unhappy Accident gave some stop to the proceeding of
the Fleet, in hopes to save most of the Rigging, and Materials thereunto
belonging: But in fine a Gale of Wind springing up, the Ship was broken in
pieces, and no more saved than only the Men and eight Pieces of Cannon of the
50 with which she was mounted, besides some Bombs, and other Materials for War.
This Accident hindered something of the Proceedings of the Fleet, which
received yet a greater Impediment from the Northern Winds, which at this Season
of the Year so constantly reign in those Seas, as if they were Trade-Winds:
Howsoever when the Gale abated, as it does commonly toward Night, the Galleys
made use of their Oars to row to Windward as high as Cape Colonna, where
afterward the Ships joined them: And taking the Calm of the Night, the Galleys
by force of their Oars towed up the Ships, and on the 11th of July they entered
the Channel of Negropont; and on the 13th came to an Anchor in the Road, called
the Gardens, about six Miles distant from the Capital City of Negropont.

Here it was that all the Soldiers, Horse and Foot which were Embarked on the
Galleasses, Galleys, and Galleots, making a Body of about 8000 Foot, and 500
Horse, Landed without the least opposition; Some of the Forces landed on
Negropont.
having only seen a Party of about 50 Turks on Horseback who presented
themselves in view, to take cognizance of the Motion of their Enemies, amongst
which Mustapha Pasha Commander of the Town was there in Person. So soon as the
Out-guards of the Turks posted on a Tower erected on a Neck of Land which
stretched out to the Euripus, espied the Troops which were disembarking, they
discharged some Guns, to give an Alarm to the Town, and immediately quitted the
place, as being not tenible; into which some Soldiers were entered from the
Ducal Gally, being an advantageous Post, wherein were found four Iron Guns, and
some small Provisions.

The Day that these Forces were Landed, some Greeks of the Country, together
with the Captain of a French Tartana came, and gave Intelligence, Turkish
Strength in Negropont.
that the whole force of the Island consisted of about 6000 Men, with
Janissaries and Spahees; but that they did not trust much to the Faith of the
Inhabitants, whom they had lately disobliged by taking from them the best of
their Goods and Furniture for their Houses: That the Walls of the City were
lined with Earth, and fortified on all sides with Bastions, well provided with
Cannon: That all the Gates, and Entrances to the City were Mined; and that the
Suburbs were surrounded with a deep Ditch and Pallisadoes: Besides which, that
there were some Outworks lately finished, all provided well with Water, and
Provisions necessary for a long Defense. That there were two Governors in
chief, one called Mustapha Pasha, a Man of great Reputation, who Commanded the
Mount, on which a Battery was erected toward the Sea: The other was Ibrahim
Pasha, who defended the Outworks of the City, both Men of Resolution; besides
these, who defended the Town, in which the Garrison was very strong, the
Seraskier lay Encamped with 4000 Men, most Horse, not far from Negropont.

On the 14th of this Month his Serenity the Doge, The Doge, and General
Officers, take a view of the Country.
accompanied with General Konismark, and the Engenier Verneda, attended with
many Barges and Felucaes, went to take a Survey of the Country, of the
Situation of the City, and the Forts, and Batteries, which though more in number,
and furnished with Cannon beyond expectation, did not yet abate the Courage of
these Assailants. All things being well observed by these Generals, they
discovered how the Turks had on the left Hand of the Bridge raised a Battery
with Earth, and planted many Pieces of Cannon thereon, and pitched their Tents
along the side of the Aqueducts: And on the left Hand had formed a Line of
Communication between the Suburbs and the Hill which commands the Sea, from
whence they could offend the Galleys with their Shot, and the Venetian Tents;
besides which, they discovered diverse other Trenches in different Forms,
strengthened with Pallisadoes, with a deep Ditch full of Seawater, 30 Paces
long, reaching to the Gate of the City, covered by a Hornwork: And below the
Mills another Battery was raised of three Pieces of great Cannon, which
commanded the Shore along the Seaside; all which Forts were defended by some
Christians more or less in every Work, most of them of the French Nation, who
were skilful in throwing Bombs, and all sorts of Fireworks.

Thus the Doge, and his Generals, having taken a full Survey of the several
Fortifications of the City, and the Situation of the Country, on the 15th of
the Month, was the Day appointed for the March of the Army toward a rising
Hill opposite to another which covers the City: The Christian Troops advance.
And at the same time the Galleys, and Galleasses advanced by force of their
Oars, against the Northern Winds, which continually blow at that Season, and
came to an Anchor under that rising Hill, which is near to a Wood, from whence
they could see the new Fort of Karababa, or Black Father. An in regard the
Ships could not enter into the Channel of Negropont, by reason of contrary
Winds, the Doge dispatched away the Captain of the Gulf, with 10 Galleys to
take out the Soldiers, and Transport them ashore to join with the rest of the
Army: And for more expedition in this Work, the Proveditor Pisani, who
Commanded the Galleys which are Manned with such as are Condemned to the Oar,
being returned with the nine Ships, of which we have given an Account, to have
been ordered to the Dardanelli; and by reason of contrary Winds, were put into
the Port of Andro, was also commanded to give his Assistance, for landing
Soldiers, Horse, and all the Instruments, and Necessaries for War.

Whilst these things were preparing for the Siege, The General of Malta
receives Audience of the Doge.
the Baly Spinelli, a Neapolitan Cavalier, General of the Galleys of Malta,
demanded Audience of the Doge, to pass his Complement of Congratulation upon
his Advancement to the Ducal Throne, the which being granted, the General
appeared with a great Attendance, followed by many Boats, Barges, and Felucaes;
so soon as he was ascended into the Ducal Gally, which was adorned with Flags
and Streamers from Stem to Stern, he was saluted with four great Guns, and at
the Stairs was met and conducted by Lieutenant General Pisani, to the Stern of
the Gally, where his Serenity was seated on his Throne, having on his Head his
Ducal Bonnet, and wearing the Senatorian Gown after the ancient Roman Fashion;
before him stood the four Admirals of the Seas.

The General of Malta being entered into the Presence, the Doge arose from his
Throne, and received him standing. The General with eight other Knights,
Captains of the Galleys, and his Comrades, made a most profound Reverence at
their Entrance, and having delivered the Letter to the Doge, from the Grand
Master of Malta, full of kind and amicable Expressions, all there present stood
Bare-headed whilst it was reading: After which the General was caused to sit
down on a Seat placed on the right Hand of the Doge, and four of the Knights on
a Bench on the left Hand, the other four remaining without, seated also on
Banks, the Antiport of the Cabin being drawn up, the Slaves at the Oar were
clothed in White, and the Soldiers clad with diverse Colors, armed with
Half-Pikes, Muskets, and Swords, each bearing a Burgurdian on his Head, which
being to the Number of 500 Men, appeared very pleasant to the Eye.

This Complement was no sooner passed, than News was brought, That a Skirmish
had happened between the Voluntier Adventurers and the Turks; A Skirmish
between the Turks and Venetians
but the first being reinforced by the Marquis Corboni, with some of his
Dragoons, and Soldiers of the Greek Nation, the Fight became very warm, but the
Turks were at length forced to retire with considerable Loss; though this Success
cost the Life of Colonel Paul Macri, being shot in the Head, who for his
Bravery and Deserts having obtained the Honor of Knighthood, was much deplored
and lamented by the whole Army.

By this time the Ships under Veniero, and the main Body of the whole Armata
were come about, and had doubled the Point of Karababa, from whence they
received many Shot, but without any damage; so that the Ships and Galleys
having taken the several Posts assigned to them, and also four of the Duke of
Tuscany's Ships laden with Warlike Provisions, and 400 Land Soldiers, being
come and joined to those other Forces belonging to the Great Duke's Galleys,
composed a Body of 800 Men; all which being arrived and united to the Fleet and
Army, the Doge prepared every thing ready in order to a formal Siege. The
General of the Great Duke's Forces was Named Chigi, who having made a Visit to
his Serene Highness the Doge, the same Ceremonies passed, as were shown toward
the General of Malta.

Eighteen Days after the Forces were Landed, all the Approaches were finished
in fight of the Town; during which Time the Turks made not the least Sally to
hinder, or disturb the Works, nor did the Venetians fire a Gun against the
Turks, who greatly wondered at so long silence, as if on both sides a Cessation
of Arms had been agreed; and all remained quiet, The Town Invested.
until the 30th of July, when the Cannon began incessantly to play about Break
of Day in the Morning from the Venetian Batteries, with Showers of Bombs and
Carcasses, which being thrown into the Town and Outwarks of the Enemy, filled
the City with Terror and Consternation, especially the Women, whose Cries and
Schreeks were heard into the Venetian Camp.

The first of August a Resolution was taken to Attack a certain Fort called
Loppo, August.
situate on a little Hill, but upon discovery that the place was Undermined,
the Design was altered, and Orders given to Bomb the Place with a Palandra, a
Vessel made for that purpose, which ruined some of the Turks Trenches;
howsoever this Attempt cost the Life of two Mariners, and the Loss of the
Captain's Arm, who commanded the Palandra.

After which the Venetians advanced under the Mills securing their Posts with
Earth and Baskets; and the Malteses and Florentines endamaged the Enemy very
much, by the Bombs and Carcasses which they threw into a small Fort on the
East Side, and thereby it was, as it were, totally destroyed and levelled. And
as the Venetians were diligent in their Approaches, so the Turks were not less
active to give them a Repulse, and to make frequent Sallies as they did one
upon the Malteses, of whom they killed and wounded about 40, and afterward
retreated, but not without some loss both of Men and Horse. In the mean time
the Cannons played continually from the Batteries, and Bombs thrown into the
Town, one of which falling into the House of the Pasha, so affrighted the Women
and Children, that with Schreeks and Cries casting themselves at the Feet of
the Pasha, begged and beseeched him to surrender up the Town into the Hands of
the Enemy upon Terms of Capitulation; but the Pasha inflexible, and refusing to
hearken unto such Entreaties, resolved to maintain it to the last Extremity: To
which End many Retrenchments were made within the Walls, and Caverns dug
under Ground, to secure the People, and Goods, and Soldiers which were not on
the Guard, from the Desolation made by the Bombs.

During all this time the Seraskier, with a Body of about 4000 Men, remained at
a Place called Petra in Livadia, The Seraskier at Petra.
about six Miles distant from Negropont, with design not to adventure his Men,
until some unavoidable Necessity happened, or the City was reduced to its last
Agony; which as yet was not so far straightened, but that there remained some
hopes that it would be able to relieve it self; it being esteemed better
Service to keep the Passes free, and an open Commerce with the Town, than to
hazard an Engagement with the Enemy, with so unequal a Force, which being
overthrown, would prove a certain forerunner of the Loss of the City.

The Venetians finding it more easy to proceed on the Attack of the Town, than
to lose time in taking the Fort of Carababa, they raised a new Battery upon a
small Rock, at the Entrance of the Port under Command of the Captain of the
Gulf, which he effected with his own, and the help of another Galley. The
Venetian Camp wasted with Sickness.
But what most incommoded the Venetian Camp, was the excessive Heats; for though
the Winds were Northerly, as they commonly are in those Seas; yet passing over
the Land, they contracted such Heat, and carried with them such a kind of
Noxious, and Sulphurous Vapor, as produced Malignant Fevers amongst the
Soldiers, and Officers, that many of them Died, and the Camp became enfeebled,
and much weakened; amongst which was General Konismark; who being forced to
leave the Camp, to go Aboard his Ship in order to his Cure, his Command was
committed to the Charge of Major General Horn of Brunswick. The Sickness still
spreading with Fevers and Tertian Agues, a Sergeant General of Battallia,
Pietro Gaspari, and Colonel of the Switzers, died thereof; and the Count
Palatine Landgrave of Hesse, reduced to the last Extremity; so that many
Designs were neglected, which might have gained the City, and all the
Enterprises of the Army became faint and languishing. Besides Health there was
nothing that wanted; the Island it self being very fruitful, Negropont a
Fruitful Country.
abounded with Wines, and all sorts of Victuals, and Provisions for the
Sustenance of Humane Life, and were it not for the Depredations made thereon by
Pirates, it would be one of the most happy Countries of the World: The
Inhabitants thereof being of an Open, Free, and Cheerful Nature, The Temper of
the Inhabitants.
of a Sanguine Complexion, and Merry like the other Greeks, without much
Thought, or Care, which renders commonly the Lives of Men very uneasy to
themselves and others; and though the Country abounded with all things, yet the
Neighboring Islands brought over their Cattle and Fruits thither; which
finding a ready Market, caused as great Plenty, and abundance of all things, as
could be desired.

On the 10th of August the Turks made a Sally into the Venetian Trenches,
whence happened a Skirmish, but without much damage, or hurt on either side;
nor had the Enemies Cannon done any great Execution as yet on the Christian
Camp; which, on the 11th of August had perfected all their Batteries. And to
spare the Labor of the Soldiers, who had already suffered much in opening
Trenches, and raising Batteries, and Fighting; Orders were given to Seignior
Delfino Proveditor of the Camp, to gather what Greeks he could to serve for
Pioneers, and that every Gally, and Galleass should prepare 500 Faggots, with
some Pallisadoes, which was readily effected.

And now about the 13th of this Month, The Turks show themselves.
the Enemy began to show themselves Evening and Morning near the Venetian
Trenches, but attempted nothing, with design as was imagined, to draw their
Enemies into a place which they had Undermined; so that for three or four Days
nothing happened of any thing considerable, unless it were the bursting of a
Cannon, which battered the Pallisadoes of the Enemy, by which the chief Gunner
was killed, and five others were wounded; and another Cannon dismounted by a
Shot from the Enemy upon the Wheel of the Carriage.

But on the 16th about Sunset, the Turks Attacked the Trenches of the
Malteses, where a very hot Skirmish began, The Turks Attack the Malteses.
which continued for the space of an Hour, until Night coming on, the Turks
retired with considerable Loss, and of the Malteses about 15 were killed, and
about 20 wounded: Upon which the Malteses advanced and enlarged their Works,
and whilst they were Fighting on that side, a Detachment of 3000 Men Attacked a
Fort near the Mills about a Pistol-shot from the Enemies Pallisadoes, of which
after some resistance, they rendered themselves Masters with the Death of above
100 Turks, A Fort near the Mills taken.
and some wounded.

The loss of this place being of great importance to the Turks, by Break of Day
in the Morning on the 17th, they fell upon it with great Numbers to recover it,
and surprised the Florentines and the Regiment of Atti, which were the Guard
placed there to defend it; which being Sleeping, or found in a negligent
Posture, The Turks recover it.
the Turks returned with 150 Heads, amongst which were several Cavaliers of
Florence, and three Captains of the Regiment, and the rest quitted the Fort and
fled, amongst which were above 100 wounded; which Action cost the Turks very
little.

The Doge being highly enraged at this ill Success, and desirous of Revenge,
resolved to Attack the Enemies Trenches; which though esteemed by a Counsel of
War, The Doge resolves to Attack the Turks in their Trenches.
to be a hazardous Enterprise, which though it should succeed, would cost much
Blood; yet the Doge nothing moved, continued his Resolution to put the Attempt
in execution on the 20th of August, being well assured, that nothing could be
effected on the Town unless first they could possess, and make themselves
Masters of the Enemies Trenches. In order unto which on the 17th the Doge, with
the chief Sea-Officers, came ashore to take a View, and Survey the Enemies
Trenches, the which extended almost three Miles from the Hill to the Sea, the
Soldiers therein lodged securely, as if they had been Buried; The Manner of
their Trenches.
they were very spacious and deep, so that 50 could march a Breast, secured by
vast Oaken Beams, over which were Sacks of Cotton artificially laid, and the
void places filled up with Earth; and what damage was done hereunto by the
Venetian Cannon, or Bombs in the Day, were by the Industry and Labor of the
Turks repaired in the Night. These Trenches were likewise defended by five
Batteries, on which 26 Pieces of Cannon were mounted, and six Mortar-pieces
which threw Stones at such distance, as served not only to defend their own
Trenches, but also to offend the Venetian Camp.

Whilst the Doge, and principal Officers were contriving the Attack which was
to be executed on the 20th: The Turks on the 18th made a Sally on the Regiment
of Colonel Gaspar an Athenian, August The Turks Sally on.
who was placed to guard the Aqueducts, but were so bravely received by the
Valor of that Colonel, that they were repulsed with the loss of 150 of their
Men killed on the place; Colonel Gaspar an Athenian killed.
and 50 or 60 of the Christians, amongst which was Colonel Gaspar himself,
being shot in the Breast with a Musket-Bullet; in recompense of whose Resolute
and Valiant Behavior to the general Satisfaction and Applause of the whole
Army, the Doge bestowed the Command of the Regiment on his Brother Demetrio,
with an Annual Pension to his Son, during his Life.

The Morning of the 20th being come every one prepared himself for the intended
Assault on the Enemies Trenches. The Marquis of Corbon with his Cavalry, was
the first to break in upon the Enemies Horse, The Turks Attacked in their
Trenches.
which he performed with such Success, that he thereby opened a way for the
Foot to Attack the Trenches in three several places, which was executed with
such resolution, that neither Cannon nor Musket Shot were serviceable on this
occasion; for the Fight in the Trenches was so close with the Swords and Handy
Blows; that being intermixed one with the other, the Combatants rather appeared
like Gladiators than Soldiers fighting in regular Troops. The Turks on one side
being hard pressed, began to throw away their Arms and fly; but being seconded,
and relieved by some Troops led on by the Pasha Commander of the place, who at
the same time promised Rewards to the Valiant, and threatened Death to the
Cowardly, the Fight increased, and the Trenches were filled with the Bodies of
Dead and dying Men. The Venetians were repulsed twice, and thrice in some
places: But at length all the Passes toward the Mountain being forced by the
Regiment of Bonometti, and the Venturieri, (who are Soldiers of Fortune) the
Turks began to abandon their Posts, and betake themselves to Flight; They quit
them and fly.
and other Regiments forcing the Lines in other places, filled all with
Slaughter and Confusion; the Horse were the first began to turn their Backs,
running with full Career to take refuge in the Town, and to save themselves:
But the Infantry fared much worse, for some Thousands of them being pursued by
the Christians, even to the Gates of the City, about 500 of them were cut off,
and their Journey shortened.

Another Party of the Turks flying toward the Sea, were killed by the Horse,
and others threw themselves headlong into the Water, where some were Drowned, A
terrible Slaughter.
and others killed by Vollies of Musket Shot from the Shore, so that the Sea
was dyed with Blood, and covered with the Garments and Bodies of Men; and
besides those who were killed and wounded of the Turks, many Prisoners were
taken. This Fight continued about two Hours, at the beginning of which, the
Turks Cannon offended much the Venetian Troops, but without any disorder, every
one giving undoubted Proofs of his Bravery, and constancy of his Resolution.
This Action cost the Lives of 200 Men, amongst which Seignior Girolamo Garzoni
was slain, Girolamo Garzoni slain.
the Senior of all the Senators then in the Camp; he at first was hurt with a
Musket Shot in the Side, but refusing to yield unto that Wound, or to be
carried into the Tent for Cure, he continued to fight, until he was cut down by
a Turkish Scimeter, with which the Turk would have taken off, and carried away
his Head, but that Seignior Almoro Morosini, covered his Body, and defended it
from the Insults and Indignities of the Enemy. Of the Venetians about 200 were
wounded, amongst which was Prince Harcourt by a Shot on his Breast, The
Venetians Masters of the Turks Trenches and Suburbs.
Prince of Turene in the Arm, but the Prince of Wirtemberg mortally. In the
Trenches all their Cannon and Mortar-pieces were taken, with great Numbers of
Arms, and all their Baggage and Provisions; after which with little difficulty
the Venetians made themselves Masters of the Suburbs, wherein also they found
some Cannon, Provisions and Arms, besides some good plunder.

Aug. 21.
The Day following this Action, News was brought by a Deserter, That the wounded
Men brought into the Town, were above 1000, and those who were killed, were
much more, amongst which they reckoned the Son of the Seraskier, and one
Mustapha Pasha, The ^oss of the Turks.
who was Bey of five Galleys, with many other Officers: The next Day the
Venetians continued to batter the Town with Cannon and Bombs; and the 23d the
Turks made a furious Sally, but were repulsed with the loss of 150 Men, and 30
killed on the Venetian side.

For three Days afterward nothing happened, besides the continual shooting of
Cannon and Bombs, until the 27th; when the Christians began to open their
Approaches nearer to the Town, which continued until the 5th of September,
without the least damage imaginable to the Pioneers, or Soldiers; when the
Turks to the Number of 500, made a Sally from the Part of the Suburbs on the
Quarters of the Sclavonians, The Turks Sally again.
and made themselves Masters of the first Trench; but afterward rallying again
in good order, they drove them out of the Trench, and pursued them to the very
Ditch, killing about 40 of them, with the loss only of 14 Christians.

General Konismark continuing sick, and his Fever increasing on him, the Doge
substituted the Major of the Troops of Brunswick in his place, Gen^ral
Konismark sick.
to oppose the Sally of the Enemies; and though this brave Man was also at that
time laid upon his Bed, and laboring under the Access, or Fit of a Fever; yet
he arose, and strove against his Natural Weakness, to comply with the Command
of the Doge, but so soon as he was gone out of the Door of his Tent, a
Cannon-shot from the Enemy stroke his Bed and overthrew it. September.
The Night following, Captain Verneda the chief Engineer, and a Captain of the
Regiment of Wirtemberg, with some common Soldiers, were killed by Musket Shot
as they were advancing their Works toward the Ditch.

The 6th and 7th passed without other Action than firing Cannon on both sides;
by which the Venetians made a Breach in a Tower on the Seaside at the end of
the Ditch; A brave Offer made by an Engineer.
upon which the Engenier Romagnato, a Man of resolute Courage, made an offer
with 50 Persons, how difficult soever the Attempt seemed, to mount the Breach:
This generous Offer being accepted, and greatly applauded, the Doge came ashore
in Person, and placed himself in one of the Batteries, to be a Spectator of
this Enterprise, and to give the necessary Orders therein, which should be
required for seconding so resolute an Enterprise.

On the eighth an Attack was made, and with great courage they mounted the
Breach, and planted two Ensigns thereon; but because the Breach was very
narrow, without any covert from the Shot of the Enemy, and the descent into the
Town very deep and hazardous, they were forced to quit the Post, The Venetians
repulsed.
which they had gained with the loss of six or eight Men, amongst which was one
of the Ensigns, whose Colors howsoever were recovered by another Officer: Nor
did the Turks escape without some loss on occasion of the Attack; for 300 Men
being lodged in the Ditch to support those who were to make the first Entrance,
did great execution on the Turks that appeared on the Breach without any
covert, or shelter. A remarkable Passage.
There is one thing very remarkable of a Soldier, who in this Assault received
six Wounds on his Head and in his Body with Scimeters, by which falling on the
Ruins, was esteemed for Dead, and so remained until the Dusk of the Evening,
when rising up, it was not so Dark but that he was perceived by the Enemy, who
made many Shot at him; to avoid which, he threw himself into the Sea, bleeding
with all his Wounds; and notwithstanding the many Shot aimed at him, of which
he received one in his Shoulder, he swam away, and got ashore at the Camp,
where he was afterward cured of his Wounds, which made the Doge to give him
the Name of the wonderful Man.

The Regiments of Count Waldeck and Colonel Bilz, belonging to the Troops of
Wirtemberg, being advanced without any Order for so doing, one to the Bank of
the Ditch, and the other to the Foot of the Tower, received an unhappy welcome
by several Vollies of small shot, The Venetians again repulsed.
both from the Wall, and from the false Bray; by which two Colonels, seven or
eight Captains, twelve or fourteen Subaltern Officers, five Cavalier
Adventurers, and about 200 common Soldiers, were all slain upon the place, and
as many wounded; which was a discouraging loss to the Besiegers, though the
Defendants, according to the Report of some Deserters, lost double the number
within the City.

Howsoever, the Venetians being not dismayed hereat, on the 10th of this month
forced an Entrance into the Ditch, where they began to form a Gallery for a
more near approach unto the Wall, under which they designed once to form a
Mine; but because it would be the work of fifteen Days at least before the Mine
could be brought to Perfection, for want of good Engeniers, of which many were
Dead, and Sick; They raised a new Battery on the other side of the Water, from
whence they made a Breach on the other Tower; and with two pieces of Cannon
planted on the Bank of the Ditch, they bartered the foot of the Courtain
between the two Towers.

The Day following, some Deserters from the Town brought Advice, That the whole
Garrison within did not consist of more than 3000 Men, and those much afrighted
and discouraged by their many losses; only that which supported their Spirits,
was the free and open passage by the Bridge, between the Turkish Camp and the
City; by which every third day they received Recruits of Men, and Supply of
Provisions; The Difficulties of taking the City.
so that now little hopes remained of taking the City for this year, the Season
also being far advanced: All therefore that remained to be done, was to
continue the Batteries and to throw Bombs, of which above 10000 having been
already cast into the City, few Houses remained standing, but all reduced to a
Mass of Rubbish and Ashes.

The Venetians being under these discouraging Circumstances, the Attacks
proceeded but slowly; nothing being heard in the Camp, but of the Death or
Sickness of their great Men; amongst which, News was brought to the Doge, that
Signior Molino and Delfino were forced to yield unto their sick Beds; That the
Engenier Ramagnato was killed with a Musket Shot, The Venetians discouraged.
whilst he was giving Direction about the Works in the Ditch; That Signior
Aurelio Marcelli was Dead of a Fever caused by his Wounds; as was also Mattio
Bon Patritii, a Nobleman of Venice; And that General Kenismark was Dead of a
violent Fever, General Kenismark's Death.
having Breathed his last on the 15th of September, to the great Grief and
Sorrow of the whole Army; but especially of his Lady Carlotta, who with great
Affection and Tenderness, having been his Companion in all this Expedition, was
overwhelmed with Sorrow and confused Grief at his Death. His Bowels were
Interred the same Night with many thousands of Torches and Lights; but his Body
being Embalmed, was afterward designed for Strade, a place in the Duchy of
Bremen, there to be Interred in the Burial-place of his Ancestors. The same
Night two Engeniers were wounded, and one killed, and many common Soldiers
killed and wounded by the Enemies shot from the false Bray, whilst they were
perfecting their Works in the Ditch.

And now it being the 17th of September, the Florentines were the first to
Demand a Dismission from the Camp, The Generals of the Great Duke and Malta
desire leave to return home.
and License to return home, alleging that the Season of the year was far
spent, and the long Voyage they had to make unto their own Country. The time
also appointed by the Great Master of Malta unto his General, for the Fleet to
remain abroad, being also expired, License was demanded for their return; but
the Doge flattering himself with hopes of a speedy Surrender of the place,
persuaded that General to stay some few days longer; to which he consented, in
expectation of taking part of that Glory which would belong to him by the
Conquest of that place.

But it was not the Will of God that this Place should yield to the Christian
Arms, for that from this present time, until the End of the Siege, nothing but
Misfortunes attended the Actions of the Venetians. However, The Courage and
Constancy of the Generals was such, as that they would not leave one Stone
unturned which might tend to the Conquest of the place, resolving not to desist
from that Enterprise, whilst any hopes appeared of becoming Masters thereof. In
order unto which, the Doge Morosini, considering with the principal Captains,
what was farther to be done to facilitate this Enterprise; [it was observed,
that the greatest difficulty, was, how to convey their Forces under the Wall,
for the Ditch was 30 Paces broad, and washed at each end by the Sea; to do
which, the Ingeniers found no other means than by a Traverse, which was to be
covered on the top, and defended by Gabions filled with Earth, which being
considered, and resolved, it was put into immediate Execution, all things
necessary for that work being brought to the place, with the Instruments for
fixing the Miner to the Walls; but the Waters so increased in the Night, that
the Labor became much more great, and the Design more difficult than was
imagined, they being forced to Work under the Enemies small shot; by which the
Engeniers, The diff^culty of directing a Traverse.
Samuel Miller was killed, and Renaldo Della Rue, and Antonio Captain of the
Miners, grievously wounded. Howsoever, not discouraged from the prosecution of
this Design, the Marquis of Corbon, Serjeant-General, with some of his
Dragoons, undertook that work of the Traverse, which notwithstanding found not
the Success expected; he being, whilst he was giving direction about the
Traverse, wounded by a Musket Shot, which passed his Left-Thigh.

The Turks, who were very vigilant and industrious to destroy the Work of the
Traverse; formed a Work in the False Bray, by which they so annoyed the
Laborers upon the Traverse by continual firing, that it was not possible to
proceed, until the Enemy was droven out of the Counterscarp; The Venetians take
a Bonnet from the Turks, and again droven out of it.
to perform which, it was resolved to take a Bonnet which lay in the way, which
succeeded according to Desire; But the Besieged having considered, that that
place was of great Importance, they soon Assaulted it, with such Vigor, that
the Venetians not being relieved by the farther advanced Line, were droven out
from thence with much Blood and Slaughter.

Thus all hopes failing of taking the Town, Camillo Chigi, Admiral of the
Galleys of Tuscany, The Galleys of Tuscany depart.
having as we have said obtained his Discharge, sailed away with his Squadron
of Galleys by Night, that the Turks might not observe his Departure, leaving
howsoever behind him two Ships, and some Troops in the Service.

The Venetians resolving that the Turks should not remain in quiet Possession
of the Bonnet, attacked them again therein, and drove them thence, and
fortified it in such manner, that it would be very difficult for them to regain
it. Likewise a new Battery was raised of fifteen pieces of great Cannon, The
Bonnet retaken.
which shot into the Houses of the Town; and at the same time, a Line of
Communication was made for relief of the Bonnet.

During which Time and Actions, Diseases increased in the Camp, and Officers,
as well as common Soldiers fell sick, by which, and daily slaughters of Men in
the Assaults made, Sickness in the Christian Camp.
the Army was much diminished. And though the Condition of the Turks in the Town
was rather worse than better, yet their Spirits being supported by the
Encouragements given by the Seraskier, who promised speedily to relieve them,
and to send 2000 Horse into the Morea to make a Diversion, they made several
Sallies out of the Town, The Turks Sally.
which though not with much Advantage to themselves, yet it showed a Vigor of
Spirit, and that they labored not under any Fears, or despairing hopes of
Defense. On the other side, the Venetians failed not in their Industry, and
assiduous Projects every day, in acting some Enterprise or other, which might
facilitate a general Assault, and give that decisive blow, which should put an
end unto, and terminate the Labors of that year: October.
But neither the Traverse, nor the Batteries, found the Effect desired and
expected; wherefore the Engenier Basignani, who had long labored under a
violent Fever, being now a little recovered, projected a Subterranean Gallery
under the Water of the Ditch, to pass unto the Wall; and there underneath to
make a Mine, which being sprang could not fail of making such a Breach, as was
requisite for an Assault; but in the execution thereof, there was found too
much difficulty, and almost an impossibility; for the bottom of the Ditch was
altogether Mud for many yards deep; and in sinking the Shaft to the depth
required, they met so much Water as wholly drowned out the Miners and put them
by their Work; and Basignani himself, Basignani the Engenier fails in his
Design, and is killed.
whilst he was giving Directions, was shot by a Musket-Bullet in the Head,
which put an end to this Design, which had it been practicable, would yet have
required more time than what the season of the year would admit. The Turks also
on the other side had formed a Mine under the Bonnet; which being fired, it had
not the due effect, by reason that it was not rightly placed; howsoever the
Defendants were so afrighted with the blow, that they abandoned the Fort; as
did those of the Battery, not far distant from that place.

But what made all things the more desperate, and to look with an ill Aspect,
was the Indisposition of his Most Serene Highness the Doge, The Doge sick.
being not only forced to keep his Bed, but to use such Remedies as were
necessary for his Recovery: Also at the same time, Mateo Querini of Noble
Extract, Died, after a sickness of a few days continuance.

And to the farther Weakening and Disabling of the Camp, the General of Malta
having obtained his License to depart, upon Allegations that he had already
transgressed the time which was allotted him by the Grand Master, set Sail in
the Night without Ceremony, The General of Malta departs.
or noise of Guns at his departure, which would have animated the Turks to a
longer perseverance in Defense of their Town.

Notwithstanding all which, the Batteries continued to play with so good
success, that they made such wide Breaches in the Wall, as gave hopes that the
Walls might be yet attempted, and made open to an Assault; in which matter,
whilst Count Raperta, Chief Officers killed.
who was Serjeant-Major of Battle, was giving Directions, he was wounded in
the Breast by a Musket Shot, which was a great loss and disappointment to the
whole Design: In like manner, the Marquis of Corbon, who was a
Serjeant-General, was killed by a Cannon-shot from the Battery of Carababa, to
the great trouble and loss of the whole Army; there being now much want of good
Officers, endued with Bravery and Conduct.

And though all things went thus Ill, yet the Recovery of the Doge, and his
Appearance in the Field, inspired new Courage into the Hearts of the harassed
Soldiery: But in regard, the weakness of the Doge was such, as to disable him
from taking an exact View of what was acting in the Camp, or what Breaches were
made, he was constrained to take all his Informations from the Proveditors of
the Camp, Prince of Brunswick, and General Hor command the Army.
who were Commanded to join and concur in all their Resolutions with the
Prince of Brunswick, who at present was posted in the principal Command of the
whole Army; being assisted with the Counsel and Advice of Serjeant-General Hor,
a Soldier of great Esteem for his long Experience in War, though much weakened
and faint by a long Sickness. The Doge depending much on the Bravery and
Conduct of these Generals, by whom he was assured of the excellent Order and
Disposition of all things, resolved to appoint the Day for a General Assault:
But that an Enterprise of such high Concernment should not be undertaken
without mature Advice and Deliberation, a Council of War was called, which
might discuss all Points of Difficulty; and consider whether such an Action as
this might be practicable under the present Circumstances; and the common
Safety of the Army, and Glory of the Venetian State, not put to Hazard under
doubtful Uncertainties. After some Debates in this Council, a Report was given
to his Serenity the Doge, That an Attack was very feasible, (...) of W^^^^ v^s^
an Attack.
and might in all probability succeed, in case the Breaches were made a little
more wide and commodious, and that the Mine were ready to be sprang under that
part of the Counterscarp which was near the Battery, which would open a passage
to the Assailants over the Ditch; for which purpose, thousands of Faggots, and
Sacks of Earth were provided, and all things disposed in good order by the
Generals, Brunswick and Hor; and Directions given to the Commanders of their
respective Troops, what Rules and Methods they were to observe in the Attack,
and in what manner they were to Succor and Relieve each other. And to enforce
and envigorate this Attack, the Levents, The Preparations made for it.
or Marine Regiments were taken out of the Galeots; and Reformades, and
Mariners from the Fleet; and amongst them 200 choice Soldiers belonging to the
Ducal-Galley, under the Command of Colonel Dissinfeldt, all desperate Fellows,
were ready to attempt the most hazardous Enterprise.

The day following was appointed for that general Assault, which was to
determine the Fate of that place; when above 8000 Men were posted in their
several Stations, and every thing disposed in such manner as was requisite for
this great Work; Likewise Alessandro Bon, the Captain of the Gulf, was
Commanded with his Squadron to enter the Port on the Lar-board-side, and Invest
the Fort of Carababa, whereby the Garrison therein might be diverted from
sending their Forces for succor of the Town.

About Ten a Clock in the Morning the Mine was Sprung under the Counterscarp,
October. 12. An Assault made,
which was to be the signal for the Assault; upon which the Troops appointed to
storm the Breach began to move, having some Granadiers in their Front; and at
the same time, Antonio Medini their Commander, scowred the Ditch with a Party
of his Men, being followed by 1500 Soldiers, who were to Repulse the Turks, in
case of a Salley from the Town; but this unfortunately succeeded; for being
come to the Traverse-Line, which was necessary to be overcome, the Turks so
vigorously defended it with Vollies of small shot, that many Captains and
Soldiers being there killed, a stop was given to their farther proceeding; for
not being sustained by the Troops appointed to second them, And miscarrie^.
who Halted at the entrance to the Ditch, they were forced to sound a Retreat.
From this first Misfortune several Disorders followed; for whilst a great Body
of Soldiers marched unfiled through a narrow Passage one after another, they
were so raked by the Cannon from Carababa, (there being no other Trench opened)
that many were killed, and all put into such confusion, that there remained no
possibility of entering the place on that side.

All this time, those who had mounted the Breach were in great danger, and many
lay Dead thereupon, being destroyed by Sacks with Powder, by which they were
blown up. Nor was there any better appearance of Success, or hopes of Entrance
on the other side, where, though they had mounted to the top of one of the
Towers, being conducted by the special Valor of their Commanders, and by the
signal Courage of Bonesana a Major General of the Troops of Milan; from which
height they discovered such a dismal Descent into the Town, that it was
impossible to enter, without throwing themselves Headlong down a Precipice;
Many Men lost.
so that no other was the Sequel of this Attempt, but the unhappy and fruitless
loss of the Lives of many brave Men.

Nor was the 4th Attack more successful than the former three; for on this side
the Town was inaccessible; howsoever the Troops marched with their Officers
leading them forward, Great misfortunes.
and took their Post in the Ditch, without proceeding farther; but this place
being neither provided with Bavins, nor Faggots, nor Sacks of Earth, some of
the Soldiers standing up to the Middle in Water, remained exposed to the
Enemies shot, who guarded the Traverse; which being thus sustained for several
Hours, above 1000 Soldiers, with diverse Officers, lost their Lives; amongst
which were Lieutenant Colonel Slade, and the Captains Pini, Pipam, and Gilinon;
and of the Stranger, or Foreign Troops, several were sorely wounded, amongst
which were General Spahar, and the Prince of Hermanstadt, who were the
Principal Officers appointed to direct the Assault.

Nor were the Losses on the Seaside, less than those on the Land. For the
Galleys appointed to make the Diversion, were so droven by a Storm of Wind into
the Current, that it was impossible to save themselves, The Loss^s sust^ined by
the Galleys.
but by coming to an Anchor just under the Town, from whence they received many
Cannon-shot. Antonio Nani had his Mainmast disabled by a Shot of 1000 weight.
Gredenigo received the like, which carried away all his Poop, besides other
Damages: The Gally of Pizzamano was struck with a Stone-Bullet of three Fathom
and a half in Circumference, which had almost sunk the Gally: Alvige Foscari
received a Shot of 50 weight in the Midship of the Gally, and another which
carried away his Rudder: George Marin had the Poop of his Galley carried away,
and he himself wounded in the Throat by the Splinters. Nor did it pass much
better with the Captain of the Gulf, by a Shot on the Lar-board side of the
Galley, by which he received much damage.

In this manner the Galleys drawing off at a farther distance, October 1^
and the Land Soldiers desisting from their Attacks, all hopes of taking the
Town began now to fail; so the Commanders assembling at a Council of War, where
every thing was debated, A Counsel of War r^solves to desist from the Attack.
and the impossibility considered of making another Assault, in regard to the
Fleet, which (as we have said) was much endamaged; and the Camp much diminished
by Sickness, Slaughter, and Departure of some of their Troops; and the Season
of the Year advanced to the beginning of Winter, so that it was judged
impossible longer to maintain the Siege.

But because much Blood and Treasure, and the time of a whole Summer had been
consumed before that City, a Retreat from which, would look something shameful
before the Turks, and make an ill noise, and report over all Christendom; A
Proposal made to stay all the Winter in the Island.
it was proposed at a Council of War, not wholly to quit, or abandon the place,
but to remain before it during the Winter Season; in order unto which it was
projected to draw a Line of Circumvallation from one Neck of Land to the other,
which was not above the space of an Italian Mile, and the Mould, or Soil being
all Earth, it might easily be effected; the which being fortified with a Ditch,
and Pallisadoes, Redoubts, and Cannon, might make a sufficient place of defense
for the Soldiers, and convenient Quarters might be made for them out of those
Timbers and Planks which they had saved from the Ruins of the Suburbs of
Negropont. And that they might be in a condition all the Winter to endamage the
Town, and hinder the Turks from repairing their Breaches, the Mount of
Muslekat, and the Hill of Vilibaba, were to be strongly fortified with Cannon:
In fine all things were proposed, and provided as far as Humane Reason could
contrive for security of the Camp, and Maintenance of the Soldiery; and for
Provision and Sustenance, they promised themselves sufficient from the
Inhabitants of the Islands, besides those which might be brought from the other
Isles of the Archipelago.

These Matters being thus proposed, and projected in the Council of War, where
Enquiry was made into the Miscarriages of the late Assault, (which was made
appear otherwise than was represented) it was ordered, that the Cannon which
were nearest to the place should be drawn off, and the manner contrived how it
might be executed; and the Night following they began to draw off the covered
Cannon, Some Cannon drawn off.
which lay under the Works, the which Attempt was the most difficult of any: To
prevent which, the Turks all that Night assaulted the Bonnet with quantities of
Grenades, and Sacks of Powder; but a valorous resistance being made by the
Defendants, the Turks were repulsed with great loss; so that the Night
following all the remaining Cannon were drawn off and secured: In which Work
Silvester the Admiral of Candia, having been very active and adventurous, as he
had been in many other doubtful and hazardous Attempts, the Doge honored him
with a Gold Chain and Medal, October. 15.
as an evidence of his good Services, and of the Esteem he entertained of his
Personal Courage and Conduct.

Had the Project of Quartering all that Winter on the Island succeeded, it was
very probable, and with good reason it might have been rationally concluded,
that the City would have been obliged to yield before the Spring; The Foreign
Troops mutiny, and will not Winter on the Island.
but the Foreign Troops being acquainted with the Design, began to mutiny, and
loudly to declare, That they would not Winter on the Island, it being one of
their Capitulations of Agreement, when they first Enrolled themselves for
Soldiers, that they should at the Season when Armies usually break up their
Camp, be provided with warm and convenient Quarters, and with the Spring return
again into the Field.

To force the Soldiers to an Obedience in this particular, was not esteemed
advisable; but to try how far soft Terms and persuasive Arguments might
prevail upon them, several Noblemen, and chief Commanders were employed to
incline the Wills and Consent of the Soldiery thereunto; but the Plot was
deeper laid, for though the Commonalty only appeared openly therein, yet it was
well known, that their Officers had the chief Hand in the Design, and
instigated their Soldiers to act that part which was most desired by
themselves. But what was most prevalent with the Council of War, was the Report
made by Sergeant General Hor; That the Soldiers in the advanced Lines, were so
far set on a Resolution to Abandon the Siege, that in case it were not done,
above 100 of them would desert, and fly to the Enemy. Whereupon the Doge took a
Resolution before other Misfortunes arrived, to comply with the Soldiery; and
as a beginning thereof, to embark all their Sick and Wounded Men, and Baggage;
The Siege raised.
and that the Enemy should not discover the Design, it was ordered, That the
Cannon which were not drawn off from the Lines, Bonnet, and Batteries should
continue still to play upon the City.

After which, by degrees, all the remaining Cannon was shipped, and many of
their Horse embarked; and all things put in order for an entire Desertion of
the Island and Siege; which when the Grecian Inhabitants observed; who had
taken the part with the Venetians against the Turks, full of Fear, and
terrified Consternation, came running to the Shore, petitioned to be carried
off to the Christian Coast, to avoid the Fury of the Turks; for performance of
which, all the Boats and Vessels of the Island were taken up at Freight for
Service of the Army, and Transportation of the Islanders; of which several of
them were cut off by the Turks, before they could reach the Vessels on which
they intended to embark. Some disorder.
The Turks seeing their Enemies draw off, and commit themselves unto the Seas,
had cause sufficient to rejoice; as the Christians had to be sad and dejected,
when the Rear of the Army was forced to betake themselves to a precipitate
Flight with some Confusion and Disorder. October. 22.
Howsoever they all got Aboard on such Vessels, as they could at first come
unto, so that the lighter Vessels were overcharged with Soldiers, and with
Islanders, until such time, as at the adjacent Islands, where Vessels usually
Careen, they could more orderly dispose their Companies, and repart them by a
more commodious, and proportionable share unto every Ship, Galeass, and Gally.

From this place Orders were given by the Doge unto Venier Captain
Extraordinary, to pass into the Archipelago, Orders given to the Admirals, and
places appointed where to disbark the Soldiers.
to collect the Contribution of the Island. Admiral Zaguri was dispatched with
four Ships laden with Provisions and Biscuit, to furnish the Fortresses of that
Kingdom. The Vessels laden with the Horse, were ordered to disembark them at
the first Shore, and thence to march by Land to Napoli di Romania. Some other
Companies were Landed at the Fortress of Termizi. All the Foreign Troops were
put into Winter Quarters in diverse parts of the Morea. November.
Other Companies and Troops Embarked on the Squadron of Ships commanded by
Captain Pisani, were Transported to Modon, Navarin, and Patras; from whence
Pisani had Commission to Sail for Zant and Corfu, and thence to carry all the
Provision and Ammunition which had been brought thither from Venice for Use,
and Refreshment of the Army. All the Galeasses were ordered unto the secure
Port of Varvaronda under Cranidi in Romania. The Regiments of Brunswick,
Wirtemberg, and Hesse, having completed their time stipulated for Service,
were discharged, and permitted to Sail for Venice.

Thus all the Troops being dismissed, and sent into their Wintet Quarters, the
Doge intended himself to Land at Napoli di Romania; The D^ge Lands very sick.
but being taken short by the Wind, he could only fetch the Port Tolon, where
the next Day he Landed, and went to Napoli di Romania, but in an ill condition
of Health, caused partly by the Hardships of the Siege, but chiefly by the
Troubles and Affliction of Mind for the Loss and Disgrace he had sustained
before the City of Negropont; a great cause of which being attributed to the
Miscarriage of some Officers, who performed not their Duty in the last Attack,
he ordered a Process to be made against them, and their Trials to be managed at
a Counsel of War.

But here we will leave the Venetians for this whole Winter, and return to the
Wars in Hungary, transacted in the Year 1689; at the end of which, we shall
recount all the Actions performed by the Venetians during that Campaign. But
Procurator Girolamo Cornaro was more fortunate and successful in Dalmatia, and
Albania, where he Commanded the Venetian Army: For having Landed his Forces at
Scardona on the 24th of August, Cornaro marches against Clin.
they speedily marched toward Clin, with design to invest that place; and on
the 27th, the several Troops took their Posts, and began a Line of
Circumvallation, fortifying the same with several Redoubts. The next Day
Summons were sent to the Garrison, which being answered with Vollies of small
and great Shot, the Night following the Trenches were opened, and in the
Morning the Cannon and Mortars began to play upon the Town with great execution.

September.
In the space of two Days a considerable Breach was made in the first Wall,
which the Besieged laboring to repair, the Cannon quickly ruined their Works.
The Venetians sto^m the Breach.
So that by the 1st of September, the Venetian Trenches were advanced so far,
and the Breach made so wide, that it was resolved to give an Assault, which was
accordingly executed on the 2d of this Month, and performed with such
Resolution, that the Venetians notwithstanding the Vigorous Opposition of the
Enemy, mounted the Breach, on which having lodged themselves, obliged the
Defendants to retire within their second Wall, or Retrenchment.

On the 3d and 4th, several new Batteries were raised, from whence the Enemy
was greatly annoyed; and a Bomb falling into their Magazine of Powder, blew up,
and killed many of the Inhabitants; however the Defendants still continued to
maintain their Castle and the Lower Town, with great Resolution. At length it
being observed by General Cornaro, that one side of the Town was naturally
fortified by Water, without other Guard or Defense; he ordered, that the
Regiments of Corbon and Sebenico, should pass over, and streighten the Enemy on
that side, the which they cheerfully performed; for most of them being
practiced Swimmers, they carried their Swords naked in their Mouths, and swam
over to the other side; which when the Turks observed, fearing to have their
Retreat cut off from the Castle, they quitted the defense of the Breach, and
retired some within the second Retrenchment, and others into the Castle. They
b^come Masters of the first Retrenchment
Thus the Venetians without farther opposition, entered the first Retrenchment,
where they found some pieces of Cannon, 50 Horses, two Camels, some Mules, 100
Head of Oxen, some Corn, and a good quantity of Hay.

The Venetians having gained the first Retrenchment, appointed Marquis Borro,
and Francisco Grimani, to maintain the Ground they had gained; which they
performed by throwing up Earth for shelter of their Men, whilst on the other
side they cut off the Pipes, and ruined the Aqueducts which conveyed Water to
the Castle. The Turks in want of Water.
The want whereof, and the blowing up of the Magazine of Powder, greatly sunk
the Courage of the Defendants; howsoever the Venetians continued still to throw
their Bombs and Fire into the Castle, and batter the Walls of it with their
Cannon, by which they had now made the Breach so wide, that an Assault might be
made thereon: But the Proveditor-General well considering that the Turks could
not long subsist without Water, deferred for some few Days the Assault, until
he saw the Effects which the Extremity of Thirst would constrain them unto, the
which speedily happened out according to expectation: For on the 12th of
September, the Defendants spread a White Flag on the Walls, desiring to
Capitulate, and that in the mean time a Cessation of Arms should be granted.

Hereupon the Pasha of the place, They Capitula^e.
sent out two Aga's, who being conducted to the Tent of General Cornaro, they
offered the Surrender of the Town and Castle, upon License given them to march
out with their Arms, and Baggage, as is usually granted to Valiant Soldiers.
But Cornaro answered, That their Behavior had not merited such kind and
honorable Usage: And growing angry at their Discourse, he told them plainly,
That he expected they should immediately yield at Discretion, without farther
Argument, or Capitulation. The Turks astonished at this peremptory Resolution,
desired time to propose the same to the Garrison, and to the Inhabitants; but
no more time would be allowed than four Hours; during which, in case they did
not submit, they threatened them with the last Extremity. Within the space of
four Hours, the same Aga's returned again, declaring their necessity to submit
to the hard Conditions of the Conquerors; and soon after they were followed by
the Pasha Atlagick, attended with his Son and Nephew, and with Cernigick the
Sangiack, They Surrender at Discretion.
and five Aga's, with 50 other Turks of Condition; who being conducted to the
Tent of General Cornaro, they were received by him in quality of Slaves;
howsoever to demonstrate the Generosity of the Conqueror, an Allodgment was
assigned them in a Tent provided for them, where they were treated with all
Conveniences, both of Victuals and Lodging.

The Day following in the Morning, about 900 Women and Children came forth, and
about 400 Turks capable to bear Arms, with Countenances full of Sorrow, and
dejected Looks, which showed the inward Grief which oppressed their Spirits.
These were followed by a Troop of 150 poor Christians, who having hereby
regained their Liberty, and Freedom from Slavery, changed the Scene of Sorrow
into another of Joy and Festivity. 22 Pieces of Brass Cannon were found in the
place, 200 Horse, great quantities of Provision and Ammunition both for War,
and Sustenance for Life.

Clin being in this manner surrendered, the Proveditor Girolamo Cornaro,
General in Dalmatia, designed to take Narenta, an ancient Port for all sorts of
Merchandise, brought thither in former Times from Thrace, Cornaro designs
against Narenta.
Servia, Bosnia, and Macedon, and several other Provinces; but first it was
esteemed necessary in order thereunto, to become Masters of a small Tower
called Narino, built about three Years before, by the Pasha of Bosnia, who had
furnished it with some Guns, and encompassed it with a double Palisado. October.
In pursuance of this Resolution, the General embarked at Spalatro, all his
Troops, Provisions, Cannon, and other Military Appurtenances; with which having
loosed from that Port, they were so crossed by contrary Winds, that the Fleet
was forced to put into diverse Harbors, and the Winds continuing long in that
Quarter, they spent some Weeks without any Action. At length the General being
wearied with longing Desires to act something, the Season of the Year also
spending apace, and the time approaching both for the Fleet and Armies to draw
into Winter Quarters, he resolved to proceed from the Port of St. George de
Lesina with the Galleys, Galleots, and lighter Vessels only, leaving Orders
with General St. Paul, to follow him with the Ships, and Galleasses, so soon as
Wind and Weather should serve him: And being by force of the Oar come to the
Mouth of the Port of Narenta; at the Point of which, the Fortress of Narin was
situated: Cornaro Landed some Troops both of Horse and Foot; upon whose
approach, He takes Narin.
the Turks of the Garrison of Narin, to the Number of 150, finding themselves
battered by Cannon from the Galley called Querini; they quitted the Fort, and
betook themselves to a hasty Flight, in hopes to escape with their Liberty; but
being pursued by the Horse, and some Morlacks who were good Footmen, they were
either cut to pieces, or taken Prisoners, amongst which was Alaibegh Carovaz,
their Commander in chief. The Venetians being encouraged by this Success, the
General marched to a certain Village, called Metrovich, where he remained some
Days in expectation of the Fleet under the Command of General St. Paul; and of
being thereby reinforced with Men, Artillery, Provisions, Ammunition, and all
things necessary.

By this unexpected Invasion, The Morlacks waste the Country.
all the People of those Countries being greatly alarmed, and in much
Consternation, provided to save and put themselves into a posture of defense.
Howsoever the General Cornaro having made several Detachments of Morlacks to
waste the Country round, they had the Fortune to surprise diverse Villages and
People, which they having first Plundered, put all to Fire and Sword, and
returned with a considerable Booty both of Cattle, Captives, and Heads.

But the Winds still continuing opposite to the Ships of Burden; and by Rains,
The Fleet of Ships stopped by contrary Winds.
and blustering Weather according to the Season of the Year, which was now far
advanced and improper for Action, General Cornaro having secured the Country
and Forts which he had conquered, embarked the remainder of his Forces, and
returned to Spalatro, where he disposed his harassed Troops in Winter Quarters,
Cornaro returns to Spalatro.
there to refresh and take Breath against the next Campaign. After which, above
1500 Inhabitants of the Country about Narenta came in, and put themselves under
the Protection of the Republic.

And now after all these Actions, and Martial Exploits both by Sea and Land; of
which the Turks have had little cause to boast in all the course of the past
Year, unless in their defense of Negropont; it will be time for us to conclude
this Years History, and proceed to the Transactions of the following, being the
Year 1689.

The Successes of the GERMANS, AGAINST THE TURKS in Hungary, In the Year 1689.
Sighet, January.
to the Clemency of His Imperial Majesty, not being subdued by Arms, but by
Famine, having almost for the space of two Years endured extreme Want, and
Scarcity of all things necessary for the Support of Life. At length common
Reports flying, That Sighet was upon Capitulations reduced thereunto by extreme
Want, and a thousand other miserable Sufferings; the News thereof came
confirmed to Vienna by the Duke of Holstein, on the 21st of January, and that
the Surrender was agreed on Articles, not much differing from those of Alba
Regalis; after the Example of which, one or two Commissioners were appointed in
behalf of the City to carry the Particulars unto Vienna, there to be Signed by
His Imperial Majesty; for which Affair, the Person deputed was Hassan Bei,
Lieutenant Governor of the place; who on the 28th Day of January arrived at
Vienna, desiring that the following Capitulations might be confirmed and
corroborated by the Imperial Signature, which were expressed in this manner.

I. THAT so soon as Hassan Bei shall be returned to Sighet, the Governor, and
Garrison therein, shall faithfully deliver up into the Possession of the
Germans, the Castle and City of Sighet, with all the Powder therein without
spoiling it, or maliciously suffering it to be made wet, as also all other
things belonging to Military Services. That upon the Surrender, the Turks shall
retire to such place in the Lower City, as shall be assigned for their Quarters
to lodge in, and there protected by a Guard of Imperial Soldiers; there to
remain until the rigor of the Winter Season is past, and the Drove become
Navigable, by Thawing of the Ice; and in the mean time Wagons and Boats shall
be provided for their faithful and secure Transportation; and till such time
the Arms which belong to them in quality of Soldiers, shall be deposited in
some safe place, and be thence returned to them upon their Departure. All
things belonging to the Castle shall remain, as upon Delivery: And because it
is uncertain, when the River will be open, and become Navigable, so soon as the
Ice is Thawed, and the Carts provided, a fixed Day shall be set for Departure
of the Turks, after which they shall not stay longer than 24 Hours: And in the
mean time they shall lodge quietly in the Lower Town free from all Molestation,
Damage, or Insolence of the Soldiers.

II. All Prisoners in the Hands of the Turks, without concealing any, or
Persuasions, Allurements, or Promises to stay, shall be set at liberty, be they
of what Age, Sex, or Quality soever.

III. That all Conveniences and Necessaries shall be allowed to the Turks for
their Money, as well in their Journey, as in the time of their present Abode.

IV. That no Violence shall be offered to any upon their Departure.

V. That Carts, or Wagons shall be provided, as well for the Old, as for
others, to carry them to the Waterside.

VI. All those who became Renegadoes before this War began, shall have License
to depart in Company with the Turks; but such others as have denied their
Faith, since the beginning of these Wars, shall not be permitted to depart with
the others, but shall remain still in the City: And whosoever shall desire to
stay behind, and live at their former Habitations, shall be left to their own
Wills and Arbitrament, to do as they shall think fit.

VII. A sufficient number of Wagons shall be provided to carry all the People
to the Waterside; where in like manner a sufficient number of Boats shall be
furnished, to Transport the People, under a secure Guard to the Confines of the
Ottoman Dominions.

All these Articles being subscribed by His Imperial Majesty, a strict charge
was given to all Officers, and Soldiers, and Subjects whatsoever, to observe
religiously the Contents thereof: But before the same had passed the Imperial
Signature, the Vice President of the Council of War, summoned Hassan Bei
several times to Audience; and at length upon Delivery of the Capitulations
into his Hands, he made a most Elegant Speech, exalting the generous Piety and
Clemency of the Emperor; who having all the Inhabitants and Soldiers of Sighet
in his Hands, and at his Disposal, so as either to put them to Death, or make
them Captives, was yet pleased, out of a Natural Principle of Mercy, to
consider their Distresses, to spare their Lives, and give them Liberty. In
sense of which, Hassan Bei acknowledged the truth of what had been uttered, and
in token of Thanks to the Vice President, in the Name of the Pasha, and People
of Sighet, with Eyes full of Tears he received the Capitulations, and kissed
them with profound Reverence and Submission.

So soon as Hassan Bei had received these Capitulations he departed with all
speed by the Post toward Sighet, being fully satisfied with the obliging
Entertainment he had received during his stay at Vienna, where he was
sumptuously lodged in the House of Marquis Ferdinando Obizzi.

Hassan Bei being returned with the Articles subscribed, to Sighet, no time was
lost to put them into execution; for all things being prepared, and the River
open about the beginning of February, February.
the Turks quitted Sighet, leaving one of the chief Fortresses in the World,
esteemed both by Nature and Art to be impregnable, in the Hands of the Emperor.

Sighet.
For Sighet has both a Castle and a City fortified after the ancient manner,
with Earth lined with Brick; has four very fair Towers encompassed with a very
deep Ditch full of Water, and environed round with Fens and Marshy Grounds,
which make the Town inaccessible. So that it seems no wonder, that Solomon the
Magnificent Emperor of the Turks should have spent three Years in taking
thereof; and not being able to take it in his Life time, his Grand Vizier
afterward subdued it by Storm, with the loss of 36000 Men. The Turks took it
on the 7th of September 1566, after a most valiant Resistance made by Nicholas
Esdrin Count of Serini, Great Grandfather of the Famous Nicholas Serini, who
vanquished the Turks in many Battles, and died in the Year 1664.

The Town has three Gates, one called Quinque Ecclesiae, another Siclos, and a
third Canisia, because they lead to those places. The Castle is fortified with
three Walls, and a treble Ditch, and is the Capital City of that Province so
named: There are three Moschs, all stately Buildings, and covered with Lead:
The Country round is Pleasant and Fruitful; especially one Hill about two Miles
from the City, which the Turks call Turbe Doggi, which was rarely planted with
Vines, and all sorts of Fruit Trees, and is famous for Cherries of an
extraordinary bigness, of which there are none so good either in Hungary, or in
any part of the Ottoman Dominions; the Ponds and Lakes are filled with Fish,
and the Woods yield store of Deer, Hares, Partridges, and all sorts of Game; so
that no place in the World can afford greater plenty of all things to support
Humane Life, or to furnish the Tables of the greatest Monarchs.

Howsoever Canisia refused to follow the Example of Sighet, Canisia refuses to
surrender.
being not as yet it seems reduced to such a Condition of Famine, as to oblige
them to a Surrender, for living in hopes that the Turkish Ambassadors would be
able by their Negotiations to obtain a Peace, they suffered the utmost
Extremities of Want, with much patience; that in reward thereof they might
preserve their Dwellings and Lands, and obtain the Honor due to the Constancy
of good Soldiers, and the Praise and Commendation of their Prince.

In the mean time the Turkish Ambassadors pressed with much Importunity to be
admitted unto Audience, The Turkish Ambassadors desire Audience.
that they might deliver their Credentials, and execute the Commands of their
Master: But the Imperial Ministers were not, it seems, so much in haste,
intending first to deliberate in what manner they were to be received, and what
Answers were to be given to their submissive Requests for Peace, a Matter
unknown before to the Turks, who since the beginning of their Empire, had never
before been acquainted with the manner of supplicating for Peace. But the
Fortune of the World being now changed, and the Game running high on the
Emperor's Hand, Expedients were contrived rather to return a plausible cause of
denial, and a justifiable ground for continuing a War, than how to form and
project advantageous Articles for a Peace. Howsoever the Resolutions being
taken what to do, it was judged necessary to admit the Ambassadors to Audience,
for by the Law of Nations that could not be refused; and so accordingly it was
agreed, That on the 8th of February an Audience should be given them: In order
unto which, two Days before, the Ambassadors were conducted from the Castle of
Pottendorff, into the Suburbs of the City, and lodged in that Street called
Landt Strass, being attended by two Regiments of Foot: The Solemnity observed
at the Audience.
The Day appointed for the Audience being come, they were brought with a Party
of Horse to the Gate of Carinthia about Two a Clock in the Afternoon, and there
consigned up to the Guard of the City, from whence they proceeded to the
Emperor's Palace in the manner following.

In the first place two Turkish Chiauses on Horseback led the way, with Staves
in their Hands denoting Peace or Amity, after whom came two led Horses,
followed by the Secretary of the Ambassadors carrying the Credentials made up
in Purses of Cloth of Gold, holding them up in his Hand, that they might be
seen by the People who flocked in great Numbers to see this Entry.

After these followed several Attendants with led Horses, all richly Harnassed,
and covered with Embroidered Cloths: Then came Zulfigar Effendi the Ambassador
in the Emperor's Coach accompanied with Alexander Maurocordato a Greek,
Associate to Zulfigar, and Interpreter to the Grand Seignior, together with
Lacovitz the Imperial Interpreter. On the right side of the Coach walked the
Ambassador's Footmen clothed in Green, and on the left those of Maurocordato,
being Rascians with Liveries of Yellow; all which were followed by a numerous
Train of Attendants belonging to the Ambassador, amongst which there was one
Coach with the Ambassador's Kinsman, and Senior Tarsia, chief Interpreter to
the State of Venice at the Ottoman Port, who were likewise attended with led
Horses and Footman.

In this manner being come to the Gate of the Palace, it was permitted only to
the Ambassadors to enter into the first Courtyard; the others alighted at the
Drawbridge, and walked on Foot to the Stairs; whence the Ambassadors, with the
Secretary carrying the Credentials before them, were conducted between the
Guards of Archers and Halberdiers, to the first Antichamber, being followed by
great Crowds of People.

In the mean time, whilst they were ascending the Stairs, The Emperor seated on
his Throne.
His Imperial Majesty came out of his private Apartment, and entered into the
Chamber of Audience, and seated himself under a rich Canopy of State opposite
to the Entrance into the Chamber, having the chief Princes and Ministers of
State ranked on each Hand according to their several Degrees and Qualities.
They are admitted to his Presence.
Then were the Ambassadors admitted in, without other Attendance than their
Secretary, who carried the Credentials before them; they were then conducted to
the Foot of the Throne, the Turk wearing his Turbant on his Head, and
Maurocordato carrying his Cap in his Hand, with his Head uncovered after the
Christian manner. Zulfigar Effendi having made three very low Bows in his
approach to His Majesty, took the Credentials into his Hands, and with another
profound Obeisance, was offering to present them; when His Majesty making a
Signal with his Hand, they were laid on a Side-Table near the Chair of State;
and then both one and the other kneeled a little, and kissed the Hem of the
Imperial Mantle: After which retiring at some distance back, Zulfigar Effendi
made his Speech in the Turkish Language to this effect.

The Ambassador's Speech.
THE Most Puissant, and Great Emperor of the Musselmen, the Highest Monarch of
the Universe, Sultan Solomon Han, Son of Sultan Ibrahim Han, our Lord and
Master, has sent us to you, who are the Most High, and Most Glorious Emperor
amongst the Christian Kings and Princes, to deliver this His Imperial Letter to
You His Friend: The Summary Contents of which, is to signify unto You, His
Exaltation to the Throne of his Ancestors, which has happened in the Year, or
Hegeira 1099. on the 2d Day of the Month Meherem: And also to put ^ou in
remembrance of the ancient Friendship, and mutual good Correspondence which
passed between his Progenitors, and Your famous Predecessors with all
Sincerity. And has commanded ^s his Servants, to signify unto You His Great
Friend, the High Respect he bears in His Imperial Breast to the ancient
Friendship which intervened between the Progenitors on both sides. May the High
God inspire, and instill into the Hearts of both Monarchs, that which is
profitable and best for the Devout Servants of God.

To this Speech His Imperial Majesty did not vouchsafe to return an Answer by
Words from his own Mouth; because that as yet no Treaty was begun, nor the
least step made thereunto; and likewise because that the Persons who brought
these Letters were not qualified with the Character of Ambassadors, but rather
of Messengers sent to prepare the way, in order to a stricter and closer
Treaty; and therefore the Baron de Herbert, a Gentleman of the Emperor's
Bedchamber, and Councellor of State, by Command of the Emperor, returned an
Answer in the manner following.

An Answer returned by Baron Herbert.
THE Most August, Puissant, and Invincible Emperor of the Romans, King of
Hungary and Bohemia, Archduke of Austria, etc. Our Gracious Lord has heard
and understood what has been most humbly proposed to His Sacred Caesarean
Majesty, in the Name of the Most Serene, and Most Powerful Prince Sultan
Solomon, notifying by You His Exaltation to the Throne. And whereas You have
made mention of the ancient Friendship which intervened between the Ancestors
of both these Sublime Monarchs; You are to reflect and consider, That it never
entered into the Thoughts of His Imperial Majesty to trouble, or dissolve that
friendly Correspondence; but would rather most sacredly have continued the same
until this very Hour, had he not been most Unjustly Attacked, against the
League, and Articles stipulated, and Sworn by both Monarchs, by which the
Effusion of much Humane Blood would have been spared. Of all which, the Most
Just God being Witness, has Crowned the Peaceable Mind of Our Most August
Emperor with Wonderful Success, and Glorious Victories. Howsoever the Mind of
His Imperial Majesty being still inclined to a Peace, he resolves so soon as he
shall have read the Contents of the Letter, to give Order unto His Ministers to
receive and consider what farther Proposals shall be given thereupon, and to
enter into the Particulars of a Treaty; which is all that I am Commanded by my
Imperial Master to say in this Matter.

To which Zulfigar Effendi, made this short Reply.

The Ambassador's Reply.
THAT though many times most grievous Wars have arisen between Great Monarchs,
yet frequently, even in the heat thereof a Peace has unexpectedly ensued. And
whereas they had been employed and di^patched from the Ottoman Port, on a Work
so beneficial and happy to a great part of Mankind, they did not doubt, but
upon the Treaty and Conferences such Expedients would be found, as would bring
all Matters to a happy Conclusion. And farther he said, That he had another
Letter from the Grand Vizier directed to the President of War, beseeching His
Majesty that he would be pleased to behold the same with a Gracious Eye.

The Audience being in this manner ended, The Ambassadors return from Audience.
which lasted about the space of half an Hour, the Ambassadors (for so they
were called in Turkish) returned from the Palace, in the same Form as they came
thither, and conducted to their Lodgings, where at the Charge of the Emperor, a
most sumptuous Dinner was provided for them, sufficient to entertain a Hundred
Persons.

Though the Ceremonies observed at this Audience, and the Honors and Treatment
given to these Ambassadors, were much inferior to those, which had at other
times been shown to Persons dispatched on the like occasions from the Ottoman
Port, yet the Concourse of the People, who are fond of new Sights, was not less
numerous; all the Streets, Balconies, and Windows, being filled with
Spectators, who came to behold the mean Reception of the debated Turks, who
never came before to beg Peace, but with a proud and haughty Behavior to give
the Conditions of it.

The next day the Ambassadors, much in the same manner, were conducted to
Audience of Count Staremberg, A Treaty begun.
and in his Coach, who was Marshal, and Vice President of the Supreme Council
of War, in the absence of Prince Herman of Baden, who resided at Ratisbonne, in
Quality of Plenipotentiary for his Imperial Majesty at the Diet. The
Ambassadors being Introduced into a Chamber of his Palace, and caused to Sit
down at a Table opposite against him, they delivered the Vizier's Letter to
him; which being Read, after some Complements which passed on both sides, they
returned again to their Lodgings.

The Letters being afterward Read, The Turks submissive.
and Observed, contrary to the Custom of that Proud Nation, to contain unusual
Expressions of Submission, and earnest Desires for Peace, the Emperor appointed
Four Commissioners to Treat with these Ambassadors; Namely, Count Kinnisek
Great Chancellor of Bohemia, Count Straatman Great Chancellor of the Court, the
Commissary General Count Caraffa, and Marshal Count Staremberg.

These Commissioners being assembled together, with Baron Razinsky, Envoy
Extraordinary from Poland, and the Cavalier Frederico Cornaro, Ambassador from
the Republic of Venice to the Imperial Court, with his Secretary Capello, the
Turkish Ambassadors were called to hold a Conference with these Ministers of
the Allies, at a Palace belonging to the States of the Province of Austria; the
which beginning about Ten in the Morning, lasted until Three a Clock in the
Afternoon: After which, several Conferences were held, at which Maurocordato
was the chief Speaker, No step made to a Conclusion of Peace, by reason of the
Demands made by the Turks.
expressing himself in Latin, and sometimes in Italian; but in fine, Debates
ended without making the least step toward the Conclusion of a Peace; for the
Turks, instead of yielding to any Proposal in favor of the Allies, required
some of the Conquered Places to be restored to them; that Transylvania should
pay a Tribute to the Ottoman Port, as formerly; and that the Bloccades should
immediately be taken away from before Canisia and Great Waradin; so that the
Letters from the Grand Seignior and Grand Vizier containing nothing but General
Terms, which testified their Desires of Peace, and their Negotiations, and
Proposals far from any particular Condescentions, their Actions looked, as if
they designed nothing more than to gain time, and to hear, and observe what
progress the French made by their Arms in the Palatinate, and other parts of
Germany.

Their hopes in the French promises.
Nor indeed were the Turks deceived in these Measures, being supported by the
French Promises, and Arms, and without which, the Turks would have Condescended
to any Conditions which the Emperor and his Allies might have offered:
Notwithstanding which, the Faith of the French was so low in the Esteem of the
Turks, that had the Emperor in that Conjuncture proposed some little
Advantages, which might have kept up the Credit of the Ottoman Power amongst
their own People, a Peace would certainly have ensued, which some Years
afterward by the Wiles and Artifices of the French could not be obtained, nor
the Turks inclined thereunto by foul or fair means, by overthrows in Battle,
and loss of Towns, and a long continued Train of Misfortunes; The Germans
blamed for not making a Peace.
nor by the Mediations of England and Holland, offered by their respective
Ministers to the Port, as may hereafter be declared; so that it is an
unaccountable piece of Policy, the blame of which the World is apt to Charge on
the Clergy, and the secret Partisans of France hidden in the Imperial Councels,
there being at that time no apparent Reason why the Applications and Overtures
of the Turks were not Embraced, and improved to a Peace; For at that time the
French had entered the Palatinate with Fire and Sword; and their Armies
committing all sorts of Hostility, had entered the Archbishopricks of Mentz,
Cologne, the Dukedomes of Juliers, Bergue, and other Places of Suabia; so that
now it was manifest, the Emperor had the Wars of two mighty Powers to sustain,
which had soon overwhelmed all Germany, had not a firm Alliance been made
between England, Spain, Holland, and most of the Princes of Germany; which was
brought about by a most miraculous Providence; which not being the Subject of
this History, we shall turn our Discourse toward the Wars against the Turks;
the Treaty with whom breaking off, the Hostilities on both sides were carried
on with the same Fierceness and Cruelty as before.

The Turks contrary to their Natural Temper, were become extremely humble, and
Supplicant, debasing themselves to so low, and mean a Degree of Submission,
that the Imperial Ministers suspected that some Design lay covered under their
fawning Expressions, and over-acted Humility: All which would have appeared
real, had not the French encouraged the Divan with Presents, and Promises of
recovering all Hungary back, and something more, The French encourage the Turks
to continue the War,
if they would only reassume their Ancient Courage, and patiently support the
Inconvenience of a War for a few years longer; to incline them whereunto, the
French sent the Turks a Minute Account of all the Victories they had obtained
over the Germans, what Cities and Towns they had destroyed, what Devastations
and what Incursions they had made into the very Heart of Germany, with Fire and
Sword; by which they had already rendered all those Provinces on the Rhine, so
weak and miserable, that it was impossible for them to resist the violent
Course of the French Arms, much less, when united with the Puissance of the
Ottoman Empire. And to facilitate this Work, And endeavor to draw the King of
Poland from his Alliance.
several Engines were employed to Tamper with the Poles and Ambassadors sent to
that King; one of which was Monsieur de Bethune, who was Brother to the Queen
of Poland; and to quicken, and give life to this Negotiation, vast Sums of
Money were sent, sufficient to blind and corrupt the Mind of an Avaritious
Prince; and though these means were not productive of a Peace, yet they begot
such cold Motions of War, as looked something like a Truce, or an indifferent
Neutrality: And indeed, several Campagnes after this were carried on with so
slow a pace, that the Arms of Poland came not into the Field until it was
almost seasonable to retire from thence; The Poles cold in their Actings.
and such Negligence was practiced in their Martial Discipline, that they were
commonly surprised by the Tartar, and defeated: And so little care taken to
provide the Army with necessary food for Horse and Man, that in the year 1691,
(as may hereafter be made appear) all the Horses of the Army died, even in the
very Stables of the King, who was forced afterward to return home in a Wagon
drawn by Buffalo's and Oxen.

Howsoever nothing was omitted on the part of the Emperor to carry forward two
such important Wars, by several ways. And in the first place, The Emperor
encourages the Bulgarians and Rascians,
to secure the New Conquests, it was thought necessary, to encourage the
Bulgarians and Rascians, who had made a Defection from the Turks, and submitted
themselves entirely to the Service of the Emperor; and as a means to secure
those People, Count Marsigli, the Chief Director and Surveyor of the
Fortifications, was dispatched to erect a Fortress in some Place or other, the
most convenient for Defense and Protection of those People; for which no place
could be situate so advantageously as that of the Iron-Gate; which would very
much have secured the Christian Conquests, and been a good Frontier, between
which and Adrianople there was not the least Fortification in all that vast
Country; nor from thence to the very Walls of Constantinople.

Though the Emperor was greatly burdened by a War against France, and at the same
time against the Turk, yet all Care was taken both in one and the other. The
Imperial Chamber issued out vast Sums to Recruit the Militia in Hungary, And
makes Preparations against the Turks.
to Remount their Artillery, and provide all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions
for the next Campaign, with which the Magazines both in Servia and Sclavonia
were supplied; as also Carriages, Bridges, Boats, and all sorts of Warlike
Preparations, which were carried on by the great Industry of Count Caraffa,
Commissary-General.

In the mean time the Turks made continual Incursions into Bosnia, along the
sides of the Rivers Unna, and Culpa, but without much Success; they being on
all sides straightened in their Quarters, and Marches by the Germans. For
Piccolomini having notice, that the Pasha of Bosnia designed to overrun all
the Country near the Save, detached some Parties of Hungarians and Germans from
the Garrison of Proot, to discover the Actions of the Turks; and being in the
night time advanced some Leagues into the Enemies Country, they surprised the
Town of Lisnia, and set Fire to it, and killed all the Garrison, consisting of
500 men, some few only excepted, which they carried away Prisoners.

But the Confusion at the Ottoman Court was much greater, A Rebellion in Asia.
by reason of a new Rebellion in Asia carried on by Yedic a famous Robber in
that Country, and Partner with Yeghen Pasha, whom we mentioned in our Treatise
of the last Year; the which continued for some time before it was appeased, and
Yedic cut off: But before we touch upon that Story, it will be necessary to
declare the Fate of Yeghen, who had forced himself upon the Government, and
obliged the Vizier to Create him Seraskier, which happened in this manner.

After that Yeghen had fled from Belgrade, he quarrelled with Noradin Galga,
The Fate of Yeghen.
Son of the Tartar Chan; upon which, Noradin being a Man of a high Spirit,
called him Coward, and pitiful, mean spirited Rascal, fit for nothing but to
Command a Band of Thieves and Robbers; at which Yeghen, who looked on himself
as Seraskier, or General of the Army, was so enraged, that shaking his Topuz at
him, (which is a kind of Iron-Mace, He kills the Prince of Tartary.
carried by the Turks on the side of their Horses Saddle) caused him to be
Strangled before the Eyes of many of the principal Men belonging to the
Tartarian Court.

The News of this Affront and Outrage committed on the Son, the very hopes of
the House, highly enraged the Chan his Father; The Father meditates Revenge.
who studying Night and Day a Revenge, wrote to the Grand Signior and Grand
Vizier, in the most resenting Terms possible against Yeghen, urging, that that
insolent and unhumane Robber was to be destroyed, without which, the Cause of
the Musselmen could not be Blessed, nor any Fortune be expected against their
Enemies.

But the Grand Vizier thinking himself under some Obligations to Yeghen, who
had the Year before saved his life before Nissa; when the Janisaries mutinying
for want of Pay, (he being then Janizar-Aga) conspired to Strangle him: The
Grand Vizier favors Yeghen.
In remembrance of which, being now advanced to the sublime Office of Grand
Vizier, he endeavored to sweeten the matter, and render the case of Yeghen as
plausible as might be. But such was the Misfortune of Yeghen, that the Tartar
Chan coming in Person to Adrianople, to consult on such Measures as were
necessary to be taken for the succeeding Campaign, he fell on his Quarrel with
Yeghen, who had put his Son to Death, urging to the Divan, that there was an
unavoidable necessity for putting Yeghen to Death, as the Cause and Fomenter of
all the Mutinies in the Army, and the Rebellions in Asia.

Yeghen being advised by his Friends, and Correspondents, of which he had many
at the Ottoman Court, of the Complaints and Endeavors of the Tartar Chan
against him, found himself not only thereby defeated of his expected
Confirmation in the Office of Seraskier, but in danger of the Evil which the
Wiles and Accusations of an irreconcilable Enemy at the Court might bring upon
him. Wherefore abandoning himself to Despair, Yeghen commits all sorts of
Outrages.
he began again to practice all sorts of Villainy, to rob Villages and Towns,
entertaining all sorts of Robbers, Murderers, and People accustomed to Spoil,
arrogating to himself a power of creating Pasha's, and exercising all sorts of
Violence and Cruelty upon the Inhabitants of Romelia, or Greece. And moreover
he wrote to his Friends and Acquaintance in Asia, particularly to Yedic, to
Declare in favor of his Cause, which was also supported by the Authority of
the Grand Vizier.

Commands issued from the Port to take Yeghen either alive or dead.
But the Grand Seignior and the Divan entertaining Sentiments different to those
of the Vizier, consulting the necessity there was of gratifying the Chan,
issued immediate Orders to the Pasha of Sofia to suppress the Incursions of
Yeghen, and to Call to his Assistance the Nefiran, which are like our
Trained-Bands, or Militia of the Country, to seize, and take, either Dead or
Alive, this Yeghen Pasha, who had violated the Laws of their Prophet Mahomet,
and encouraged and fomented all the Rebellions in Asia.

This dismal News struck Yeghen with a sudden Amazement, so that not knowing
where to find any safety in the Parts where he remained, all the World
conspiring his Destruction, He flies into Albania.
he resolved to retire into Albania, and betake himself to the Aid and
Protection of his old and faithful Friend Mamoot Bei Oglu; it having been
suspected for some time, at the Port, that this Yeghen, whenever he should be
droven hard, would endeavor to shelter himself in Albania, under protection of
this Mamoot Bei; means were contrived beforehand, with a thousand fair
Promises made to Mamoot Bei, that whenever Yeghen should come for Refuge
under his Command, that he should do that Service to the Sultan, as to betray
him, or cut him off. Accordingly Yeghen putting himself into the hands of his
ancient Comrade, Mamoot, was received by him with outward Joy, and the most
Endearing Terms of Love, and real Sincerity, that could be expressed, and
desiring him to continue with him for some days, he promised him all security,
to join with him in his Adventures, and to run with him all the hazards of his
Fortune; and so continued to Comfort and Encourage him, until all his Troops
being got together, Mamoot Bei cuts off his Head.
when one Night being in Consultation with Yeghen, in what manner they might
with most Advantage annoy the Port, Orders were privately given to the
Domestic Servants to fall upon him, which was accordingly executed, and his
Head on a sudden taken from his Shoulders, with the Heads of many of his
Followers, which were immediately dispatched by Mamoot to the Port, for a
Testimony of his Fidelity to the Sultan, and in Reward thereof to Challenge the
Promises which had been made him.

In the Month of September last, as we have already related, News was brought
to the Port, that the Disorders in Asia increased, where the Robbers appeared
in great Bodies, Commanded in chief by Yedic, and encouraged by Yeghen,
Disorders in Asia by Yedic.
who sent Commissions over to his Kinsman Yedic, by which such numbers of
Robbers assembled from all Parts, that all the Country was spoiled and laid
waste by them; and the People being fled, there was nothing but Rapine and
Violence in all Places. To suppress these Disorders, Commands were sent by the
Vizier, to the Pashas and Governors; but these Officers were so far from being
able to Execute them, that they returned back stripped and plundered. Whereupon
new Measures were taken to pacify these Mutineers or Robbers rather, with
Promises, that Yeghen should be created General of the Army, and that these
Troops now in Asia should be passed over into Hungary, there to Fight under the
Command and Conduct of their Beloved Yeghen, where they all hoped to be made
Pasha's. But whilst these Mutineers were preparing to march into Europe, News
came to the Grand Signior of the Death of Yeghen, with many of his Followers;
the which was confirmed by the undoubted Evidence of their Heads, which were
laid at the Feet of the Sultan. This particular Action changed the whole Scheme
of the Turkish Councils; and all the soft Promises made to Yedic, Defiance
given to Yedic.
were changed into Vengeance and Punishment, Orders being given to the
Chimacam, not only to oppose and hinder the passage of the Asiaticks into
Europe, but to Fight and Defeat them them in their own Country. By this time a
great Party of these Rebels were come very near to Scutari, and scattered in
the adjacent Villages, where remaining with all security, not having as yet
received the fatal News of the Death of Yeghen; when by Order of the Chimacam,
A Party of his Soldiers defeated.
some of the Ottoman Troops quartered on the side of Scutari, fell upon them,
and by surprise, entirely defeated them, some of which were drowned in the Sea,
and others killed by the Sword: Those who were already passed over to
Constantinople, hearing of this Disaster, and the Fate of Yeghen, retired back
into Asia, and recounted those unhappy Stories to Yedic, who was upon his March
to follow his advanced Troops. Upon this News, Yedic, and his Companions,
despairing of all hopes of Pardon, declared themselves more openly Rebels than
before; so that assembling all the Scum and Rascality of the People, to the
number of about 6000 Men, Yedic marches to Prusa,
they marched toward Prusa in Bithynia, pillaging, destroying, and ruining all
in the way before them: So that there was no passage for any, unless Emirs or
Green-Heads, mounted on Mules and Asses with Pack-Saddles.

The Ottoman Court, which lately by the Death of Yeghen, and the Defeat of so
many Troops near Scutari, thought all things now safe and secure from the
Asiatick Rebellion, were again strangely surprised with a Consternation to hear
that the Rebellion increased, and grew hotter than before; to suppress which, a
Pasha was sent to Prusa to raise the Nefiran, who had the Fortune at first to
Defeat a considerable Body of the Enemy; but being a Person of no Experience in
the War, and ignorant of Martial Discipline, he unfortunately engaged with a
more expert Body of the Rebels, And defeats the Pasha.
by whom he was defeated, and made a miserable Sacrifice to the Fury and
Revenge of Yedic; who killed and made Prisoners, all the Forces of the Pasha.

Yedic being encouraged with this unexpected Success, caused himself to be
Proclaimed, Declared King of Anatolia, besieges Angora.
King and Sovereign of Anatolia; and by his Arbitrary Power, laying
Impositions, and exacting Contributions from all Cities and Towns of that
Country, he laid Siege to Angora, a rich City, famous for the Trade of Grogram
Yarn, who would not submit it self to the Tyranny and Plunder of Yedic: Of
which the English and other Merchants at Smyrna took such an Alarm, not knowing
but that the Rebels, encouraged with the Riches and Openness of the Town,
without any Walls or Fortifications, might march thither; they Packed up all
their Goods, and put themselves in a readiness to fly on Shipboard when any
Danger approached, where they might remain out of all danger or Violence either
to their Persons or Estates.

The People of Angora, being in a Condition not long to withstand a Siege, and
Despairing of all Relief from the Ottoman Port, made their Composition with
Yedic, Angora pays a Ransom.
and Ransomed their Town from Plunder, by the Payment of 80 Purses of Money,
each Purse containing 500 Dollars.

This unhappy State of Affairs, suggested unto the Turkish Governors their old
Methods of fair Promises, and smooth Words to work upon the Affections of Yedic
and his Accomplices, assuring them all of Pardon and Reward in case they would
return to their Duty: The Rebels refuse all Offers of Grace.
But these being a sort of rough Villains, bred up in Rapine and Violence, who
were Conscious that they could never merit a Pardon, and had transgressed
beyond all Hopes of ever being trusted, they no sooner heard the fawning Words
of the Grand Seignior's Grace and Favor pronounced toward them, but with one
Consent they cried out loudly against it, saying, That they had learned not to
be Cheated and Betrayed like Yeghen, and their Brethren near Scutari. And that
their Rebellion might carry a good Face, and some Reason with it, Yedic and his
Accomplices declared, That they took not up Arms for Spoil, or Disaffection to
the Grand Seignior, but out of pure Zeal to Religion, and true Profession of
the Mohammedan Law, which the present Governors had miserably corrupted: In
Defense of which he Summoned all the People and Inhabitants of Anatolia to come
in under his Standard, and join with them to Reform the Abuses of the
Government and State.

These Traitorous Practices of Yedic being made known at the Port; it plainly
appeared, that there was no other means and expedient left, to reclaim the
Practices of such Robbers, and suppress the dissolute Lives of Rebels, but only
force and dint of Sword; The Nature of a Teftish Pasha.
to which end the Pasha of that Country honored with the Title of Teftish,
which is as much as an Inquisitor, who in the Times of Peace, is every two or
three Years ordained to enquire into the State of Anatolia, and make enquiry
into Robberies, Breaches of the Peace, and Abuses of the Government committed
by the Kadees, Aga's, and other Officers: For execution of which, the Pasha is
commonly attended with 500 Men, and authorized with such an unlimited power,
that he may act and do what he pleases with as uncontrollable an Authority, as
the Sultan himself. I have known this sort of Teftish in the Summer time having
pitched his Camp near some great Town, immediately to call for the Kadi, or
Judge, and the Imaum or Priest of the place, and to demand of them the Names of
the Lewd and Disorderly Young Men of the Place, and the Villages adjacent; and
in case the Pasha, or the Imaum especially, shall give an ill Report of any of
them, as of such, who come not constantly to Prayers, or frequent the Moschs,
his Business is done for him; and for as many of them as come under his evil
Report. For the Teftish Pasha concluding all such for Thieves, requires no
farther Testimony or Proofs against them; but sending for them, Condemns them,
and Hangs them up on the next Tree.

In this manner the Business of Yedic and his Accomplices, was committed to the
care and conduct of Teftish Achmet Pasha, whose first step was rightly to
inform the People of the perfidious Designs of Yedic, who fought against the
Sultan and the Laws of the Prophet Mahomet, of which the People being once
persuaded, withdrew themselves from that Party, and turned their Arms against
Yedic, and his Villainous Accomplices; by which means the Teftish having
increased his Forces to such a considerable number, that he might with all
security promise himself Victory, he marched against the Enemy, and after two
Days, he came in sight of their Camp, and found them drawn up in good order,
according to Martial Discipline. The Teftish engages Yedic and defeats him.
The Pasha readily attacked them with 3000 select and brave Men, and well
mounted, and with such Resolution, that at the first Onset they put the
Vanguard of the Enemy into disorder, and with a Shower of Arrows from the
whole Army, they put them all to flight; so that their Leader Yedic, trusted
all his safety to the swiftness of his Horse; notwithstanding which, the
Teftish pressing for an entire Victory, pursued him so hard, that having
enclosed him in the midst of two Squadrons, Yedic himself, with many of his
chief Captains and Commanders, were either killed, or made Prisoners. The rest
of the Common Soldiery seeing themselves deprived of their Chief, submitted to
the Teftish Pasha, desiring to be enrolled under his Banner; but the Pasha
having no good opinion, or hope of getting any benefit from an Union with such
a sort of Rabble, and Scum of the People, who had been bred up, and nursed in
Robbery and Violence; resolved to make no use of such corrupted Companions in
his Army, but dismissed them all with License to return to their Countries, and
respective Habitations, and afterward proceeded to reform the Abuses and
Disorders of those ill-govern'd Provinces.

The Port having now entirely suppressed those two desperate Rebellions, Regeb
Pasha made General in the place of Yeghen whose Nephew is put to Death.
the most dangerous of any in such a time of a decaying Militia, and a
victorious Enemy, began to be at leisure to prepare for their War in Hungary;
and in the first place Regeb Pasha was created Seraskier, or General, in the
place of Yeghen: But first to extirpate all that Party entirely, they seized on
the Nephew of Yeghen in Philippopolis, and put him to Death, with 40 of his
Followers; as they did also the Governor of Widin, whom Yeghen had put into
that Place the last Campaign, being a Favorite and Creature of his.

The Turks to encourage their People to prosecute the War in Hungary, did not
only cause a Report to fly about, That the Sultan had resolved to appear this
Year at the Head of his Army against the Christians; but the Sultan did really
march from Adrianople toward Sophia, The Grand Seignior marches to Sophia.
with an Army of about 30000 Men, together with a Train of Artillery,
consisting of 90 Pieces of Cannon, and 6 Mortar-pieces of a very large size,
the which being joined afterward to a Body of 40000 Men under the Command of
the Seraskier Regeb Pasha, formed a considerable countenance of an Army; but
being all raw, and undisciplined Men, would, as was supposed, be inspired with
new Courage at the presence of their Sultan.

On the 15/25 of April, April.
the Grand Seignior began to move from Adrianople, at which time a very great
Earthquake was felt both in that City and Constantinople, An Earthquake about
the time of the Grand Signiors Departure.
which was so terrible, that several Moschs, Houses, and Towers were
overthrown. At which time the Tungia and Meritz, Rivers which glide on a Sandy
and Gravelly Soil near the Walls of Adrianople, overflowed their Banks with so
violent an Inundation, that they Drowned all the Fields and Meadows round, and
forced the Turks to remove their Camp, and pitch at some farther distance; the
which Accidents were diversely discoursed by the Learned Men, and the Turks
being naturally Superstitious, did generally interpret them as sinister Omens
for the succeeding Campaign. Howsoever Sultan Solomon marched forwards to
Sophia; where according to the Custom of the Turkish Army, they soiled their
Horse, giving them Grass, and remained in expectation of the arrival of the
Asiatick Troops, and other Forces not yet come up; and here it was that the
Sultan entertained himself in the Army, not intending to proceed nearer to the
Enemy.

In the mean time great Conferences and Consultations were held at the Imperial
Court, for carrying on two mighty Wars against France, and the Ottoman Empire;
to which end the Forces were divided; those which were to serve in the Empire
against France, were committed to the auspicious Conduct of the Elector of
Bavaria, and the Duke of Lorrain: Those which were intended against the Turk in
Servia, were to be commanded by that Valiant and Fortunate General Prince Lewis
of Baden; and under him as Field Marshal by the Duke of Croy, General of the
Artillery was Marquis Parella, Lieutenant General was Count Veterani, and
Major-Generals were the Counts of Hoffkirchen, Duke of Holstein, with the
Princes of Hanover and Heisler: And on the other side in the Upper Hungary,
Transylvania, Bosnia, and Sclavonia, the Command was lodged in the Hands of the
Counts Aspremont, Piccolomini, Trautmansdorff, Guido of Staremberg, Herbeville,
and Baron Herbeville; whose force consisted of 11 Regiments of Cuirassiers,
nine Regiments of Dragoons, and 20 Regiments of Foot; together with the several
Independent Companies of Hungarians, Croatians, and Rascians, who had lately
taken up Arms against the Turks.

In the mean time Tekeli, to keep up his Credit and Reputation with the Turks,
caused a Report to spread abroad at the Ottoman Port; that by his Spies, and by
his Letters of Advice, he had certain Intelligence, that the French had so
distressed the Empire, that it was impossible for the Emperor to spare at that
time above 10000 Men to carry on the War in Servia; and that all his Measures
in Transylvania, and the Upper Hungary, were entirely broken.

And indeed by the Plots of Tekeli, and the Contrivances and Intrigues of the
French, whose Emissaries began now to spread in all the great and considerable
Towns, as well in Hungary as in Germany, Towns and Countries were burnt, and
vast Devastations committed thereon. The City of Cronstadt in Transylvania, was
in the Month of May totally destroyed and consumed by fire, May.
which was kindled at the four Angles thereof; Plots of the French discovered.
which in a few Hours, by the help of a strong Wind, was reduced to Ashes,
notwithstanding the Endeavors of Colonel Baron de Pace to extinguish it; only
by the help of his Soldiers he preserved the Castle, and the Ammunition
therein, notwithstanding the Flames, which by the forcible Winds were carried
to the very Walls of it. At the same time the like Misfortune befell the
Fortress of Honot in the Upper Hungary, and the Citadel of the Jews at Prague,
so that both one and the other were in a few Hours miserably reduced to Ashes;
all which was suspected to have been done by Treasonable Practices, and not by
Chance, or Accident; and that which gave undoubted Assurances thereof, were
certain Sacks of Powder found at the Gates of some Houses in Vienna; and a Fire
breaking out in a House adjoining to the great Hospital of the City, being
kindled at a time when the Wind was very high, put all the City into a great
Combustion; but by the Vigilance of the Magistrates, and the activeness of the
Soldiers, it was soon extinguished: The which horrid Practices were some Days
afterward discovered to have been acted by certain Frenchmen, who being
convicted by course of Justice, were sentenced, as Incendiaries, to be cast
into the Fire, and committed to the Flames. The which Trials and Proofs being
produced, and laid before the Council of State, extorted from the benign Nature
of His Imperial Majesty, a severe Edict for Banishing all the French out of his
Dominions, The French Banished out of the Empire.
unless such as had been Naturalized, or for the space of 10 Years past, could
prove their Abode, or Residence with their Wives, established in some City,
were all, without any exception, to depart in the space of 14 Days. The which
Edict, how severe soever it might seem at another time, was in the present
Conjuncture no less than necessary, when the French Nation was crept into every
City and Country, and entertained for Valets de Chamber, Pedants, Dancing
Masters, Cooks, and such like in most of the Houses and Families of Princes,
and Nobles of principal Quality; where they served for Spies, and Traitors to
the Empire: But the Wars in Germany not being the Subject of this History, let
us proceed to the Affairs of Turkey, where it was reported, That the Turks were
assembling all the force they were able to recover the City of Belgrade; and
that the Seraskier was already in the Field, and had prepared Bridges to pass
the Morava above Jagodina; and began to march so fast, as if he intended to
force Belgrade, before the Grand Vizier was joined with him, the noise whereof
caused some Consternation at Belgrade; but at the appearance of Prince Lewis of
Baden, Pr. Lewis coming to the Army, encourages the Soldiers.
sent thither with Commission of General of the Imperial Forces in Hungary, all
the Fears of the Soldiers vanished; and every one reassumed his Courage, and at
the Command of the Prince, fell to work about the Fortifications; the which
Work being by direction of His Highness put into a way of dispatch; he
proceeded forward to the Army.

And on the 14th of June, June.
being arrived at Semendria, he made it his business in the first place to
enquire, and inform himself of the true State of the Affairs of the Enemy, who
according to common report of the Spies, were said to be very near, being
encamped in the Plains of Jagodina, to the Number of 40000 Men under Command of
the Seraskier, the greatest part of which were Asiaticks, raw, and
Undisciplined Soldiers, to which very speedily the Grand Vizier was to join
with 10000 Turks, and a considerable Train of Artillery, which was already on
the way from Sophia. Reports of the Turks Power, alarm Pr. Lewis.
The Prince being alarmed hereat by reason of the small force he had with him,
dispatched an Express away to the Counts of Veterani and Piccolomini, with
Orders to hasten their March what was possible, and come to his necessary
reinforcement against so formidable an Enemy; and in the mean time, the heavy
Baggage was sent to Belgrade, with about 30000 Inhabitants of that place, who
for their better security, were ordered to pass the Save: But for the more
certain Intelligence of all, the Prince dispatched an Express to Hassan Pasha
Palanca, Hassan Pasha Palanca.
where Count Hoffkirchen was Quartered, to know of him what News he had
received there from the Camp of the Enemy. At this Palanca I lodged one Night,
as I remember, which is no other than a small Fortress built of Stone in a
Woody and a Desolate Country, at the Charge of one Hassan Pasha, with intent
only to cover a Chan, or Inn for Reception of Travelers, and their Goods, from
Spoilers and Robbers, which often infested that place, where notwithstanding by
means of this Fort, Garrisoned by 60 Soldiers, Strangers may sleep, and remain
secure from Robbers.

The Messenger being returned from Hoffkirchen, brought Intelligence that the
Turks were neither so numerous, and strong, nor so near, as common Fame
reported: And they only appeared sometimes in Parties on the River Morava, but
with some Care, and Caution in apprehension of the Germans, whose Numbers though
they knew not, yet they were sensible enough of their Valor and Vigilance.
This News, and the Conjunction with the Militia of Veterani and Piccolomini,
Veterani and Piccolomini join with Pr. Lewis.
greatly encouraged, and animated the Prince; and more especially, because that
Piccolomini had passed a Bridge over the Save, between Belgrade and Sawaz, for
the more commodious Transportation of Ammunition, and Victuals, which came from
the Parts of Hungary.

In the mean time Tekeli did not remain idle, but made several Incursions, with
design to relieve Temeswaer, Giula, and Waradine, which were straightly blocked
up by the Imperialists: In which, though he did not succeed, yet having joined
with the Pasha of Silistria, he fell upon Fetislau, a Garrison of the Rascians,
Fetislau ^^en by Tekeli
which after a stout defense for 12 Days, and having no hopes of succor, they
were forced to yield at Discretion, and being made Prisoners, several of the
principal Men, with their Colors, were sent in triumph to the Grand Seignior,
who in recompense thereof, sent a Scimetar, a Vest of Sables, and some Money
unto Tekeli, (with an Aferum) or You have well done, and do still better.
Tekeli having put a Garrison of 1000 Janisaries into Fetislau, he marched to
Orsoua, a place which Heisler had lately deserted and demolished, which he
possessed, and delivered it into the Hands of the Prince of Walachia, to be
Garrisoned, And possess Orsoua.
and made a place of Arms, and a Magazine for diverse sorts of Provisions and
Ammunition expected from Nicopolis; and which, if well fortified and provided,
might be considered, as the Key of the Upper Hungary.

About the same time, Count Corbelli made a Detachment of 1000 Heydukes, from
the Blockade of Waradine, who approaching near the Walls with intention to
carry off the Cattle which were feeding thereabouts, they were so furiously
attacked by the Enemy, that before they could retreat, 300 Heydukes killed by
the Turks.
they lost 300 of their Men, and amongst the rest Captain Tugnochy, a Valiant
Soldier, who the last Year had signalized himself on various occasions against
the Turks.

This Loss was soon afterward recompensed by the Success which the Croats
gained upon the Turks; who having formed a Body of about 8000 Men, intended to
spoil all the Country round about Costanovitza, near the River Unna. On the
other side the Croats, to the Number of 2000 Men, under the Command of Count
Drascovitz, marched against them, with design rather to view the Countenance of
the Enemy, than to give them Battle; took their March through certain Woods and
Mountains, and unfrequented Ways; when happily near a place called Czrin, The
Croats defeat a great Body of the Turks.
they met a strong Party of Turks, who were come out also to discover the
Enemy; and having espied the Croats, and believing them to be of greater force
than they really were, they betook themselves to Flight; but being pursued by
the Croats, several of them were taken Prisoners; and by them it was known,
that 8000 Turks, or thereabouts, under the Command of Sar Mustapha Pasha, lay
encamped not far from that place.

Upon these Advices the Count and his Croats resolved bravely to attack the
whole Camp; which being performed without other Hesitation or Delay, and taking
a short Turn about some little Hills, they charged the Turks with such Fury,
that they being surprised with some Consternation, the Spahees betook
themselves to Flight, leaving 2000 Janissaries open and undefended, who all
yielded themselves Prisoners at discretion; of which some intimation having
been given to the Croats on the Confines, they marched with such haste, that
they met the Spahee's in their Flight; and the Bridges being broken down, the
greatest part were made Prisoners, besides many who endeavoring to Swim were
Drowned in the Waters; A complete Victory.
in which Action the Croats took 11 Colors, and much Booty. In this Fight the
Flower of the Militia of Bosnia was cut off; and the Ways were covered with
dead Bodies for the whole length of an Hungarian Mile; of which many of them by
the finery of their Clothing, were judged to be Persons of Quality: The
Commander in Chief, called Sar Mustapha Pasha Kaja, with the Bey, or the
Lieutenant General, were taken Prisoners; and according to the Report of those
who came to enquire after some who were missing, there were 6000 Men killed and
scattered: In which Action very few Croats were killed, or wounded.

Count Corbelli having intelligence that the Turks of Jeno and Giula intended
to fortify Fechedebator, in revenge for his late Misfortune, resolved to use
his Endeavors to surprise the Castle, and thereby save the Turks the trouble of
their intended Fortifications; and in order thereunto he mounted the Regiment
of Gondola on Horseback, and with 500 Hussars, and 100 Musketeers, and about
as many Heydukes, which he had mounted on Wagons, he passed the River Geresch
in sight of the Garrison of Waradin, who had drawn out about 2000 of their Men
into the Field: But to amuse the Enemy, Corbelli marched to and again the whole
Day; and at Night he detached two great Bodies of Hussars before, to take
cognizance of the place; and being come near to Fechedebator, they took two
Rascians Prisoners belonging to the place, by whom they understood that there
were not above 50 armed Turks in the place, besides some few Rascians; for the
greatest part of the Garrison were gone to Jeno, to solemnize the Marriage of a
certain Person of chief Quality in that Country; upon which intelligence the
Party sent to discover only, without farther design, Corbelli Summons
Fechedebator.
meeting this Opportunity, and resolving not to lose it, sent immediately a
Summons to the Castle to surrender; to which the Turks returning an impertinent
and scornful Answer; and saying, That when he brought the Keys of their City
with him, meaning Giula, Jeno, and Waradin; upon taking of which, they should
be forced to surrender, that then they would open their Gates to them; until
which time they craved their excuse, intending to defend themselves to the
utmost Extremity. At the same moment that this Answer was returned, a Rascian
who had made his Escape out of the Town, advised that there was a great
Division arisen amongst the Turks in the Castle, of the which Corbelli desirous
to make use, he caused the Regiment of Gondola to pass the River on Horseback,
and the Foot on Ferry-Boats and Floats, and being on the other side, he drew up
in order of Battle in sight of the Fortress, threatening them, that in case they
did not surrender in the space of one quarter of an Hour, that he would give no
Quarter to any Person whatsoever.

The Governor of the Castle being terrified with this sudden Demand with such
affrighting Menaces, he requested the respite but of one Day only; which being
denied, he then Capitulated to have 30 Carts allotted to them, and to be
Convoyed with their Arms and Baggage to Waradin; but Corbelli refusing that
also, they were conducted to Jeno, Fechedebator is surrendered.
a place infected with Sickness, and starved with Famine. Accordingly the Turks
came forth to the Number of 40 Soldiers, 14 Young Men with Arms in their Hands,
with about 80 Women and Young Children, who were all carried to Jeno.

In the mean time Corbelli entered the place, and found the Castle in good
repair, encompassed on one side with a Ditch full of Water, fortified with
Palisadoes, and on the other side with the River Geresch; the which place, though
in it self small, was yet considerable for its Situation, being seated in a
convenient place to cut off all Communication between Waradin, and the Towns
straightened by Blockades; and for that reason Corbelli put a Garrison into it
of 200 Hussars under Command of Comloschi a stout and valiant Soldier, and
after this Action returned to his Camp.

In the mean time Prince Lewis of Baden had discovered that the Design of the
Seraskier was to avoid a Battle; and that the Report he gave out of his March
to Belgrade, was only to amuse the Germans, and cause them to draw their Troops
on that side, whilst he encamped his Forces near the Banks of the River Morava.
Wherefore the Prince having reinforced the Garrison of Belgrade with 2000 Foot,
July. Pr. Lewis encamps near the River Morava.
and fortified Semendria, he moved with the whole Body of his Army, and toward
the end of July, encamped near the Morava; where Boats being provided, the same
Night by help of the Moon, a Bridge was cast over the River, over which 2000
Horse were Commanded to march under the Command of Colonel Strasser, The Turks
retreat.
to observe the Countenance of the Enemy; who upon the News of the Germans
Advance, had made their Retreat. Whereupon Prince Lewis having raised a Fort,
and put a Garrison into it of 6000 Men to secure the Bridge, he marched his
whole Army on the 2d of August over the same, August.
with design to pursue the Enemy, and either force them to a Battle, or to
abandon all their Magazines at Nissa. The Turkish Army under the Command of the
Seraskier, did not then consist of above 40000 good fighting Men, and
disciplined Soldiers, the rest were raw and unexperienced Fellows, fit rather
to follow the Plough, or Plunder, than to fight a Battle. The Army of Prince
Lewis consisted of about 12000 Germans, The force of both Armies.
and 6000 Hungarians and Hussars, besides some of the Country People, who were
got into a Body in hopes of Booty and Plunder, being animated thereunto by the
Success of the Caesarean Arms. Notwithstanding this great disadvantage in
Numbers, the Germans being Spirited with Desires of farther Glory, and the
meaner sort of them with hopes of Prey and Booty, The Germans contemn their
Enemies.
and all confiding in a continual Course and Run of Fortune, boldly proceeded
on their March, having the Turks in Contempt, whom they had so often overthrown
and defeated.

The truth is, the Turks were in a bad Condition both at Home and Abroad; The
Grand Vizier goes not to the War.
the Grand Vizier himself durst not appear in Person in the Field, least his
Enemies at home should suggest Matters to the Sultan in his Absence, which
might cost him his Head, or the Loss of his Office: And indeed the Army was so
inconsiderable this Year, that it seemed beneath the Dignity of a Grand Vizier
to appear in the Field, with other than a Royal Army, which was ever reckoned
at 100000 Men; to which it was much inferior, and scarce did arise to half the
Number. For the Tartar Chan excused his joining with the Turkish Army this
Year, by reason of the Alarms given them by the Muscovites, who in vast Numbers
threatened their Country, and were on the Frontiers ready to enter with Fire and
Sword. The Militia also of Aleppo, Damascus, Arbekier, and others of the more
Eastern Countries of Asia, which always compose a great Nerve of the Ottoman
Arms, began to mutiny for want of Money, not being able longer to support and
maintain themselves: Upon their Remonstrance of which to the Grand Vizier
Answer being returned, That the Royal Treasuries were empty, and exhausted, and
that they were obliged by the Constitutions of the Empire, to maintain
themselves out of their Timarlucks, or Lands given them for that Service: The
Reply was so displeasing, that great Disorder would have followed, had not the
Torrent of the Soldiers Anger been seasonable stopped by paying the Spahee's,
or Timars, five Dollars apiece, which qualified, and appeased the Mutiny, and
Sollevation which was ready to break forth into an open Rebellion. A Mutin^
prevented in the Turkish Camp. Heisler demolishes Orsoua.


Whilst Prince Lewis was on his March, News was brought to him, that Heisler
had demolished Orsoua, and retired to some other Quarters; of which the Turks
having received Advice, they entered into it, and having strengthened it with
some Palisadoes, they put a Garrison into it. At which Prince Lewis was so
displeased, that he sent immediate Orders to that General, that he should
forthwith return thither, and endeavor again to recover the place; and with
all possible speed repair the Fortifications, and conserve that Post, as the
most convenient Situation, whereby to transport Victuals and Ammunition, and
cut off all the Succors, and Correspondences on that side, by which the Turks
might bring in Succors and Relief to Temeswaer, and other places,
Countermanded by Pr. Lewis.
which had been for some time straightened by Blockades. But in regard that
General Heisler was much indisposed by Sickness, Heisler sick.
and forced to retire to Hermanstadt, for recovery of his Health, Orders were
given to the General Count Herbeville, Herbeville ordered to recover the place.
to execute that part which was to be acted by Heisler, and accordingly having
dispatched Sempsai with his Hussars in the Van, it was his Fortune to encounter
a Party of Turks, from whom he carried 30 Heads, made 25 Prisoners, and took
three Colors. The General following with the rest of the Army, and being come
near to Orsoua, another Party of Turks appeared, which had newly passed from
the other side of the Danube in small Boats; and these being Attacked by
Herbeville, between the Fortress and the River, the whole Body was in a moment
either cut to pieces, or Drowned, He defeats a Party of Turks,
or made Prisoners; of which 50 Horse were taken, and one Standard.

After which the gross Body of the Imperial Army being advanced under the
Fortress, the place was observed to be well fortified; and on the other side of
the River they discovered an Army in their Trenches, well defended and guarded
with Cannon; and on the Shore side many well armed Galleys, and 100 Vessels
laden with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions; the which, according to
Report, was said to be the Army of Tekely joined to the Forces of the Pasha of
Silistria, and another Pasha. Howsoever the General being desirous to make
trial of his Fortune, advanced with his Forces near the place, and having
posted themselves under shelter of Banks and Sacks of Earth, to take a view of
the Enemies State and Condition, And Petires from Orsoua.
they were so warmly received by their Cannon and Grenades, that they were
forced to retire toward Caransebes; and at the same time News came that Tekely
had killed 100 Rascians, and taken some Boats with the Hussars which were in
them, and advanced with resolution to carry Succors and Relief into Temeswaer.

In the mean time Prince Lewis was on his March toward Nissa, but finding the
way very bad, and difficult by reason of the thick Woods, and Marshy Grounds,
and much Rain, so that it was almost impossible to draw their Cannon and
Wagons laden with Provisions, which began already to be wanting, it was
resolved to retire to Semendria.

And here it was that Prince Lewis altered the Course of his March; and being
come into the Parts of Ressava, August 27th and 28th.
the Foot advanced a Day before, and the Horse following them the next, they
joined at Gabrovitz, where a Survey being taken of the Situation of the Place
along the Banks of Morava, by several Engeniers, and particularly by Count
Marsigli, A Bridge made over the Morava.
they fixed on a place the most commodious for casting a Bridge over the River,
which was effected in a few Hours, and the same secured with 16 pieces of
Cannon, mounted on a Redoubt which they newly raised, and defended by 500 Men.

The Germans having passed all their Forces over the River, a strong Detachment
of the Enemy appeared, and surprised the Sentinels and Out-guards, of which the
Tartars killed some, and pursued the others, until the Imperial Troops, (who
were always ready upon the first Alarm) gave a stop to the Career of the
Tartars, of which they killed some, and took two Prisoners; from whom they
received intelligence, that a great Body of Turks and Tartars under Command of
Sultan Galga, Son of the Chan of Tartary, had passed the Morava near Jagodina,
with design to attack the Germans on that side of the River near Passarovitz.
And moreover that the Seraskier was on his March with an Army of 50000 Men
toward Passarovitz and Semendria, with design so to environ the Imperial Army
on all sides, The Designs of the Turks.
as to cut off the Provisions from coming to their Camp; the which Resolution
was formed upon the Report of some French Fugitives, who had deserted and fled
to the Turks; and given them intelligence, that the Germans were in great want
of Provisions, which was the cause of their Retreat to Semendria.

Prince Lewis being well assured, that he was able to march securely to
Passarovitz, notwithstanding a Thousand Difficulties which were presented
before him; Pr. Lewis resolves to Attack the Seraskier.
and though a Body of Turks and Tartars were not far distant, and the whole Army
of the Seraskier encamped not above an Hour and halfs March from the Christian
Forces; yet trusting to the good Conduct of his General, and the Bravery and
Courage of his Soldiers, he resolved to dislodge the Camp of the Seraskier, and
thereby open a free Communication between the Palanca of Hassan Pasha and
Semendria, whereby the Magazines would be maintained, and the Reputation of the
Imperial Arms supported.

Hereupon on the 29th of August by Break of Day in the Morning, His March.
the Prince commanded two Regiments of Dragoons, with all the Quarter Masters,
and Foragers, and a Party of 500 Horse to ascend the rising of a Hill not far
distant from the Bridge, to cover and secure the March of the Foot, which were
sent before under Command of General Heisler, and Count Guido of Staremberg,
who were appointed to secure the Baggage in passing the River Ressava: And at
the same time the Prince himself, with his Cavalry, advanced toward the River,
keeping the rising Hill on his right Hand, and the Plain to Ressava on his
left; marching always in a Line, the better to withstand the Enemies Horse,
which ran on all Quarters to find out where they might best annoy and break in
upon them. And here it was that Prince Lewis very wisely, and with much Policy
commanded the Horsemen to dismount, as if they intended to lodge there, for
securing their Baggage: But in regard the sole Design of the Prince was to
fight the Enemy, and drive them to the other side of the River, he commanded
Colonel St. Croix with some Hundreds of choice German Horse, and the Generals
Cziacchy, Diach, He advances toward the Turks.
and Badiani a Captain of Strigonium, with their Hungarians, privately to pass
the River, and with their Hussars to hide themselves amongst some Woods and
Bushes in a certain Valley, opposite to the Horse; upon which Veterani, and
Piccolomini, and the Hussars, advanced in full Career against the Enemy, whilst
the Prince, with the rest of his Cavalry, followed upon an easy Gallop.

At the first the Turks did not believe that the Design of the Prince was to
advance so far upon them, or to force them to a Battle; and therefore they
retired very easily with their Tartars, keeping a Reserve of 12000 Horse, with
500 Janissaries mounted behind, which they embosked in a Wood to attack Veterani
and Piccolomini, which they looked upon only as a handful of Men: But so soon
as they discovered the whole right Wing moving through the Plains under
Veterani, and the left commanded by Piccolomini; and the Prince following with
the main Body of the Army, directly marching, and pouring upon them, they made
more haste in their Retreat than before, and being attacked on all sides, both
from the Hills, Mountains, and Valleys, they made a hasty March away for the
space of four Hours; but being closely pursued to a narrow Pass, where they
were forced to make a Stand, they were so furiously assailed by the Troops of
Veterani, and afterward seconded by those of the Prince, that in a short time
they were defeated, and dispersed in the Woods; The Turks defeated.
in which being pursued, and hunted for the space of an Hour and a half into
the Plains on the other side; the Turks were so beaten, that above 400 of their
best Horse, both Turks and Tartars were killed, and many Prisoners taken,
amongst which was the Commander in chief of the 500 Janissaries, with 12
Standards and Timbals which are the Music of Pasha's.

In this Confusion many of the Turks forsook their Horses, and betook
themselves to their Heels through Bushes and Thickets, and the adjacent Hills
and Mountains; but being pursued by the Heydukes and Hussars, who were
acquainted with the private and secret Ways and Conveyances of the Country,
many of them were killed and taken: Others of them, who to make themselves more
light for Escape, threw away their Arms, and whatsoever else might incumber
them in their Flight; so that all the Ways were strowed with Lances, Turbants,
Boots, Caps, Clothes, Vests and Arms, all which became a welcome Booty and
Spoil to the Victorious Soldiery.

This Success so encouraged the Germans, that Prince Lewis to improve this
Advantage to an entire Victory, resolved to defeat and thwart the Designs of
the Son of the Tartar Chan, (who lay encamped on the other side of the River)
by falling upon him before he could come to join with the Turkish Cavalry
lately beaten: And though the Imperial Horse were much tired and harassed with
the Fatigue of that Days Action, he returned notwithstanding to the Bridge,
where after three Hours March, about seven a Clock in the Evening he arrived.

The Cavalry being here refreshed, and set up for a while, the Prince went in
^erson to visit the Infantry, which he found well encamped out of all danger,
and every thing perfectly well disposed, and in good order by the Care and
Conduct of those two brave Generals, Veterani and Piccolomini.

After which some Scouts were sent to discover the Ways, and observe the Ground
on that side; Consultations to Assault the Enemy.
upon whose Report that there was only a very narrow passage through a rough
and thick Wood, about half an Hours March in length, by which there was an
Entrance into a small Plain, which if the Enemy should possess, they might
easily defend the Pass, and make an Attack on the Tartars difficult and
hazardous. Prince Lewis and the Generals, being well assured hereof, detached
Count Solaro with 500 Men to secure the Passage into the Plain, but the Enemy
having intimation thereof, with 3000 Janissaries, and a good Body of Horse, not
only gave a stop to his March, but caused him to retire with the loss of
several Men: But General Heisler coming seasonably in to their succor, so
advantageously posted himself within the Woods and thick Bushes, that he
maintained the Pass, until such time (which was next Morning by Break of Day)
that Prince Lewis coming on with his main force in a thick Fogg, posted himself
before the Wood, being sheltered on the right Hand by Thickets and Bushy
Grounds, almost unpassable, extending his left Wing to the side of the Morava;
and being thus advantageously drawn up, immediate Orders were dispatched to the
Cavalry, The Turks attack the Christians,
which were refreshing themselves at the Bridge, to hasten unto the Foot; but
before they could come up, the Fog clearing away, unexpectedly the whole Body
of the Turkish Army appeared (the most part consisting of Moors and Arabs)
drawn up in order of Battle, just fronting the Imperial Infantry, which the
Turks assailed with such unusual Fury, and sudden Violence, that Prince Lewis
had scarce time to draw up his second Line into a posture of defense. The
Imperialists howsoever stood the Shock with great firmness and constancy, and
received the Fire both of their great and small Shot; and though the Chevaux de
Freeze, were of great use to them at this, as on other occasions, yet many of
the German Foot were at that time cut to pieces by the Turkish Scimetars.

And now the Fight became very hot on both sides, and continued so for the
space of two Hours within Pistol-shot, by which time General Count Casselli
being come up with his Cavalry, and sounding without the Wood with his
Trumpets, Hautboys, and Kettle-Drums, the Enemy were put into such a Fear and
Consternation, that they began to retreat into the neighboring Wood; by which
Prince Lewis having gained both Time and Ground, drew up his Horse behind the
Foot; Are beaten and retreat.
and whilst he remained in this posture, a Bavarian Soldier, (who had been
taken Prisoner at the Siege of Buda) having made his Escape, came and reported,
that the Enemy was retired to another Plain behind the Wood; where for their
better security, they had thrown up some Earth, and made new Trenches: Upon
this Intelligence the Generals were in great hopes of gaining an entire
Victory, if they could handsomely come to Charge the Enemy in the Flank; to
perform which they designed to open a passage by their Musketeers; but it
seems there was no need of so much Labor: for Count Guido of Staremberg being
commanded to advance before with a Party to discover the Countenance and
Disposition of the Enemy, he found a way sufficiently open and wide for a
March, and not above 500 paces to the Plain, where the Enemy was retired not
far behind their Trenches.

They quit their ground.
Upon this News the Prince immediately detached 300 Horse, and a Battallion of
his own Regiment, and another of Count Strasser's under Command of that Count,
to seize that Post, which succeeded so happily, that the Turks upon their first
appearance, cowardly abandoned the place, and fled; which the Imperialists
possessed, whilst another party of Foot came in to their Assistance; and then
the Cannon on both sides fired with mutual damage, the which continued for the
space of an Hour and half; during which time several German Soldiers were
killed and wounded, Some German Soldiers killed.
as also four Captains killed, besides Lieutenants and Subaltern Officers who
were wounded.

And here it was thought fit to take Breath a while, and enter into
Consultation, whether it were advisable to prosecute the Victory farther, or
not, and pursue the Enemy, who had again posted themselves with more advantage
in another Trench about 3 or 400 Paces behind the former, and which was much
stronger, being encompassed with a deep Ditch of Water, and only accessible in
one place, which the Turks continued to fortify without any fear or
apprehension of danger.

Another Attack on the Turks.
Upon due consideration of the strength of the place, and the Difficulties of an
Attack, it was concluded that an Attempt was to be hazarded, and that with all
expedition, and without loss of time: Accordingly the Prince ordered that the
first Trench should be levelled for the more easy passage of the Horse; and
that Count Piccolomini (to whom the Command of the Vanguard was that Day
committed) should advance with some Regiments of Horse, and some Battalions of
Foot, and put himself into Battalia before the Trench; and Count Palfi with his
Regiment of Heydukes, was ordered to take the left Hand by way of the Wood, and
to sound all his Drums, and Hautboys, and other Instruments, making the
greatest noise he was able in the Wood, and to give an Alarm, as if some great
Body were in motion, to Attack them in the Rear, which would serve to put them
into greater Consternation and Disorder.

Matters being thus wisely ordered, Piccolomini began to advance in Battalia,
and the Enemy endeavored to repulse him with their Cannon; but when they
observed that the Germans without fear of their Fire, advanced still resolutely
upon them, and gained ground; The Turks fly to Patoschin.
and that the Heydukes came on desperately to the left; so fearing to be
engaged in the midst, they abandoned this their last advantageous Post, and
with great Disorder marched through thick Woods to their Camp at Patoschin.

This Cowardly Flight of the Turks inspired new Courage into the Christians to
pursue them to their ultimate Retirement; which they had done to the entire
Destruction of the Enemy, but that the Way was so narrow, that they were forced
to break their Ranks, and march one after the other, which lost much time, and
gave the Turks means to escape, and the Janissaries having Horses ready Sadled,
notably advanced in their Flight; but Baron Zant having Orders to pursue the
Rear-Guard of the Enemy, being joined with the Regiments of Sarau, and Kisel,
they overtook many of them in the Woods, and pursued the rest to their very
Camp; after which, these Colonels not having Orders to follow the Enemy
farther, who were 25000 strong, besides those which straggled in the Woods,
they betook themselves to the rising of a Hill, where they halted until Prince
Lewis came up to them with the gross Body of his Cavalry, and then the Turks
fled with Disorder and Precipitation, as the Germans pursued with greater Heat
and Courage; and had not the Woods been thick, and the Germans ignorant of the
Ways and Passages, they had made a most terrible Slaughter, to the entire
Defeat and Destruction of the Turkish Army. Howsoever Prince Lewis continued
the Pursuit with some Parties of Horse, under the Command of Colonel Zant; who
gave so frightful an Alarm to the Turks, They abandon their Camp.
that forsaking their Camp with Fear and Consternation, they left all their
Cannon, Ammunition, and Provisions to the Disposal of the Enemy.

In the Camp they found 105. pieces of Brass Cannon, and three Mortars, with
great Numbers of Bombs, Grenades, Powder, and all sorts of Warlike Ammunition,
and Provisions, with their Camels, Oxen, Buffalo's, and Tents; The Germans
possess it.
and in short all their Baggage became a Prey to the Victorious Germans, whilst
the timorous Turks fled in much Confusion toward Jagodina and Krakolovetz; and
many of them were taken up on the Way by the Hungarians, Hussars and Rascians.

Great was the Joy of the Generals and Soldiers for so signal a Victory, and
having lodged one Night in the Enemies Camp, with much Pleasure and Festivity,
the Day following early in the Morning they sang Praises to God for his Mercy
and Blessings of Victory; Return Thanks to God.
and as a signal of Triumph, made the Camp to resound with three Vollies of
Shot, with Drums, Trumpets, Timbals, and all sorts of Warlike Music.

After Thanks were returned to Almighty God, who is the God of Hosts, and Giver
of Victory; the Imperial Generals thought it reasonable and necessary to give
some repose and rest to the wearied Troops; and to augment their Commons and
Refreshments, Orders were given to the Commissaries to distribute amongst the
Army the Provisions found in the Enemies Stores: In the mean time the Hussars
and Hungarians, who had pursued the Enemy for some Days, returned the 3d of
September to the Camp, September.
bringing some Colors, and many Prisoners with them, together with 36 pieces
of Cannon of the largest size.

And thus the Victory being complete, Prince Lewis permitted the Courier, whom
the Turkish Ambassadors had dis-speeded from Vienna to Constantinople, to
proceed; he had been detained for some Weeks at Semendria, so that now besides
the Dispatch from the Ambassadors, he carried another from Prince Lewis to the
Grand Vizier, giving him to understand, Pr. Lewis Writes to the Vizier.
that the Imperial Armies having advanced so far within the Bowels of the
Ottoman Dominions, he would now proceed forward to meet him, and save him the
trouble of a tedious March; but in case his Company, and coming should be
unwelcome and displeasing to the Sultan, they might thank themselves for the
trouble of such unacceptable Guests; which might have been avoided, had they
hearkened to the Propositions which His Imperial Majesty and His Allies made to
them for a Peace, which they having unadvisedly rejected, had brought upon
themselves all those Misfortunes which had attended them in every Action of
this last Campaign.

In the mean time the Blockades of Canisia and Great Waradine, were daily more
straightened, Blackades of Canisia and Great Waradine continued.
and all the Corn and Grass burned up in those parts which were neighboring to
those Cities; and though they suffered much Want and Penury of all things, and
had received the unwelcome News of several Defeats given to the Turks; yet
supporting and comforting their Spirits with hopes that a Peace would speedily
ensue, at least in the Winter Season, they resolved not to surrender until the
last Extremity.

Prince Lewis having refreshed his Forces with several Days of rest, and plenty
of Provisions taken from the Enemy, and reinforced his Army with some Troops
coming from Belgrade, he prepared for a new Enterprise, Pr. Lewis marches to
Nissa.
and began his March toward Nissa, about 20 Leagues distant from the Camp at
Patoschin, the most part of the way Woody and Mountainous; but nothing was now
difficult, or insuperable to the exalted Courage of the Germans. The Turks on
the other side, though somewhat abased and mortified, yet supported themselves
with the Comfort, That though they had lost their Camp, with their Cannon, Tents,
and Baggage, yet most of their Army was still in being; That the Tartars had
beaten the Muscovites; That the Troubles in Asia were pacified, and the
Discontents in Albania wtih Mamut Ogli Bey, composed. Moreover a Reinforcement
of 20000 Men were sent to the Seraskier, with new Tents, and all the necessary
Appurtenances for War; and likewise it was reported abroad, That the Grand
Vizier would come himself in person, and in despite of the preceding
Misfortunes, would yet put an Honorable end to this Campaign.

Prince Lewis little regarding the Talk, and the Reports with which the Turks
comforted themselves, committing the charge of Patoschin to a Sergeant Major,
with 100 Horse to cover the Artillery, and to guard them on their Way to
Semendria, he dis-speeded some Hungarians and Rascians to take a Survey of the
Country, and of the State of the Turks Affairs; who accordingly coasting the
Country, brought News, that the Turks were not only fled out of all those
parts, but had likewise abandoned Nissa, having for their easier passage built
a Bridge over a Marshy Ground near that Town. Pr. Lewis marches toward Nissa.
Whereupon the Prince having fixed his Boats on Wheels, Convoyed by a Party of
500 Horse, he took his March with the whole Army on the 11th of September, and
arrived that Night at Jagodina, after a hard March through Woods and Marshes;
and to make a passage for the Boats which were designed to make a Bridge over
the Morava, a new Way was made through the Woods, where being arrived, they
happily met some other Boats from Passarovitz, with some quantities of Flour,
which came seasonably for relief of the Army.

At Jagodina News was brought that the Turks had quitted Nissa; whereupon
Prince Lewis detached 50 Heydukes of Palfi's Regiments, Bridges broken and
others made.
and 10 Dragoons on Foot to Crussavetz, to break down the Bridge there, and
conserve that Post; and for passage of the Army at a more convenient place,
another Bridge was made with Boats, and to cover it Colonel Strasser with 2000
Men, made a Redoubt on the other side of the River.

And here so great was the Mortality of Men and Horse, and want of Forage, that
it seemed almost impossible to advance farther; but News being brought, that
the Turks were in great Consternation in their Camp, and that the Soldiers
deserted by Hundreds every Day; and the Dukes of Croy, and Holstein coming
about that time to the Camp with some Recruits, animated Prince Lewis to come
to one Battle more with the Seraskier; and having raised two Forts at the
Bridge, he passed over with his Horse on the 16th, and the Day following with
his Foot. The Turks had just then received a Recruit of 10000 Men, and strongly
entrenched themselves by the side of the River near Nissa.

The Prince being ill provided with Victuals in his Camp, had no time to lose,
and therefore marched so fast, that on the 22th of September, he pitched his
Camp within a League distant from Nissa, near a little Stream which falls into
the Nissava; from whence he took a prospect of the Countenance and Situation of
the Enemy, and their Camp; and having observed every thing, and in what place
the Enemy might most commodiously be Attacked; on the 23th they marched forward
in a close, and well ordered Battalia; but nothing happened that Day besides
some small Skirmishes of little importance; but that Night before the Evening
was quite shut in, the Prince made as if he intended to make a Bridge over the
Rivar to pass to the Tartars, who were posted on the other side; September. 24.
but in the Morning he took another Method, possessing himself of the sides of
the Hills, over the Enemies Camp; Pr. Lewis engages the Turks near Nissa.
which when the Turks discovered, they detached a Party to engage with them,
and with 2 or 3000 Turks and Tartars, they attacked the Rear-Guard of the Right
Wing, by which Count Veterani was forced to keep a little behind with the two
Regiments of Hanover and St. Croix, which formed the second Line of that Wing,
and were appointed to guard and cover the Baggage, which was always placed in
the Rear of the Army: This slow motion of the Cannon and Baggage, which could
not be avoided, retarded the motion of the advanced Troops, which ever and anon
made a Halt, so that it was five a Clock in the Evening before they could reach
the Foot of the Hill, where both Armies came in sight of each other.

And because it might rationally be conjectured, that the Turks would before
the Morning, fortify their Camp with some Trenches, and Parapets of Earth; the
Prince resolved without giving them so much time, to advance upon them with all
the Courage and Fury imaginable; extending his right Wing toward the Foot of
the Hill, and his left along the Plain to the Banks of the River Nissava; which
being orderly disposed, resolutely Attacked the Enemy, Pr. Lewis Attacks the
Turks.
according to the Methods and Measures designed.

The Turks with their accustomed Cry of Allah, Allah, caused the greatest part
of their Cavalry which was drawn up on the declivity of the Hill, to charge the
Infantry of the left Wing, Commanded by Count Guido of Staremberg, and the
Regiments of Kisel and Sarau; which when the Prince observed, he caused some
Cannon to be brought on that side; with which, and a Detachment from these
Regiments, the whole left Wing advanced toward the Enemy; the Turks seeing
this, retired with their Body of Horse, and wheeled about toward the right
Wing, and Attacked them at the Foot of the Hill on the Flank, which could not
well be secured; which produced some Fear and Confusion amongst the Hussars,
but being succored by the Regiments of Holstein, and Noircharmes, which
Piccolomini Commanded, and by a Party of brave Hungarians, The Turkish Horse in
disorder.
they so disordered the Turkish Horse, that they had been put to an open
Flight, had they not been stopped in their Career by some of their own Troops,
who met them and Fired upon them: By this Accident the Enemy still maintaining
their Ground on the side of the Hill toward the right Wing of the Germans,
gave opportunity and time to the Cavalry to rally again in the Plains: But
Prince Lewis incessantly riding and giving Orders in all places of the Army,
commanded the main Body, which was directed by Baron Heisler, to Attack the
Turks on the Hill, which they performed so effectually, that after a long
Conflict, they gained the top of the Hill; and then drawing all the Battalions
into an equal Line, both the right Wing and the Baggage were both secured from
the Attempt of the Enemy.

On the other side the Duke of Croy, Duke of Croy succors the right Wing
who commanded toward the River, being advised by the Prince, that the right
Wing was distressed, and hardly beset by the Enemy, he presently resolved to
advance to the top of the Hill in a direct Line toward their Succor, to give
a greater Diversion to the Enemy, and to gain the top of the Hill; the which
being effected, the Situation thereof proved so advantageous a Post, that in a
short time they drove the Enemy from thence with a considerable Slaughter.
Notwithstanding which, the Turkish Horse rallying again in the Plains, made
another Vigorous Assault on the left Wing, but were received by them with so
much Bravery and Resolution, that they were once more on their Flight, when the
Janissaries who were making new Trenches, Fired upon them, and forced them to
stand another Charge; which they steadily performed, and with great Vigor
against the Hussars, but they being succored by the Regiment of Caprara,
forced the Enemy entirely to quit the Field, and pursued them with great Fury
to their very Camp.

Whilst the left Wing had thus gloriously acquitted themselves, another Party
of the Enemies Horse Attacked them in the middle of their Body, but being
succored by Count Guido de Staremberg, with some Battallions of his own
Regiment, and of the Heydukes of Palfi, they discharged such terrible Vollies
upon them, that great Numbers of the Turks fell Dead on the Ground; and the
others so cowed and affrighted, that losing all hopes of Conquest, The Turks
put to Flight.
when they saw their Trenches possessed by the Prince, and shut up on all sides
by the right Wing, they betook themselves in good earnest, to a confused and
disorderly Flight; and though the Night came on, yet the Victorious Germans
pursued the Turks so long, as they could have the least glimpse or appearance
of the Enemy; so that many of them to avoid the Sword, threw themselves
headlong into the Nissava; where by the depth of the Water, and rapidness of
the River, they miserably perished. And here, as well as during the whole
course of the Battle, the two Brothers Charles and August Princes of Hanover,
with their Regiments, behaved themselves with great Bravery; and in the heat of
the Action, could scarce be withheld from following the Enemy into the Water;
but only by the Persuasions and Injunctions of General Veterani, they gave a
stop to the Pursuit.

Thus the Night put an end to the Victory, and the Slaughter of the Turks, who
abandoned the City though fortified with a good Ditch, and some Palisadoes, after
the Turkish manner, The Christians gain an entire Victory
though irregularly planted; the same Night Prince Lewis put into the Town,
several Battalions to conserve it from being burnt, as the Turks intended to
have done. In the Morning Provisions and Forage were found sufficient to
subsist the Army for three Weeks. In short, all the Cannon being 30 pieces for
Battery, became a Prey to the Germans, as also many Thousands of very fine
Tents, (amongst which was that of the Seraskier, which the Grand Seignior had
lately sent him) with diverse Standards, particularly that of Mamoot Ogli Pasha
of Albania. The Horse-Tayls were also taken.

Numbers s^^in.
The Numbers slain on the Enemies side, with those Drowned, were computed to be
10000, amongst which were 3000 Spahee's, whose Horses and Mules, with rich
Furniture and good Lading were brought to the Camp, where for that Night it
remained, and next Morning was distributed amongst the Imperial Cavalry.

This Victory was so much the more Glorious and Wonderful for having been
achieved by 15000 Germans tired and harassed by Marches, Countermarches,
Skirmishes and Battles, as before related, against 80000 Turks; The Victory
wonderful.
and what is still more miraculous, there was not on the Christian side above
300 killed and wounded, and none of any considerable Quality, besides the
Sergeant-Major of the Regiment of Stirum, and Count Vellen, the which great
Success is entirely to be attributed to the Almighty Hand of the God of Armies.

This second Victory being in this manner obtained against the Seraskier on the
24th of September, the whole Army continued in Arms all that Night; and in the
Morning Quarters were regularly set out for the Soldiers within the City of
Nissa; The Christians enter Nissa.
and on the 26th all things being settled in good order, Te Deum was solemnly
sung in the Seraskier's Tent, with three Salvoes of all the Cannon, and Vollies
of Muskets returning Thanks to Almighty God, for this Wonderful Victory, which
none but the Powerful Arm of the God of Hosts was able to bestow.

Afterward Prince Lewis having visited the City, observed that it was fortified
only with a single Ditch and some Palisadoes; howsoever it was judged very
convenient for Winter Quarters, It is fortfied for Winter Quarters.
and therefore ordered that it should be something better fortified, by the
Work of 2000 Foot, which were drawn out of several Regiments to labor on the
Fortifications, which in a short time was brought to that condition, as to
render it capable of being the head Quarters for the whole Winter, where
Provisions were accordingly laid up in Storehouses for Subsistence of the
whole Army. And to discover the Countenance and Condition of the Enemy, Count
Piccolomini gave Orders to Detach a Party of 1000 Horse to enter farther into
the Country, to view and observe the Quality and Situation of all places, as
far as Sophia, and to possess all the Passes which the Enemy had abandoned.

This Party being returned, brought News to the General, that though they had
proceeded above half the way toward Sophia, they had not met, or seen, so much
as one Turk on the Road, having found diverse Places and Castles without People,
and Deserted; amongst which, Mustapha Pasha Palanca.
was Mustapha Pasha Palanca, a Fortress, as I remember, raised by a Pasha of
that Name, to cover a Caravasarei, for Travelers to Lodge with their Horses
and Goods in security, from the frequent Attempts of Thieves and Robbers, which
in that desolate Country gained great Spoils and Booty; and that they might be
better protected, a Garrison was put into it of 60 Men; for maintenance of
which, this Pasha had given a Revenue sufficient for it is Subsistence: And in
this place I slept one Night as I remember, without any Care or Fears.

From this place a small Party of Germans and Hungarians were sent as far as
Dragoman, A Party of the Germans near Sophia.
about four hours Journey from Sophia; which gave such an Alarm all the way,
that the Turks every where forsook their Dwellings, and so affrighted the
Inhabitants, that hundreds of them ran to the Mountains, but suddenly returned,
so soon as it was known, that the Party was small which gave the Alarm.
Howsoever, the Consternation was so great, that the Soldiers contrary to the
Commands given to make their Rendezvous at Sophia, fearfully deserted, and fled
to their own Dwellings.

The News of this Defeat was first brought from Sophia to Constantinople, on
the first of October, October.
by one called Mustapha Aga, whom Zulfigar the Turkish Ambassador at Vienna had
freed from Captivity, and afterward dispatched him with some Letters to the
Ottoman Port; but on his way, Prince Lewis had stopped him for some Months at
Semendria, until the last Victory was obtained against the Turks; after which,
he discharged, and suffered him to proceed, to carry his stale Packets from the
Ambassadors, and fresher News from the Turkish Army, which was now entirely
defeated, and dispersed in the most shameful manner that ever was recounted in
any History.

The News hereof struck all the Ottoman Court with confused Consternation, The
Turkish Court in great Confusion.
none knowing what to say, or what to Counsel, much less to Act; but all wished
that the Measures and Resolutions taken at Sophia, by the Grand Vizier,
presently after the Battle of Patoschin, had been put in Execution, whereby the
last defeat before Nissa had been avoided, and an end put to the War with more
Honor and Advantage than could now be expected. For the Grand Vizier had on
the 17th of September, a thing not usual, Convened a General Council at Sophia,
A General Council of the Turks called at Sophia.
of all the Grand Officers and Ministers of the Empire; such as the Nakib
Effendi, who is the Chief of the Green-Heads, or those of the Kindred of
Mahomet, the Mufti, the two Kadileskers or Chief Justices of Romelia and
Anatolia, the Generals of the Spahees and Janissaries, with many other principal
Officers of the Army, and Civil Government. At which Council, the Proposals for
a Peace made by the Emperor and his Allies were publicly Read, and with much
Attention hearkened unto by this Grand Assembly; which though judged in the
Opinion of all there present, to be very severe and dishonorable, and unknown
before to their mighty Empire, which was used in former times to give rather
than to receive Conditions of Peace; yet considering the present unhappy
posture of Affairs; it was unanimously concluded by them, to Embrace the Offers
made, least God who had punished them for the Violation of their last Truce or
Peace, should punish them yet farther, if they should refuse to accept the
Conditions now proposed to rescue them from Destruction.

The Articles being drawn up in Paper, were presented to the Grand Signior for
his Approbation, who having Read them, gave Answer, The Grand Seignior consents
to a Peace.
That he desired to return to his Throne at Constantinople in Peace: And having
signed them, they were committed to Mustapha Aga to carry them to Vienna; for
which Journey he had received 3000 Hungarian Ducats from the Treasurer. The
Articles were as follow, enclosed in a Letter to Zulfigar Aga, one of the
Turkish Ambassadors in the Castle of Puttendorf.

Offers of Peace by the Turks.
I. THat he should use his utmost Endeavors to Conclude a Peace, so much
desired by all the People; who notwithstanding the many Arguments, Allurements,
and fair Promises of the French to the contrary, would not trust to that
Nation, which had been false to them in all Ages, and now also endeavored to
entertain them with a thousand false Hopes.

II. That he should labor by all means possible to persuade the Emperor to
quit Belgrade, and to make that place the Limit of their Dominions; and the
Save to Terminate the Frontier on both sides. And if any scruple or difference
should arise thereupon, that then in lieu thereof he should offer Canisia, or
if that should be taken, then to propose Giula, Temeswaer, or Great Waradin.

III. As to the Polanders; to Content them, a Proposal should be made to
demolish Kaminiec; and if that would not satisfy them, that it should be
surrendered.

Lastly, As to the Venetians, They should Enjoy and Keep all that they had
taken; and that no mention should be made of Negropont.

Now whilst Mustapha Aga was ready to depart with these Articles, the unhappy
News was brought to the Grand Vizier, The News of a defeat given the Turks
hinders the Peace.
That the Turks had received a total defeat before Nissa, with the slaughter of
many thousands of Turks, and with the loss of all their Cannon and Ammunition,
together with the City of Nissa it self: And that the Vizier Kaja, or Deputy,
with the Treasurer of the Army, had made his Escape out of the Battle to Sophia
with great difficulty; and that the remainder of the scattered Army went
wandering through the Woods and Mountains; it not being known as yet, who was
killed, or taken, or alive.

So soon as this Report was made known to the Grand Vizier, he immediately
posted the same by the Messenger who brought it, to the Grand Seignior, then at
Adrianople; and all the way he Rode, he gave Orders in all Places to raise the
Nefiran, or the Trained-Bands of the Countries, by which all things were in
such Consternation, as if the Germans had been at the very Gates of Sophia.

This Change of Affairs gave a stop to the Expedition of Mustapha Aga, until
new Resolutions should be taken by another Divan, or some other Assembly of
Council; the which being again met, they confirmed the former Resolution, and
dispatched away Mustapha Aga, with the former Propositions of Peace; The
Ambassador proceeds to Vienna.
And an Express was dispatched before him from Sophia, to obtain from Prince
Lewis, a Passport and Safe Conduct unto Vienna: The Prince readily granted, and
ordered him a Party of 25 Horse to Convoy him safely so far as Pyroth. And here
Prince Lewis gave a period to the Proceedings of this year's Campaign: The
Campaign ended.
For considering, that the Season was entirely spent, the distance far from the
Danube, the Difficulties of so long a Communication, and the uncertainty of
subsisting the Army in the Enemies Country already wasted, and ruinous, he
thereupon judged it most secure to return back to the Danube; and accordingly
marched away on the 4th of October, having committed the Government of Nissa,
and of the Conquered Countries, to the Care and Conduct of Count Piccolomini,
with some Regiments of Horse and Foot, and some Rascians under Paul Dio^h,
placing a good guard on the Mountain Hemus. But because the Prince was very
desirous to defeat Count Tekeli, Designs to surprise Tekeli.
the great Partisan of France, who was encamped near to Widin, he judged it of
great importance to fall into his Quarters on his way to the Danube; and
accordingly on the 6th of October, he encamped near the Castle Saverlick; and
the next day he Quartered at the foot of the Mountain of Temach, which he
passed on the 8th, through so narrow a straight, that a single Cart could
scarce pass; and moreover, the ways were so very rocky and incommodious, that
the Baggage was greatly retarded; wherefore the Prince commanded some German
and Hungarian Troops to advance toward Widin, and on the way by such Prisoners
as they should take, to inform themselves of the State of Widin, and of the
Enemies Camp. These Troops had not been on their way above two hours, before
they returned with two Turkish Prisoners, who informed them, That Orsoua and
Fetislau had been burnt on the first of this Month, Orsoua and Fetislau burnt.
and abandoned by the Enemy; And because they feared, that some sudden Attack
would be made upon them by the Germans, they had carried away from Widin all
the Provisions of that place, and were gone farther by Water into the more
distant Places of their Country; And that about 2000 Turks, and others of
Tekeli's Troops were encamped near the River to cover the Boats on which their
Baggage was to be laden; and that their Camp consisted of about 200 Tents: So
Prince Lewis lodged that Night in the Country and Plains of Bergfelt.

Upon these Advices, next Morning by break of Day, being the 13th of October,
the Army then with the Prince, consisting but of some few Regiments, proceeded
on their march toward Widin, designing to arrive at the place early next day;
and because the Hungarians returned with the News, that the Enemy quartered
near the City with all security, not suspecting the approach of the Germans,
having refreshed their Horse for some few Hours near Drenoua, they marched all
that Night, and came about 11 a Clock in the Morning within sight of Widin, Pr.
Lewis marches to Widin.
where they first discovered the Camp of the Enemy; and having taken a view of
the situation of the place, and the several Avenues thereunto, they found that
they must necessarily pass Three Bridges, or take a round through some marshy
Grounds, which perhaps were unpassable, at least very hazardous, The Horse pass
the Bridges and enter the Enemies Camp.
without a faithful Guide or Pilot. Wherefore taking the opportunity, when the
Janissaries and People were in the Mosch at Prayers, they caused the Horse to
pass the Bridges, which having done without any Opposition, they trotted
directly to the Enemies Tents, and entered into them about Three a Clock in the
Afternoon: This unexpected Enterprise so alarmed the Turks, that part of them,
with affrighted Precipitation, betook themselves to the Boats, and others
mounting on Horseback, drew out with the Janissaries, to the number of 12000,
ranging themselves in posture of Battle.

Prince Lewis (advancing with some of his light Cannon in the Front) committed
the Conduct of the Right Wing to Count Veterani and Trautmansdorf; The Turks
make a stand before Widin.
and the Left he commanded in Person, with which some Countermarches were made
to spend time until the Infantry could come up, gaining still some ground upon
the Enemy. Howsoever, the Turks made a stand, and fought with such Resolution,
that the Victory seemed dubious for a while; but the Dragoons of Veterani
dismounting, which were used to do Miracles, threw themselves with their Swords
drawn into the Ditch of the Town, killing and slaying all that came in their
way; which, when the Turkish Infantry observed, part of them came to their
assistance; but the Right Wing, Commanded by the Prince, soon relieved them,
and came thundering on them with such furious Resolution, The Turkish Cavalry
put to flight and the Army defeated, and Widin taken.
that they put all to the Sword, excepting those who were retired into the
Castle, or made their escape by Water: The greatest part of the Turkish Cavalry
(unless those belonging to the Baggage) fled by the way of the Moor or Marshy
Ground (with which they were acquainted) toward Sophia and Nicopolis, leaving
the Mountains on the Right Hand, and the three Bridges on the Left; and all
their Camp, with their Tents and Baggage both within and without the City, for
a Prey and Booty to the Victorious Christians: Many Colors, four Horse-Tails,
some thousands of Horses, and other Beasts, were taken, with great quantities
of Forage: Above a thousand Turks were killed on the place, with many
Prisoners: In short, the plunder of the City was given for a Prey to the
wearied Soldiers, who had well deserved it for a Reward of their Valor, and
indefatigable Labors, and for an Encouragement to future Services.

The Germans gained greater Honor by this Action than by any other of this
Summer's Expedition; for their Forces were few, and the Enemies fought with
more Resolution and Bravery than they had done in any former Engagement; for in
none were more killed, and wounded than in this. Count Veterani received a
Wound with a Musket Shot, and Count Trautmansdorf with a Scimetar, and both in
the Head; and Baron Orlich, a Lieutenant Colonel, was killed on the place.

But as yet the Castle of Widin held out, for which reason the Soldiers kept a
watch about it all Night, that the Defendants might not have an opportunity to
make their Escape.

The next Morning the Castle was summoned, but no Answer being given, the
Prince sent a Turk to the Commander, to let him know, The Turks refuse to
deliver the Castle of VVidin.
That unless he did Surrender up the Castle and Garrison that very Day, he was
not to expect any Quarter, or Conditions of Mercy. It was not long before the
Turk returned from the Castle, with a fierce Answer from the Governor, That he
and his Companions were resolved to defend the Castle to the last drop of their
Blood. Prince Lewis was not a little displeased at this Answer, because for
want of Provisions he was in some haste to remove his Camp; but not to leave
such a necessary Work as this imperfect, he immediately dispatched away to
Semendria, for Cannon, Mortars, and Ammunition; And having raised on the 16th
of October, a Battery, he plied the Castle so hard, that the Turks spread a
white Flag and came to Capitulations, which were soon agreed, upon Terms; The
Castle of VVidin surrenders.
That the Garrison and People therein might march forth with all their Goods:
for Carriage of which, 30 Boats were to be assigned them; The Soldiers and
People march out.
but in regard Boats were not to be procured, 200 Carts were provided in the
place thereof; So that on the 19th of October, 2559 Soldiers, all Armed, with
about as many Inhabitants, marched out of the place, which were Convoyed by 200
Dragoons toward Nicopolis; and the Hostages being committed to safe Custody,
five Companies of the Regiment of Dunghen, were placed therein for a Garrison.

Upon the Report only of the march of the Imperialists toward Widin, Tekeli
abandoned the City, though he had a stately House therein, and very well
furnished; yet so debased was he in his Courage, that he fled before the Battle
toward Nicopolis; from whence he came with a sad Countenance, and Tears in his
Eyes, to meet the Garrison and People expelled from the Town and Castle:
Howsoever, he showed a courteous Aspect to the German Soldiers, who were
appointed for Convoy to the People of Widin, and in a Friendly manner treated
them with Wine, and a plentiful Entertainment.

Widin a place of much advantage to the Christians.
As Widin was a great loss to the Turks, so it was of high advantage to the
successful Arms of the Emperor; for by taking this place, all the Conquests
made by the two last Victories, namely the Territory of Nissa, and other Places
possessed on the Way to Sophia, were all covered, and the Way secured for
importing Forage and Provisions, and all Necessaries for support of the
advanced Troops under Piccolomini, posted for guard and defense of the
Conquered Countries, and free Communication and Correspondence with the
Neighboring Principalities: And on the contrary the Turks of Temeswaer, and
other Garrisons maintained in the Upper Hungary, were all greatly straightened
and annoyed thereby, without any hopes of being succored, or relieved; and
thereby Tekeli also was dislodged from those Parts, in which he had persuaded
the People by his fair Words and Promises, to remain constant and faithful, and
stand by the Grand Seignior with their Lives and Fortunes.

Winter Quarters provided for the Soldiers.
It being now toward the end of October, it was judged high time to give
refreshment and ease to the wearied Soldiery, by putting them into warm and
commodious Quarters during the Winter Season. The Province of Walachia was a
Country near to them, abounding with all sorts of Provisions, and there it was
intended to Quarter a great part of the Army.

Upon which Resolution Prince Lewis dispatched to the Prince of Walachia these
following Propositions, requiring an immediate Compliance therewith, otherwise
that he would do himself Reason with his Sword, giving him only six Days time
to return an Answer.

The Propositions made to the Prince of Walachia and the States of that
Province, dated the 28th of October, were as follows.

Propositions made by the Prince of Walachia.
WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God to give many signal Victories unto His
Imperial Majesty, whereby several Cities, Countries, and Provinces have been
recovered out of the Barbarous Possession of the Turks, and thereby also
Walachia secured from Servitude and Slavery; in consideration whereof, it was
demanded from the Prince and States, that Winter Quarters be given for the
space of seven Months for 15000 Men Horse and Foot, according to the Rules and
Proportions which have been settled by the Imperial Decrees in former times,
both in Hungary and Transylvania: That is to say, from the first of November
1689, to the last of May 1690, in the manner following.

I. That two Pounds of Bread shall be provided for every Man per Day, For
Winter Quarters.
with a Pound of Flesh, and a Measure of Wine, besides his Bed, Salt, Candle,
Wood, and all other Necessaries for support of Humane Life. That four Bushels
of Oats a Month, eight Pounds of Hay a Day, with two Bundles of Straw a Week,
shall be allowed for every Horse.

II. That the Prince and States shall pay unto the Soldiers 800000 Florins
within a certain time.

III. That the Prince and States shall find 1500 good Horse, to mount those
Cavaliers who have lost their Horses, and also shall find them Armor within a
certain time, according as has been practiced in Hereditary Kingdoms and
Provinces; the Arms for Cuirasiers shall not be valued at more than 30 Dollars
for every Horseman, and 25 for every Dragoon, the which shall be defalked out
of the Sum of the ready Money which is to be paid.

IV. That the Deputies sent by the Prince and States, shall return to them
again; and in the space of six Days, shall come back to the Imperial Camp, with
the positive Resolution of what shall be performed in this Matter, and shall
bring with them Commissaries, who shall allot to the Soldiers their respective
Quarters.

V. That the Prince and States shall appoint and ordain Hostages; namely, two
Barons of the chief Nobility in the Province, who shall remain with the
Imperial General as Guarantees for performance of the Treaty, and that the
Prince may have liberty to change and relieve them every Month (if he pleases)
with two others.

VI. That in case the Prince and States shall punctually comply with these
Propositions, they are hereby assured in the Name of His Imperial Majesty, That
neither the Emperor's General, nor any other Officer, or Soldier shall bind, or
oblige them to any other Conditions, nor shall they in the least manner be
farther oppressed, or damnified, but to the contrary they shall be succored,
defended, and protected in the free Exercise of their Laws, and maintained in
their Rights, Privileges, and Possessions.

Given in the Imperial Camp under Fetislau, the 28th of October, 1689. Signed,
Lewis of Baden.

About this time the Express which Prince Lewis had dispatched lately to
Piccolomini, returned back with this following Letter.

Count Piccolomini to Prince Lewis.
IF Your Most Serene Highness shall be pleased to return me back all Your Army,
I can here give them Quarters and good Subsistence. The Albanians of Clementa
have sent their Deputies to me, with Proposals to submit unto the Emperor, with
whom I am now in Treaty. The Albanians under the Turks have done the like, and
have offered to surrender unto me all their Castles. I have summoned all the
Greek Communities to come unto me; and I have sent the Draughts of the Imperial
Escutcheon, or Arms, which I brought painted from Vienna to be affixed and set
up in every Town and City: And I hope speedily to bring all the Countries from
Scutari to Novibassar under subjection. Upon these Successes, I hear that Mamut
Pasha is fled, and I have sent to seek for his Horse-Tail which the Vizier gave
him. The City of Prisseren being abandoned* by its Inhabitants, I intend to
make use thereof. Ten Thousand Rascians with Arms in their Hands are come in to
me without any Head or Commander, with intention to rob, and live on Violence
and Rapin. I know not what to do with these Wild Beasts, for upon pretense of
coming in to us, I know not how to restrain them, though they ruin and spoil all
the Country, and put me into some Fears and Apprehensions for them, whilst
their Outrages affright others from coming in. To dismiss them out of our Army,
I fear something worse, and to keep them, is to suffer them to destroy all. I
am going to the Pass of Cavinigh, intending to secure my self on every side.
How I may succeed at Uscopia I do not as yet know. Our People lately discovered
great Numbers of Turks assembled together in the Castle of Novibord, which is
upon the Mountains, who upon our Summons surrendered at discretion. I have many
Irons in the fire, but too weak a force for execution of any great design,
howsoever I will do what I can, as becomes

Your Highness, etc. Count Piccolomini.


Upon these encouraging Advices, Prince Lewis resolved to detach Prince Charles
of Hanover, with three Regiments, viz. of Sarau Hanover, and the Infantry of
Croy, to reinforce Piccolomini at Procopia, Picolomini reinforced.
where was a Magazine replenished with Hay, Oats, Flour, and every thing for
the Subsistence of an Army. With these Recruits Piccolomini on the 14th of this
Month marched from Procopia toward Uscopia; and the Day following came to a
narrow Passage which the Turks call a Dervent; where meeting with a Deserter
from Sophia, they were advised by him that the Turks had a design upon Nissa,
for which reason retarding their March, until the 17th, they learned within
that time that those Informations were only the Lies of Greeks, who are
naturally false, and haters of the Western Christians; whereupon they took
their March for two Days through the Mountains, on which are the two Counties
of Clementa and Rossaiava, which had never paid Taxes, or Contributions to the
Turks, Count Picolomini marches toward Pristina and Clina.
but rather the Turks unto them. In these Countries they made no stay, but
hasted with all expedition possible toward Pristina and Clina, where they had
understood from the advanced Guards, that 6000 Arnouts, with 1300 Carts, and
many Thousand Head of Cattle remained in expectation to join with the Germans,
and to oppose the Turks with all the People of the Country, and to yield
themselves Subjects and Vassals to His Imperial Majesty. They conclude a Treaty
with the People. And Kazianech.
Being arrived at Pristina, they concluded a Treaty with those People; and on
the 23th they proceeded to a certain little City with a Castle called
Kazianech. Upon the News of this Approach, the Turks fled the Night before; but
a Party of Horse pursuing after them, they happily encountered within the
Mountains near a Bridge, with 300 Turks, Defeat a Party of 300 Turks.
which were coming from Scopia, to reinforce the Castle of Kazianech, which was
already taken; and though it was Night, yet they attacked them, and killed 19,
taking some Horses, 4 Colors, and 11 Slaves: And here it was necessary to make
a Halt for a short time to secure a Pass which was in the middle way, which was
so rugged and narrow, that the Cannon not being able to pass, they were
remanded back to Kazianech, with all the Carts of heavy Baggage.

In two Days time more they marched through this narrow Pass, and entered into
a large Plain, distant about three Hours from Scopia, where they received
different intelligences of the State of Affairs in that City, some reported
that the Turks were resolved to defend the Place unto the utmost Extremity;
others, that those People who the Night before had escaped from the Attack, had
given a terrible Alarm to the Town, Mamut Pasha encamped in a Valley with 10000
M^n, flies upon a Report that the Christians were marching against them.
insomuch that the Turks and Greeks had abandoned the place, and had joined
themselves to Ma^ut Pasha, who with 10000 Men was encamped in a Valley. Nothing
could come more joyful to the Christian Army, than to hear that the Turks had
quitted their Walls, and places of Defense, to draw into an open Plain; with
which they were so animated, that they gave a Salvo with the 10 pieces of
Cannon which they had with them, and with such Shouts of the Soldiers, as if
the Victory had been already in their Hands: At the sound whereof, the Turks
were put into such a Consternation, that they quitted their Camp and fled for
refuge and shelter into the Neighboring Woods; but being pursued and hunted by
the Hussars, Are pursued by the Hussars.
and some few Germans, many Turks were killed, and 2000 Carts belonging to the
Country People, were set at liberty, which the Turks had pressed for their
Service, to carry away whole Families of Men, and Women, and Children into
Slavery: Moreover some Christian Slaves were recovered, together with a
considerable Booty, besides above 100 Turks, and as many Jews were made
Prisoners.

In this manner the Way being made open, Piccolomini marched into the adjacent
Countries of Scopia, in which he found the ancient Seat of Count Ladislaus
Cziacchy, The Ancient Seat of Ladislaus Cziacchy plundered and burnt.
which was of a much more capacious and large extent than it was supposed to
be; howsoever without a Wall, Ditch, Cannon, People, or Money; howsoever there
was in it a large Magazine, filled with all sorts of Grain, Flour, and other
sorts of Provisions and Merchandise; but according to the Report of the
Inhabitants, much infected with the Pestilence: There was also an old ruinous
Castle, conserved only for its Antiquity. Piccolomini not giving much credence
to these Reports, went in person to visit the place; where having considered
the Situation of it, and the difficulty to maintain it, he gave it over to the
plunder of the Soldiery, and afterward putting Fire to it in several places,
the Houses were all in a short time reduced to Ashes together with several
stately Moschs and Fountains.

Piccolomini retir^s back to Kazianech.
Upon these Successes Piccolomini retired back toward Kazianech, which he had
left defended with a strong Garrison, the People flocking thereunto in great
Numbers to be protected, and received for Subjects of His Imperial Majesty.

At this place having divided his Army, he detached a Party under Command of
the Prince of Holstein, with a Regiment of Cuirasiers belonging to the Hanover
Troops, to march toward the Mount Hemus; and with the remainder of the Forces,
he went himself to Lippian, and thence he detached Colonel Strasser with his
Regiment of Foot, and six pieces of Cannon toward Bosnia, to drive the Turks
out of the Castles of Zwetzey and Panza. Piccolomini sick, yet marches toward
Prisseren,
And though the Sickness of Piccolomini increased upon him, which some People
termed the Plague; yet his active Soul struggling with the Distemper, he took a
March with his own Regiment, and that of Stirum, with two pieces of Cannon,
toward Albania, to discover and inform himself what his Lieutenant Colonel the
Baron of Hebersburg had acted in Prisseren with his Albanians: November.
Whilst he was in this March his Fever increased, so that he was constrained to
rest a while with his Army at Capuschmit, where he received advice, that
Lieutenant Colonel Maursberg of the Regiment of Stirum, had possessed himself
of the Castle of Panza; but that the other of Zwetzey, being situate on a Rock,
refused to Surrender, unless compelled thereunto by Fire and Cannon.

Though the Disease of Piccolomini increased, yet he could not be persuaded to
take a longer rest and repose, which is necessary in Fevers; but being full of
Zeal, and desire of Triumph, he marched with his Regiments toward Panni; And
to Panni.
on the way to which, Advices came to him, That the Commander of Pyroth, The
Commander of Pyroth defeats 1500 Turks.
with a Party of Germans, and 800 Hussars, had taken the Field in the Enemies
Country, where at the first they had the good fortune to defeat a Party of 1500
Turks, which they found encamped near Dragoman, a place distant about six or
seven Hours from Sophia, where they had posted themselves, to observe the
Motions of the Imperial Forces; but that soon afterward the Turks being
Alarmed in all their Quarters near Sophia, they appeared in several Bodies on
both sides of the Mountain, The Imperialists defeated near Dragoman.
with Reserves both of Turks and Tartars; and having with their Numbers
surrounded the Germans, after a great Slaughter on both sides, the Christians
were forced to give back, and betake themselves to Flight.

To repair the damage, and prevent the ill Consequences of this Surprise,
Piccolomini without any delay dispatched positive Orders to Colonel Strasser,
to desist from his Enterprises in Bosnia, and return to Nissa, least the Enemy
encouraged by this Success, should adventure to make an Attempt upon that place.

In the mean time Piccolomini continuing his March, Piccolomini comes to
Prisseren.
on the 6th of this Month came early in the Morning under the Walls of
Prisseren, where he was met by the Archbishop of Albania, and the Patriarch of
Clementa, carrying a Standard in which a Cross was painted, and followed by
8000 Arnouts, Geceks of Albania, Turks, and Christians, with other Natives of
those Countries; who having given their Salvoes with three Vollies of Muskets,
they joined with the Germans, declaring their Resolutions to live and die with
them in the common Cause.

Count Piccolomini, though in a languishing Condition, was yet much relieved by
such a surprising appearance of People, who came with humble submission to
devote themselves to the Imperial Sovereignty, but being acquainted with the
unsettled and voluble Temper of that People, he knew not what to think of this
sudden Revolution, until he had first satisfied himself by the Archbishop, and
some of the Officers, (who were the first of those that were come in) that this
People would prove obedient, and constant to the Emperor's Interest; with which
Report Piccolomini remaining satisfied, The Arnouts list themselves.
he caused all the Soldiers to be listed under his Banner; with this
Temperament howsoever, that all those who were desirous to retire, and live
like orderly Citizens within the Walls of Towns, or in the Fields to cultivate
the Ground, should have a free liberty so to do, and be protected by the
Imperial Arms: But as to those who were willing to follow the Camp, and be
formed into regular Troops, should be obliged to take the Military Oath, And
formed into regular Troops.
binding themselves to all Obedience and Respect toward their Commanders, and
to live according to the rigor and exact Rules of Military Discipline.

So soon as Piccolomini had made this Declaration, and given this Charge to the
new Soldiery, his Disease increased upon him, of which being sensible, he sent
to the Archbishop to perform all those Offices, which were to be done in the
time of the last Agony; Piccolomini's Death.
which being administered with great Devotion, this brave General expired his
last, to the unexpressible Lamentation of the whole Army, and Sorrow of the
Imperial Court.

The Command and Government of all the Conquered Countries, December.
having been promised to General Veterani, upon News of the Death of
Piccolomini, he prepared to take possession thereof; but in the mean time that
the Army might not be destitute of a General, the Conduct thereof was committed
to the care of the Prince of Holstein, Prince of Holstein Commands the Army.
to maintain and support the Conquests of those parts, until Veterani should
come and take possession thereof.

Thus ended the Campaign of 1689, glorious in the whole progress thereof to the
Imperial Arms, the Victories whereof over the Turks being scarce to be numbered,
filled Vienna, and the Hereditary Countries with Joy and Triumph. And here it
had been happy for the Empire, and all Europe, had the Germans fixed the
Conclusion of the War at this period, before the Air of Fortune, which had
blown for some Years with a prosperous Gale in favor of the Germans, had
changed her Kindness, which we shall find in the following Year inconstant and
favoring the Enterprise of the Turks. It is a most unaccountable Infatuation,
That the Imperial Court, observing before their Eyes the vast Preparations of
France to attack the Empire, Mustapha Aga comes to renew the Treaty of Peace.
should not have endeavored to quench the Fire of War on one side, an
Opportunity for which so fairly offered it self, by the Arrival of Mustapha
Aga, sent with Letters from the Ottoman Port to the Turkish Ambassadors
detained in the Castle of Puttendorf, to renew the Treaty, which had for some
time been laid aside.

The Imperial Court was at this time at Auspurg busied in the Election and
Coronation of the King of the Romans; and therefore the Emperor appointed Count
Quintinio Jergher, Knight of the Golden-Fleece, and Counselor of State, and
Lord Lieutenant of the Hereditary Countries of Austria; together with Baron
Dorsch Secretary and Counselor of War, to enter into Conference with the
Turkish Ambassadors; to whom also was joined the Cavalier Girolamo Venier, who
was Ambassador to the Emperor from Venice, and there attending the Interest of
that Republic, in regard to this Treaty. But before the Turks would enter into
the Particulars, they dispatched a certain Bey to the Congress, with some
Considerations and Reflections which might represent the State and Temper of
the Ottoman Empire, not to remain in so vile and debased an Estate, as to beg a
Peace; but that they were still able with their Swords in their Hands to Treat,
and in case of failure of an Agreement, to maintain a War. The Considerations
offered were these.

Considerations Offered by the Turks.
I. THAT they should conceive a right Notion of the great Power of the Ottoman
Port.

II. That the Christians favored rather by Fortune, than by the strength of
their own Power, had gained all those Victories of which they now Triumph.

III. That all the Insurrections in Asia, and Civil Commotions amongst
themselves were now appeased.

IV. That the Sultan had diminished much of his Expenses, and reduced the
Number of useless Officers in his Seraglio, whereby vast Sums were spared for
Maintenance of the War.

V. That the Taxes on the People, were raised from five Dollars on every House,
unto a hundred.

VI. That it might now be hoped, that the Anger of God being appeased for the
Sins of the Believers, the Christians turn would shortly come, when they also
should be punished for their Offenses.

VII. That the Ottoman Empire was still powerful, both in Men and Money.

VIII. That the Sultan would in lieu of Belgrade, which upon the Peace must be
surrendered, that the Save might be made the Confines of both Empires, yield up
to the Emperor some other Fortresses, as an Equivalent for that important City.

These preliminary Suggestions were generally turned into Ridiculous
Interpretations, and Commentaries thereupon; so that in Answer thereunto these
following Reflections were drawn up, which evidenced the Scorn and Disdain, the
Imperialists at that time conceived of the Turkish Power.

Answers to the Considerations Offered.
TO the First it was replied, That the Ottoman Power consisted more in Numbers
than in Force; an Evidence whereof appears to the World, in that the Turks, who
for the space of 300 Years had waged a War in Hungary, do now scarce possess a
Foot, or Palm of that Kingdom, unless in some few Cities, which are yet so
straightened by Blockades, that they are ready to perish with Famine, and offer
themselves up to the Mercy of the Emperor. Witness also the Success before
Vienna, when Besieged by 300000 Turks, were not yet able to render themselves
Masters of the same, but were forced to fly, and ignominiously to turn their
Backs to a quarter part of their Number, and forced to return without other
Glory, than that only of burning some Villages, which might have been done by a
Rabble of People, or 100 Incendiaries.

To the Second it was said, That with the Divine Assistance, the Christian
Troops, though much inferior in Number to those of the Turks, had won diverse
Battles during this War, and made themselves Masters of many Towns, and
Castles; and particularly of Buda and Belgrade, the Capital Cities of great
Provinces, which were not subdued by long Sieges, but by Storms, and dint of
Sword.

To the Third it was said, That the Troubles in Asia still continued, and their
Civil and Domestic Seditions, not as yet appeased, and were yet likely to
increase higher, by reason of their Tyrannical Government, which the oppressed
People would not longer endure.

To the Fourth it was said, That the Discharge of the Women, and Officers, to
the Number of 4000 out of the Seraglio, was an evident Token of their want of
Money to sustain the War.

To the Fifth it was said, That the heavy Burden of Taxes, from five to a 100,
was the ready means to move the People to a Rebellion, of which there are
frequent Examples in all Histories.

To the Sixth, that howsoever the Turks might flatter themselves with the
pacification of God's Anger against them, they would yet find the contrary, and
prove the just Revenge of the Just God, whom they had provoked by the Breach of
their Faith, and Oppressions of those People whom they had subdued.

To the Seventh, That there was great difference between Soldiers and
Incendiaries, in the latter of which the Turks ought rather to be reckoned,
than amongst the former.

To the Eighth, which concerns the Surrender of Belgrade, it was replied, That
the Emperor would sooner surrender Newstadt in Austria, or the Gardens about
Vienna, than that City, with which this Conference was concluded.

Amongst all the foregoing Particulars, we find nothing solid or material, or
under any Dispute, unless that point of exchanging Belgrade for some other
place or places, not as yet Conquered in Hungary; that so the River Save might
be the limit and confine between the two Empires: Nor was it probable, that the
Turks would have broken off the Treaty on this Point only, had they not
hearkened to the Promises of the French, who now being sensible how useful, and
necessary the Alliance of the Turks would be to them, The French and Court of
Rome, obstruct the Peace.
were resolved not to lose the Benefit of so helpful an Associate; and
therefore used all their persuasive Arguments to continue the War, which were
inculcated with mighty Presents to the principal Officers of State, and
Assurances that with the next Spring they would not only enter the Empire with
such vast Armies, as should oblige the Emperor to withdraw his Forces out of
Hungary; but also assist them both with Money, and with able Engineers and
Officers to carry forward the War.

And indeed though in the following Year of 1690, we shall not find any great
matter warmly acted by the French on Germany, pursuant to the Promises they had
made unto the Turk; yet we shall find them in a Year or two afterward entering
Germany with Fire and Sword; and in the Year 1693, besides the Conquests gained
in Brabant and Flanders; we shall hear of the burning of Heidelberg, and all
the Upper Germany in danger of an entire Desolation: All which might easily
have been prevented, had the Emperor hearkened at this time to the Offers of
the Turks, who came prepared to accept of any Conditions, that in reason could
have been imposed upon them. But this Opportunity being let slip, Fortune
changed its Course, and the Exploits of War were acted with various Successes;
and though afterward the Emperor sought for Peace by Interposition of Mediators,
the Turks were so far engaged with the French, and so encouraged by their
Successes, that they would now hearken to nothing under the Surrender of Buda,
and all the Conquests in Hungary.

The Loss of this Opportunity for gaining a Peace, The Reasons for which the
Peace was obstructed.
may be attributed to the Infatuation of the Minds of the Germans, blinded for
punishment of the Sins of Christendom. No doubt but the French Faction in the
Imperial Court, availed much in the defeat of this Design, as did also the
power of the Papal Court, in which at that time Alexander VIII. reigned; who
hearing of the Overtures of Peace treating at Ausburg and Vienna, dispatched
away from Rome, Cardinal Colonitz, with Instructions about the Affairs of
Hungary, who after having assisted in diverse Consultations, and Conferences
thereupon, the whole Treaty broke off, and the Ambassadors dismissed from all
farther Negotiations, of which we shall very speedily bewail the fatal Effects.

THE Venetian Successes In Their WAR against the TURKS, In the Year 1689.
Venetian War against the Turks, January.
maintained in the Island of Negropont, and against the chief City thereof
known by that Name. The Enterprise was of great Importance, and the
Preparations for the same agreeable to so mighty a Design, which had it
succeeded, would not only have settled and established the Venetians in their
Conquests of the Morea, but rendered them Masters of all the Coast of Romania;
but the Vetians instead thereof, being compelled by Sickness, and unfortunate
Attacks upon the place, in which they lost many of their brave Officers, to
quit the Island with some Confusion, and as it were stealing off in the Night,
for fear the Enemy should fall on their Rear, Cannon and Baggage; but the Turks
being desirous to be rid of such Guests, were willing to have made a Bridge for
them, rather than to have administered the least Retardment, or Hindrance to
their Departure.

All the Auxiliary Galleys, as those of the Pope, Malta, and Florence, being
retired (as we have said) to their respective Countries; the main Body of the
Venetian Armata entered into the Port of Napoli di Romania, The Venetian Fleet
Winters at Napoli de Romania.
with design to Winter there, so as better to Command the Archipelago, and to
be near Negropont, so as to be ready to obstruct the Turks in case they should
Attempt to repair those Works, it being intended to make another Attack on that
place early in the Spring; and to that end Orders were sent to Venice to
dispatch away the Recruits for the Land Forces, with all Necessaries for the
Fleet, and Provisions for the Winter, of which there was so great want, that
both the Land and Sea Forces had much difficulty to subsist, so melancholy a
Countenance was put on through the whole Camp, that nothing but the prevailing
Authority of their Doge and Captain General could restrain them from a Mutiny;
The Venetians in some distress.
but that which a little comforted the Soldiery, was the mildness of the
Winter, which gave a cheerful green color to the Fields, which yielded Herbs,
and Winter-Fruits in much Plenty; and because the Buildings of the Town had
been much destroyed and ruined by the Bombs, and Cannon, they raised little
Hutts and Cottages for shelter, and Lodgings for the Soldiery; to which the
Athenians, who had no great desire to return to their own City, had greatly
contributed, having Built diverse Houses at their own Cost, and with their own
Labor.

But what most dis-spirited the Army, was the Sickness of the Doge Morosini,
who long had labored under a violent Fever, in such a manner, that the
Physicians themselves despaired of his Life; for Conservation of which, solemn
Prayers and Processions were appointed to be made, The Doge sick.
both at Venice, and in all Places under that Dominion.

At length, after a tedious Expectation, the Convoy arrived, to the universal
Joy and Consolation of all the Forces and Country round about; February.
which began to give new Life to all Motions and Enterprises, and to inspire
the Soldiers with a new stock of Courage; for all People having been supplied
both with Money and Provisions; A Convoy with Money and Provision arrives from
Venice.
the Carpenters fell heartily to Work on the Vessels, and Galleys, to repair
and make them fit for the next Voyage, and the Soldiers remained ready to
Embrace any new Enterprise: But the Doge continuing sick, and reduced to a
great weakness and debility of Body, put a damp on the Spirits of the Soldiery,
and much retarded the proceedings of all Designs.

For though the Captain Extraordinary Venier, was Commanded with his Ships to
watch, and guard one side of the Channel of Negropont, Turkish Forces landed at
Negropont.
and Captain Valier Commander of the Great Alexander to attend the other: yet
the Captain Pasha broke into Negropont, with ten Galleys, and there landed 500
Men, promising them by Order of the Sultan, in a short time, a much greater
force, with which they should be supplied very speedily: and that in the mean
time, they should labor with all possible industry to repair the Works which
the Enemies Bombs and Cannon had ruined; so that the Venetians were not able to
obstruct the Turks from giving Relief to Candia, but instead thereof, had the
Misfortune to lose two of their Galleys by Storm, and were forced to return
back again to Napoli di Romania, where their chief Comfort was, that the
Sickness began to decrease, which had for some time raged both in the Fleet,
Army, and Countries round the City.

March.
The Spring coming on, the Doge began to recover his Health and Strength again,
Morosini recovers his Health.
to the great Joy of all the Soldiery, so that he could now attend to Business,
and give Orders to the Armata, which had been so well repaired, and Careened,
as that the Galleys were in a Condition already to put to Sea: Notwithstanding
all which, the Turks were not obstructed in their passage to Negropont,
Negropont supplied.
where four Galleys belonging to the Beyes arrived, bringing Spades, Shovels,
Pick-axes, and several other Instruments for repairing the Breaches made last
Year by the Enemy; on which, their Slaves, being dis-enchain'd from the Oar,
labored Day and Night with all diligence; and Missir Ogli, with some Galleys,
was also arrived, being sent to forward that Work; for the Turks had an
Opinion, that the Venetians would make another Attempt thereupon, and which
should be the Work of the following Summer.

But the Venetians had suffered so much the last Year before Negropont, that
they esteemed themselves in no good Condition for a second Enterprise, they
having not as yet licked their Wounds whole, nor recruited their Army, which
was much more weak than it was the Year past, and unable to undertake an
Enterprise in which they had already been foiled. Howsoever, not to sit Idle,
and look about them, their Aim was on Malvasia, to reduce which, ten Galleys,
and 12 Galleots were dispatched by the Captain General to assist in the
Building of two Forts near the Bridge entering to the Town, on which the
Mainotes, whom the Captain General had armed, were laboring to finish, being
of great importance toward a Blockade, and to hinder all Vessels from bringing
Provisions to the place: And farther to proceed in this Design, the whole
Armata was Commanded to Sail to Porto Porro, appointed as it was the last Year,
to be the Magazine for Arms, Provisions, and Ammunition for the War; where
being arrived, they attended the Duke of Guadagne, with his Troops for
Reinforcement of the Army; and in the mean time, the Bridge was broken, and the
two Forts before Malvasia were finished, and a great number of Boats,
Felucca's, and Palandra's, lay before the Town to hinder all sorts of
Provisions and Succors from being brought into it, by which the place was
entirely blocked up on all sides, Malvasia blocked up.
both by Sea and Land; for the situation of the Town being on a Peninsula,
there was no Communication could be had with the Country but by the Bridge, and
a narrow spot of Land.

Whilst Ma^ters remained in this Nature before Malvasia, a certain Greek,
called Liberachi, lay encamped near Xeromero alias Missolonghi, with about 100
Turks, Liberachi encamped.
150 Sclavonians, and some Deserters from the Venetian Army. This Liberachi or
Liberio, was a Mainote by Nation, a Fellow bold and subtle, and did great
Services for the Venetians, until he was taken Prisoner by the Turks and
carried to Constantinople: He had not remained any long time there, before he
gained such Credit with the Turks, that by his fair Words and Promises, they
were persuaded that he could draw all the Mainotes to their Party, and cause
them to Revolt from the Venetians. Upon which Opinion, they set him at Liberty,
and entertained such Confidence of him, that they gave him the Title and Charge
of Bey, that is, Lord of the Mainotes; whereby many Deserters from the Venetian
Camp came in to him; And some Propositions for joining Forces passed between
him and Ensign Bossina, He purposes to join with Bossina.
who in the Month of October 1687. with most part of the People called
Oltramarines, had Deserted and listed themselves under this Bossina, who styled
himself Commander in Chief of the Deserters; and having his Headquarters at
Carpenizi, toward the Confines of Lepanto, he exacted Contributions from the
Villages and Countries round about: With him joined some other seditious
Captains, and a certain Ensign called Vito of Captain Rado's Company, a Fellow
of a bold Spirit, without Faith or Honesty; and with him he debauched several
dissolute Soldiers to forsake the Camp and join with Bossina. The Troops of
Liberachi being greatly increased by this Conjunction, the Venetian Generals
consulted in what manner they might give a stop to this Desertion, The
Venetians f ar the increase of Liberachi's Forces.
and cut to pieces Liberachi, Bossina, Vito, and their Followers: In the first
place it was resolved to declare, That ten Zechins should be given for the Head
of every Deserter, or for any that should be brought alive to the Camp; the
which produced an excellent Effect; for hereupon many of the Albanians, who had
designed to be of the Conspiracy, changed their Minds, and having possessed
themselves of the narrow Passes from Thebes to Petra, Negropont, and Vola, The
Remedy.
seized on many of them, and brought them back to the Camp, where they
sustained the Punishment which their Treachery deserved; by which means the
Conspiracy was broken, and many of those who watched an opportunity to Escape,
contained themselves within the Limits of their Duty.

But the manner how to Ruin Liberachi was much more difficult, A Plot laid
against Liberachi.
and some Consultations were held thereupon: At length it was concluded, That
the only way to Effect this Stratagem, was either by alluring him into the
Hands of the Venetians, or by rendering him suspected to the Turks; who upon the
least Jealousy were ready to apply the Bow-string to his Throat. To this
purpose, a certain Captain, called John Dambi, offered himself, a Person of
great Bravery and Conduct, A Plot against Liberachi.
and a good Soldier; one who spoke Turkish, Greek, and Italian, and was very
well versed in all the Manners, Ceremonies, and Customs of the Turks; and above
all, that which made him the most proper Instrument for this work, was, That he
had been a most intimate Friend of this Liberachi; for having been a Fellow
Slave with him, and linked in the same Chain at Constantinople, they became
sworn Brothers, Dambi sent to him
and made Protestations of mutual and unviolable Friendship ever to continue;
and that after they should be eased of their Chains, yet the same Bonds of
Faith and Affection should never be dissolved.

Nor was Dambi only his Friend; but the Doge Morosini had been Liberachi's
Godfather, a Relation much endearing in that Country; and therefore the Title
both of Friend, and Godfather, had great Charms with the generous Temper of
Liberio; who upon the first notice given him by Dambi, that being at Lepanto,
not far from Vracori, was very desirous to make him a Visit, he instantly
dispatched a Pass, or Salvo Condotto to him, inviting him with all the kind
Terms imaginable to come to him without the least scruple or fear imaginable.

In Confidence of Liberachi's Fidelity, Dambi departed from Lepanto in Company
with two Friends, and two Servants; Is kindly received by Liberachi.
and in two days time arrived at Vracori, where he was received with all the
Ceremony and kind Treatment that could be expected. Upon the News of a
Stranger's arrival in that Town, the Turks were curious to know who he was,
which Liberachi freely declared, saying, That he was come from the Venetian
Armata, on no other Design, than as an old Friend, to see him, and tell old
Stories of what Troubles and Miseries they had sustained together. The Turks
supposing that he might be come over to their side, bid him kindly welcome; as
did also one Marco Stifichi, Captain of a Galleot, whom the Captain General had
for his many Pyracies committed to the Galleys; howsoever, in respect to the
Oltramarines, had set him at liberty; but he, ungrateful for the favor
received, fled to Liberachi, intending to side with the discontented, or rather
licentious Mainotes under his Command. Their Conference.
After some Discourses over a Dish of Coffee and Sherbet, according to the
Turkish Treatment, the Turks and Stifichi withdrew; and then Liberachi began to
unbosom himself to Dambi, That the Obligations he had to the Captain General,
who in the year 1657, had Answered for him at the Holy Font in Calamata, were
such, as called for all Respect and Duty to him; and moreover, he could not but
be sensible, that his most Serene Highness, could not but be displeased, and
troubled to see one, whom he had made a Christian, to side with the Enemies to
that Religion; and therefore he did not doubt, but that he had sent him, that
is, Dambi, to endeavor to get him back to the right Way from whence he had
swerved: Dambi hereupon confessed the same, and assured him from the
Captain General of Favor and Promotion, in case he would return, and bring
over with him the Revolted Mainotes, which would be a good Example for Bossina,
and his Oltramarines to follow. Liberachi excuses his coming over to the
Venetians.
To which Liberachi made this Reply; That he would most readily comply, were
not his Obligations too great at Constantinople, where he had not only a Wife
and Children, but two Friends engaged for his Fidelity to the Grand Seignior,
and which would most certainly suffer with the Ruin of their Families, should
he Prevaricate from the Faith he had given to the Turks; moreover, he had
Married the Widow of the late Prince of Moldavia, with an Estate of 20000
Crowns; in which Match, the Grand Vizier had been instrumental; so that his Sin
of Ingratitude would be the more notorious, should he make a Revolt after so
many Kindnesses he had received on all sides. By this time Dinner was brought
in, which was with great Plenty both of Dishes and Wine, well dressed, and very
sumptuous; at which there was none present unless Liberachi himself, Dambi, and
his Priest. After Dinner, the same Discourse was carried on, and Dambi
persisted to urge him with all the Arguments which Reason could suggest to
return unto his Duty; but Liberachi still persisted, that his Obligations to
his Wife and Children were so great, that they out-weighed the Duty to his
Prince; for that the Laws of Nature and Faithfulness given to those, who had
been Bail, and Security for his Fidelity, ought upon no Considerations in the
World to be violated, and therefore he desired his Friend to press him no
farther upon that Point. At the end of this Discourse, Ali Bey disturbs the
Discourse.
one Ali Bey, sent with Money from the Seraskier to pay the Soldiery under
Liberachi, came in, and demanded who this Dambi was; and being informed, that
he was an Ancient Friend known to him at Constantinople, and came now to him
from the Venetian Armata, for no other Reason than to make him a Visit: Ali Bey
desired, that he might have him in his Custody, to carry before the Seraskier,
promising upon his Faith to return him back again in Safety: But Liberachi
refusing so to do, saying, That he had pawned his Word already that he should
return back without Hindrance or Molestation; Ali Bey departed, but with some
Threats, that he would make this Denial known unto the Seraskier, and how he
had given Entertainment to a suspected Stranger. Dambi fearing some stop or
trouble from hence would immediately take leave of his Friend, who just at his
departure, desired him, that so soon as he should be arrived in the Morea, that
he would kiss the Feet of his most Serene Highness, and return him a thousand
Thanks for the great Goodness and Favors which he had by many instances
demonstrated unto him; Liberachi his Compliment s^nt to the Doge.
giving him to understand the Reasons and Causes which debarred him from
enjoying the true Felicity of those many Offers of his most precious Grace and
Favor: Howsoever, he gave him Assurances of doing all Services possible to his
Highness, by advising and informing him of all the Motions and Designs of the
Turks; but because the practice hereof might be dangerous by Letters, which
were subject to be intercepted; he desired that his Highness would direct the
way, and manner of such a Correspondence; And in the mean time, he prayed Dambi
to inform him, That the Seraskier was at Zittuni, with 4000 Soldiers, amongst
which were 1200 Horse; A^a his Advices.
That his Orders from the Grand Seignior were, That in case the Venetians
should make a second Attempt upon Negropont, and that he had force sufficient,
that then he should give them Battle, and not suffer them to Entrench before
the City: But if on the contrary, the Venetians should be too strong for him,
that then he should endeavor to make a Diversion, by falling into the Morea,
wasting and consuming the Country; and that he, Liberachi, was ordered with his
Forces, being about 2000 Men, to join with the Seraskier in this Action. And
farther he desired him to acquaint the Captain General, That in Negropont they
had made a Pallisade round Carababa, about a Musket Shot distant from the Town,
which was of great Defense to the place. Likewise, That Ibrahim, who Commands
in Negropont, had declared, That in case the Seraskier at Land should not
assist him in the Defense of Carababa, it would be impossible to maintain and
conserve the City; That they were making other Outworks to cover the place;
That the Seraskier was ordered not to depend upon any Succors from
Constantinople, but received Commands to raise what Men he was able in the
Parts where his Army was, as far as to Larissa; and that the Garrison of
Negropont consisted of no more than 3000 Men: And that the Orders which he
himself had received, were to bring all the Country under Contribution from
Salona to Santa Maura; which he was resolved to do with great rigor, by
forcing them to pay ten Dollars a Head; by which means they would be
constrained to fly for Refuge into Morea, which he thought would be of some
Advantage to the Venetians. Discoursing farther upon these Matters, Dambi
desired to know what was become of Captain Bossina, who Commanded the
Oltramarines, which had deserted from the Army; to which he gave Answer, That
they were in the Villages of Carpenizi.

In this manner, Dambi departs.
the Discourse being ended, Liberachi would accompany Dambi on some part of his
way, and brought him four Miles with 70 Horse, and some Footmen, commanding
also two of his Captains with some Men, to give him Convoy so far as the River
Lepanto; to which place being conducted with safety, he was admitted with all
readiness to the presence of his Serene Highness, who much applauded the
punctual Relations and Services of Dambi; hoping from thence, that the Plot
could not fail that he had laid for Liberachi; for either he would be forced
thereby to leave the Service of the Turks, with many of his Followers, or
otherwise falling into the Jealousy of the Turks by this free Conference, it
could not but prove fatal to him; so that take it which way they would,
Liberachi was under a necessity with his Men of seeking Refuge under the
Protection of the Venetian Arms.

The Troops embarked.
These Circumstances being well considered, were a sufficient motive to Embark
the Troops, and to order some Ships, and other Vessels to sail forthwith to
Malvasia, and to direct Orders to Gradenigo Proveditor-Extraordinary, to march
with the Horse into those Parts. But whilst the Doge was in a readiness to
Embark, there arrived an Express with Letters from Demetrio Gaspari, an
Athenian, dated at Culuri, advising, That he, and those Inhabitants had
received Intelligence, That several Galleots belonging to the Enemy, were
coming upon them, and therefore in all Humility, they supplicated, that they
would come to their Assistance and Succor; Whereupon Orders being given to the
Galleasses, Ships, and Galleots to sail for Malvasia, The Doge sails for Culuri.
the Doge with the Galleys took his Course directly for Culuri; but before they
could come thither, laboring against the Winds by force of their Oars, the
Turks had been there, and transported from thence 350 Greeks, for the most part
Women and Children; for the Men had secured themselves in the Mountains; but
great Instances being made for their Transportation to some more secure place,
and that they might be set ashore on the Island of Egena; it was ordered, that
three Vessels should attend, and carry them to what Place they should
determine; and then the Doge proceeded to the Island of Specie, and the day
following to Malvasia.

And here having Intelligence, That several Barbarosse Ships infested the
Coasts of Zant, and Sapienza, and had already taken a Patach belonging to Zant;
the Doge began to be in some fear for the Convoy expected with Money from
Venice for Subsistence of the Army, under the Command of Girolamo Cornaro
Proveditor-General of the Sea; Some fears for the Convoy coming from Venice.
the which being debated at a Council of War, and the importance of the Matter
well considered, it was resolved to dis-speed away immediately, the Proveditor
of the Armata, Augustino Sagredo, with twelve Galleys, and Lorenzo Venier,
Captain-Extraordinary, with six Ships, with Orders to sail as far as Corfu to
meet the aforesaid Cornaro, and to bring him and the Ships under his Convoy,
laden with Money and other Necessaries, in security to the Fleet. In which
matter, both the Commanders of the Galleys and Ships having received their
Instruction, and having provided themselves with all things necessary for their
Voyage, they set sail in few hours before Night.

In the Morning the Ships were observed to be at some distance from the Shore,
and at least ten Miles from the Galleys, which were making their way to Cape
St. Angelo, the which gave some Trouble to the Doge, by thinking, that in case
these two Divisions were so far separated at the beginning, what would become
of them before the end of the Voyage; Whilst the Doge thought of these things,
a great Fleet appeared Steering directly to that Port, The Duke of Guadagne
joins the Fleet.
which coming nearer was found to be the Fleet which brought the Duke of
Guadagne, Serjeant-General Baron Spaar, and several other Officers, with 333
Foot Soldiers.

About this time arrived the unhappy News of the loss of two Venetian Galleys,
Two Venetian Galleys lost.
one Commanded by Pietro Dona, and the other by Henrico Pappafava, both
Venetian Noblemen, taken by the Corsairs of Tripoli on the Coast of Sapienza.
This Advice was very surprising to the Doge, it being a loss which had not
happened with so much Disgrace for many years to the Venetian Arms; and the
more strange it was, in regard, That Francesco Dona was on Board the Galley, a
Person of great Experience in Maritime Affairs, and yet suffered himself to be
deceived by two white Streamers or Pendants which the Enemy had put forth, to
be esteemed French, by which the Galleys were decoyed so near, as to be out of
all possibility of Escape.

The Doge having laid Siege to the Town of Malvasia both by Sea and Land, a
certain Slave, A Relation of the state of the Town.
who had been Captain of a Tartana, having made an Escape from the Fortress,
gave an Account of the State and Condition of the Town and Castle; relating,
that the Garrison consisted only of 700 stout Soldiers, with which, and with
the Inhabitants, they might amount to about 2000 Souls, Women and Children, all
resolved to defend themselves, as appeared by the Sequel. The Commanders in
Chief were Mustapha Disdar, or Governor of the Castle, an ancient Man, who
carried great Authority and Resolution in his Face and Actions: And Assan Aga,
who Commanded the Town, who upon approach of the Enemy, caused their Galleots,
Brigantines, and smaller Boats and Vessels to be drawn close under the Wall of
the Town, for their better security; That the Houses of the Town were strongly
built; May.
and that the principal Persons thereof had filled all their upper Rooms with
Earth, to cover them from the Bombs; but that the Streets for the most part
were very narrow: That the Turks were then at work in drawing their Cannon to
such parts of the Wall, from whence they might most annoy the Bridge: That the
rich Inhabitants were well supplied with Provisions, of which they were forced
to Communicate some part to the poorer sort: That the Garrison was not paid;
but that consisting for the most part of Natives of the Country, and Seamen
inured to Hardship and Pyracy, were contented to suffer and undergo any Trouble
and Want for the Sake and Defense of their Native City: And in shorr, That
besides the Garrison there were about 160 Greeks, who kept Watch and Ward, and
underwent all the Duties of a regular Militia.

This Information gave some Retardment to the formal Siege and Attack of the
place; for it was resolved to attend the arrival of the several Convoys, and
Auxiliary Galleys shortly expected; and that in the mean time, the Town should
be kept under a strict Blockade, and the Guards placed in all the Avenues and
Passages to the Town, where the Duke de Guadagne the General should judge most
proper to dispose them; June.
and to lose no time, all the Troops were drawn into a Body, that a particular
Review and Account might be taken of the Numbers and Condition of the whole
Army.

Whilst these things were acting, the eight Galleys of Malta began to appear,
being then Doubling the Cape of St. Angelo, The Malta Galleys arrived the 24th.
Commanded by Fra. Carlo Spinelli, who was Bali of Armenia; a worthy Soldier,
and a Religious Commander, whose Fortune being to join the Venetian Fleet on
St. John's Day their Tutelar Saint, added very much to the Joy and Festivity of
the Day. And what farther increased the Satisfaction both of the Fleet and
Army, was at the same time to see the happy arrival of a Convoy Commanded by
Pietro Bembo, The Venetian Convoy arrives.
bringing 72000 Zechins in Gold for Service of the Army; upon which also
arrived, the Prince de Harcourt, and Count Enea Rapetta Serjeant-Generals,
besides several select Companies of Foot to the number of 455 Soldiers, with
Provisions of all sorts for their Support and Maintenance; as also the
Regiments of Hisy, and Simon Famsogna, both Colonels of Croatia, consisting of
about 700 Foot; as also a Regiment of Dragoons of the the same Country, under
the Command of Colonel Strel. After the Entrance of these several Galleys and
Vessels into Port; and having cast Anchor in their orderly Divisions, and the
Salutes made and returned by Cannon, and Vollies of small shot, according to
the customary Civilities of the Seas, Visits made to the Doge.
the Admiral of Malta attended with his Followers of Knights and Gentlemen,
went to pay his Visit to the Doge, after the same manner as he had done the
year before, (which happened then to be on the 16th of July) the Ducal Galley
remained with it is Anchor a-Pique, in an open place, having the Galleasses for
Antiguards, with their Anchors also a-Pique, and with Streamers and Colors
flying, as is usual in such Solemnities; The Doge received these Generals below
on the Deck, and afterward conducted them into the Poop, where having
entertained one the other, with Discourses of their respective Voyages, and of
the present state of the Camp before the Town, and passed other Civilities and
Compliments, they took their leaves, and returned to their several Vessels.

The next Day the Doge sent his Lieutenant General Andrea Pisani to return the
Compliments in his Name with the like Ceremony, The Complements returned,
and to deliver unto those Generals the several Ordinances of War, and the
Instructions both for Fighting and Navigation. After which, a Council of War
was called, at which the Doge, the General of Malta, the Duke of Guadagne, and
all the General Officers both of Sea and Land, were present to Consult, and
take such Measures as were most agreeable to the present Exigencies.

There were four Propositions made for employing their Arms, and four Designs
offered, but they were all of so different a Nature, that they could not come
to any Determination at that Meeting; but at length, after various Reflections
made on the necessity there was of coming to a Resolution, it was concluded,
The Result of a Council of War.
That General Guadagne should with his Cavalry take a view of the Straight of
Corinth, (which is that Neck of Land which joins the Morea to Greece) and upon
a Survey thereof to make a Calculate, how many Men would be required to
Maintain and Defend that Pass in case the Turks should endeavor to force their
entrance that way into the Morea, it being of great importance to fortify that
passage, and not leave it open, and undefended to the Incursion of the Turks;
whilst the Armata should be employed on other Enterprises.

Whilst things remained under these Uncertainties, News was brought by an
Express from Salona, That Liberachi had wrote a menacing Letter to the Bailiffs
and principal Men belonging to the Villages and Parts adjacent, that they
should come and pay their Respects to him, Liberachi threatens Villages near
Salona.
and bring their Carach, or Poll-Money with them, or otherwise he would come
and punish them according as their Disobedience should deserve. To which they
unanimously made Answer, That he might come when he pleased, that they feared
him not; and that he should find their Scimetars to be as keen, and sharp as
his. Liberachi upon this Answer, being then at Zittuni, not far from Salona,
immediately put his Troops in order, and marched against them; and was boldly
encountered by Charopoliti, who Commanded the Country People, and being joined
with some Troops of the Confederate Provinces, and of the Oltramarines, (who
under the Command of Elia Damianovick, had deserted the Venetian Army) they
joined Battle with Liberachi, and after a Bloody Fight defeated him, He sights,
and is defeated.
and carried many of the Turks Heads to General Cornaro, who with his Gally was
nearly approached to that Coast.

July.
But as to the Venetian Arms, all things remained still and without motion; only
the Doge and Guadagne passed with some Galleys along the Shoar-side by way of
the Gardens, to take necessary Observations of the Countenance of the Enemy,
and Situation of the place, without coming to any certain Resolution. Howsoever
at length, after long Debates, they resolved at a Council of War, (that their
Arms might not remain longer unemployed) to dis-speed the Cavalry, which were
to march by Land, and 3000 Foot Soldiers to be embarked on the Ships, furnished
with all sorts of Provisions both for Arms, and Victuals, and therewith to sail
to the Straight of Corinth, to disappoint the Seraskier of all hopes of
Entrance into the Morea: The Narrow of Corinth fortified.
The Prince Harcourt was to Command the Horse, accompanied with the
Sergeant-General Spaar; who joining with the Auxiliaries of that Country under
the Command of Dambi, it was calculated, that they might form a Body of about
7000 fighting Men effective; who were to be attended by Cornaro the
Proveditor-General, who, with some Galleys, was to assist as any occasion
should occur.

But whilst this Design was putting in practice, and all things prepared for
the March and Voyage of the Soldiers, and some already gone, the unhappy News
arrived, The Plague ^^ck^^^.
That the Plague was broken out in the Country of Propoliza, whereby the whole
Army might be in danger of Contagion; that being the common Way, and Road by
which all the Provisions were to pass for Relief of the Army, unless they would
take a compass by Sea round the Morea, which would be an uncertain and tedious
Navigation. But His Serene Highness the Doge, having put all things in the most
secure manner possible to avoid Infection, 14 Sail of Ships were dispatched for
Transport of the Soldiers, on which were laden the Chevaux de Frise, with all
sorts of Provisions, and Ammunition for War, and Sustenance of the Soldiers.
And that the City of Malvasia might still remain straightened by a Blockade, and
as it were Besieged, the two Forts were finished, which served to keep the
Defendants within the compass of their own Walls, and to hinder them from other
Avenues on the side toward the Gardens, Malvasia blocked up.
at that place which is called Palio Dirgo, some Regiments were ordered to
raise certain Forts and Redoubts on that side, the Slaves belonging to the
Galleys, which were brought as near as they could come, were employed in the
Works to cast up Earth, and make Faggots; and a Squadron of Galleys under
Command of Pisani, was posted there to be assistant to the Regiments ashore.

The Doge in the mean time removed from the Fort of St. Nicholas, which was the
Old Malvasia, toward the New Forts, which being entirely completed, four
pieces of great Cannon of 50 Pound Bullet were Landed, and planted on the
principal Fortress, whence they greatly annoyed the Turks; howsoever the Enemy
was not negligent on the other side to ply their Cannon on that part which is
nearest to the Bridge.

In the mean time also the General of Malta, The Malta Galleys permitted to
cruise abroad.
(for whom at present there was no great Action) by permission of the Doge
received license to be absent for 15 Days, and to cruise about the Cape of
Sapienza, and Watch for the Corsairs of Barbary, which did commonly infest the
Seas.

About this time Prince Maximilian of Brunswick arrived at the Armata, where
the Day following he was received with the usual Ceremony by the Doge; he
brought with him no more force than what served for his own Equipage, and for
the better Defense of the Ship, on which he was Embarked: but so soon as this
Prince had performed his Complements, A Storm endangers the Galleys.
a sudden Storm arose with Hail and Wind, so violent, as put all the Galleys
into imminent danger; some lost their Boltsprits, others their Main-Yards,
others had their Oars broken, some had their Poops blown away, and Boats were
overturned, with such prodigious Hail, as the like had scarce ever been seen
before. In short the whole Armata was in danger of being lost; but God be
praised, though the Escape was wonderful, yet it cost some Trouble, Time, and
Charges to repair the Damages; in which also the Forces on Land had their
share, having had their Tents and Huts overthrown by this Hurricane of Wind;
only the Turks received some benefit thereby, having had their Cisterns filled
with the Showers of Rain and Hail, which fell like a Deluge into all the
Receptacles and Vessels made to receive fresh Water for the Use and Service of
this City, of which before this Accident, they began to be sensible of some
want.

And now Letters were brought from the Forces lately sent to guard the Straight
of Corinth, that the Defense and Conservation of that place, would require a
1000 Men more; which His Serene Highness being desired to dispatch away, they
were without any delay embarked on the Squadron of Captain Pisani, and by that
time the Batteries for the Mortar-pieces being also completed, Reinforcement
sent to the Narrow of Corinth.
they began to throw their Bombs and Carcasses thick into the Town, which so
incommoded the Defendants, that the Venetians began to conceive some hopes of a
speedy Surrender, and the Forts played so constantly on the Town, to open and
widen the Breaches, as if they had intended to have stormed the Walls, for
which they had neither Men, nor other Preparations. Howsoever it was hoped,
that by the Cannon and Bombs only, the City might be reduced: For that a
Magazine of Powder in a place called the Windmill, was blown up, and by a
Report received from some Deserters, The Bombs annoy the Town.
the Defendants were extremely annoyed by the Bombs; of which their greatest
damage was to their Cisterns, and Conservatories of Water; by this intelligence
the Doge was encouraged to ply them incessantly with Bombs, not only from the
Land-side, but from three Palanders, or Bomb-Ships, two of which were placed
directly opposite to the City, and a third was drawn just under the Fortress to
increase the Annoyance which was made by the Cannon.

The Galleys of Malta return.
In the mean time at the expiration of the 14 Days allotted, the Malta Galleys
returned from cruising on the Coast of the Cape Sapienza, having neither met
the Ships of Barbary, nor other Booty: And whereas it was represented, that
these Galleys could be little serviceable at present toward the Subjection and
Surrender of the City, it was judged, that they might be best employed in
cruising on the Pirates of Barbary, and securing the Christian Vessels which
Trade in those Seas; and accordingly those Galleys were without the least delay
dispatched again for the Cape Lands, which are most infested by the Pirates,
being favored by the Northern Winds, which continued for several Days, They go
again to Sea.
even to the end of this Month.

But this Wind which was beneficial to the Galleys of Malta, was so prejudicial
and dangerous to the Palanders, as put them besides all their Works and
Operations; so that instead of annoying the Town, they had Business enough to
save themselves from sinking in the Seas, which the Northerly Winds drove
violently upon them: So that now the Besiegers had nothing to annoy the Enemy,
but what was thrown from the Forts erected on the Land.

Things in this manner not succeeding well on the Venetian side, August.
some little encouragement was administered by the Arrival of the Proveditor
General of the Seas, Cornaro joins the Fleet.
Girolamo Cornaro, who on the 5th of the Month of August, whilst the Doge was
in person on the side of the Gardens, to invigorate, and by his presence to
animate the Approaches against the Town, was discovered to double the Cape of
St. Angelo with two Galleys, and a Galleot, and to bend his Course directly
toward the Fleet. The Arrival of Cornaro, a person of so much Honor and
Esteem, generally applauded in all parts, gave wonderful satisfaction to the
Fleet and Army; for though the Galleys and Galleot he brought with him, could not
contribute much to the Reinforcement of the Armata; yet the Reputation of such
a person, renowned as well for his Bravery and Conduct, as for the fame of his
Family and Ancestors, gave a general Satisfaction and Confidence to all the
Forces.

It being observed by the Doge, that notwithstanding all their Endeavors, no
great Advancement was made on the Town, and that the Defendants continued still
resolute and unterrified, and therefore that something more effectual should be
attempted upon them, to force them to a Surrender: It was ordered, that four of
the greatest Ships should be appointed to batter the Town with their Cannon,
whilst an Attempt should be made to burn their Galleots, Brigantines, and
Londra's, Attempt to burn the Vessels of the Town*
which were drawn up close under the Walls: To execute this Enterprise, four
Boats, or Pinnaces armed with Stout Resolute Seamen, Commanded by Peter
Ferrari, were appointed to burn the Vessels lying under the Walls, and being
furnished with Fireworks, were to make an Attack on them, under the Smoke of
the Cannon, which were to play on the Town from the four Ships.

Things being all prepared for such an Enterprise, the Doge left his own, and
mounted the Galley of Pisani, who was Captain of the Slaves condemned to the
Oar, and thereon returned to the Garden f^re, to be a Spectator of the Action,
knowing that his presence would much animate and inspire Courage into the
Assailants. The next Day being the time appointed, a Body of about 100
Oltramarines, were ordered in the Night to hide themselves under some little
Hills and Rocks called Grebani, and at the Foot of one of the Enemies Forts, to
cover the Attack in case the Turks should make a Sally from the Town. But the
Success did not answer the Expectation of the Martial Spirits of so many brave
Officers and Soldiers, But without effect.
who came down in great Numbers to behold the performance of this Action; the
which was absolutely defeated for want of the four Ships, which were detained
below by contrary Winds: Howsoever the Expectation being great, the Officers on
the shore approached the Town nearer than was necessary and safe, of which the
Turks not neglecting their Advantage, made many Shots amongst them from the
Walls, one of which killed Lorenzo Venier, Venier and Caraccioli killed.
Captain Extraordinary of the Ships, and Michael Angelo Caraccioli, a Cavalier
of Malta, whilst they were both in serious Discourse together, having received
the Mortal Blow on their Heads. The Death of Venier was greatly lamented not
only by the Doge, but by the whole Army, and indeed the Loss was general, being
one of the most able Citizens of Venice, and the best Sea Captain belonging to
that Republic: And indeed it seemed, as if an unhappy Constellation had been
reigning over him at that time, when being desirous to be aboard for better
direction of the four Ships, Are greatly lamented.
the Doge permitted him not, out of a regard to his Person, which he did not
think fit to adventure on so desperate a hazard, so that what was intended for
his Conservation, was turned to his Loss and Destruction.

But this was not all the Misfortune; for the Turks observing such a Concourse
of People, and from thence apprehending some intention of an Assault, made a
Sally, not only from the Town, The Turks make a Sally.
but from the Rocks, under which the Oltramarines had concealed themselves;
where the Turks falling on them in the Rear, killed many of them, and put the
rest to Flight; and though the Sergeant-Major Tomaso Pompei, with some of his
Men, Sem Oltramarines put to fl^ght.
came in to their Succor, he got nothing thereby more than a Musket Shot in
his Thigh, after which he was forced to retreat.

After which unhappy Misfortune, the Doge returned to his Ducal Gally greatly
afflicted for the Death of Venier; by which the Ships wanting an Admiral,
Domenico Diedo was substituted in his place, until the return of Pisani from
the Gulf of Corinth. All which time the Forces sent to guard that important
Pass and Narrow leading into the Morea, remained there without any Action, the
Seraskier not intending to make any effort thereon for that Year; The Seraskier
keeps a Guard on Negropont.
for that his Eyes being fixed on Negropont, where he expected that the
Venetians should renew their Attempt, he judged that their appearance before
Malvasia, was nothing but a Blind to divert him from the guard of that
important place.

Things not being very promising before Malvasia, and little hopes to subdue it
by force, the Doge resolved to spend the remainder of the Summer in cruising in
the Archipelago; but not to lose all the Fruits of the preceding Labors, the
Redoubt raised at the Bridge was fortified and perfected, and the other Forts
strengthened with as many Men and Cannon, as were esteemed sufficient both to
keep the Enemy from Sallying out, or Provisions from entering in; but before the
Doge departed, four of the greatest Ships were ordered to batter the Town, The
Ships batter the Town.
and give a farewell to them with their biggest Cannon: The which being
performed within Musket Shot, ruined almost all the Suburbs, yet not without
some Loss aboard the Ships by the Enemies Small-shot from the Walls.

The Preparations for securing the Blockade of the Town being perfected, and
the Work of Careening, Washing, and Tallowing of the Venetian, and Maltese
Galleys being ended, September.
it was concluded necessary to execute the former resolution of sailing up the
Archipelago, to the Gulf of Negropont, whereby the Seraskier might be alarmed,
and amused so far as to keep his Forces on that side, and without farther
attempt, to pass the Straight of Corinth into the Morea; and that in the mean
time all things might be secured before Malvasia, four Galleys were appointed
to remain there, under the Command of Frederico Bembo, and Colonel Fabio Lanoia
to maintain the first Fortress, and Colonel Carlo Montanari the second, with
their respective Regiments.

All things being thus ordained, and agreed, the Doge weighed Anchor in the
Night, and endeavored to get out, but the Winds being contrary, he was forced
to return back again to an Anchor; as the like happened also the next Day, not
only by contrary Winds, but by some Misunderstandings between the Vessels of
the Vanguard. But what was worse than all the former Misfortunes, The Doge
sick of a Fever.
the Doge was seized with such a violent Fever, as confined him to his Bed, in
which the Physicians discovered very dangerous Symptoms of a long Distemper.
Moreover some unhappy Reports were then flying abroad, That the Captain Pasha
was come out, and roving upon the Seas in the Archipelago with 14 Galleys, 31
Ships, including those of Barbary, and 18 Galleots, with design to raise
Carach, or Contributions from the Islands: But no great credit was given to
that Report, by reason that the Season of the Year was so far advanced, that it
seemed rather time to lay up Vessels in Harbout, than to begin a new
Expedition. Howsoever the News hereof, and the Distemper of the Doge
increasing, which the Physicians termed a Relapse, and therefore more
dangerous, declaring also that the change of Air would be the most proper
Remedy for the Disease, The Doge returns home.
it was resolved, That the Charge and Command of the Fleet, should be committed
to the Conduct of that Wise and Prudent Cavalier Cornaro the Proveditor-General
of the Seas, whose Vice Admiral was Carlo Pisani, and Rear-Admirals Bartolmeo
Gredenigo, and Giovanni Pizzamano; to whom also the Galley of Ludovico Balbi
designed for Dalmatia was joined, together with the Galleys of Malta, which
being according to the Season of the Year, recalled home; the Admiral with that
Squadron, sailed with the Venetians, esteeming it a great Honor to accompany
the Doge on that occasion, so far as his Way and Course would admit.

In this manner the Doge, whose Illness increased, set sail the 15th of
September, and directing his Course toward Venice, came the next Day in sight
of Coron, and passing at no great distance from Modon, they Anchored that Night
at Prodano, and the next Day in the Road of Zant; where having remained all
that Day, they Anchored the next Day in Port Viscardo upon the Island of
Ceffalonia, and the following Day at Corfu. We omit all the Ceremonies which
passed between the Armata, and the Officers of the several Cities, and
Countries by which they sailed; as also the short stay made at Casopo, where
Prayers and Money were offered at the Miraculous Image of our Lady, for the
Health and Recovery of the Doge; and here it was not far from the Rock of
Jasseno, The Galleys of Malta separate from the Fleet.
that the Galleys of Malta taking their leave of the Venetian Fleet, returned
to their own Country: From Casopo they came to the Entrance of Cattaro, where
they had intelligence, that Alexander Molino, Proveditor-General in that
Province, was returned from Narenta, having failed of the Design he undertook
in those Parts, by reason that the Morlacks had not executed his Orders.

On the 28th they came in sight of Ragusi, from whence the Senate sent off five
of their principal Gentlemen to Complement the Doge; but by reason of his
Indisposition they were introduced to the Presence of the Lieutenant General,
to whom, with sensible Expressions of their Sorrow for the Indisposition of His
Most Serene Highness, The Doge at Ragusi.
they declared the great Honor and Deference they conserved for the Most
Serene Republic of Venice, being extremely sorry, that they should be deprived
of the satisfaction of laying themselves at the Feet of His Highness: After
which they made their Presents of all sorts of Refreshments, such as Confects,
Fowl, Fruit, Wax, Herbs, and Ice, with whatsoever else might be acceptable at
Sea.

The 1st of October they Anchored before the City and Castle of Spalato,
October.
the strongest Venetian Garrison that is on the Dalmatian Shore, Spalato.
commanded by Bartolmeo Gritti, who with the Archbishop attended with many
Followers, came to the side of the Ducal Galley, where they were received by
the Lieutenant General. And here it was thought fit to pass the Quarantene,
which is observed with indispensible Rigor by all Vessels coming from the
Levant; for which this being esteemed a commodious place, Orders were given for
fitting and preparing the Lazaretto, and to provide it with all things
necessary, and with faithful and diligent Guardians.

And here it was that the Doge having all things fitly accommodated for him,
went ashore to enjoy something of Repose and Rest, being much weakened by his
Sickness and Fatigues of his Voyage. October. 3d
From hence was dispatched an Express to the Senate, to give them notice, that
the Doge resolved to make his Contumacia at that Place, The Doge makes his
Quarantene at Spalato.
and was already entered into Quarantene. In answer unto which, the Senate
dispatched their Ducal Letters to signify their Pleasure, that the Doge might
continue to finish his Quarantene at Spalato; to which end the Prior, and
Overseers of the Health, were dispatched from Venice to take care that all
things relating to that Matter, should be performed with due Care and
Punctuality; and accordingly all things were inspected by them, whether of
Goods or Merchandise, and nothing of rigor omitted with the least respect to
the Person of the Doge, or his Retinue.

At the beginning of November, November.
News was brought to Spalato, That the Proveditor-General Molino, had succeeded
in his Design against Trebigne, having possessed himself in that Country of 10
Towers, of which he had demolished seven, and retained three, into which he had
put some Forces, which might serve to incommode the Turks in their Excursions.

During the time of this Quarantene, nothing passed at Spalato, but only
Triumphs and Festivals for the Successes of Prince Lewis of Baden against the
Turks, and for the Election of Cardinal Ottoboni to the Papal Throne, They
rejoice for the Successes of Pr. Lewis of Baden.
under the Name of Alexander VIII. Letters also were brought from the Ports of
Malvasia, of the 4th of October, That the General of the Seas Cornaro, departed
from thence the 23d of September, with the Galleys under his Command; having
left four Galleys behind for Guards under Rear-Admiral Bembo, and 10 Ships
under Marco Pisani; and that since the Departure of the Doge, about 30 Persons
had made their escape out of Malvasia, declaring the great Misery which was in
the City, besides the raging Diseases of Fluxes and Convulsions.

In performance of the Quarantene the Month of November passed, and an entrance
made into the Month of December, by which the Doge being returned to a better
State of Health, The Pratcick given to the Doge.
and all the Galleys well refreshed, and in a good Condition, and supplied with
Provisions, come from Venice; and all things put into a Posture for Sailing;
Prattica was given to the whole Fleet, (that is, a License of Converse and
Communication) by the Officers of Health; and next Day being the 17th of
December, December.
Anchors were weighed, and the Doge proceeded on his Voyage toward Venice,
where he arrived about the end of this Month; with which the Year expiring, The
Doge departs from Spalato, and arrives at Venice.
we shall not need to describe the glorious Reception of the Doge into the
Palace of St. Mark, with all the Pomp and Magnificence which the Riches, and
fervent affection of this celebrated City, and Wise Senate could confer on a
Prince so famous and deserving as this: And so let us proceed to the following
Year.

Anno 1690.
1690. January.
THUS far had the Affairs of Christendom succeeded prosperously against the
Turks; for though the Venetians had for the two last Years performed no great
Feats, yet the Imperial Arms under the Conduct of Prince Lewis of Baden, had
been Prosperous even to a Miracle; but now the German Empire being furiously
Attacked within the Bowels of it by the Arms of France, there was a necessity
to look homewards, and for the several Princes to provide for their own Safety,
and guard their own Countries, for which reason many of the German Troops being
called out of Hungary, the main Burden of the War fell upon the Emperor, and
was carried on with various Success, though for the most part Prosperous, whilst
his Affairs were under the Auspicious Government of that Valiant and Renowned
General Prince Lewis of Baden.

This Month of January began not very favorably on the Christian side; for the
Prince of Holstein hearing that the Turks miserably destroyed the Countries
round about, he marched to Prisseren, with some Troops to meet them, and
thence, not being able to spare many Forces, he detached the Prince of Hanover,
and Colonel Strasser, to relieve the Pass of Casseneck, which was said to be
Besieged by the Turks: On the the 1st of January, when they decamped from
before Prisseren or Prissina, their Troops consisted of 120 Foot, drawn from
the Regiment of Aspremont; 80 of Aversperg's, five Companies of Dragoons of the
Prince of Hanover's Regiment, eight Troops of Horse of Holstein, six Troops of
Horse of Hanover, four Troops of Horse of the Regiment of Stirum; all which did
not amount unto more than 1600 Men, with which they marched so diligently, that
the next Day they arrived near Casseneck, in sight of the Enemy; their Orders
were not to approach too near, nor advance too far, until they had well
observed the true strength of the Enemy, and discovered whether they were so
strong as had been reported: Accordingly they at first posted themselves with
their Backs to a Morass, and planted four Fieldpieces against the Enemy, who
durst not Attack them in that Place; but keeping within the Hills and Woods,
they detached 1000 Tartars into the open Fields, upon sight of which, Colonel
Strasser quitting his Advantageous Post, forced them to retreat with the Death
of some of them; but the Germans being now in the open Field, and not able to
retreat, they found themselves surrounded on all sides with 30000 of the Enemy,
against which having sustained a Battle from Nine in the Morning, till Three in
the Afternoon, The Germans defeated.
and having spent all their Powder and Ammunition, they were at last totally
defeated. In this Fight the Prince of Hanover, Colonel Strasser, Count Solari,
with most of the Officers, and many of the Common Soldiers were killed on the
Place, most of the Prisoners being wounded, died; all their Colors,
Kettle-Drums, etc. were taken by the Enemies; nevertheless 6 or 700 Men, by
help of the Night, and of Woods and Mountains, came safe to Belgrade, from
whence they were dispatched to their Regiments.

This News being brought the same Night to the Prince of Holstein unto
Prissina, he retreated from thence to Nissa, leaving behind all the Forage and
Baggage of the Regiment of Stirum.

On the 4th the Regiment of Piccolomini, which was to join with Strasser,
having no Advice of the Defeat, came near to Casseneck, Count Montecelli
Attacked by the Tartars.
under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Count Montecelli, so soon as he came
in sight of the Tartars, they immediately Invested him, but he very prudently
retreated toward a Morass, over which there was a Bridge; on the other side
whereof he commanded a Lieutenant with 30 Horse to guard that end of the
Bridge, until he put himself in a Posture to fight on the other side. After
some time the Tartars Attacked them on both sides, the Lieutenant with 30 Men
defended himself for a good while; until being overpowered, he was relieved by
two Companies sent to his Assistance, He makes his Escape with some loss.
and on both sides defended themselves so valiantly until Night, that under
shelter of the Darkness, they made their Retreat; the Tartars followed them
with great noise for the space of an Hour, but could not put them into
disorder; so about Midnight, they arrived at Prissina, which Place they found
Abandoned; but having refreshed themselves and their Horses there for a while,
they proceeded to Procopia with the loss only of about 30 Men, and one Captain
and some wounded, their Baggage was not with them, they having sent it to Poza,
and Novibassa, which afterward fell into the Hands of the Enemy, with most of
those which accompanied it, the rest saved themselves in the Woods.

By this time Veterani who was appointed General in the Place of Piccolomini
deceased, arrived at Nissa from Transylvania, with some Troops; which being a
Place open to the Attack of the Enemy, and much feared, they caused the
Garrison and Inhabitants to work Night and Day upon the Fortifications;
Veterani also provided Pyrot, Procopia, Mustapha Palanca, being Passes, with
all Necessaries, and demolished Cossova, Albania, and some other little Places,
from whence he withdrew the Soldiers to strengthen Places of greater moment.

Casseneck surrendered.
The Pass Casseneck which was Besieged, (wherein was a Garrison of 180 Men) and
before which the Turks had raised a Battery of seven Guns, defended it self
several Days, and at length surrendered on Conditions, one of which was that
they should be conducted to Belgrade.

Whilst things were acting on this side, Colonel Corbelli, who commanded the
Blockade of great Waradin, received Advice that the Turks at Bellingesh had
provided a great Number of Cattle, and 100 Wagons with Provisions, under a
strong Convoy, to be put into Waradin for relief of the City, whereupon making
a Detachment of 200 Horse, 300 Dragoons, 300 Hussars, and 200 Heydukes, he
marched therewith toward Bellingesh; but those of the Place having received
early notice hereof from Waradin, Corbelli destroys the Palanca if Bellingest^.
withdrew all their Provisions into the Castle; so that the original Design of
Corbelli was defeated, yet not to return empty, he stormed and entered the
Palanca, where after the Slaughter of several Turks, he plundered, and carried
away every thing that was in it: He could not Attack the Castle which was well
fortified, for want of Cannon; and therefore having destroyed the Palanca, with
the Gardens thereabouts, he returned back with good Booty.

On the 15th Tekeli with his Men, and 2000 Turks, arrived near Oraviza, with a
design to Attack Temeswaer; but he miscarried therein, and was forced to
retreat.

On the other side the Governor of Lippa, Captain Christopher Morris, with
Captain Baltasar, having under them 100 Hussars, 100 Horse of Heisler's, and
100 Dragoons, marched toward Temeswaer, with design to surprise some Turks in
the Villages thereabouts, but meeting with none, they proceeded until they came
in sight of the City; leaving the greatest part of their Troops in Ambuscade at
some distance from them: Upon their Approach, the Turks sallied out with Horse
and Foot, and posted themselves in a hollow Way, where the Germans, under the
cover of a Mist or Fog, attacked them, the Hussars falling upon their Horse,
The Germans get an Advantage.
and the Dragoons on the Janissaries, with such bravery, that they put them to
flight; after having killed above 300 on the Place, and taken several
Prisoners, and having only four Men killed, and nine wounded, they retired back
again to Lippa.

About this time 50 Soldiers having deserted the Service of Tekeli, took the
Oaths of Fidelity to the Emperor, and were sent to Prissina to recruit the
Garrison of that Pass, consisting of some Imperial, and Rascian Troops. These
Deserters gave Intelligence to General Veterani, that Sultan Galga the Tartar,
was designed in a few Days to join with Tekeli, and to make an Invasion into
Transylvania; upon which, Orders were given to work on the Fortifications on
the Frontiers, with all diligence: And now Advices came to Nissa, That the
Turks had burnt Uranic, with all the Villages round that Place; as also
Cossova, and the adjacent Places near to Prissina; but some little time before
this piece of Execution was performed, the Turks had allured the poor Peasants,
with their Wives and Children, The Tartars barbarous Usage of the poor People.
to return from the Woods and Mountains, to their own Dwellings, where they
promised them Quietness, Protection, and Safety; but the Tartars not having
been concerned in this Guaranty, the poor People were no sooner returned to
their Habitations, but they were barbarously attacked by the Tartars, who
killed all the Old Men and Women, and carried away the Young of both Sexes into
Captivity: After this unhamane Butchery Sultan Galga retreated with most of his
Hords to Sophia, and thence by way of Nicopolis he made all the haste possible
to return for Budziack, because he had received Advices, They return to
Budziack.
That the Moscovites with a very numerous Army, were on the Frontiers, ready to
Invade his Country; but his March was not so hasty, but that he had time, after
the Tartarian Fashion, to destroy the Province of Schnepoli; and to kill, and
assassinate all the Country People that they met; and though this Retreat of the
Tartars was Unfortunate to these poor Wretches, yet thereby General Veterani
was delivered from his Apprehensions for Nissa; which was howsoever laboring
under great want of Ammunition, and Provision of all sorts; and how to supply
them was not as yet resolved. Nissa in want of Provisions.
For though the Country of Schnepoli had engaged to furnish Nissa with a good
quantity of all sorts of Provisions, yet being now burnt and destroyed by the
Tartars; and the remainder of what was left pillaged by the Turks, there could
be no expectation of any supply from thence: And as to what was to be conveyed
to them from Belgrade, by reason of the Winter Weather, Snows, and tired
Cattle, came so slowly over the Mountains, that General Veterani, and the other
chief Officers, had Abandoned the Place, had not some Horses at the very
instant arrived at Nissa with 50 Wagons, February.
all laden with Provisions and Ammunition, together with four Pieces of Cannon
which had been taken out of the Fort of Jagodina, and great Quantities of
Flour, and Oats, much more of which was daily expected, by which Stores, though
Nissa was abundantly relieved, yet the Fortifications proceeded more slowly
than was fit for a Frontier Garrison, exposed to the main and chief Power of
the Enemy.

Canisia i^clining to capitulate.
Thus things stood at Nissa, when the Blockade of Canisia was so narrowly
watched and observed, that the Garrison began to be reduced to the utmost
Extremity; so that the People would have forced the Pasha to Capitulate; but he
remaining resolute to endure the last Extremity, persuaded them with Presents,
and fair Words, to a longer Patience: But the Inferior and Subaltern Officers
not enduring longer, dispatched a Messenger, (without making the Pasha, or
Janizar-Aga privy to their Design) with Letters to the Grand Vizier, desiring
that he would either take some Measures for the Relief of the Place, or to send
his Orders to the Pasha for the Surrender thereof; but this Express was not got
far from the Town, before he was overtaken, brought back and Executed; but such
was the Misery in the Town, that he who could escape, got out, amongst which
was a Turkish Imaum, or Priest, and an Arabian Jew, who reported, That about
Palm Sunday, the City would Capitulate, which afterward proved true
accordingly.

In the mean time the Croats made an Invasion into Bosnia, burnt Kazaraz,
Places taken and burnt.
and took some Hundreds of small and great Cattle: Howsoever in their Retreat
being pursued by the Turks of Bannialuca, and Attacked by them near the Save,
some of the Cattle were recovered, several of their Men killed, 15 Prisoners,
and five Horses taken.

And about the same time the Governor of Novi having gotten together a small
Body of Men drawn out of that Garrison, and that of Zim, made an Incursion into
the Enemies Country, where he burnt Ostrovitz, Ztergarick the Little, and the
Great Badick, with Houses belonging to Gentlemen in the Country, in which
Expedition they killed about 200 of the Enemy, took 76 Prisoners, 100 Head of
Cattle, 32 Horses, and much other Booty, and all this with the loss of one Man
killed, and 10 wounded.

In revenge hereof, March.
the Turks of Novi-Porto, Attacked with a strong Party, some German Horse, as
they were Foraging abroad, but were so warmly received by Brumati the Governor
of Lescoviza, and with such Valor, that the Turks were put to the Rout, and
forced to fly, leaving 20 of their Men dead on the Place.

Whilst Matters thus passed with various Successes, there were some Fears of
the Constancy and Steadiness of the Rascians toward the Emperor, but those
Apprehensions were soon taken away by Antonio their Captain, who being sent by
General Veterani, to take a View of all the Passes round about, reported at his
return, That he had met within the Pass of Prissina, with one Haram Bassa, The
Rascians faithful to the Emperor.
who in the Name of all the Inhabitants of Colossi, Moloch, Letaner, and Gaas,
had assured him of the Faith and Allegiance of those People to the Emperor,
having refused the Protection of the Turks, which had been offered to them: And
hereof they soon gave a Testimony by an Assault they had made on a Party of 500
Turks, under the Command of the Pasha of Ostrolub, in their March toward the
Castle of Zwetsey, situate in the Pass of Bosna, of which they killed 60 Men,
took four Prisoners, and 90 Horses, of which 30 were laden with Flour, besides
a great Booty of other things. On the other side Mahomet Pasha roved round
about the Country of Novi Passar, burning and destroying all the remaining
Villages, killing the Country People that they met with, and acting all the
Cruelties that Fire and Sword could execute.

But what was of most importance at this time, was the Surrender of the strong
City and Fortress of Canisia, having been reduced thereunto by Famine, after a
long and severe Blockade, by which being brought to such Extremities, that not
being able to support themselves any longer, the Pasha on the 16th of March,
sent out two Aga's to the Christian Army to treat with the Commanders of the
Blockade, who were Count Adam Bathiani, and Count Stephen Zitchi: Canisia
treats.
to whom being conducted by Lieutenant Colonel Pisterski, after the usual
Complements had been passed on both sides, the Turks desired that four Weeks
might be granted them to make their Surrender; offering in case no Succors
came to them within that time, they would then resign the City into the Hands
of the Emperor's Generals, with all the Cannon and Ammunition therein, (four
Guns only excepted) which they pretended to carry with them: But in regard it
was then late in the Evening, when these Offers were delivered, the Messengers
were kept all Night in the Camp, and well treated; and the next Morning a
Council of War being called, an Answer was returned them to this Effect. That
it being well known, Answer to the Garrison of Canisia.
that neither in four Weeks, nor in four Years, any Relief, or Succor could be
expected for them; and that though their Extremities were so evident, that they
were certainly assured they could not subsist any longer, yet that they might
taste of the Grace and Clemency of the Emperor, they promised them their Lives,
(provided they should Surrender themselves in the space of 24 Hours:) With
which Answer the two Aga's returned back to the City, on which some
Consultation being there had on the 19th, three Turks were sent out again to
the Christian Army, declaring to the Generals, in the Name of the Pasha and the
Garrison; That though they were still furnished with four Months Provision in the
Town, yet they would no longer refuse the Clemency of His Imperial Majesty, but
deliver up the City unto him. And for the further management of this Treatise,
they proposed, That three German and Hungarian Officers might be sent into the
Town for Hostages, Hostages given.
in lieu of five Turks, who should be employed to Capitulate in the Army. The
Christians having assented hereunto, the three Messengers were next Day
returned with this Answer. That the Clemency of His Imperial Majesty was such,
that he never desired to shed the Blood of his Enemies, when they implored his
Mercy; and that the General Bathiani had full Power to pardon them, which he
was ready to do, on Condition that they Surrendered the Place in the space of 24
Hours. With this Answer the Turks returning to the Town, they desired a third
Conference on the 21st; the which, after a long Dispute, was granted, and
agreed, That five Turks, of which the Janizar-Aga should be one, should come
into the Camp; and that in the Place of them, a German and two Hungarian
Officers should be sent for Pledges into the City. This being performed on the
22d Day, these following Capitulations were agreed and signed.

Capitulations Agreed.
I. THAT whatsoever is belonging to the Arsenal, and Public Stores, either of
Provision, Ammunition, Cannon, or other Arms should be delivered to the
Imperial Commissaries, to whom also all Mines made about the City should be
discovered. II. That the Prisoners on both sides, should be released without
Ransom. III. That all the Inhabitants of the City, and Strangers, shall have
liberty to march out with their Arms, Movables, Clothes, Servants, Children,
Horses, and all other Cattle, who shall have safe Passage, and Conduct into the
Ottoman Dominions, but without Flying Colors, or Sound of Drum:
Notwithstanding which, in case any of the Rascians who are in pay of the Turks,
should freely desire to come over to the Christians, they shall not be
hindered, either on the Score of Debt, or any other Pretense whatsoever. IV.
All Christian Renegadoes, who shall be desirous to return unto their Ancient
Faith, shall have liberty to do it, and no Christian Children be privately
conveyed away. V. A sufficient Number of Wagons, shall be allowed to the Turks
to carry them to the Waterside, and from thence Boats to Transport them into
the Turkish Dominions. VI. That so soon as these Capitulations shall be Signed,
the Imperialists shall immediately be put into Possession of the Palanca, our
Out-work, called Baschlar Kapoesi; in which the Turks shall have liberty to
sell what they please of their Goods, or to carry them away. VII. That so soon
as the Imperial Ratification shall be returned, the Turks shall immediately
quit the City, and begin their Journey. VIII. The Turks shall deliver to the
Imperial Commissaries all the Tax-Registers in Canisia, with such Books as
concern the Military Sallaries paid from Bosnia, and other Districts depending
on Canisia, with the Tefter, or an account of such Revenues which the
Janissaries usually Pay, and Receive out of the Homage, and Tributary Countries.
IX. That the People of Canisia shall be Convoyed with a sufficient Number of
Officers and Soldiers, unto the first Turkish Fortress, leaving howsoever
behind them the Hostages at the last Christian Fortress, until the return of
the Convoy. X. That during the March Provisions shall be furnished to the Turks
at moderate Prices.
With these Capitulations, the Imperial Councellor of War, called Pozo, the
Aga, and two more Turkish Officers, were on the 24th dispatched to Vienna to
have the Capitulations Ratified and Signed with the Imperial Firm; The Emperor
ratifies the Treaty.
they arrived on the 30th, and the next Day had an Audience of Count
Staremberg, President of the Council of War, to whom they delivered the
Capitulation; April.
and on the first of April it was returned back again to them Signed by the
Emperor, who was graciously pleased to make a Present therewith unto the Aga,
of a Watch set with Diamonds.

With this Ratification the Aga being returned, which was on the 3d of April,
it was resolved by the Pasha, and other Officers in the Divan, immediately to
put the Christians into Possession of one of the Gates of the City; The Town
surrendered.
the which by the 12th, they fully quitted; and the next Day the Pasha being on
Horseback, attended with some Turks on Foot, delivered unto General Bathyani
the Keys of the Town in a gilded Basin hanging on a Gold Chain. The Pasha
indeed expected, that the General should have alighted from his Horse to
receive them, but the General refusing to receive them in such a manner, as a
Condescension too inferior to the Dignity of His Imperial and Victorious
Master, the Pasha insisted no farther thereupon, but presenting the Key, said,
I deliver unto you the Key of a Fortress, the like whereof there is none in all
the Turkish Empire.

This being done, the General went into the City to visit the Fortifications,
and afterward entertained the Pasha, the Aga of the Janissaries, and Zorbagee
Aga at Dinner, with some others. Then the Garrison marched out, consisting of
600 Turks, which with the Inhabitants, made in all 4000 Souls; the which were
conducted into the Dominions of the Turks, according to the Capitulation.

It seems that this strong City was surrendered rather by Divisions amongst
themselves, than for want of Provisions: The Cannon and Ammunition and
Provisions taken therein.
On the Walls were mounted 56 Brass, and 10 Iron Cannon, the most part of them
made in the time of the Emperors Maximilian I. and II, and of Charles V, and
Ferdinand I. In the Magazine, or Storehouse under the Governor's Palace, were
found 1540 Muskets, and in the Arsenal 2200 more, with much Lead, Cannon, and
Musquet-Bullets, Swords, Grenades, with all sorts of Arms and Warlike
Instruments in great abundance.

Canisia, or Canisa, is situate on a River toward the Frontiers of Styria,
near the Drove, and not far from the Fort Serin; it is so environed on all
sides with a Morass, or Marsh, that no Army can lie near it, The Situation of
Canisia.
which renders the Town almost impregnable, and inaccessible, notwithstanding
it was taken by the Turks in the Year 1600.

The next Year following Mathias Archduke of Austria Besieged it in the Month
of September, but was forced to retire after a Siege of two Months.

In the Year 1664, at the beginning of it, in the Month of January, Count
Serini, by favor of the Frosts, which gave him some Footing on the Morass,
after he had taken Quinque Ecclesiae, and some other Places, and had burnt
Sighet, he besieged Canisia, which he had infallibly taken, if they had sent
him the Succors which were promised him; but as I have related in my former
History, so great a Faction was against him at the Imperial Court, that they
were not willing to see him prosperous, but chose rather to Sacrifice the
Public Welfare to Private Animosities; but the expected Recruits not arriving
at the appointed time, and the Year coming on, the Ice was Thawed, and the
Great Vizier advancing with a Powerful Army, the Count Sereni being under all
these Discouragements, was forced to raise his Siege and be gone.

General Veterani in the mean time whilst things were thus acting at Canisia,
being much straightened for want of Provisions, ordered the Garrisons of
Lescowitz and Pyroth, to make Incursions into the Turkish Territories,
Incursions made into several places.
which they performed so effectually, that they returned back with more than
1000 Head of Cattle; the which being divided amongst the Regiments, such as
were sit for the Slaughter were killed, and the rest employed for drawing the
Wagons laden with Ammunition and Provisions.

On the other side the Turks surprised a Village near Belgrade, which they
Plundered and Burnt, killing, or carrying away Captives all the Inhabitants of
the Place. Some Skirmishes.


But the Garrison of Pyroth being much animated with their late Success, made
another Incursion, as far as within three Leagues of Philippopolis, burning the
Villages, and killing the Turks which they met in their way; but at length
being pursued by 1000 Turks, they drew themselves up into good order, and
posting themselves advantageously on the rising of a Hill, they engaged the
Enemy for two Hours space; The Turks worsted.
during which time, 30 Turks were killed, and many wounded, and 28 Prisoners
taken, with which and some Hundreds of Cattle, they returned safe to Pyroth. In
like manner 100 Germans and some Hussars belonging to the Garrison of Zolnock,
encountered a Party of 160 Turks, and Malcontents, which belonged to Giula,
and having engaged them, they killed 20 of them, took 60 Prisoners, of which 16
were of the Malcontents, the remainder throwing themselves into the River,
were for the most part drowned.

During this Season of the Year, before the Grass was sufficiently grown, no
other Actions passed, but only by Parties sent abroad to surprise Cattle, and
burn Villages. Amongst the rest, a Party of Rascians having roved over the
Country of Schnepoli, returned back to Nissa with a Booty of several Hundred
Head of Cattle, and some Yoaks of Oxen, taken near to Sophia; the which
Successes still attending the Imperial Arms, the Country People on all sides
offered to embrace the Imperial Party, and implore their Protection so soon as
the Christian Army should take the Field.

On the other side Mahomet Bagavitz Pasha, who had some time quietly Quartered
at Poza, (having left 1500 Men for Garrison in that Place) he marched out with
a Party of about 4000 Men, toward the Pass of Bosnia, but having in his March
received Intelligence, That Captain Antonio attended him in the way, and was
ready to receive him, returned and marched toward Bagnia, from whence also by
reason of the great Snows, he was forced to retreat back to Poza, without any
Action.

Little more was acted now, as we have faid but by Parties, of which Kathana
Pasha commanding one, he made an Incursion therewith into the Neighborhood of
Pyroth, where he took several straggling Hussars. Another Party of Hungarians
to the Number of about 20, commanded by that Valiant Hungarian Captain, called
Baudi, which had made a bold Incursion, and roved about 14 Days beyond Sophia,
near to Philippopolis; were at length attacked by a strong Body of Turks, with
which having fought for a considerable time, were at last overpowered, and all
of them cut off, (two only excepted) who made their Escape to Nissa.

On the other side a Party from Belgrade surprised a Body of Turks, Several
small Parti cengage.
the most of which they killed, or took Prisoners. Likewise a Party of Rascians
made an Excursion as far as Bagnia in Bosnia, where they killed 20 Turks, and
took 12 Prisoners, with 400 Head of Cattle: Besides which, those who guarded
the Blockade of Great Waradine, beat a Party of the Enemy, brought home 11
Heads, and eight Prisoners. Another Party of 500 Hussars, and 40 German
Dragoons, made a Sally out of Sclavonia under the Command of Lieutenant Bonidu,
and passed the Save; and having in their way an Information that the Turkish
Garrison belonging to the strong Fortress of Teockzach was fallied abroad,
having only left eight Men, and 15 Women therein; they attacked and entered the
Fort early in the Morning, with the loss of six of their Men killed, and eight
wounded; of the Turks, four of the eight, with the Women, saved themselves in a
Tower, from whence the Women threw Fire, and Stones, and hot scalding Water,
but at length were forced to surrender, and leave the Place to the mercy of the
Enemy, in which they found a good Booty of Turkish Horses, and other rich
Goods, and therewith repassed the Save, having left four Troops of Heydukes for
defense of the Place.

The Season of the Year being now far advanced toward the Summer, and things
preparing for greater Action; the German Officers were very intent, and
studious in what manner to conserve Nissa; May
for which they had great reason to be apprehensive, for that according to the
Reports of all those who lately came from Adrianople, and of such Deserters who
came out from the Turkish Quarters; Nissa provided.
the Turks were become much more numerous than the last Year, and were marching
on purpose to make Nissa the first Achievement and Design of their Conquest.
But what could be done for Conservation of that Place, was not omitted; all the
Old Works were repaired, and several New ones completed; and the River Morava
being with much Expense and Labor made Navigable, great Quantities of
Provisions, and Materials necessary for War were brought down by that Water to
Nissa, so that nothing was wanting for Conservation of the Place, unless a
greater Garrison within, and a more numerous Army without.

About this time a small sort of Venomous Flies swarmed about Nissa, which
killed many Horses, Cattle, Camels, and Mules. I remember in a Journey I once
made through those Countries in the Month of May, that we were much infested
with this sort of Animals, which was the smallest Fly that ever I did see,
covered with a thin Fluff, or Down; the which would not touch the Flesh of a
Man, Small poisonous Flies
but Horses, Camels, Mules, etc. were killed by them. Wheresoever they fixed on
the Sides of a Horse, or any other Part, they would draw a Blister as big as an
Egg; and entering into the Nostrils, immediately poisoned the Brain, which
caused a sudden Death to the Beast; but hereof I have discoursed more at large
in a former History, to which I refer the Reader.

Though the great Armies were not as yet in the Field, yet Parties were roving in
all Parts and Places, the Weather becoming moderate according to the Season,
and the Grass grown; the Turks encamped near Gradisca, where they staid a while
in expectation of some Troops to join with them, and therewith to pass the Save
into Sclavonia, with no other Design than to ruin and spoil the Country; but
Baron Koniseck having Advice thereof, marched from Brod, with all the Hussars,
and Heydukes which were Quartered in the adjacent Villages unto a Place where
the River is fordable, and therefore the most likely place where they might
design to pass; by which not only the Passage of the Turks was obstructed, but
News coming to them that the Croats were fallen into their Country on the other
side, they quitted their first Design, and marched to oppose the Croats, who
were too quick for them, having taken great Booty, and committed a vast Spoil
before the Turks could come in to the Succor of their Country.

About the same time one Herlniovich, a Dalmatian Captain, marched six Days
Journey beyond Nissa into the Enemies Country, which he Surprised and
Plundered, and returned back with the Heads of several Turks, and some
Prisoners. The same Captain soon afterward having recruited himself with some
more Troops, fell upon Berkowitz, in which was a Garrison of about 127 Turks,
provided with all things necessary for defense of the Place, being fortified on
a very advantageous Situation, Berkewitz taken by a Captain of Dalmatia.
but coming upon them by Surprise, the Place was taken, and all the Men put to
the Sword, except some few, who made their Escape; the Booty was considerable,
besides 90 Turkish Women, four Standards, and two pair of Kettle-Drums.

In like manner a Captain of the Garrison of Pyroth roving abroad, and seeking
his Fortune, met near to Sophia with 20 Horses laden with Nails, Iron, and
several Warlike Instruments, he seized them all, and killed 19 Turks, and took
one Prisoner alive, who in the Night making his Escape, gave Intelligence
thereof to Sophia, from whence a Party being commanded out, they overtook the
Germans, and fought with them, but the Germans behaved themselves so well, that
they forced the Turks to leave them, and suffer them to escape with the Booty
they had gained.

At this time also some Sea Robbers landed in the Bay of Vola, Sea Robbers Land.
and made an Incursion into the Territories of Macedonia near Monassir, burning
and spoiling all the Country; whilst another Party of them, to the number of
about 600 Men, made a Sally toward Stippo, where they surprised 500 Turks, and
put them all to the Sword, without Quarter given to any one; but the
Inhabitants they carried away Prisoners, and made use of them for Slaves in the
Hills and Mountains.

Nor were things more quiet in Hungary, where several Skirmishes happened to
the Loss and Damage of the Turks; and particularly the Soldiers of the
Garrison, and those of the Blockade had an Encounter, and the latter returned
Victorious, with 16 Prisoners, 22 Heads, 49 Horses, and some Cattle.

Moreover Count Corbelli sent out a Party of 500 Horse, which met, and
surrounded a Party of Turks, of which they killed three or four of the Chief
Commanders, with 70 private Soldiers, took 10 Prisoners, and many Horses; in
which Action 12 Men were slain and wounded, and 22 Horses killed.

Moreover 3000 Rascians under the Command of Captain Antonio, and 200 Germans
under Rusbach, a Captain of Hanover, arrived one Morning about Break of Day
near Bernia; Bernia surpriv'd by the Christians.
from which a Detachment being made of five Troops of Rascians, with some
German Musketeers; having their Vanguard led by Artusser Adjutant-General of
Piccolomini, and three Lieutenants, pushed forward into the City without any
Halt or Hesitation, or regard to the Troops which followed, with such Courage
and Valor, that the Turks being surprised, not having time to gather
themselves into an Orderly Body in the open Marketplace; and seeing the Enemy
already in the City, and more Troops following them, the Pasha, with about 200
of his best Horse, fled out of the opposite Gate, leaving the remainder of the
Garrison with the Inhabitants, which consisted of about 3000 Men to their own
Fate, which ended with the Death of about 1700 of them, most whereof were
killed Sleeping on their Beds; tho Booty taken, was very considerable, besides
much Cattle, and 500 good Horses, with the loss only on the Christian side of
seven Germans, and 17 Rascians, who were killed.

It being now toward the end of May, which is the usual Season for Armies to
take the Field, News was brought to Nissa, that Kuperlee the Grand Vizier, The
Grand Vizier marches to the Camp at Nicopolis.
was decamped from before Adrianople with 20000 Men, and on his March to join
with 40000 more, which were Encamped at Nicopolis with intention to attack at
one and the same time both Nissa and Widin; and whereas the Turkish Army was in
great want of Artillery, by reason of the many Cannon which they had lost
during this War, the French furnished them with 100 Pieces, which were brought
from France, and Landed at Galata, and thence conducted on Carriages to the
Army.

But the Season not being as yet come for pitched Battles, or Siege of Towns,
the Armies not being gathered into a Body, General Corbelli, June.
who Commanded the Blockade near Great Waradine, detached 220 Germans and
Hungarians; with design to attack the Palanca of Bellanasch, where coming to it
before Break of Day, and finding no Sentinels to observe their Appearance, all
the People being asleep with the greatest Security imaginable, the Soldiers
climbed the Walls, and unperceived entered the Place without any opposition
whatsoever, The Palanca of Bellanasch surprised and taken.
killing Men, Women and Children, without any distinction; some Turks howsoever
escaped, and saved themselves in the Castle; which General Corbelli being
desirous to take, by reason that the People of Great Waradine had been
frequently relieved from thence, he sent for 500 Men more to reinforce his
Troops; but before these could come up to join, the others laden with Booty and
Spoil, were departed, and gone to secure what they had gained.

These two late Successes by Surprise, animated the Governor of Lescowitza,
and Count Montecelli Captain of Horse in the Regiment of General Hoffkirchen,
to attempt a third, and joining with them a Party of Germans and Rascians, they
marched to Noviporto, with intention to surprise it, in the same manner as the
others had been; but some of the Rascians having Friends and Relations in the
Place, A D ^gn on Noviporto discovered.
gave information to those within; upon which they all retired into the Castle,
which was well defended with a strong Tower, and a good Wall, and with
Provision sufficient for some Weeks, and stood upon their Guard; so that the
Party finding their Design defeated, fell upon the Cattle which were feeding
near the Place, and carried away some of them, to the Number of 6000 Sheep, and
2000 other Cattle; but the Turks of the Country gathering themselves into a
Body, pursued after them in such Numbers, that attacking the Rascians in the
Rear, they recovered most of their Cattle, and took some of their Horses;
howsoever the Rascians carried off about 1000 Head of Cattle, and some
Prisoners, with the Heads of 15 Turks, which they had killed.

The Germans still continued to rove about the Country with Parties, returning
most commonly with Success; one of them surprised and took Uhicza and Dobran,
two small Palanca's, killing all that they found alive therein.

Likewise Captain Schenchendorff with 800 Germans, and some Hungarians, passing
near Radimir, a Turkish Garrison, in hopes to surprise it, found the Turks
vigilant and ready to receive him; upon which being forced to make a Retreat,
the Turks sallied out upon them, but were repulsed with the loss of 50 of their
Men killed, and three taken Prisoners, upon which the Turks being put to
flight, Radimir abandoned by the Turks.
the Germans pursued them so close, that they entered with them into the
Suburbs, which consisting of about 400 Houses, they burnt all to the Ground,
and then retired toward Pyroth; but in their way meeting with 400 fresh
Hungarian Horse, they joined with them, and returned again toward Radimir; but
in their March having received Advice, That the Turks had abandoned the Town,
and laden their Wives, Children, and Goods, on 130 Wagons, and sent them
farther into the Country, a Party of Hussars was commanded to pursue them;
which they did, and soon came up with them, and took all the Wagons, People,
and Goods that were in them; but they were not so easily carried off, as they
were taken; for a Body of about 1200 Turks from the Frontiers, coming in to
their Assistance, they not only retook all the Booty from the Hussars, A Booty
taken from the Hussars.
(the Captain Schenchendorff being at too far a distance to relieve them) but
also forced them to fly, leaving some of their Companions, who were the worst
mounted, unto the Mercy of the Enemy; after which, the Turks pursuing farther,
fell in with Schenchendorff, who finding himself over-matched, made a handsome
Retreat to a convenient place, They Rally and Kill some Turks.
where taking his Advantage, made Head against the Turks, and killed above 100
of them, took several of their Horses, and much Cattle, which they carried off
with them.

General Corbelli who commanded the Blockade before Great Waradin, made an
Incursion with 2000 Men, and ruined all the Corn and Fruit of the Field, so
near the City, as was within reach of their Guns: Upon which Approach the
Garrison sallied out, A Sally made out of Great Waradin.
but were repulsed with great loss, and amongst the rest the Chiaus-Bashee was
killed: The Defendants terrified herewith, above 40 Families escaped out, and
at their Request were Baptized.

In the mean time a stricter Watch than ever was kept in the Blockade about the
Castle of Bellanasch; and the Stream of Water which ran at the Foot of the
Palanca, and Castle, by which both were supplied, being cut off by the
Christians, and the Current turned another way, the Defendants were reduced to
great Extremities, and more especially they began to be affrighted, when they
saw a fresh supply of Horse, Dragoons, and Hussars, ready to attack the Place,
and that two Batteries were already raised, which continued firing for two Days
without intermission, they at length inclined to a Surrender, and in order
thereunto sent out two Aga's to make their Capitulations, which were soon
concluded, and agreed, That the Garrison consisting of 150 Men, The Castle of
Bellanasch surrendered.
besides their Wives and Children, and other Inhabitants, should the next Day
be conveyed to Giula, which was accordingly performed on the 4th of July. July.


Whilst these Matters went on, the Parties from Nissa, were always Plundering
and spoiling the Countries, and Captain Strahina, the famous Partisan, who was
continually on Parties, made his Inroads near to Philippopolis, and surprised
the Turks in several Places of that Neighborhood, with much Spoil and Damage:
The Turks alarmed hereat, got into a Body, and pursued after Strahina, The
Turks Attack Strahina.
and having overtaken him, attacked him with great Fury and Bravery; but were
as resolutely repulsed, and their Teftish Pasha killed in the Action; 200 of
their Horse taken, and much Booty, with the loss only of five Rascians: The
like Success Strahina had against Kathana Pasha, who meeting on the Road,
whilst one Party was returning to Sophia, as the other was to Nissa; the Turks
were beaten, and put to Flight, and the Pasha, with his Men that escaped, were
forced to take Refuge in the Mountains, scattered and dispersed, whilst
Strahina, and his Men, with their Booty, returned safe to Nissa.

And now to conclude the Successes of the many Parties which roved abroad in
diverse Places, the Captains Schenchendorff, Strahina, and Wildenham, with one
Lieutenant Funck, sallied abroad with 100 Germans, and 1500 Rascians, with
which having stormed Pernich in three several Places at the same time, they
entered the Fortress, Pernich stormed and taken.
and cut down all the Turks in the way, only 50 of them got into a Tower, and
refusing to take Quarter, Fire was put to the same, and then the People too
late cried out for Mercy; after which the Town was Plundered, and the best of
the Goods, with 3000 Head of Cattle, were carried off safe to Pyroth.

But to make way to greater Actions, the French Ambassador at the Ottoman
Court, Tekeli declared Prince of Transylvania.
after a long Solicitation, had procured for Tekeli a Baratz, or Commission,
whereby he was declared Prince of Transylvania, and to publish the same, he
dispatched his Circular Letters to all the Cities and Provinces, written in the
Latin Tongue: The Contents whereof were as follows.

THAT whereas God Almighty, and the High and Mighty and always Flourishing
Ottoman Empire, had created, and ordained him Prince of the Hereditary
Countries of Transylvania, belonging to the Ottoman Empire, with an express
Clause, That he should enjoy the same, with such Power, and in the same manner,
and with as high and ample Privileges as had been given to Bethlem Gabor; for
which Cause and Reason, having sent Greeting to all the People and Subjects of
that Country, he did strictly forbid, and inhibit all Persons to give any
Succor or Assistance whatsoever unto the Germans, but on the contrary, to put
themselves into a readiness to give Assistance unto him the said Tekeli, as
also the Grand Vizier, and the Tartars, who were now coming in great Numbers
very speedily into the Field, to deliver their Country of Transylvania from the
Terrible, and Unjust Oppression of the Germans.

Now follows Tekeli's Declaration in Latin joined hereunto.

Emericus Tokolius Dei Gratia, a Fulgida Porta Ottomanica declaratus Princeps
Transylvaniae, Partium Regni Hungariae Dominus, and Siculorum Comes.
QUAM preciosa and inaestimabilis res sit, animae corporisque libertas, si
caeterorum Orbis Christiani Regnorum ac Nationum exempla praetereamus, pro
sufficienti tamen exemplo esse poterit Nationi Hungaricae olim tanto sanguine
acquisita libertas; quantam enim Hungari inquietudinem, arma effusionemque
sanguinis impenderint in defensione libertatum suarum, apud homines prudentia
and experientia rerum exornatos, manifestum est; hoc etiam ignotum esse nequit,
quod a quo Hungariae Corona and Gubernium in Potestatem Nationis Germanicae
devenit, omnia consilia, labores omnes, in eo vertebantur, qua ratione Nationem
Hungaricam debilitare, bonis omnibus privare, tandem Regnum Hungariae
haereditarium constituendo ad Servitutem ignominiosam, and intoleranda tributa
praeciptari possit. Quod ipsum cum ante plurimos annos prudentiores, and in
summa dignitate constituti Proceres vidissent, neque per innumeras instantias,
supplicationesque satisfactionem diplomatis a Domo Austriaca obtinuissent, e
contrario indies laesio libertatum, and intolerabilium contributionum onus
incrementa sumpsisset, nescientes aliud quid facerent, coacti fuerunt, penes
leges Patriae, etiam cum inculpata tutela, ad vindicandas libertates, arma
capere, omnibusque constat, a quot annis bellum continuebatur; quinimo si ad
hanc calamitatem praecipitata Natio Hungarica Praedecessorum suorum vestigiis
insistens arma non deposuisset, cervices contumelioso servitutis Jugo ex
voluntate Spontanea non submisisset, sperare poterat ex divina benignitate post
multas etiam calamitates antiquae libertatis restitutionem.

Transylvania quoque, licet tantopere sicut vicina Hungariae non fuerit coacta
Nationi Germanicae sese submittere, neque enim in tantis extremitatibus fuerat,
ut ad meliora tempora se conservare non potuisset, multis fortalitiis, quae in
sua potestate habebat firmata, nihilo tamen minus nonnullis libertatis Patriae
contemptoribus and privato commodo obnoxiis, quomodo tradita sit, cum omnibus
fortalitiis in extraneorum potestatem, and in quas oppressiones praecipitaverit
Dominationes Vestras, ejusdem fructus acerbitas adhuc in ore omnium est.

Ut autem ad scopum nostrum propius accedamus, etiamsi omnipotentissimus. Deus
nos quoque ad miserias acerbas redegerit, and per multas mutationes
vicissitudinesque transire debuerimus propter quas multi ex praecipuis
praepotentis hujus Nationis malefactorum suorum premium acceperunt, Deus tamen
qui nunquam permittit justam causam finaliter opprimi, nos ex iis omnibus
eliberavit, personam causamque nostram, apud praepotentem Nationem, tam gratam
honorificamque fecit, ut causam tam dedecorose suppressae Nationis nostrae non
minus in Fulgida Porta, quam apud alios Christianos Monarchas utiliter
promovere valeamus.

Quorum intuitu, licet in eo nunquam laboraverimus, Fulgida Porta tanquam
Transylvaniae Domina Haereditaria fidelia servitia nostra, and in fidelitate
constantem perseverantiam, quoque ponderando Principatus Transylvanici
Dignitatem cum omnibus requisitis and immunitatibus nobis contulit, super
indeque diploma and Achname suum, quod antiqui principes multis expensis
obtinere non potuerunt: Iisdem conditionibus, qualibus beatae quondam
recordationis serenissimo Principi Gabrieli Bethlem contulerat, nobis quoque
dedit sine injuria Regni, ejusdemque territoriorum imminutione, una cum statis
refi, Residentem insuper, sive Kapithaiam Transylvaniae, qui hactenus in Porta
fuit, ad nos dimisit: Praeterea Achname Hani Tartarorum nostris etiam in
manibus est.

Jam in nomine Dei cum militia praepotentis Turcarum Imperatoris pariter and
Hani Tartarorum movimus indiesque iter nostrum continuamus, Dominationes
vestras communiter ex omnibus statibus constitutas supremi, medii, infimique
gradus, ordinis per praesentes informare, requirere and admonere cupientes, non
dubitamus, quin Universis Patriae libertas ejusdemque vindicta in cordibus sit,
ideoque singuli ex Dominationibus vestris, obligationis suae erga deum and
patriam memores cogitent de rebus, recta conscientia insurgant, and antequam
confinia regni ingrediamur monstrent Realia Documenta obedientiae expedientes
nobis obviam ex omnibus Nationibus ablegatos primariae conditionis, interim
viritim arma sumentes, difficultates in passibus semoveant, nemo seipsum vel
arma sua Germanis jungat, vel hostiliter se nobis opponat, ad desolationem
Patriaeque ruinam, and multarum millium animarum depraedationem causam
subministret; Literas has patentes nemo supprimat, quin potius publicet, quia
talium animae coram judicio Dei rationem reddent, nostram quoque gravissimam
indignationem cum posteris suis non effugient, de his omnibus coram Deo and
Mundo protestamur, quod nullius ruinae interitusque causa nos erimus.

Datum ex Castris ad Kula positis die 26 Junij, 1690. Emericus Tokoly.


MI Domine Judex, vel quicunque has literas ad manus suas acceperit, Deus
magnus misericordiae, afflictionum gentis suae misertus, ecce perditum miserum
Emericum Tokoly tanquam aliquem Gideonem ex horreo ad promovendam suam gloriam
assumens id in nomine Domini ad vindicandas oppressiones Dominationum
vestrarum, prout ex ejusdem manifesto praesentibus incluso apparet, proinde
Dominatio vestra cum fidis suis amicis communicet, promulget, ne opprimatur,
quia Dominatio vestra dabit rationem de illo.

Bukuress 28 Junii, 1690. Valentinus Nemessay.
Annexa patente, Mittant Dominationes vestrae Amicis suis unas in Siculiam,
alteras in terram Parzensem and districtum Fogarasiniensem.

Inscriptio Literarum. Nobili Domino Judici Coronensi, Notario, vel cuicunque
ex Magistratu Dominis amicis meis trandantur.




By the many Troops of Tartars which were already entered into Valachia, and by
the Increase of Tekeli's Forces, which were become much more numerous and
formidable, by the Sums of Money which he had received from France, the
Imperial Generals were greatly alarmed, and fearing least they should Invade
that Country, all the Forces in and about Transylvania, were ordered to march
under the Command of General Heusler toward the Passes which lead to Walachia;
and as they marched, to spoil the Ways, and render them as impracticable, and
difficult as was possible.

By this time News was come to Nissa, that a great Body of Turks was assembled
near Nicopolis, and that the Grand Vizier was actually on his March to join
with them; whereupon General Veterani, having provided the Garrisons with
necessary Provisions and Ammunition drew all the Troops he was able unto Nissa,
where he remained at a Gaze to observe the Motions of the Turks, and to afford
his Assistance unto any Place which should be distressed, or in danger.

The Season of the Year was now advanced to the middle of July, when Advies
came by way of Walachia, that Sultan Galga was marching with some Thousands of
Tartars toward Bulgaria; and that Budack Commander of the Tartarian Fleet was
with four Galleys, and many Frigates, armed with some Guns, and laden with
Ammunition and Provisions, coming up the Danube: And moreover that the Grand
Vizier was with a very strong Army come as far as Sophia, and pitched in those
Plains, and caused vast Stores of Corn, and all other Provisions, to be laid up
in the Magazines of that City.

Some few Days after which the Tartars appeared before Widin with their four
Galleys, and about 60 Vessels, on which 5000 Men were Embarked, and immediately
began to fire on the Town; the which News being brought to General
Trautmansdorf, The Tartars retire from Widin.
he marched immediately with the Troops under his Command, to the Relief of the
Place, and was followed by several Vessels laden with Provisions, Convoyed by
Boats armed with Musketeers; which coming in sight of the Turks, they fired
incessantly upon them, until such time as the Cannon planted by Trautmansdorf,
on the side of the Danube, forced them to quit their Station, and retire
farther down the Stream, to the other side of the River; after which, the
General having provided the Town with a sufficient Garrison, and all sorts of
Provisions necessary, conducted the Vessels safely back, and marched farther
toward the general Rendezvous at Jagodina.

And because the whole force of the Ottoman Empire under the Command of the
Grand Vizier, was marching from Sophia against the Germans, who were very weak
in Servia, and not able to keep the Field against the Turks in those Parts;
Corbelli reinforces the Troops in Servia.
Count Corbelli who Commanded the Blockade before Great Waradin, received
Orders to march with such Troops as could be spared from the Blockade, to
reinforce the Army in Servia, the which was performed accordingly, leaving the
Care and Charge of the Blockade to Count Schlick.

The Arnouts, who had before taken part with the Germans, observing the
Weakness of the Christian Troops and the Strength of the Turks, August.
joined against their Inclinations to save themselves with the latter; with
which the Grand Vizier being reinforced, a Detachment was made under Command of
the Seraskier, to join with Tekeli in Walachia, whilst another Pasha was
employed to Besiege Widin both by Land and Water; and the Vizier marched in
Person with the gross of his Army toward Nissa, with 100 Pieces of Cannon, and
12 Mortars.

Upon this News General Veterani ordered all the Commanders of the several
Posts and Passages leading toward Nissa, to leave their Guards, and retire
with their Men, Ammunition, Provision, and Cannon to the City; which having
furnished with a sufficient Garrison of 3000 Foot, and 500 Horse, he marched
back with the remainder of the Army toward Alexin, The Christian Camp at
Alexin.
and there formed his Camp.

In the mean time the Grand Vizier on his March to Niss^, at which he aimed,
took Pyroth in the space of three or four Days, Pyroth taken.
upon Capitulation with the Garrison, which consisted of no more than 150 Men,
to be conducted safely to Nissa, but the Vizier pursued them so close at the
Heels, that on the 14th of August he Invested the City with his whole Army, and
on the 17th began an Attack at Bergele, compassing one half of the City, on
that side; and on the same Day he sent a Chiaus with Letters to summon the
Place, the which Colonel Jorger returned back again unopened, Nissa invest^d.
with this Answer, That there was none there who could read Turkish.

Upon return of this Answer, the Grand Vizier caused some Cannon to be shot
into the City; and on the next Day the Trenches to be opened, after which the
Turks fired without ceasing, both with their Cannon and Mortars; and because it
was believed, that the Town would not hold out for any long time, the Turks
plied their Business very close, and made their Attacks with wonderful Courage
and Bravery.

A Sally made from the Town.
On the 19th General Staremberg, who now Commanded in Nissa, in the Place of
Colonel Jorger, who was fallen sick, ordered a Sally to be made by 100
Granadiers, and 200 Fuzeleers, sustained by a Battalion of German Foot, and at
the same time all the Horse of the Garrison made a Sally on the other side of
the Town, which succeeded so well, that above 1000 Turks were killed on the
Place, most of which were slain in their Trenches; besides those, who upon the
Retreat of the Christians, pursuing them to the Palisadoes of the Town, were
killed by the Cannon, and Muskets from the Redoubts, and Outworks. In this
Sally the Besieged had 20 Men killed, and 60 wounded.

Whilst the Siege of Nissa proceeded in this manner, the Seraskier having
joined his Troops with those of the Tartars, of the Prince of Walachia, and the
Forces also of Tekeli, (under whom were nine Pasha's) their whole Army
consisted of 16000 Horse, 2000 Janisaries, and 500 Talpats, with which Tekeli
marched toward a certain Pass called Terezwar, being distant about three
Leagues from Cronstadt, where General Heusler lay encamped with four Regiments
of Horse, consisting in all of about 1700 Men, together with 5000
Transylvanians, called Zecklers from the Province so named, under the Command
of General Tolecki. Tekeli not knowing well how he might with Advantage attack
Heusler, passed his Forces over Mountains, and untrodden Ways, being conducted
by the People of the Country, until they came within sight of the Germans; who
nothing dismayed at the appearance of so formidable and unequal a force,
marched with the right Wing directly against that of the Enemies left, and
charged them so furiously that they put them to a shameful Flight, and had that
Day gained a most entire Victory; had the Zecklers seconded this good
beginning; but instead thereof, they most basely fled without string one
Musket; so that then the whole force of the Enemy falling upon General
Heusler, General Heusle^ def^ated
and his Men, having quitted their former advantageous Post, they were so
overpowered by them, that after a long and bloody Fight, they were put to the
Rout: In this Action General Nordquermes, Tolecki, Von Wald, Springfelt and
Winckler, with some Captains, and 500 common Horsemen were killed: General
Magni escaped, and saved himself in the Church of a Village called Hansberg,
where a Peasant killed him with a Pitchfork, and buried him under a Dunghill:
General Heusler having his Horse killed under him, was taken Prisoner by
Tekeli's Men, and Marquis Doria, and Major Fisker by the Tartars: Lieut. Col.
Rainin, with several Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns, and 32 common Soldiers
were made Prisoners by the Turks. The Enemies also gained four Pieces of
Cannon, 29 Standards, and three Wagons with Ammunition, but lost 3000 of their
Men in this Action; the remainder of the German Horse being about 1200 Men,
with 13 Standards, retreated under Hermanstadt. After the Fight was ended,
Count Tekeli being desirous to rescue as many Prisoners as he could out of the
Hands of the Tartars, he bought Marquis Doria for 60 Rix-dollars, Ma ^ Doria
sold for 60 Rix Dollars.
and many other Officers for a small Matter, and afterward sent away the
Marquis Doria with the following Letter to his Lady at Vienna, written in Latin.

GOD Almighty comfort thee, Tekeli's Letter to his Princess.
and also me with a more happy time. After many Misfortunes, I have been
comforted with a Victory over my Enemies; having had the good Fortune to make
General Heusler my Prisoner, and Marquis Doria, which with several other German
Officers, have hunted after my Life. This Accident may give an occasion for thy
Releasement; to which end I have sent the said Marquis unto thee (for whom
General Heusler remains Security) and with him I have sent my Servant Michael
for a Companion; to the end that he being an Eyewitness of my State and
Condition, may render thee a true Account and Information thereof. God grant
that he may bring me good News from thee. Live well.

Yours Emericus Tekeli.


This Letter being delivered to the Princess by the Hand of Marquis Doria, an
Answer was returned in Latin, as follows.

The Princess's Answer.
I Wish thee Health, and all Blessings from God, (whose Name be praised) for
giving me the happiness to see the proper Handwriting of my beloved Husband,
and therewith his remembrance of me. Marquis Doria has acquainted me with the
Love which thou professest toward me. I doubt not but Marquis Doria will
inform His Imperial Majesty with the Answer I have returned to thy Letter, viz.
That I depend on Almighty God's Providence, and the Emperor's Clemency, and as
to other Matters, I am ready to give sufficient Security, that if leave should
be permitted me to go and meet my Emericus Tekeli, according to my Nuptial
Duty, that I will return again at the time appointed; as to what the Imperial
Court will do about the Prisoners, the Marquis will acquaint you; to accept or
reject the Conditions, will depend much on your Affections toward me. the
Marquis having earnestly solicited his Business, has gotten an early
Dispatch; he says as much in short as is enough, and you may believe him. I
have spoken with your Servant, who has been sick, but now is better. Perhaps
my Emericus thought me to be some Lady in a Nunnery, because he gives me not
the Name of his Wife, perhaps it might be to try me, whether I desire to be so
called. Gold is tried in the Fire, which Trial I willingly suffer from my
Beloved, expecting impatiently another Letter. God deliver the Prisoners, and
comfort all afflicted Minds, which I heartily wish, Amen.

Your Dutiful Wife, Helena Zrinin.
From Vienna, September. 24.

But let us here leave Marquis Doria returning with his Answers to Tekeli,
whilst we discourse a while concerning what the Turks are farther acting before
Nissa in Servia, now straightly besieged by the Grand Vizier himself. An Attempt
was made at the same time on Widin, Widin invested.
by the Turkish Fleet, which they expected should take the Place without any
Land Forces; but they being beaten off, and four of their Ships sunk, the
Vizier commanded that the Place should be Besieged both by Land and Water;
accordingly the Lines were finished, and the Batteries raised by the 24th of
August. In like manner the Germans had perfected a Fort which they had raised
on an Island near Orsoa, called Carolina, after the Name of the Emperor's
second Son; and therein a Garrison was put of 400 Germans, and 1000 Rascians,
with 24 Pieces of Cannon, and all other Necessaries required for maintenance of
the Place.

Whilst things were in this doubtful Condition, and the Christian Army
commanded by General Veterani, lying at Jagodina, Pr. Lewis at lagodina.
under some Discouragement by reason of the near approach of the Grand Vizier,
Prince Lewis of Baden arrived to the great Joy of the Camp, bringing with him a
Regiment of Hussars. The Prince had taken a view of the Camp, and entered into
a Council of War, touching what was to be done, when the unhappy News arrived
of the total Defeat of General Heusler in Transylvania, which altered all the
Measures before agreed; and new Resolutions were taken to march thither with
the greatest force of the Army, of which General Aspremont was to lead the Van
by way of Semendria, where care had been taken to erect a Bridge for Passage of
the Troops; and for the better security of the Ships laden with Provisions, and
with Sick and Wounded People. The Horse remained on an Eminence, until all were
Embarked; and Orders were sent to the Governor of Crassowitz to demolish that
Fort, and with the Germans National Troops, and the Country People who were
with him, to march toward Belgrade.

By this time all Intercourse with Nissa was cut off, Nissa straightly Besieged
the Vizier having encompassed the City on all sides with an Army, as was
reported of 30000 Foot, and 50000 Horse, besides 15000 Tartars daily expected;
the appearance of which, was enough to have affrighted the Place to an
immediate Surrender, as was expected by the Grand Vizier; but contrary
thereunto he met with a most vigorous Resistance, to the great loss of his Men;
and a second time, And Attacked.
which was the last of August, they made another more violent Attack with fresh
Troops, and were still repulsed with greater loss: At length the Turks for
saving their Men, made a trial of some Mines, which they sprang in diverse
Places, September.
but most commonly they reversed to the greater Damage and Mischief of the
Turks themselves.

The Grand Vizier having understood, that Prince Lewis was on the Retreat, and
had withdrawn his Forces from Widin, and Semendria, detached a part of his Army
to Widin; the which Garrison consisting of no more than 800 Men, it was not
probable, that they should be able to withstand any long Siege, and therefore
being sensible, Widin surrendered.
that no Succor was to be expected, they rendered themselves up to the Enemy
on the 29th of August, before any Breach was made, or the Enemy advanced within
40 Paces of the Walls; despair of Succor put them upon this Resolution, The
Garrison marches and joins with Pr. Lewis.
whereby they gained such good Conditions, that they marched away, and joined
with the Army of Prince Lewis, the 11th of September.

Exemplum Epistolae ab Amico ad Legatum Colyer, e Castris Turcicis ad urbem
Nicaeam positis, missae. Sept. xvi. A. D. 1690.
TAmetsi per fidum ac certum hominem, qui Sagiri Achmetis Algazirani causam,
and ablatorum quingentorum Leoninorum restitutionem huc missus fuerat, Excae.
Vae. cuncta, quae hic acta, perscripsi, non male tamen me facturum existimavi,
si and illa repeterem, and quae post consecuta sunt, adjungerem.

A. d. ix. Aug. Primus Vizirius cum exercitu ad munimentum Sarkioi accessit:
quod cum non statim dederetur, vis adhibita est: cui impares, qui in praesidio,
milites, postquam horas 24 hosti fortiter restitissent, honestas pacti
conditiones, deditionem fecere; exietuntque ducenti Germani, Hungatique milites
armati cum impedimentis, and a praefecto Turcico ad munimentum, cui Palanca
Mustafa Pascia nomen, deducti sunt. Tria hic tantum tormenta minora campestria
reperta, cum nonnullis vasis pulveris pyrii.

A. d. xi. Ad paulo ante memoratum Palancae munimentum venimus, desertum and
exinanitum rebus omnibus a Germanis, qui ibi in praesidio fuerant.

A. d. xv. Nissam perventum, quam absolutissime munitam invenimus. Admotis mox
propius castris omni vi oppugnatio instituta est: nec minore virtute oppidum
defensum: ita ut post xxiii dierum obsidionem unius Sagargibassi cuniculi vix
ad crepidinem fossae promotae fuerint. Ab quatuor simul locis coepta oppugnatio
est: primas parts curabat Janizarorum Praefectus cum Sagargibassi: alter ab
hoc erat propraefectus Janizarorum: tertiae Albanis obvenerant: quartas
obtinebant Cairini, sive Aegyptii. His cunctis praesidiarii undique simul
admirabili virtute, magnaque cum Turcarum pernicie restiterunt. E Gallis
transfugis cognitum est, Ducem Veterani quinto ante obsidionem die ex oppido
discessisse, ut suppetias procuraret, relicto, qui munimentum, dum ipse
abesset, tueretur, Stahrembergio, Stahrembergii istius, qui Viennam defendit,
agnato, cum trium admodum millium militum praesidio, omnique rerum ad
obsidionem tolerandam necessariarum copia. Uno ante mense sex Germanorum millia
haud procul Viminatio abfuerant: verum intellecto, Sultanum Galga, Tartarorum
Hani filium natu maximum indies in vicinia exspectari, ad sex alias cohortes
sub Jagodini se moenia receperant, pariterque cum iis Moravam transierant: at
postpaulo cognito rursus eorundem Tartarorum ad haec loca adventu, nostrarumque
copiarum peringenti numero, Tauruni, Semendriaeque securitati prospecturi,
Danubium petivere: quos mox Tartari subsecuti sunt.

A. d. xxx. Nuncius huc a Fonduco Mustapha Pascia missus attulit, ipsum una cum
Tokolaeo per invios montes, and inaccessa juga, cum omni peditatu, absque
tormentis impedimentisque, solis acinacibus and bombardis armato in
Transylvaniam perrupisse, obviumque descendentibus Heislerum obfirmato in
mortem animo invasisse, strictisque acinacibus, non dato ad explodenda
tormenta, aut repetendam Sclopetorum majorum minorumque explosionem tempore, in
Germanos, Hungarosque milites irruisse, and mox in fugam actos, ac a Tartaris
circumventos occidione cecidisse: ita ut de multis millibus perpauci evaserint.
Captos autem Ducem ipsum Heislerum, Marchionem Doria, and Comitem Magni. In
caesorum numero repertum primum illius Provinciae Ministrum Telleki; item
praefectum quendam cohortis Germanum, and aliquam multos de praecipua
Hungarorum nobilitate desideratos. Hanc porro victoriam trecentorum illis, non
amplius militum jactura stetisse: unum tantum alicujus nominis cecidisse
praefectum Turcici exercitus Cerkisium Achmetem. Ex eodem nuncio accepimus,
Turcarum, Tartarorum, Walachorum, and Tokolianorum conjunctas copias vix xv
millia militum explesse. Tokolaeus captivos majores minoresque duces cunctos
penes se retinet, transmissis tantum viginti signis ad Vizirium: quae ille
evestigio eopse, quo accepit die una cum expugnati intra sextum diem Viminatii
nuncio ad magnum Sultanum misit.

Vizirium aiunt scripsisse Tokolaeo de mittendo ad se Heislero: at illum
respondisse, eo sibi imprimis opus esse cum ad subjugandam Transylvaniam, tum
ad recuperandam conjugem suam Principem Ragotzki. Idem, quem dixi, Fonducus in
Cerkisii Achmetis locum Copiarum Turcicarum dux suffectus est.

A. d. v Sept. Sultanus Galga ad Vizirii colloquium public admissus, and ab eo
equo eximio, ephippio and phaleris ditissime exornato, ut and acinace gemmato,
ac talari vest murinis pellibus duplicata donatus est: familiaribus autem, and
comitibus ad ducentas talares de more datae. Hic autem Princeps cum
Kiamankiseo, aliisque duobus Turcicis praefectis a. d. viii. hujus mensis
Semendriam oppugnatum abiit, comitantibus duobus Turcarum millibus, avectisque
secum december tormentis campestribus.

Valachorum Princeps, etiamnum apud Tokolaeum haeret in Transylvania, aderitque
tamdiu Turcico exercitui, donec ille Transylvaniae sibi principatum certa
possessione vindicarit. Praecipua namque munimenta in potestate adhucdum
Caesaris sunt: duo vero tantum oppida Braslau and Fogarest Tokolaeo semet
submisere.

A. d. vii. Vizirius unum de fuis Capigibassis, sive viatoribus, ad exercitus
praefectum Mustafam Fonducum, ut and ad Tokolaeum in Transylvaniam misit,
talarem singulis vestem murinis pellibus suffultam, and aliquot simplices
caeteris minoribus tribunis, ac praefectis, munus illuc delaturum. Valachorum
Principi, quique ex ejus comitatu, novem itidem consimiles vestes missae sunt.

Hac occasion usus centurio Gallus hinc una in Transylvaniam abiit, qui anno
priore cum Tokolaeo Sophiam venerat, and cum Legato Gallico Constantinopolin
profectus inde in Galliam trajecerat. Nunc autem cursu publico Constantinopolin
reversus huc venerat, multa de Gallicis victoriis jactitans, quas de Batavis
and Anglis reportaverant. His addebat interpres Gallicus Fontanus, Gallos
Batavorum exercitum sub Waldeckio in fugam conjecisse, duodecim millibus
caesis, octo captis: mari vero conjunctas Batavorum and Anglorum classes a
Gallica victas fugatasque. At id verum esse negitant alii: Regem autem
Gulielmum Hiberniam imperio suo subjecisse, pulso ac dein in Galliam se
recipiente Rege Jacobo. Ad haec Galli nil respondent, nisi, quod certum hujus
rei a legato suo nuncium necdum sese accepisse prae se ferant.

A. d. ix. Nicaeae Praefectus tubicinem ad Galilum Pascia de deditione misit,
si aequis ea conditionibus, sibique honestis permitteretur; petens, ut Vizirius
eam in rem tres ad se militares duces mitteret. Verum Vizirius, si de tradenda
urbe secum agere decrevisset, ipsius esse respondit, certos ad se delegatos
mittere. Hoc accepto responso, duo eodem die centuriones, cum adjuncto
Commissario, in Castra Turcica profecti sunt: atque ita inter hos and
Kiaiabejum ac Sagargibassum, aliosque Janizarorum Duces, praesente etiam
pro-Vizirio, convenit, ut oppidum cum omnibus commeatibus and apparatu bellico,
nec non Turcjs fidem Christianam amplexis, ut and servis ac subditis Turcicis,
qui in oppido invenirentur, dederetur: Germani, Hungari, aliique milites
praesidiarii armati, cum conjugibus ac liberis, impedimentisque omnibus, salvi
and incolumes egrederentur, concessis ad eorum devectionem centum curribus,
additoque praesidio and praefecto, qui deducerent eos, quocunque vellent:
interea temporis praesidium evestigio fossis and munimentis exterioribus
digrediens Janizaris ea traderet. Quod ubi factum, a. d. x Sept. milites
nonnulli de praesidio pedites equitesque cum impedimentis suis oppido egressi
sunt: viis autem militaribus, cuniculis interruptis corruptisque, accidit, ut
currus aliquot eversi fractique fuerint: Unde qui praecedebant, aliquantum a
caeteris disjuncti, cum ad extrema Turcarum castra pervenissent, pars a
deducentibus Turcis, aliisque militibus spoliati, nonnulli etiam occisi sunt;
conjugesque ac liberi eorum in servitutem abducti; quorum numerus ignoratur. At
hoc certum est, Vizirium, his cognitis, e vestigio Germanis praesidiariis
mandasse, ut in oppido resisterent, posteroque die servatis ordinibus, and
cunctis rite dispofitis exirent: vulgato interim per exercitum Turcicum edicto,
ut, qui de militibus Christianis, eorumve conjugibus ac liberis quemquam penes
se haberent, eosdem intra xii horarum spatium dimitterent, atque in libertatem
restituerent: qui secus fecissent, capital iis fore. Sed pauci eorum ad suos
rediere. Hanc ob culpam duo supremi Equitum praefecti, nunciorumque Sultani
Princeps, dignitate dejecti, and cujuscunque muneris publici administrandi in
posterum incapaces declarati sunt; utpote qui milites suos in officio continere
nequivissent.

Munimentum illaesum atque integrum inventum est: siquidem Turcae, uti
supradictum, trium and viginti dierum spatio vix ad exterioris fossae
supercilium appropinquaverant. Rogavi ego nonnullos e militaribus de praesidio
ducibus, quae maturandae deditionis causa fuisset? Respondere, nullam auxilii
spem: cui mandatum accesserit clanculum ad ipsos perlatum, uti oppidum
dederent, ac saluti militum prospicerent. Certe mirari satis nequo, quum omnes
ad oppidum aditus diligentissime obsessi fuerint; qui fieri potuerit, ut quis
ad eos inobservatus pertransierit?

Postquam praesidium oppido digressum est, interpreti Gallico imperatum, ut
Gallos, quorum aliquot centeni erant ad transitum in castra Turcica invitaret:
verum quindecim tantum transiere; quorum quinque religionem Christianam Turcica
mutarunt: reliqui Constantinopolin profecti. Quod autem gentem hanc attinet,
bona fide Vae. Excae. affirmare possem, fraternam ipsos Turcis fidem, operamque
praestare.

A. d. xii. Galilus Praefectus e castris semet cum Albanis ad Sultanum Galga
contulit, suas cum illius copias conjuncturus. Hodie vero, qui xvi September.
Vizirius castra movet, eo animo atque spe fore, ut intra paucos dies Semendria
potiatur: qua capta Taurunum aggressurus est: quod mihi inceptum asperum ac
difficile videtur, quum anni tempus intempestivum, militumque clanculum sese
subducentium haud exiguum numerum considero.


Exemplum alterius ab eodem Epistolae.
DEditionem Nissae proximis inde literis Excae. Vae. significavi: hisce, quae
post evenere, exponam.

A. d. xvi. Sept. Semendriam institutum iter, and a. d. xxv. castra ad urbem
posita sunt. Verum a. d. xxvii. ante exspectatum, Albani, Janizarique Portam
Flumentanam vi summa oppugnantes irrupere, and universum praesidium 250
Germanorum militum, nemini parcentes, trucidavere.

A. d. xxx. Motis Castris, Taurunum profecti sumus: eademque vespera ad octavum
ab urbe lapidem castrametati, prostridie ab omni eam part, cinximus. Cum vero
ad usque viii Octobr. multa cum virtute defenderetur, Deo ita permittente,
invictum illud munimentum (humano more loquor) art summa munitum, in Turcarum
venit potestatem.

Eodem die servus Turca ex urbe in Albanorum stativa transfugus, and a Galilo
Pascia exactissime interrogatus, examinatusque, turrim in urbe ostendit, in qua
magna vis pulveris pyrij esset recondita. Bombis igitur in eam directis,
tectum, quod ex ligno erat, incensum, and deinceps hora circiter promeridiana
tertia universa interior urbs flammis and ignibus colluxit, turrisque vi
accensi pulveris in era disjecta muros urbis ita convulsit, ut prolapsi fossas
adimplerent. Hinc statim Albani civitatem invadentes, atque irrumpentes, nec
sexui nec aetati pepercere, quidquid obvium ferro conficientes. Tristissimus
hic casus ita Germanos perturbavit, ut desubito nullo servato ordine ad portum
flumenque profugerent, adeo trepide, ut, mortem vitare conantes, in scaphas and
naviculas se praecipitarent, ac divinae se providentiae permittentes, pars
secundo flumine descenderent, pars eodem adverso, remorum auxilio evadere
conarentur. Verum maximam eorum partem mox immissi Tartari consecuti ceperunt:
adeo ut de tribus militum millibus, quibus hoc praesidium constitit, vix
trecentos effugisse existimem, quos noctis ingruentis tenebrae texerunt, atque
conservarunt.

Inter captivos nemo alicujus nominis repertus: neque ex illorum quoquam, quid
Principe Croiaco factum sit, resciri hactenus potuit; quamquam diligentissime
in eum inquisitum fuit. Hic Princeps eodem mensis Oct. die octavo Taurunum
venerat Comitemque Aspremontium certiorem fecerat auxilii cohortium aliquot
Germanarum postridie secundo flumine adventuri. Sed nec de hoc Aspremontio
certi quidpiam cognosci, indagarive potuit.

Non in interiore, neque in exteriore urbe vel minima casula restitit,
superfuitve illaesa: adeo cuncta aedificia flammis consumpta sunt. Interioris
urbis moenia tota sedibus suis evulsa and disjecta sunt: sed exterioris
pleraque supersunt. Hac urbis per pulverem pyrium eversione, bomborumque
aliquot, qui altero etiam ab urbe capta die dissiliere, magnus Turcarum numerus
interiit.

A. d. xi. Tartarorum Hanus, corpore licet invalidus, in castra ad Vizirium
venit; quicum hic belli consilia agitaturus est. Caeterum jam sedet Vizirio,
tres Turcicos praefectos cum omni Tartarorum copia Osseckium mittere. Cui rei
exsequendae Savus fl. ponte jungitur, qui intra biduum e navibus and scaphis,
magno numero ad Belgradum repertis, perfectus erit, paratusque.

Hoc porro Excae. Vae. affirmare ausim, ni tempus anni expeditionibus bellicis
commodum jam effluxisset, fore, ut Vizirius hoc adhuc anno Budam tenderet.
Cognovit enim e captivis, perpaucos tam Budae, quam Osseckii milites in
praesidio esse, eosque magnam partem e morbo infirmos.

Reperta Tauruni tormenta bellica majora centum; minora vero multo plura: quae
cum bombis and pulveris pyrii copia sub terram reconditi, inventique,
quantumvis validae sustinendae sufficiant obsidioni.

De Tokolaeo nil certi accepimus, nisi quod plebem sibi Transylvanicam indies
magis magisque conciliet, ac subjiciat: tum in eo esse, ut Albae Juliae de more
tanquam Princeps Transylvaniae inauguretur. Veruntamen munimenta pleraque in
potestate adhuc sunt Caesarianorum. Quantum inquirendo percipio, ad ultimum
hujus mensis Octobris hic subsistemus: deinde in hyberna miles deducetur. Atque
haec hactenus: caetera proximis literis perscribam. Vale.


The News of the Surrender of Widin, caused the Vizier to hasten the taking of
Nissa, that he might have time afterward before the Winter to take in
Belgrade; to which end he furiously assaulted the place on all sides, and
continually both by Day and Night fired with Cannon and Bombs into the City; by
which the Garrison being diminished from 3 unto 2000 Men, and the Counterscarp
taken, and no hopes of Relief, General Staremberg the Governor thereof was
forced to a Capitulation, Nissa surrendered.
and Surrendered on the 8th of September on very honorable Terms: Namely, That
the Garrison should march out with Bag and Baggage, Trumpets sounding, and
Drums beating, Colors flying, and with all their Arms, and to be conveyed in
safety to the Morava. But the Turks did not faithfully observe this Agreement,
but robbed and disarmed many of them. The Tartars also pursued after them as
far as Semendria, with intent to cut them all off; of which Count Staremberg
having Advice, he speedily passed the Danube, and so arrived in safety at
Belgrade. The Turks found 90 pieces of Cannon and Mortar-pieces in Nissa; after
the taking of which they marched directly toward Belgrade, and took Semendria
in their way, of which Lieutenant Colonel Weingartler, a stout and valiant
Soldier, was the Governor; but having no more than 500 Germ^ns, and 400 Rascian
Soldiers in all, for defense of the place, they sustained a Storm from all the
Turkish Army; but being overwhelmed with Numbers, Semendria taken by Storm, and
the Garrison put to the Sword.
the Governor with all his Soldiers were put to the Sword and perished; and
the Turks became Masters of the place, in which they found a good Booty with
quantity of Provisions.

In the mean time Prince Lewis continued his march toward Transylvania, and
having passed the Danube at Culitz, a place something below Semendria, he
arrived at Karansebes with the Horse on the 16th, but the Foot and Baggage came
not thither until two days afterward. And here it was that the Prince received
Intelligence how that Tekeli's Lieutenant General was marching against him with
some thousands of Horse, by way of the Valley of Hadegger, leading to that
place, which is called the Iron-Gate, with intent to hinder the Prince's
passage into Transylvania; but the Germans were beforehand with them, and with
a Party of Horse took possession of the Pass before Tekeli's Men could reach
it; P. Lewis in Transylvania.
which they maintained for two or three days before the Army could come and
enter into it; and having passed it about the 21st, they drew into Battalia
according to the situation of the Ground, and encamped near the Ancient Romana
Colonia Vulpia Trajana, the Ruins of which do still appear, where they remained
until the 24th, before which time their heavy Baggage could not arrive at the
Camp.

The German Army being thus entered into Transylvania, many of the Nobility of
that Country applied themselves to the Prince for Safe-Conducts, or
Protections, to live quietly and to save their Goods; whilst in the mean time,
the Rascians were entered into Walachia, where they plundered, burned, and put
all to the Sword with as much Cruelty as enraged Men can exercise one against
the other. But Prince Lewis marched with his Army in three Lines, until they
came within an hours distance from Huniad, and here the Army rested for a while.

The Turks, as we have said, having taken Semendria, and killed all that were
it, the Grand Vizier marched with all his Forces toward Belgrade; of which,
News being carried to the Imperial Court, the Duke of Croy was immediately
dispatched to Belgrade, to take upon him the Command of that City.

The Duke was sent away on the 1st of October, October The Grand Vizier invests
Belgrade.
which was the Day that the Grand Vizier invested Belgrade, and encamped in the
very same Places and Posts which the Christians had set out and marked two
years before; And on the 2d he had surrounded the City from the Danube to the
Save; and from that Day to the 8th they fired continually with their Cannon and
Bombs without ceasing, and stormed the Pallisadoes with such Rage, without fear
or wit, that the Defendants wondered to see them run on so desperately before
any Breach, or the least opening was made to favor or prepare for an Attack.

On the 8th, The Duke of Croy arrived in the City by Boat, and immediately
applied himself to take a View with General Aspremont, and Officers of the
Artillery of all the Works and Fortifications, as also of the Enemies Trenches,
which were already advanced within 12 Paces of the Pallisadoes; The Duke of
Croy at Belgrade.
which done, he retired to his Lodging; and that night, the Besieged discovered
and emptied one of the Turks Mines just ready to be Sprung: Next Morning the
Duke of Croy being desirous to send a true account to the Emperor of the State
and Condition of the Place, a Draught thereof was drawn and subscribed by
General Aspremont, and Officers of the Artillery; which whilst the Duke, after
a small Breakfast, was preparing to dispatch away, giving an Account withal,
that there were not above 3200 Men in the place fit for Service, an outery was
made, The Steeple of the Castle takes fire.
That the great Blue-Steeple of the Castle began to burn; upon which Alarm the
Generals and others applying themselves to extinguish the Fire, it was soon put
out. But no sooner were the Generals and People returned to their Homes, and
busily employed in their Dispatches for Vienna, which were to be carried by the
Count Archinto; but by some unknown Accident; or as it is rather believed, by
the Treachery of a Turk disguised in a German Habit, or by the villainous and
traitorous Practice of some French, who had been employed to work in the
Magazines, and had that Morning Deserted, and gone over to the Turk; the said
Blue-Steeple, about three or four a Clock in the Afternoon (which was the
principal Magazine for Powder in all the City) took Fire, Again on fire and
blows up.
and blew up, with such Violence, that the Duke was not only wounded, but half
buried in the rubbish of his own Lodgings, and dis-interred as it were by a
Page of General Aspremont. This blow over-turned the great Bulwark, which
defended the Castle, together with its Walls, Guns, and other Defenses, opening
so large a Breach for the Enemy, that they might have entered the Town with
whole Squadrons: And so extraordinary and fatal was this blow, that it
destroyed a thousand Men of the Garrison, A great slaughter thereby.
which were drawn up on the place of Arms and on the Walls; so that when the
Generals ordered new Men to supply the Places of those who had been killed by
this fatal Clap, and defend the Breach, they could not find a sufficient number
to withstand the Enemy, then ready to take advantage of this dreadful blow;
howsoever, they made the best resistance possible, until their remaining
Magazines and Storehouses took Fire, and blew up one after the other, in such
a dismal manner, that for Fire, Powder, Smoke, Stones, All the Magazines of
Powder and Prov^sions blown up.
and Dust, one Man could not see, much less know the other; and in this
Confusion, not only the greatest part of the Garrison perished, but even a
thousand Turks storming at that time the Walls, and entering the City, were also
lost; and such as remained alive were forced to retreat back to the Camp; at
which time it seemed, as if a Cessation of Arms had been made during this
gloomy and dismal Interval; but so soon as it had cleared up a little, the
Turks observing the great Consternation in the City, so that those who remained
alive, could make no resistance, they rather entered the Walls than Stormed
them; Belgrade taken.
And being come within the City, they found very few Christians living, or
Houses standing, and the very Boats in the River were sunk by the weight of the
Stones and rubbish which were fallen into them; so that those who escaped,
saved themselves for the most part by Swimming, some over the Danube, and some
over the Save; on which occasion, howsoever some few Boats remained, The Duke
of Croy escapes with the Generals.
by which many passed over, and amongst the rest, the Duke, and General
Aspremont, with some of their Servants; but no Man could save more than what he
carried about him.

Count Aspremont being blamed for this Action, was cleared by this following
Copy.

Copy de l'Attestation donnee par le Prince Louis de Bade, a Monsieur le Comte
d'Aspremont au sujet de la part de la Forteresse de Belgrade.
LA Forteresse de Belgrade ayant ete malheureusement prise par les ennemis l'an
1690. ensuitte de la grande confusion que causa l'embrasement du Magazine a
poudre, plusieurs persons mal informees des circonstances de cette affair en
ont voulu attribuer principalement la fault au Comte d'Aspremont quoyqu'il n'y
commandast plus en Chef; ce qui a extremement diminue dans le monde le bon
credit dans le quel il etoit, sur tout a cause qu'il avoit ete mis en arrest
comme Sa Majeste Imperial a accoutume de fair en de semblables rencontres.

N'ayant donc appris autre chose de Monseigneur le Duc de Croy, ainsi que des
autres Generaux and Officiers qui ont ete commandez dans la dite Forteresse; si
non que le susdit Comte d'Aspremont y a fait en toutes manieres son devoir, and
y a montre son zele en tout ce qui pouvoit concerner le service de Sa Majeste
Imperiale, tellement qu'ayant ete pleinement inform de tout le susdit, and en
consideration de la verite du fait je n'ay pu fair moins que de donner a
Monsieur le Comte d'Aspremont non sculement la present Attestation, mais aussi
pour son unique Consolation, and afin qu'am chacun puisse voir and connoitre le
contraire des Calomnies don't on l'a voulu charger, de le recommander aupres de
notre tres Clement Maitre and en tous lieux ou il pourroit en avoir besoin pour
son avancement, etant horse de doubt que sa ete entierement contre la Clemente
Intention de Sa Majeste Imperiale qu'il a du souffrir toutes ces Calomnies. En
foy de quoy j'ay sign la present and y ay fait apposer mon cachet. Fait a
Vienne, ce 10 Fevrier 1693.

Louis Margrave de Baden de Sa Majeste Imperiale Lieutenant General, Marechal
de Camp, Colonel and Gouverneur de Raab.


And thus every Man shifting as well as he could for himself, the Duke rallied
about 400 Men in all, with which he arrived at Titul, and afterward marched
with them to Peter Waradin; but the Duke remained not long here, before he
departed, and took his march for Esseck, emptying all the Garrisons by the way,
such as Illock, Sabaz, and Brod, and joining all the Forces he was able to
Conserve that important place; it being conjectured, that after having rendered
themselves Masters of Belgrade, the Turks would not stop there, but following
the air of their good Fortune, would endeavor also to take Esseck: But the
Season of the Year being far spent, it was believed that the Grand Vizier would
think he had done enough for this Summer, and therefore would conclude the
Campaign with an Action of so much Glory; but the Grand Vizier rested not here,
but having left 10000 Men for a Garrison in Belgrade, and recommended the
repair of the Breaches to the Care of some French Ingeniers that followed the
Army, and leaving some of their Horse Cantoned near the City; the greatest part
of their Cavalry was ordered for the Upper Hungary; upon the News of which, The
Germans (...) the Bl^^kade of Great-Waradin.
the Germans were so Alarmed, that they quitted the Blockade before Great
Waradin, and with other Troops which were in the Neighborhood, they marched
toward the Tibiscus, to secure the passage of that River.

In the mean time the Pasha of Bosnia was Commanded by the Grand Vizier to take
Esseck, whilst he himself, with a strong Army of Turks passed the Danube;
whereupon the Germans quitted Lugos, and Caranzebes, and the Vizier marched
directly to Lippa, which place having been attacked with much Resolution, and
continual Storms, and in want of all Provisions, was forced to Surrender, but
on very honorable Capitulations, being permitted to march out with Bag and
Baggage, Drums beating, and with Colors flying: The Besieged lost but ten Men,
but the Turks 800 in this Action.

Whilst Matters succeeded in this manner with the Vizier's Army, P. Lewis
continues his march,
Prince Lewis of Baden continued his march by way of Weissenburg and
Mullenbach, and arrived the 3d of October at Hermanstadt, where for want of
Provisions he was forced to remain for some days; but being at length supplied
with all things necessary, they decamped, and came to Medies, And beats several
Parties of the Enemy.
where they attacked, and beat several Parties of the Enemies, whose Heads they
brought with Triumph into the Camp: For as to Tekeli, and his Troops, they
never stood their Ground, but as Prince Lewis advanced, they always retreated,
keeping at least six Leagues distant from the German Army. At length he came to
Czick upon the Borders of Walachia; where to encourage and keep his Followers
together, he boasted of great Succors coming from the Turks: But this Report
would not serve his turn; for the Prince of Walachia having received
Intelligence that the Rascians did much Infest and Ruin his Country, he was the
first to desert the Army, and return home to defend and preserve the same. Soon
afterward, the Zecklers and Transylvanians following the Example of the
former, left the Army, and returned to their Homes; the which Misfortunes were
soon seconded by the ill News, That 200 of his Men, who blocked up the Castle
of Terezwar, had been surprised, and cut to pieces by the Germans. After which,
the Prince pursued Tekeli toward Czick, Tekeli flies from place to place.
from whence likewise he decamped, and fled through the whole Country, being
hunted from one place to another; but seeing that Tekeli could be fixed in no
place, the Prince sent back all his Baggage to Medies; and having alarmed
Tekeli on every side, he caused all the Roads into the Georgian Country to be
stopped up, and rendered unpassable; and being in a full march, and fresh
pursuit after him, he almost surprised him, and had certainly taken him, had
not the Prince been discovered in his passage over the River near Marienburg;
at which Tekeli was so affrighted, that he betook himself to flight, and with
great Confusion retired through the Pass of Bozz in Walachia; He flies into
Walachia.
but being still pursued by some German Horse, they overtook seven or eight
Wagons with Baggage, which they seized with several Prisoners; but Tekeli
staid in no place, but rode Post away until he came as far as Tergovitz in
Walachia. And thus ending the short Reign of this Transylvanian King, the
Emperor became a second time the Master of that Principality; the Care and
Preservation of which was committed to the Charge and Government of General
Veterani, who with eight Regiments, and a good part of the Army, returned back
to Zatmar.

According to Orders received from the Grand Vizier, Chusacin Pasha of Bosnia,
appeared on the 29th of October, with Mustapha Pasha, and one Beg or Lord of
that Country, Esseck summoned.
before Esseck, with 12 or 15000 Men; and the day following sent a Summons to
the Duke of Croy, to Surrender up the Fortress unto the invincible Power of his
Sovereign, the Ottoman Emperor, and in failure of a ready Compliance herewith,
he threatened to destroy the whole Garrison, Man, Woman, and Child, and not so
much as to spare or give Quarter to Infants in the Womb of their Mothers.

Hereunto the Duke returned for Answer, That the Germans did not use to be
terrified with high and menacing Words; The Answer to the Summons.
That they had not a Woman in the Town, and consequently no Children to be
concerned for who were unborn; but they should find Men there who were resolved
to defend the Town to the utmost of their power.

Upon this Answer, the Pasha immediately stormed the Counterscarps, which were
without any Parapet, and provided only with some small Pallisadoes: The Turks
repulsed.
Howsoever, though the Garrison consisted only of 2000 Men, the Turks were
repulsed with great loss and slaughter. The Pasha finding himself mistaken in
his Measures, and that the place was resolved to make a better resistance than
he expected, he began to form an Attack in good Order, opening Trenches, and
raising Batteries, which was performed with such diligence, that on the 2d of
November, November.
two Batteries were finished, from whence with eight Guns, and two
Mortar-pieces, they fired continually into the Town. The Duke one Evening
walking with some Officers through the Pallisadoes to take a view of the Enemy,
was discovered by them, and thereupon a whole Volley of shot was poured upon
them; amongst which, one Musket Shot took of the Hat and Perriwig of the Duke,
and grazing on his Forehead, took off the Skin for the breadth of a Finger,
without other hurt or mischief.

On the 4th about Noon the Duke caused a Salley to be made by 200 Foot, A
Salley made from the Town.
30 Granadiers, and 100 Horse, which so well succeeded, that the Turks were
beaten out of their Trenches, having 200 of their Men killed on the place, and
five Standards taken, with the loss only of two Men killed and about 30
wounded: Had the Lieutenant who commanded the Horse, done his Duty, and
advanced as he ought to have done, to cut off the Enemies Retreat, above 40
Colors had been taken, and not one of them had escaped out of their Trenches;
for which Default the said Lieutenant was seized, and arrested.

On the 5th, The Turks had advanced within 15 Paces of the Pallisadoes, and
Counterscarp, and had so battered, and ruined the Houses within the Town,
especially that in which the Duke had his Quarters, that very few were
standing, and scarce any place to remain or abide in. The Turks likewise began
again to appear in great numbers, threatening a general Storm; But the Duke, and
the other Generals, providing to make the best Resistance, and most vigorous
Defense they were able, entered into the Counterscarps with undaunted
Resolution; but the Enemy attempted nothing, as if some strange fear had
possessed them. In the mean time, the Duke being returned to his Lodgings, the
Hussars brought to him three Turks; who being in Examination, demanded for what
Reason the Enemies had made so violent an Assault without Trenches or Earth to
cover them; it was answered, That there being a Report in the Army, that the
Christians were coming with a powerful Army to relieve the Town; it was
resolved to take the place, if possible, before the Succors came; for which
reason they endeavored to carry all at once, by dint of Sword, or force of
Arms.

The Duke, and General Staremberg having received this Information, A stratagem
to deceive the Turks.
sent out by Night all the Drums and Trumpets, and Bag-Pipes which were in the
Town, to the Regiment of Hofkirchen, and some Hussars, which were quartered on
this side of the Drove, with Orders and Instructions, that when the Evening was
come, they should under the Obscurity of the Night, march to and fro, causing
the marches of Musketeers, and Dragoons, at convenient distances to be beaten,
and Trumpets and Kettle-Drums to be sounded from several Places; which being
exactly performed according to Orders, caused such an Alarm in the Turkish
Camp, as struck all with Fear and Confusion, believing that the Succors, which
they feared, It succeeds to the terror of the Turks.
were now arrived, which caused such a Consternation in the Turkish Camp, that
they quitted all their Trenches in the Night with a confused Precipitation,
making what haste was possible for Bosnia.

Of this the Besieged knew as yet nothing, but perceiving toward six a Clock
in the Morning, that not the least noise was heard in the Turkish Trenches, the
Duke gave 50 Dollars to a Musketeer to adventure out, and take a view of the
Camp and Trenches; the which having done, he returned, and gave a Report, That
not a Turk was remaining, either in one or the other. The Turks raise the Siege
by a pannick fear.
So soon as the Day-broke, the Garrison sallied out, and entered the deserted
Camp, in which they found great Spoils, three pieces of Cannon, 100 Bombs, and
other warlike Instruments which the Turks had left behind in their affright,
which possessed them with such pannick Fear, that they stopped not, or looked
behind them, till they had passed the Bridges at Walcowar, where they stayed no
longer than only to break them down to secure their flight.

The Story hereof was pleasantly related by a certain German, who had three
years before been taken by the Turks, and had for his skill in the Turkish
Language, been received into Service of the Pasha's Secretary: This Man during
the flight had thrown himself into a Cock of Hay and Straw, where he lay hidden
until the Turks were gone, and then creeping out, escaped to Esseck, and there
told the Duke; That the ^asha was a dull, old, timorous Fellow; who when he
heard all the Drums beat, and the Trumpets and Bagpipes sound, he was struck
with so much Fear, that he trembled, his Hands and Feet shook, his Knees
knocked one against the other, and his Legs were not able to support his Body;
and he farther said, That the Pasha had been ordered by the Grand Vizier, that
so soon as he had made himself Master of Esseck, that he should not stop there,
but should make Excursions round the Country, ruining and destroying all with
Fire and Sword; but this Stratagem so well succeeded, that the People and
Country were freed of the Turks, and the Ruin which they threatened.

The Siege being thus raised, Lieutenant Colonel Lion was dispatched with the
News to the Imperial Court; Joy at Vienna.
which so much rejoiced the Emperor and the whole City, that all the former
sinister Successes of the Campaign seemed forgotten, and swallowed up in the
Joy of this Action; for which the Duke of Croy, and General Staremberg were so
cried up, that never any thing seemed comparable to this Stratagem, and gained
them not only the Fame of valiant, but wise Generals: This News was the more
welcome, because it was surprising, and unexpected; for the Town was so ill
fortified, that the Soldiers would never have been persuaded to hold out, had
not the Duke liberally distributed his Money in the Garrison, and treated the
Soldiers plentifully at the Rate of a Pound of Flesh, and a Quart of Wine for
every Day; And indeed there was a necessity thereof in that moist Country,
which is nothing but marshy and wet Places, and in that Season of the Year,
subject to Rain, Fogs, Frost, and all extremities of the Weather.

Thus this Siege being happily raised, Te Deum was sung in Esseck; and all the
Trenches of the Enemy being levelled, the Duke committed the Command of the
Town to General Staremberg, and returned himself to Vienna.

In the mean time, Prince Lewis continued his march for Zatmar, where he
arrived the first of December, December.
having been Complimented all along in his march by the States of Transylvania;
P. Lewis complimented by all the States of Transylvania.
particularly at Enget, where Thanks were particularly returned him, for having
delivered them from the Tyrannical Government of Count Tekeli: Which poor
Prince, after many Difficulties, being come into Walachia, 300 Zecklers which
had followed him did then Desert him; but marching home without leave, were
pursued by some of his Troops, and cut down in such manner, that none of them
escaped. The Walachians also, unwilling to have their Country ruined by the
Rascians, C. Tekeli in a sad C^ndition.
who designing to make their Winter Quarters there, caused great Fears, so that
he labored under perpetual Troubles and Hardships.

At Zatmar, Prince Lewis was forced to continue for some Days for Refreshment,
both of his Soldiers, Horses, and Mules, the which were so extremely tired by
their long Marches, especially the Beasts which had carried the Baggage, that
they would not stir nor rise, until they put fire under them.

In the mean time the Turks under the Command of the Grand Vizier's Son,
continued to overrun and spoil all the Country on the other side of the
Theysse, and sent a Summons to the Governor of St. Job to Surrender the place
to them; but he answered, That the Place being a Fortress belonging to the
Emperor, of which General Nigrelli had the Keys, he was not capacitated to
comply with their Desires. Hereof News being brought to Prince Lewis at Zatmar,
who had not with him above 2000 good Horse; the Enemy being 15000 strong, P.
Lewis prepares to fight the Turks.
did no think himself in a Condition to fight them, but sending to Colonel
Schick, who with his Regiment was quartered near Zolnock, and to the Hussars
who were in those parts, to join as speedily as they could possibly with him,
and to put themselves into a posture to meet and fight the Enemy. Whilst things
were forming and contriving for this Action, a certain stout Fellow, who used
to go out upon Parties, named Kis Ballad, had a Rencounter with the Tartars in
the Parts adjacent, of whom he killed 100, and took 50 Prisoners. Of this Body,
those that escaped carried News to the Turks and Tartars, that the Prince had
quitted Transylvania, and lay encamped near Zatmar; upon which Advice, 12000
Turks made an Excursion into that Country: But Prince Lewis having now got
together 4000 good Horse, adventured to seek the Enemy; and on the 20th of this
month came to Claussenburg, where two Days before the Turks had been, and
summoned the place to make a Surrender; but the Summons being rejected, the
Turks having burned the Suburbs, returned to Enget, and in their march passing
in fight of Claussenburg, they burnt and destroyed all Places in their way, and
attacked the Foragers, and advanced Guards; took some few German Prisoners,
with the loss only of about 50 of their Men, and so marched directly toward
Temeswaer: But Prince Lewis having been joined by General Nigrelli with 2000
Horse, The Turks return with loss to Temeswaer.
by which and his own he made a Body of 4000 well armed and accoutred, he
pursued them so closely at the Heels, that the Enemy entirely quitted
Transylvania, with the greatest haste and confusion imaginable; and falling in
with their Rear, cut down about a 1000 of their Men, took three pieces of
Cannon, with a great many Camels and Horses, and most of their Baggage; and
hasting away with all the speed possible, more in the Nature of a Flight than a
Retreat, they at length arrived at ^emeswaer, but with much diminution of their
numbers, caused by toilsome and long Marches, and the excessive Colds in the
Night, whereby some were frozen to Death, and others seized by Catarrhs and
Rheums, which made them incapable of farther Service.

After this, Orsoua surrendered to the Turks.
the Island of Orsoua surrendered to the Turks for want of Ammunition; the
Governor upon the Articles granted, desired to be conducted to Belgrade, not
knowing but that it remained still in the hands of the Germans; and though the
Turks told him the contrary, yet not believing them, he still persisted so
earnestly to be Convoyed to Belgrade, that the Turks at length carried him and
his People thither, consisting of 600 Men, besides Women and Children; but this
mistrust of the Turks words cost them dear, for arriving there, they were put
for two days into a Fort of the City, and afterward commanded them to bring
out their Arms, and lay them upon Wagons, on promise of sending them for
Esseck, which being done, they commanded them to come forth two by two, that
they might be the better counted. After which, they drove them back to the Fort
like Cattle, and chained them there with Iron-Chains, where they kept them in
so severe an Imprisonment, that most of them died with Want and Hunger, except
such as were under 20 years of Age, whom they Shaved and Circumcised, and made
Turks; but the Women and Children they Sold, and pillaged all the Goods, which
they brought out with them. In this Island the Enemies found 23 great Guns, 15
Fieldpieces, and three Mortars, but the Bombs and Powder were thrown into the
River: And thus ended this Year, which proved the most unfortunate to the
Emperor of any, that had happened since the beginning of this War.

THE Venetian Successes In Their WAR against the TURKS, In the Year 1690.
Venetian Successes of the last Year's Expedition, with the Triumphant, and
Glorious Entry of that Illustrious Prince Francisco Morosini Cavalier, Captain
General, and Elected Doge of Venice, to whom his Country testified as much
Honor and Glory as could be contrived and expressed; the Particulars of which
are long and not necessary to be inserted in this History; only it may not be
improper to recount in short some of the Exploits of this Great Man, with that
Applause which is due unto his Memory.

This Francisco Morosini descending from the most Ancient Patrician Family in
Venice, was Born in the Year 1618. He was in his Infancy dedicared by his
Parents to the Service of his Country, and educated in all Martial Exercises;
and rising by degrees and steps to several Offices, both Military and Civil, he
at length arrived at the Supreme degree of Government in that Republic, being
elected Doge during the time that he was fighting abroad in defense of his
Country, he was at first made a Noble Commander of a Gally, which is the first
step and degree which a Noble Venetian takes, then he was made a Vice Admiral
and Governor of a Galleass; next Captain of the Golf, Proveditor-General of
the Arms in Candia, and then Captain General, in which Office he continued a
long time until the Year 1661, behaving himself with incomparable Valor; in
which Year he fought a Battle with the Galleys of Barbary, under the Fortress
of Valona, he took a great Ship called a Sultana, richly laden from Egypt, near
the Island of Milo, he defended the Breaches of Candia, and took another great
Sultana, The Atchiev^ments of Francisco Morosini.
the Captain of which was called Admiral Nicolo of Nadalin Furlano, and made
him Prisoner; he laid the Captain Pasha's Gally Aboard, and almost entirely
ruined it; he took the Gally of the Pasha of Cyprus, together with the several
Fortresses of Calamo, Egena, Volo and Megara; and having made himself Master of
those Seas, he destroyed 13 Galleots under the Fortress of Prevesa. He made
many Sallies from Candia in the Face of the Enemy, destroying many of their
Works and Intrenchments; he subdued the Fortress of Calamata, and made himself
Master of two Turkish Galleys commanded by Hali Pasha; he also took the
Fortresses of Toron, Chisme, Castel-rugio, and Schiato, putting them and other
Islands under Contribution. He also took the Castle of Capricorno, and
destroyed the Forts of Calogero, Sancta Veneranda, and Calami, which commanded
the Fortress of Suda. He likewise took two Ships bound from Alexandria, laden
with Soldiers and Provisions, with another Convoy bound from the same Place for
Constantinople, under which were diverse Ships and Vessels.

In fine, after all these Successes and Triumphs, being returned to Venice, he
was made Proveditor of Friuli to oppose the Incursions of the Turks, who at
that time threatened those Countries very much; but those Fears being blown
over, he was sent back a second time to Command both the Seas, and me City of
Candia, then straightly Besieged by the Grand Vizier Kupriogli, with the main
force of the Ottoman Empire; the which Siege having continued for the space of
almost three Years, The Praises of Morosini.
the Turks were concluded to have lost 128000 Men before it. During which time
this Hero behaved himself with all imaginable Wisdom and Bravery; and though at
length he was forced after many Conflicts, and various Successes (which we have
distinctly recounted in our History of the Lives of the three last Emperors,)
yet the fame of that renowned Defense, accompanied with an ensuing Peace, will
much more immortalize his Fame than any other of his Martial Successes, it
being the most memorable Siege that ever happened in the World.

Finally in the Year 1683, when the Grand Vizier Kara Mustapha appeared before
Vienna with an Army of 200000 Men, he was then appointed Proveditor-General of
Friuli, to oppose the vast Inundations of the Turks, which had happened to all
those Countries, had the Success of that Vizier answered the Expectations of so
mighty a Power.

After which he was sent a third time in quality of Captain General against the
Turks in the Morea, where in the space of five Years, he performed all those
great Actions which have been before recounted; by which he acquired such
immortal Honor and Fame, that he was by the Death of Contareno, exalted to the
Supreme Throne of that Victorious and Renowned Republic; where we shall now
leave him employed in the exercise of the Sublime Dignity, and so proceed to
recount the Actions of that Noble General the Cavalier and Procurator Girolamo
Cornaro, who when the Doge, about the latter end of the last Year, returned to
Venice, was left in the Command before Malvasia, of the Blockade, which
continued during the whole Winter past.

But the Summer coming on, and the Army and Navy reinforced considerably with
Men, Provisions, and Money, dispatched from Venice under several strong
Convoys, and being joined with the Pope's and the Maltese Galleys, it was
proposed to convert the Blockade into a Formal Siege. It was now full 17
Months, that the Besieged had with much patience stood out in defense of their
City, so that it was believed, that they were reduced to the utmost Point of
Famine, and Penury; The Venetians resolve to besiege Napoli di Malvasia.
the which Opinion, the Turks were willing to confirm in the Minds of the
Besiegers, that they might take them off from the Attempts of Attacking,
Bombing, or other Methods for forcing the Town. But the Captain General having
discovered, that the Defendants were still provided for a longer Subsistence,
and able to hold out for some Months, resolved on some more expedite means,
than by the dilatory ways of a Siege, and the lazy Formalities of a Blockade;
for though it was most desirable for sparing the effusion of Christian Blood to
take it, by safe and certain Proceedings; yet when it was made known, that the
Victuals, and all sorts of Provisions, did not fail; it came to a final
Determination, to take them by a lively and vigorous force: To which end the
Engenier Bassignani, with the Count St. Felice Sergeant-General, was ordered to
take a Survey of the Town on the Lands side, and to design, and draw out the
Trenches, and Platforms for Battery, The Town battered.
the which in a few Days, by the encouragement which the Presence of the
Captain General gave, was performed and perfected; so that they began on all
sides, with the advantage of two Palanders, to batter the Town, and with their
great Guns from the Ships and Galleys, to thunder in such a terrible manner,
that the Inhabitants dismayed, and dis-spirited by their long Sufferings, and
the unexpected Attacks of their Enemies, caused their Drums to beat a Parley,
and sent forth a Cadi, with two Aga's, to make Offers of Surrender on these
Conditions, viz.

That they might carry off all their Cannon, They Capitulate.
and have 20 Days given them to make a Surrender.

But these Propositions appearing unreasonable, they were without farther
Discourse, or Expostulation dismissed, and sent back to the City.

The Inhabitants tired with the long Blockade of 16 Months, and fearing now a
forcible Assault, after some Consultation held amongst themselves, they
resolved to deliver up the City, and returned the same Messengers with these
more reasonable Conditions.

The Articles agreed.
I THAT the City should be Delivered.

II. The Soldiers and Inhabitants should go forth with their Goods, and
Baggage, in the space of 10 Days, and safe Convoy given them to be Transported
to Candia.

III. Liberty given to the Inhabitants, either to remain in the City, or depart.

In virtue of these Articles, 1200 Souls marched out of the City, a great part
of which were Men. Malvasia delivered up.
In the Town they left 78 Pieces of Cannon, part of Brass, and part of Iron,
with great Quantities of Biscuit, and with other Provisions, and Ammunition,
sufficient for several Months.

The People having quitted the City, and Transported as was agreed to Candia,
the Captain General entered into it with much Pomp and Triumph on the 12th of
August, where the principal Mosch being dedicated to God under the Invocation
of the Blessed Virgin of Carmen, was delivered up to the care of the Franciscan
Fathers, and a sufficient Garrison being put therein, the Command thereof was
committed to the Government of that Noble, Venetian, Vicenzo Gritti of St.
Alvise, in quality of Proveditor. Many Gentlemen signalized their Valor and
Conduct in subduing this Fortress, namely the Duke of Guadagni, Chabrillan
General of Malta, with several other Noble Persons, and Subaltern Officers,
worthy of immortal fame. In this last Action, 400 Men were killed and wounded.

By the Fall of this City of Malvasia, taken the 12th of August, the Turks were
entirely beaten out of the Morea, and the Venetians became absolute Masters
thereof: But to lose no farther time, the Captain General Cornaro having given
some time for the Refreshment of his Troops, fet sail from Malvasia with the
whole Armata, The Venetians design upon Valona.
toward the Gulf; and being on the 11th of September come within sight of
Valona, the Turks had time to form a Body of 7000 Foot, September.
and 1500 Horse; and having taken possession of the most advantageous Posts,
and Passes, they endeavored vigorously to dispute the Landing of the
Venetians. But things were so well ordered, that nothing could give a stop to
the Resolution of Men accustomed to Success and Victory.

They Land.
The first that set Footing on Shore, were the Malteses, which were followed by
the Pope's Militia; but the Venetians were the first to attack the Enemy under
Command of Major General Spaar; which they performed with so much Bravery and
Resolution, that having repulsed the Enemy from the Shore, they pursued them to
the Fortress of Cannina, which is situate on the top of a high and craggy Rock,
about four Italian Miles distant from Valona; these were seconded by the Duke
of Guadagni, and several other Auxiliary Troops, together with some Venetian
Troops commanded by Sergeant-General Borri; in this Action the Turks lost some
Men, and the Venetians about 8 or 10, amongst which the Count of St. Felice was
shot in the Head by a Musket-Bullet.

The Army being also joined with a Body of Cimarriotes, and Albaneses, and
considerably increased thereby, advanced so far, as to lodge that Night in the
Neighborhood, designing next Morning to attack the Suburbs of the Town, whilst
Lavettin, General of the Descent, was taking a Survey of its Situation, he was
grievously wounded with a Musket Shot; and in the mean time the Turks making a
Sally with 2000 Men, were repulsed, and forced to retire into their Houses
fortified with Stone, barricading up their Streets, and in many Places opening
Trenches to give a stop to the advanced Troops of the Enemy, by which the
Captain General foreseeing that length of time might be advantageous to the
Enemies, which in a short time expected new Forces; the Cannon, Bombs, and
other Warlike Instruments, were sent for from the Fleet, which was performed
with so much diligence, Cannina battered.
that in the space of 24 Hours, the great Cannon was brought, and some
Batteries raised, to the great Admiration and Terror of the Enemy, against the
Fortress of Cannina; in the expedition of which Work, all the Ciurma, that is,
the Slaves of the Galleys and Galleasses, were greatly serviceable, by mending
and breaking the Ways to make them passable for the Artillery; but whilst the
Batteries were playing very hotly on Cannina, a strong Party of 3000 Foot, and
400 Horse, were detached under Command of General Spaar, to attack the Enemy,
who had made a Retreat, after the late Repulse upon the Seacoasts, into some
fortified Houses and Places of Retirement. Spaar having marched for the space
of 10 Miles through Woods, and Mountains, and difficult Places, The Turks
overthrown in the Field.
came at length in sight of the Enemy, who were possessed with such Fear and
Consternation, that though at first they made an appearance of Fighting, yet upon
a more near Approach, they turned their Backs, and fled with Shame and
Confusion.

In the mean time whilst General Spaar was in pursuit of the Enemy, General
Borri, with several others of the chief Officers, made an Attack upon the Fort,
without any fear or regard to the continual Fire which was made from thence,
and being seconded at the same time by the Duke of Guadagni, together with the
Malteses and the Troops of the Religion, and of the Papalins, or the Pope's
Forces; they all in their several Stations assaulted the Places appointed to
them, and in this general Storm the Auxiliaries forced into the middle of the
Town, separating the Defendants on the Right Hand from those of the Left, The
Fort of Cannina capitulates
who finding themselves distressed on all sides, spread a White Flag, demanding
to Capitulate; the which being granted, some Persons came forth demanding such
exorbitant Terms, as were not thought fit to be granted. At length all was
reduced to these Particulars; namely,

That they should, without further delay, Surrender the Fortress into the Hands
of the Venetians, and march forth immediately with their Families, Bag and
Baggage.

Thus was the Fortress of Cannina delivered up to the Will and Pleasure of the
Captain General, Cannina surrendered.
out of which came forth about 3000 Souls, besides 546 of the Garrison, and
were with safe Convoy conducted to their Camp: The loss on the Venetian side
was not considerable as to the Numbers, but for the Quality of the Persons
killed and wounded, amongst which Alvise Sagredo was wounded with a
Musquet-Bullet in the Thigh; and General Borri through the Body, Persons of
Quality ^illed.
of which he died, to the great Sorrow and Lamentation of the whole Army;
likewise Monsieur de Moroglie, Lieutenant General of the Forces of Malta, whose
Place was supplied by Sergeant-Major de Brossie, a Person of approved Valor,
and prudent Conduct.

The Captain General not being willing to lose the favorable advantage of the
present Consternation the Enemy was in, their Army being beaten in the Field,
and put to flight, and the Fortress of Cannina delivered, and the Cannon for
several Batteries playing upon the Town of Valona, it was thought fit to make
ah appearance of the whole Army before the City, and to affright them the
sooner into a Surrender, a threatening Summons was sent them, with Menaces of
giving no Quarter in case of Refusal; but hereunto no Answer was returned by
the Turks, so that nothing but an obstinate Resistance was expected, all things
being silent and quiet in the Town, during the whole Night: At length in the
Morning the like Quietness and Silence continuing, it was discovered, that the
Turks had privately in the Night conveyed themselves away, The Turks abandon
Valona.
and cowardly abandoned the Town to the Pleasure and Will of their Enemies, on
the 18th of September 1690.

In the Fortress of Cannina, and in the Town of Valona, 134 Pieces of Cannon
were taken of several sorts of Metal, as well of Brass as of Iron.

And in this manner this Enterprise ending, to the great Glory of the Venetian
Arms, Te Deum was sung in Venice with much Joy and Triumph, and greatly to the
Honor and Praise of the Captain General Cornaro, who with equal Valor
followed the Footsteps of his fortunate Predecessor Morosini.

Nor were the Venetian Arms less successful under the Command of General Molino
in Dalmatia, The Pasha of Arzigovina, designs on the Greeks
where Zenalee the Pasha of Arzigovina, had a design with a Body of 3000 Horse
and Foot, to attack the new Subjects lately conquered by the Venetians, the
which being for the most part Christians of the Greek Church, it was resolved
to surprise them in the Easter Week, when they were more attentive to Devotion,
than to the Exercise of their Arms; but this Design was not so secretly
managed, but that it was discovered, and brought to the knowledge of Pietro
Duodo, Proveditor Extraordinary of Cataro, who upon the News, immediately
dispatched by an Express, an Information thereof to the People of Nixichi,
advising them to be watchful against the Surprises of their Enemy. He attacks
Nixichi.
Accordingly at the time appointed, the Pasha moving from Nevissigne, entering
into the adjacent Parts of Nixichi, began to execute all Acts of Hostility,
burning Houses and Villages, making Slaves, and taking a considerable Booty.
The News hereof being brought to the Churches, where the People were assembled
and intent at their Devotions, they all ran out of their Churches, and betook
themselves to their Arms, with such wonderful Celerity and Resolution, that
they unexpectedly assailed the Turks, and after a sharp Conflict routed them,
Is beaten off.
and put them to Flight. The Pasha endeavoring to stop their Career, killed
two of his affrighted Officers with his own Hand; but Fear and Consternation
had so possessed their Minds, that nothing could give a hindrance or stop to
their Course; for all being in Confusion, they trampled one on the other, and
in the Pursuit 400 Foot, and 300 Horse were cut to pieces; the Slaves which
they had taken, were set at liberty, and the Booty recovered; many Prisoners
were taken, amongst which were some principal Turks, with the Pasha himself,
who being put into Chains, offered 3000 Zechines, with two Vests of Sables for
his Ransom, with some fine Horses, and Arms of considerable value; but the
People of Nixichi were too generous to accept of a Ransom, The Pasha taken
Prisoner.
and rather chose to carry their Prisoner in Triumph unto Cataro, than to
accept of any Present whatsoever in lieu thereof. From Cataro, by order of
General Molino, the Pasha was on a Gally transported to Spalatro. And least the
Turks of Arzigovina being hereby incensed, should be provoked to take a Revenge
with greater force, the General Molino, for better security of that People,
ordered the Commander of that District to march with a Body of 300 Men to their
assistance, and to put all People into Arms; that taking advantage on the
present Consternation with which the Turks were affected, they might with more
ease enjoy the lasting Fruit of the present Victory.

With like happy Success was the strong Fortress of Filiporich situate in the
Neighborhood of Glamoz in Dalmatia, Filiporich taken.
taken and destroyed, by order of Molino directed to the Proveditor of Knin,
who accordingly executed the same with such Prudence, and Vigor, that having
dis-speeded 500 Men, to a Place called Dervis, their fortune was to take 60
Turks, which kept the Towers, Houses, and Moschs within that Precinct, together
with four small Guns, some Musketoons, Colors, and other Arms of the Turks, as
also a considerable number of Cows and Sheep; they also burnt three great
Villages belonging to the Turks, consisting of 500 Houses, and took 32 Slaves.

Thus had all the Adventures of this Year answered the Expectations of the
Venetians at Land, better than those of the Germans had done at the Court at
Vienna; but yet an unhappy Encounter at Sea, gave the Turks some cause to
rejoice, and not a little tempered the Triumph of the Venetians; the which
happened in this manner.

About the opening of the Campaign on the 22th of March of this Year, the
Captain General gave Orders to Admiral Valier Commander of the Ship St. Iseppo,
carrying 44 Brass Guns, that taking with him for his Confort, A Sea Fight.
the Ship called the St. Mark; he should sail to Milo, there to collect the
usual Charach, or Tribute of that Island, being about 10000 Dollars a Year: And
being toward the Evening come near the Island, a strong Gale of contrary
Winds, put them off from the Shore, driving them toward Candia, and so
continued until Midnight, when the Wind abating, and the Weather becoming more
favorable, they directed their Course toward the Island.

The two Ships, St. Iseppo, and St. Mark, attack d by 10 Turkish Vessels.
Upon Break of Day 10 Ships were discovered so near, that they were easily known
to be Enemies; at which Alarm the Matches were lighted, and the Ships fitted,
and all prepared for a Fight: These 10 Ships proved to be Soltano's, Commanded
by Mezzo Morto, a famous Pyrate belonging to Algier, of which he became Dey and
Captain, which having carried the usual Present to the Sultan, was some time
afterward Captain-Pasha of the Grand Seignior's Fleet.

Now returning back to Algier, and unhappily meeting with these two Ships in
their way, six of them invested the St. Iseppo; and the other four undertook
the St. Marco, a Ship of 60 Brass Guns: After some Hours Fight, an unlucky Shot
from the Enemy entered the Powder-Room of the St. Mark, with which the Ship
blew up, and thereby the Soldiers and Seamen, with all the Equipage were lost,
The St. Mark blown up.
and that brave Ship entirely perished. Hereupon the whole Number of the 10
Ships uniting together, fell upon the St. Iseppo, which sustained the Conflict
valiantly for the whole Day, and making a running Fight, was in hopes, by the
sound of the Guns, to call out some help from the Fleet, which lay then at
Napoli di Malvasia; but no Succor coming, Admiral Valier entered the Line into
the midst of the Enemies, where by some unlucky Shots, the Masts and Helm, or
Rudder were shot away. In this distressed Condition was Admiral Valier, when
still fighting with his Sword in his Hand upon the Quarter Deck, he called to
him his Lieutenant, Captain Petrina, and made him swear, That whenever he was
dead, he would blow up the Ship, rather then render it up into the Hands of the
Turks; then he threw Overboard all his Public Letters, Orders, and
Instructions, as also all the Flags and Colors in which the Lion and Arms of
St. Mark were described, that nothing which belonged to the Republic, might
fall into the Hands of the Enemy; and consequently he caused both the Pumps to
be unfixed, that the Vessel might sink, and not fall into the Hands of the
Turks. And afterward seeing two of the Enemies Ships preparing to come Aboard,
he called to those few of his Men, who were left alive, and coming on the
Quarter Deck, animated them to stand by him, and whenever those two Ships
were aboard, to give Fire to the Powder, and perish with the Enemies on either
hand: But whilst Valier was giving these Instructions, Valier killed.
he was taken off by a Cannon-Bullet, and immediately, as he had ordered, his
Body was cast into the Sea, having protested, That neither Alive, nor Dead,
would he fall into the Hands of the Enemy.

Valier being dead, and his Lieutenant, Captain Petrina grievously wounded, and
very few Soldiers and Seamen remaining alive, or unwounded, and the Ship after
a whole Days fight, entirely disabled to make any longer resistance; the Turks
howsoever durst not adventure to come near the Ship, but at length displaying
White Colors, they adventured to lay the Ship aboard with their Long-Boar,
where being entered, they enqured first for the Admiral, and his Lieutenant,
and being informed, that the first was killed, and his Corpse thrown Overboard,
and the latter mortally wounded, they made Prisoners of all those remaining
alive in the Ship; and having demanded of Petrina the reason why he had with
such obstinacy fought against 10 Ships? He answered, That it was not
accustomary to suffer the Ships belonging to the Republic, to fall into the
Hands of the Enemy; and that in case he had not been wounded, he would have
blown the Ship up, rather than have seen the Turks become Masters of her: In
fine, whilst the Turks were Aboard, Pillaging and Plundering what they could
find, The St. Iseppo sinks.
about four Hours in the Night the Ship sunk with all the Cannon; only some few
Seamen and Soldiers getting the Skiff, when it was very Dark, made their way
for Milo, where finding a French Tartana, they were thence transported to the
Armata. This Fight, though unfortunate, was yet Glorious to the Venetians; and
for that reason, though it happened at the beginning of the Year, we shall yet in
honor to that Republic conclude their Campaign with this glorious Action, and
proceed to the next Year; in which we shall find the Imperial Forces much more
fortunate, and crowned with Glory and Success, than in the preceding Year.

Anno 1691.
Turks having the last Year regained Nissa, Widin, and Belgrade, with some
other Advantages, began to recover their Courages, which before were sunk very
low, and would gladly have accepted any tolerable Conditions of Peace
whatsoever; but now as there was no speaking thereof on less Terms, than a
Surrender of all that the Emperor had conquered and gained from the Turks in
Hungary; so this Resolution was heightened and confirmed in them by the
Mediation which the Ambassadors of England and Holland had offered and pressed
upon them; The Turks despise a Peace.
wherefore the War going forward, the Grand Seignior returned to pass his
Winter at Constantinople, where, and in the Black-Sea, six or eight great Ships
were put on the Stocks, to serve the next Summer against the Venetians, on the
Coast of Morea, with which addition to their Naval Force, they hoped to
overmatch the Venetian Fleet, and do great Feats on the Coast of Morea.

The English Trade in a bad condition.
In the mean time the English Trade in Turkey was in a most unhappy and
unfortunate Condition; for it had not been long since the terrible, and
affrighting Earthquake, which had about two Years before, (as we have already
related) destroyed the whole City of Smyrna; and by an irruption of Fire,
consumed vast quantities of Goods belonging to the English Levant Company; and
what was of great Consideration, the Books, Accounts, and Papers of the
Merchants perished with them. After this amazing Judgment of God, the War
breaking out between England and France, the Navigation for Merchant-Ships,
both in the Mediterranean Seas, and in the Ocean, became very hazardous,
especially for Ships of so great a value, as those from Turkey, which were
sufficient to open the Eyes, and tempt the Avarice of the French at the Expense
of a strong Fleet to lie in wait, and watch for them, of which the Interested
were so sensible, that some of the Ships lay two Years at Smyrna, The Turkey
Trade in a bad condition.
before they could take the Courage and Resolution to adventure on so hazardous
a Voyage; but Necessity having no Law, for they must either perish in Port, or
proceed, in which doubtful case they chose the latter, and with the Blessing of
God arrived safe at Leghorn; where having joined a strong Squadron of 16 Men of
War commanded by Sir Francis Wheeler, they proceeded for England, and some of
the Merchantmen being stout Ships, and of considerable defense, they esteemed
themselves equal to any force the French could send against them: But whilst
they sailed forward without fear of any danger from their Enemies, the French
having had Advice of all their Motions, and of that great Treasure they
carried, thought it a Prize fit for their Royal Navy, and accordingly
dis-speeded Monsieur Tourville, with all their great Ships out of Breast, to
cruise upon them, and so well timed their Affair, that they had certainly taken
sight of them, had it not pleased God to cover them with a thick Mist, The
Turkey Ships arrive in England.
which lasted until such time, as they were out of their reach, and having a
prosperous Wind, arrived safe in England in the Month of July, to the great Joy
and Triumph of the Merchants.

But to proceed to the Wars in Hungary? January.
Count Tekely in the beginning of the Month of January appeared with a good
Body of Men at the Passage of Terez, against whom the Prince of Hanover was
detached with a strong Party; The Prince of Hanover killed.
but he being of a Valiant and a warm Spirit, natural to that most Illustrious
Family, advanced so far with a few Men before his Troops, that unexpectedly he
fell into an Ambuscade which lay hidden and covered in Hedges and Bushes; where
receiving a whole Volley of Small-shot, he was with one of his Men, (who died
by his side) pierced with several Bullets near a Village called Sernist, and
though the General followed close afterward with a strong Body, yet he came too
late to save this Hopeful and Gallant Prince, though not to repulse the Enemy,
who at the noise of his coming, fled with all the precipitate haste they were
able.

But Colonel Pohland was more successful in his Undertaking; for he having
given Orders to Antonio the chief Captain of the Rascians, to drive away all
the Cattle which were grazing about the Castle of Facket, and whilst he was
executing the same, the Turks sallied out upon him with all their force, but
with such ill success, that being beaten, and forced to retire unto their
Castle; Pohland and his Men rushed in with them at the same time, Facket taken
and burned.
and cut down 500 of their best well-mounted Spahees, besides the Foot
belonging to the Garrison, which was surrounded with a double Ditch, and beset
with Palisadoes; the which having plundered, they afterward Burnt, and left it.

This Success was seconded by another upon the Palanca, or Fort called Waradin;
in which was a Guard of 200 Men, the which they stormed and entered, As also a
Fort called Waradin.
killed all the Garrison, and burnt the Fort, and treated it in the same manner
as they had done Facket.

After this Excursion Colonel Pohland having retired to his Quarters to refresh
his Men, the General of the Walachians gave a false Alarm near the Pass of
Fackau; but in reality marched with most of his Troops to a Place called
Karansebes, spoiling and destroying the Country round about; but Pohland having
notice thereof, attacked them, and both he with his Dragoons, and Captain
Antonio with his Rascians, attacked the General so briskly, that he was forced
to retreat with the loss of 300 of his Men, and of all the Spoil and Plunder
which they had taken.

In revenge hereof the Turks, and Tartars consisting of a very strong Body,
intended to break into Transylvania by way of the Iron-Gate, of which Pohland
and Antonio having notice, they posted themselves in such an advantageous
place, that falling on them by way of Surprise, they routed them, and killed
upwards of 1000 Men on the place, took more than 300 Prisoners, with much
Baggage, Horses, and Booty.

February.
In the beginning of the Month of February, continual Skirmishes happened with
various Successes, as if both sides intended to practice and exercise
themselves against the time of the great Battle which was to be fought this
Year at Salankement.

In the first place the Garrison of Great Waradin made an Excursion toward
Debrezin, and had the fortune to meet not far from thence, with a weaker Party
of Germans and Hungarians, of which they killed several, and took 40 Prisoners;
but they did not long enjoy the pleasure of this Success; for Count Nigrelli
having notice thereof, detached Lucas Janos, a Lieutenant Colonel of Horse, to
pursue the Turks, whom he overtook and surprised in their Retreat, Some Turks
of Great Waradin defeated.
killed 200 of them, and released the 40 Prisoners, with about 450 Horse, which
the Turks had taken in that Adventure. Some other Turkish Parties had passed
the Ti^iscus upon the Ice, but were forced to retreat with great precipitation.

Likewise 400 Turks which had passed the Danube near Illock, Several Skirmishes.
were met by 300 Rascians, under the Command of Captain Tosar, who killed about
140 of them, and took 40 more with three Standards, some good Horses, and other
Booty.

In like manner the Turks appeared with a Body of Men before the Castle of
Novi, Novi delivered to the Turks.
which they forced to surrender upon Capitulations; but the Croats desirous to
regain it, marched with a Body of Men toward the place; which the Turks with a
like Body of Men resolved to oppose; whereupon a Fight ensued between these two
little Armies, in which the Turks were worsted, The Turks worsted.
1000 of them being killed on the spot, many Prisoners taken, and amongst them
a Pasha, with several other principal Turks.

The Croats encouraged with this Success, prosecuted their design against Novi,
and stormed the place; the which being provided with a strong Garrison, and
fresh Troops marching for its relief, the Croats retired with their Prisoners
and Booty, in very good order.

The Turks more active, than fortunate, sallied out again this month from Lugos
to pass the Marosch, and by the way upon the Ice, to make an Excursion into
Transylvania. Colonel Pohland having notice hereof, designed with his 400
Dragoons joined to the 1000 Rascians under Command of Antonio, to stop them in
their march; and being advanced so far as Dobra, intelligence was given him,
that the Enemy was returned to Lugos; The Garrison of Lugos make a sally.
upon which, being desirous to try his fortune, Pohland drew up his Regiment of
400 Men in view of the place, placing his Rascians in a certain Ambuscade, well
covered and undecerned; The Turks seeing so small a number drawn up before
them, detached from the Town a Body of 700 Spahees, and 100 Tartars, to take a
view of them: Upon appearance of this Party, the Dragoons retired to the
Ambuscade, into which the Turks unwarily pursuing them, unhappily were fallen;
and seeing their danger, betook themselves to a precipitate and disorderly
flight toward their Forts; but being closely pursued, Are put to flight.
the Rascians and Dragoons, entered the Palanca together with the Turks,
cutting down and killing all that were before them. In this Confusion, The Town
and Castle of Lugos taken.
many of the Turks betook themselves to the Castle, but with so much haste,
that they had not time to draw the Bridge up after them; so that the Rascians
passing thereon, cut down one of the Castle Gates with their Battle-Axes; and
being come to the last Gate, the Turks hung out a white Flag, desiring to
Capitulate; the which admitted of no long dispute, it being in a moment Agreed,
That those who were in the Castle should have their Lives given them, and
securely Convoyed to Temeswaer; there were remaining in all no more than 152
fighting Men, with their Tefterdar, or Treasurer, Bey or Governor of the
Castle: Out of the whole number of 1000 effective Men, as they were before this
fight began; the same according to Capitulation, were safely conducted to
Temeswaer; the remainder being 850, were killed in this Action; on the other
side, 10 Germans were killed, and about 100 Rascians, besides the wounded; of
which there were some Rascians, and 22 Germans, amongst which Pohland was shot
through the Arm. In this place of Lugos, four Brass Guns, and one Mortar piece
were taken with 15 Standards. After which 700 Rascians, and 100 Dragoons, were
left for a Garrison in the place.

The News of this Success encourageing all the Imperialists round about, the
Hungarians in the Garrison at Beche, The Garrison of Bech makes a Salley.
about eight Leagues distant from Segedin, sallied out with a Party of Horse
and Foot, and met a Party of Tartars, not far from Zatmar, pillaging and
robbing the Country, the which he having attacked with great vigor, they
returned with 200 Heads, together with two of their Captains Prisoners, and 300
Horses. Another Party of Hungarians of the Garrison of Zento, met with a Party
of 60 Turks, of which they killed 20, and made 40 Prisoners; and in their
return they took the Palancha of Cariawiez, and killed all the People, and
found a rich Booty in it.

The Garrison of Segedin surprise Chonad.
The Garrison of Segedin being informed of all these Successes of their
Neighbors, were resolved not to sit idle, but to try their fortune in the same
manner; and accordingly by break of Day, attacked the City of Chonad, and
entered it by surprise, before the Turks knew that their Enemy was near them:
All in the Town were killed; and those in the Castle being terrified by the
Flames round about them, abandoned the place the night following.

These frequent Misfortunes of the Turks made them more cautious and
circumspect in all their Motions for the future, retiring and keeping
themselves close in their strong Holds, and Fortresses. On the other side, the
Imperial Court took all possible care to reinforce their Army, and make it more
strong and numerous than it had been the last year: To which end, Orders were
given to repair and strengthen the Fortifications of Buda and Esseck; and
especially the latter, where the Counterscarps were enlarged, and two whole,
and two half Batteries were raised; and the Ice of the Danube, (for it was now
the month of March) being thawed, March.
the River was open to bring all necessary Materials for the Fortifications,
whereby that work went on with all Diligence. This Employment did not hinder
the Governor of Esseck from making some Attempts on the Turks; the which he
prosecuted with some vigor, for having given Orders to a Captain of Walkowar,
Percilia by Name, with 400 Hussars and Heydukes, to fall into the Dominion of
the Turks: He accordingly surprised Irrick, Irrick surprised, with much Booty
taken.
burnt and plundered, and put all to Fire and Sword: He destroyed also the
Neighboring Villages, and cut down all the Turks and Tartars who had their
Quarters in those Parts: In this Action Percilia got so considerable a Booty,
that he laded 70 Wagons with the Spoil, besides a considerable number of
stately Horses; only 40 Turks of Note and Quality were made Prisoners; and
several Standards, as a signal of Victory, were sent to Vienna. With this
Booty, a great quantity of Copper-Money was taken for payment of the Turks and
Tartars, together with 12000 Ducats in Gold, and 3000 in Silver, with Clothing
for the Soldiers, and rich Habits belonging to the General Officers. The
Report of this Action being noised abroad, a Pasha of that Country, A Pasha
pursues them, but recires.
called Kathana Mustapha, with 200 Horse pursued and overtook them; but finding
them too strong for him, and preparing to attack him, he retired and saved
himself in a Castle not far distant from thence. Nor was this all; for
Percilia, meeting with another Party of Tartars, caused his Trumpets to sound a
Turkish March: In answer to which, the Tartars called, and spoke to them in the
Turkish Language, which Percilia returned with good Blows, falling on them so
suddenly, Percilia routs a Body of Tartars.
that they entirely routed them, took all their Colors, and a good Booty, and
released many Christians which had been enslaved by the Tartars; in which
Action, and in the former, they killed 1200 Turks and Tartars, and so returned
safe with all their Prisoners and Booty to Walkowar and Esseck.

A like Exploit was done by Antonio, Captain of the Rascians, who having joined
with 600 Heydukes, and 400 Hussars, attacked a Castle, called Karakowar, a
place situate on a high Rock, and by a Stratagem took it, Karakowar taken.
and found therein great quantities of Corn; the which he distributed amongst
his Men; only he put a Garrison into the place, and lest with them 2000 Sacks
of Corn for their Subsistence.

Though the Turks had the last year been more successful than they had been any
time during the War; yet by their long and tedious Marches, and by the Losses
they had sustained in small Parties beforementioned, they could not put
themselves into a posture of taking the Field until the middle of the month of
July: Howsoever, in the mean time, they made great preparations both by Land
and Water; ordering their Troops from the remotest parts of Asia to march for
Hungary; several of their Ships laden with Ammunition and Provisions arrived at
Widin, with design to transport the same to Belgrade, where the Magazine of
Stores was to be made. Antonio, who was now made a Colonel, had notice hereof,
and suffered two of their small Ships to pass by, without interruption;
herewith the Turks being encouraged, sent 10 more; but these Antonio attacked,
and took two of them, and two more of them were taken by the Rascians near
Modava, the rest returned back to Widin.

May.
These great Preparations made by the Turk obliged the Emperor to do the like;
and accordingly a great Train of Artillery, with vast quantities of Ammunition,
Bullets, Bombs, and Carcasses, were sent down the River to Buda and Esseck; at
the latter of which places the General Rendezvous of the Imperial Army was
appointed.

The Turks on the other side began to draw some Troops out of their Garrisons
of Great Waradin and Temeswaer, consisting of 200 Foot, and 1000 Horse,
carrying some great Guns with them in their march, seeming, as if they intended
an Attempt upon Lugos, with hopes to surprise it; of which Antonio having had
some intelligence, happily met with them; and having a stronger Body of Horse
and Dragoons, fell on the 200 Foot, and defeated them, killed 61 of them on the
place, took some Prisoners, the rest saving themselves in the Marshes and Woods
adjacent: By some of these Prisoners, Antonio received Information, that the
1000 Horse were marched toward Lugos, and accordingly directing his Course
thither, he surprised and took several of them who were separated from the
rest; and causing all the Rascian Drums, Trumpets, and Kettle-Drums to sound,
they struck such a Terror in the Turks, that they fled from their several
Quarters with such Confusion, that dispersing themselves, many of them were
taken, and amongst them, an Aga, with many other principal Turks.

The time now approaching near for Action, 1690. June.
Count Guido of Staremberg drew out several Troops which were quartered in the
Neighborhood, into a Body; the other Troops which lay about Pest, where they
had had their Winter Quarters, were drawn over to the opposite side, where
joining with those of Buda, they encamped at Souseberg: Whilst these Troops
were drawing together, a Party of Rascians surprised and took Titul, in which
they found 400 Turks, and put them all to the Sword. In this interim, General
Veterani received Intelligence, That 300 Ships laden with Provisions, under the
Convoy of 4000 Men, were speedily designed from Widin to Belgrade, for
subsistence of that place; and hereupon the General sent Orders to the
Colonels, Pohland and Antonio, to intercept them in their passage. These two
Braves having joined their Forces, making together 4000 Men, lay in wait for
the Enemy about two days, and on the third, seeing them begin to appear, they
drew their Forces so close together, that they seemed not to make above 400 Men
in all: The Turks contemning so small a number, detached a Party of 1000
Jannizaries to attack them; which running upon them with fury and
precipitation, were so rudely treated by the Rascians, that the Turks were
forced to send a stronger Party to their assistance; the which also were so
bravely received, that above 1000 Turks were killed on the place, and many
drowned in their retreat; but the Ships betaking themselves to the other side
of the River, were saved.

Nor were the Rascians less fortunate, some days afterward having taken 400
Wagons laden with Ammunition and Provisions in their passage from Belgrade to
Temeswaer, besides several Prisoners, amongst which were three Turks of good
Quality.

Another strong Party of Rascians making an Incursion near Mitrovitz, attacked
Kathana Mustapha, and killed 1500 of his Men on the place, took several
Prisoners, four Guns, and all his Baggage; upon which the Turks quitting
Mitrovitz, the Rascians entered and possessed themselves of it.

These Successes being the Preludes to the ensuing Campaign, were good Omens of
a happy and glorious Victory, the truth whereof will speedily appear, by what
is to follow before the Conclusion of this Year.

By all the Misfortunes which had attended the Turks in this War, it was
believed not only at Vienna, but concluded as well in England, as in all parts
of Germany, that the Turks were become weary of the War, Turks had already
given Proofs of their Inclinations to a Peace by the Ambassadors, which
(contrary to the Custom of the Turks, and which had never been practiced
before) had sent their Ambassadors in a manner to supplicate Peace with the
Emperor, and who remained still in the Imperial Dominions, though confined to the
Castle of Puttendorf, in the nature of Prisoners; the which was excused by the
Austrians, by the constant practice of the Turks, who had for the most part
Imprisoned Ambassadors, or put Guards upon them, at all times when their
Negotiations succeeded not; or that Propositions were offered not very pleasing
to the Grand Seignior.

But be it how it will, it being now evident, that both Parties had need of a
Peace, no Princes appeared capable of the Office of Mediation, but only William
King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Provinces, being
both Friends to the Port, and to the Emperor and his Allies.

About that time, Sir William Trumball, sent by King James II. to reside
Ambassador at Constantinople, being recalled, Sir William Hussy, one of the
Members of the Turkey Company, Sir Will. Hussy chosen Ambassador for Turkey.
was Elected by that Company, according to their Privileges, to reside
Ambassador at the Ottoman Port: And being afterward presented to His Majesty
King William, to receive His Royal Consent and Confirmation, he was accepted by
His Majesty, and received his Commission and Instructions accordingly; by which
he was appointed in the Name of King William and Queen Mary, to Offer unto the
Sultan Their Majesty's Mediation.

For better effecting of which, Sir William Hussy was appointed to take a
Journey by Land to the Ottoman Port, and in his way to call at Vienna, there to
receive such Directions about Treating this Peace as should be delivered him by
the Emperor, the King of Poland, and the State of Venice, then in an Alliance
together.

Sir William Hussy not leaving England until the latter end of the year 1690.
and having his Lady, with her Women in his Company, he arrived not at Vienna
until the beginning of the Winter; when the Danube being frozen up, and no
passage without great danger by Land; and the Instructions according to the
slow Motions of the Imperial Court not formed, nor delivered to the hands of
Sir William Hussy until toward the Spring; he arrived not at Adrianople till
the Month of June, where the Grand Vizier was still remaining, and preparing
for his march with the Army toward Belgrade. But before he departed, he first
gave Audience to Sir William Hussy the English Ambassador; at which, little
passing besides Ceremony, no Judgment could be made of the Viziers Inclinations
to a Peace, whose Thoughts were taken up with the Contrivances for the War; for
the Turks being resolved to try the fortune of the following Campaign, would
not much hearken to Proposals of Peace, especially being offered with an Uti
Possidetis, The Grand Vizier no^ inclined to a Peace.
that is, to make short work, That both Parties should be contented with what
they had in Possession, and so an Amnesty to pass. What the Vizier had in his
Mind, he was not willing to declare; but by the Sequel it appeared, that he
resolved to Fight, and to adventure his own Life with the Fortune of the
Ottoman Empire, on the hazard of a Battle, esteeming it more glorious to die in
the Field, than poorly and meanly in a private Chamber by a Cord applied to his
Neck by the Hands of two Executioners: With these thoughts the Grand Vizier
proceeded to Belgrade to Head the Army, which was full of Hope and Assurance of
Victory, under the Auspicious Conduct of this Kuperlee, Son of Old Kuperlee,
and Brother to that Prudent and Moderate Vizier, who subdued Candia, and put an
end to the Venetian War, The Turks in hope of Victory under this Grand Vizier.
which had lasted for 27 or 28 Years; for the Turks attribute more to the
Fortune of a Man, and of his Family, and the Stars under which he is Born, than
to his Wisdom, Conduct and Experience: And for this reason, the Turks so often
change their Ministers, doing as Gamesters do with their Dice and Cards,
throwing them away, in hopes by this Change, to change their Fortune.

In this manner, as we said, the Grand Vizier marching hastily away to the
Frontiers, The English Ambassador hastens to Constantinople,
the Business of the Mediation went not forwards, but this great Work being at
a stand, Sir William Hussy proceeded to Constantinople, which has for many
Years been the usual place of Residence for the English Ambassadors.

On the 18th of this Month of June, Sir William Hussy made a Solemn Entry into
the City, And makes his Entry.
being met on the way by at least 50 of the English Nation, all well and
bravely mounted on Horseback, with rich Furniture and Clothing. Moreover, to
make this Solemnity the more splendid, the Holland Ambassador the Here
Colliers, sent his two Brothers with the Officers of his Court, to make up the
Train, and in this manner the English Ambassador was conducted in great Order
and Triumph to his House at Pera.

Much about the time, or perhaps the same Day that Sir William Hussy departed
from Adrianople, The Death of Sultan Solomon.
being the 12/22 of June, Sultan Solomon died at that place; the News of which
being known and divulged every where to the People in the space of five Hours
afterward; the Mufti, Caimacham, Kadileskier, Nakib Effendi, and all the other
great Men then present at Adrianople, assembled together, and without any delay
proclaimed Sultan Achmet, Sultan Achmet, Brother of Solomon, proclaimed Emperor.
Brother of the Deposed Mahomet, and Deceased Solomon, for Emperor of the
Ottoman Empire; and having first set him on the Throne, and kissed the Hem of
his Vest in token of Obedience, he was carried to St. Jub, as accustomary, on
Horseback; where having his Sword girt to him by the Mufti, he was reconducted
back to the Seraglio amidst the Throngs of People, who attended him through the
Streets with Prayers, and loud Acclamations for his Prosperity and long Life:
And solemn Prayers were publicly made in two several Moschs, which continued
from Break of Day, until five a Clock in the Evening, all loudly praying for
the Prosperous and Auspicious Inauguration of the new Sultan, and also for the
Soul of the Deceased Solomon.

Sultan Achmet being thus exalted to the Throne, the common People began to
expect a change of Fortune, conceiving higher thoughts of this Prince, than
they had done of the late Solomon, who merited no other Character than what we
have already given him at the beginning of his Reign. The former was dull and
heavy, studious, and given to Books, and much of the Behavior of a Dervis; The
Charact^r of Sultan Achmet.
but this present Achmet was more lively, free, and jocund in his Humor; he
was both a Poet, and a Musician, made Verses, and sang them, played well upon
the Cittern, and Colosseo, after the Persian manner.

In his Jovial Humors he would sometimes make Visits to the Disconsolate
Mahomet his Brother, singing and playing before him with his Instruments,
bidding him be Merry, and telling him that he should not lament his Fortune. I
have been (said he) a Prisoner for 40 Years, during which time you were Sultan,
and did what you pleased; now my time is come, and yours may return: And then
he would take his Instruments and play, and sing; saying, Brother you have let
me live, and so shall you, and be m^rry: And in this good Humor he would often
pass his time, to the great comfort of his Deposed Brother.

The Body of Solomon deceased, was embalmed, and brought to the Royal Mosch,
built at Constantinople by Solomon the Magnificent, and there Interred. Solomon
interred.


So soon as Sultan Achmet came to the Throne, and the Ceremonies, and
Solemnities past, he immediately called the Mufti, and gave order to dispatch
away with all expedition two Capugi-Bashees, the one to the Grand Vizier with a
new Seal, The Grand Vizier confirmed.
a Scimetar studded and set with Jewels, and a Coftan, or Vest lined with
Sables, as an encouragement and evidence of his Confirmation in the Office of
Prime Vizier: In this manner another Messenger was dispatched with the like
Present to the Tartar Han, with Orders forthwith to march unto Belgrade, and
join the Grand Vizier with his Forces, which having been divided into three
Bodies, the Han could not supply the Vizier with more than 8000 Men for the
present Campaign

These Forces with several Asiatick Pasha's, The strength of the Turkish Army.
amongst which there was a considerable Body of Curds, or Gordi; and another of
2000 Arabs passed over to the Vizier's Army; with which, and with an Army of
12000 Albanians, the Turkish Army was so increased, that it was esteemed to
amount unto 100000 Men; and in reality, and according to a moderate
Computation, it did not amount unto less than 80000 good experienced, and
disciplined Soldiers: Besides which 10000 Men were ordered for Great Waradin,
under the Command of Topal Husaein, Pasha of Silistria, and Seraskier, for
Reinforcement of that Garrison.

In the mean time Tekeli being fallen under the jealousy of the Port, he was
forbidden to enter into Transylvania, where the People having a desire that the
Son of Apafi should be placed over them, rather than Tekeli; the latter was
commanded not farther to meddle in the Affairs of Transylvania, but only in the
Concernments of the Upper Hungary.

At this time some Mutinies happened amongst the Soldiers of the Turkish Army,
upon Pretense and Demand of Donative due to the Militia at the Inauguration of
every new Sultan, which, according to ancient Custom, was six Dollars to every
Soldier, besides the constant Pay; but this amounting unto a vast Sum, which
was not at present to be found, the Soldiers were forced to content themselves
with fair Words of being paid at the end of the Campaign, and at their return
home; in which matter, that real Compliance might be made with the Soldiery,
when time should come, Great Taxes on the Christians.
the Christians were taxed over all the Empire at four Hungarian Ducats a Head;
that is, Men of some Estate, and two Ducats for those of Inferior Condition;
portrait of Ottoman Sultan Ahmed II The Grand Seignior Achmat the 11.15th.
Emperor of the Turks was proclaimed Sultan the 12th of June 91.
M. Vander Gucht (...)
as also in like manner the Armenians and Jews were taxed; July.
from which, it was believed, that a vast Sum of Money would arise.

The Grand Vizier, that he might secure his Government the better, during his
absence in the War, had before his departure caused several of the principal
Governors in Asia to be strangled, Principal Men in Asia put to Death.
and amongst them, a Seditious Mutinous Fellow, called Charachehaia; who might
have been the Author of Dangerous Commotions; howsoever there still remained a
desperate Rebel in Asia, who with 1000 Men, roved over all the Countries of
Sivas, or Sebaste; but that being a Country far distant from the Port, gave
little care or apprehension of danger to the Vizier, or Grand Seignior. But
that which administered most of fear at Home, was the Commotion of the Common
People, caused by the Copper Money; which having been permitted to pass for
Current by the Government, was yet refused to be received in Payment by them;
the which caused such Confusion in Trade, and especially in buying Provisions
at the Markets, The Copper Money the cause of trouble.
that there seemed a Dearth or Famine almost in the Countries; upon which many
bold Complaints and Menaces were carried to the Caimacham, who was forced to
give the People good Words, assuring them that Silver Money was Coining, and
that the Copper Money, August.
by Hattesheriff of the Grand Seignior, should be no longer Current; the which
for the present gave a stop to the Murmurings, and prevented a general
Insurrection; though the great scarcity of Corn, and all Provisions, both in
Constantinople, and Adrianople, made the People very uneasy, and apt to break
out into Mutinies.

It is the Custom in the World, that when a Prince comes first unto the Throne,
for the People to be inquisitive concerning his Humor, Temper, and Abilities
for the weight of Government.

The Character of this Sultan Achmet being now the common Discourse, he was
represented to be much more lively, brisk, and quicker of Apprehension than his
Brother and Predecessor Sultan Solomon, who (as we have said) was as dull and
as heavy as an Ox; a weak, simple Man, more fit to be a Dervis than an
Emperor; The Character of Sultan Achmet.
but this Achmet was said to delight to ride on Horseback, and to throw the
Gerit, a Sport used by the Cavaliers, and mettled Sparks and Soldiers amongst
the Turks. Farther, he was said to love Justice, and to be rigorous in the
execution thereof; an Enemy to Tyranny, and Oppressors of his People; but a
great Admirer of the Fair Sex; which Qualities were thought very laudable, and
for them, whether true, or false, he was had in high esteem with the People;
and particularly because he was entered into the Project of Coining Silver
Money, and debasing the Copper to half the value of what it lately passed for
in ordinary Payments.

But the important Affair of all was the Success of a Battle, which the Grand
Vizier resolved to adventure, both in confidence of the strength of his Army,
and his numerous Troops, which now were said to amount unto 87226, Horse and
Foot, The force of the Turkish Army.
as they were counted by faithful Persons, whom the Grand Vizier had appointed
to tell them, as they passed the Bridges over the Save; besides 3000 Seamen,
and some Spahees from Asia, which lagged behind, and the Rabble which attend
Armies.

This great Force, The French Ambassador persuades to a Battle.
with the encouragement which the French Ambassador gave the Grand Vizier to
put the Dispute to the Decision of a Battle, promising him undoubted Victory,
prevailed very much with the Vizier, who considering the Applications which the
English and Dutch Ambassadors made for a Peace, was an Argument both to him and
all the Turkish Officers, that the Emperor was in a dangerous condition, and
unable to maintain the War: Howsoever when the French Ambassador was instiling
this Consideration into the Mind of the Chimacham at Adrianople, and that as
his Master had already brought great Ruin and Destruction into the Dominions
of the Emperor, so he would assist and support the Grand Seignior in his Wars
both with Men and Money. To which the Caimacham made this Answer. That if it
were true, what the Ambassador alleged, the Imperialists could not be in such
a condition as at present to come down upon the Ottoman Armies, and be able to
overmatch them both in Numbers and Valor: What diversion then (said he) has
he given to the Power of the Emperor? If he has Wars with the English and
Hollanders, what is that to us? We believe nothing but what we see, nor esteem
of any thing, but what brings us immediate and manifest relief.

Sir William Hussy the English Ambassador, as we have said, Sir William Hussy
at Constantinople.
being arrived at Constantinople, was admitted three Days afterward to an
Audience with the Caimacham, who received him with great State and Pomp, and in
a Friendly manner demanded of him the Particulars of his long Journey, and
assured him of the Protection of the Port, both for his own Person, and
security of his Nation; after which, and that the usual Ceremonies were
performed, the Ambassador and his Followers were vested with 22 Coftans, which
was as many as at any time were given to the French Ambassadors at other times,
18 or 19 were bestowed on the English; but now the Number was made equal, to
show that the Esteem they made of the English Nation, was equal with that of
the French.

But how civil soever was the Behavior of the Chimacham toward the English
Ambassador, the Grand Vizier seemed to be of another Temper; for he not only
neglected the Addresses of the English, but privately gave the French
Ambassador to understand all that had passed between him and the English; and
this Confidence between the Turks and the French was much increased at that
time, by the arrival of a skilful Engineer from France, well practiced in all
Military Exercises and Arts, relating to Mines, Sieges, Encampments, etc. and
with him came 22 French Officers, who were all clothed in good Green Cloth,
after the Turkish Fashion; and with these, Monsieur Darmans a famous French
Physician, The Friendship between the Turks and French.
was recommended by the French Ambassador to the Vizier, who took this Offer
the most kindly of any thing; for as the Turks have very few Physicians of
their own, they highly esteem those who come from the Parts of Christendom; so
that the Grand Vizier took this Doctor with him, and kept him always near his
own Person.

August.
The Ambassador, Sir William Hussy, having continued some few Days at
Constantinople, to settle the Affairs of the Turkey-Company, and his own
Domestic, and private Concernments, Count Marsigli.
Count Marsigli arrived from Vienna, bringing a Chiaus with him: This Marsigli
had the Title of Secretary to Sir William Hussy, appointed by the Emperor to
assist in the Matters of Peace, being a Person well practiced in all the
Treaties relating to the Emperor and the Turks. The same Day that Marsigli
arrived, both he, and Sir William Hussy had a Conference with the Dutch
Ambassador, Here Colier; at which it was resolved to take a Journey to the
Grand Vizier at Belgrade, and there again to press the Reasons and Arguments
for a Peace.

Accordingly the two Ambassadors departed from Constantinople the 11th of
August, and entered into Adrianople the 16th of that Month, with intention to
proceed to Belgrade in a few Days, had not the News of the total Defeat of the
Turkish Army in a Battle given near Salankement, with the Death of the Grand
Vizier, put a stop to their Journey for a while, until a new Vizier should be
created; the which was soon performed, for immediately one Ali Pasha, formerly
Kahya of the deceased Vizier, and late Pasha of Scio, A new Viz^er made.
was constituted in the Place of his Master; and he being commanded to proceed
in 10 or 12 Days, the Ambassadors resolved to accompany him to Belgrade, there
to attend his Motion, and those Overtures which might open a way to a Treaty.

Now since this great Defeat given the Turks, in all appearance might cause an
Alteration, and Change in the Affairs of Christendom, and be improved to a
happy Agreement between the Christians and the Turks; it is most necessary, and
natural to this History, to give a succinct Relation thereof.

The greatest part of the Month of July, The March of the Christian Troops, to
the place of Rendezvous.
was spent in the Marches of the Armies toward the Field of Battle: The Troops
under the Command of the Count de Souches, designing their Marches toward
Esseck, they came to Pax, where they joined with five Companies of Houchins,
and five of Amenzaga's Regiments, and at Mohatz they were reinforced by 6000
Brandenburgers; about the middle of the Month of July, Prince Lewis arrived in
the Camp, being welcomed with all the Cannon of Mohatz, and the same Day he
took a View of all the Troops, at that Place, commanded by General Souches, and
the next Day of the Brandenburgers; which having done, he sent Expresses to the
Army which was behind to hasten their March to Esseck; to which Place the
Prince in Person riding Post, he arrived the 17th of July, where having been
received in the same manner as at Mohatz, Pr. Lewis views the Troops.
he took a View of all the Fortifications of that Place, and of the several
Regiments which were encamped near thereunto: In the mean time the Cavalry of
Count Souches, having passed the Drove, arrived in the Army, and were next Day
followed by the Infantry of that Body; and the Day after that by the 6000
Brandenburgers: So that now the whole Imperial, and Brandenburg Forces being
joined; Orders were sent to the General, Count Aversperg, to send down toward
Segedin, all necessary Materials for Bombing the Places down the River; so that
on the 20th of this Month, the Army decamped from the side of the River Drove,
and marched as far as Bonce, where News being brought that part of the Turkish
Army had passed the Save, a Lieut. Colonel was immediately detached with 150
Germans, and all the Rascian Foot, and commanded to Embark on Boats, and hasten
down the Stream to take their Station at Peter Waradin; and for farther
Reinforcement of that Garrison, the Hungarian Heydukes of Illock, were
commanded forthwith to join this Officer at Peter Waradin; so as on all
occasions to be in a readiness to oppose the Enemies Excursions into those
Parts.

The great Army on the 20th joined with the Regiment of Staremberg at Walkowar,
which was esteemed the best in all the Army: The Forces join.
On the 24th they came to Bachin, and there joined with five Companies of Foot
of the Regiment of Archinto, and with the Regiment of Horse of Bassompierre: On
the 26th the Army encamped under Illock, and there rested that Day, when News
was brought, That the Grand Vizier was arrived at Belgrade, and having laid two
Bridges over the Save, he had begun to pass the River with his Army, which
consisted of 100000 Men, extending it self from the Mountains on the side of
the Danube, as far as to the Island of Zigan in the Save.

Besides which numerous Army the Turks had a vast number of Ships and Galleys,
100 of which, under the Command of a Pasha, were sent to attack Titul, with
which coming before the Place he immediately invested it; the Town was
commanded by Captain Those, the Garrison of which consisted only of 120 Germans,
and 200 Rascians, Titul surrendered to the Turks.
and with them he defended the Place for three or four Days; but considering
that for want of Ships, he could not be relieved by Water, nor by Land, by
reason of the vast Deluge of Rains which had filled all the Marshes, and made
them unpassable for the intended Succors; Captain Those capitulated on
Conditions, that the Garrison should be safely conducted to the Army of Prince
Lewis; but this Capitulation was not well observed by the Turks; for as the
Garrison was marching out, the Lieutenant of the Pasha would not suffer the
Rascians to pass, The Turks falsify their Faith.
ordering them all to be put to the Sword; but Captain Those not allowing this
piece of Treachery, and Breach of Faith, he came to high Words with the Pasha;
upon which, the Pasha in a Fury drew his Scimetar; but Captain Those being more
ready than he, July.
killed him with one of his Pistols, and with the other shot another Turk dead,
who stood next to him: Hereupon the Quarrel growing high beyond all
Reconciliation, or means of Agreement, Captain Those caused his Men to fire upon
the Turks, who were then 4000 Men strong; yet this handful of Men, armed with
Despair, stoutly defended themselves, until being overpowred with Numbers, they
were all put to the Sword, except some few who were made Prisoners, and six
Rascians and one German, who made their Escape from this Bloody Action; the
which howsoever cost the Turks dear, for they lost 500 of their Men, who were
killed on the Place, and as many wounded.

Peter Waradin fortified.
Prince Lewis continuing his March, arrived the 29th of this Month at Peter
Waradin with the gross of his Army, attended with all the Ships and Vessels,
which carried the Provisions, Ammunition, and other Necessaries: This Place
being very advantageous for its Situation, was ordered by Command of the Prince
to be fortified; and here it was that a Regiment of Horse of the Duke of
Newburg, and a Battalion of the Regiment of Huschin, with 19 Fieldpieces
joined the Army.

On the 30th of this Month of July, a Rascian Peasant, or Country-fellow, was
taken, sent by the Vizier for a Spy, to take a view of the Christian Camp; whom
the Prince would not suffer to be punished; but returned him back to the Grand
Vizier, to give him notice, that he was marching toward him with his whole
Army; the truth of which was verified soon after by the ensuing Battle, which,
as we shall see, was given on the 19/9 of the Month of August.

This interval of time, Preparations for a Battle.
between the last of July, and the 19th of the following Month, was taken up in
recruiting the Forces, and other Preparations for that great Day; so that on
the beginning of this Month, 6000 Rascians, and 3000 Hungarians were added to
the Army, under the Command of General Batthiani, besides 2000 Bavarian Foot
commanded by Colonel Zacko; so that now the whole Imperial Army consisted of
near 66070 Men; with which Body the Prince marched as far as Carlowitz, where
the Army having rested some few Days, they marched to Salankement, and there
encamped; and in the mean time the Turks blew up Titul, making their Escape by
Water to Belgrade.

The Turks hearing of this Advance of the Christian Army, sent 4000 Spahee's
under the Command of Kathana Pasha, to recognize, or take a view of them in
their March; but a Party of Hussars commanded by Raab, and Badiani being sent
out against them, the Turks withdrawing, they retreated back to the Army, and
with them a Christian, who having been a Slave, made his Escape, and reported,
That the whole Turkish Army had already passed the Save; so that the Prince
resolving now to meet them, continued his March to Semblin, a Place near to
Belgrade; between which two Places, nothing but the River intervenes.

The Turks being much stronger in Shipping than were the Christians, they were
always passing up and down the River, so that all the Ships attending the
Imperial Camp were forced to remain at Peter Waradin; from whence, The Turks
strong in Ships, hinder the Provisions of the Army.
with great inconvenience, all Provisions and Ammunition were brought by Land
to the Camp; until such time as General Dunewaldt being come to the Army, had
dispatched 300 Germans, and 200 Hungarians, back to Salankement, to cover and
secure 300 of the Christian Vessels, which were arrived at that place laden
with Provisions; which was of great Relief to the whole Army.

The two Armies being now very near to each other, Parties were daily detached
on both sides to make Discoveries, and bring Intelligence; one of which from
Prince Lewis on the 8th of this Month, Skirmishes in Parties.
had an Encounter with some advanced Guards of the Turks near Semblin, which
upon appearance of the Christians, immediately retreated; and a Fog covering
the whole Turkish Camp on a sudden, that Party returned without being able to
give other Informations.

In like manner the Grand Vizier on the 10th of this Month, came in Person with
all his Horse to take a view of the Christian Camp; upon which the whole Army
was drawn out into Battalia; and some Volunteers, and other Troops, advanced so
far on the Turks, that being attacked by great Numbers of them, they were
repulsed, and droven back with some loss, until the left Wing of the Army (in
which Prince Lewis was in Person) came in to their Succor; howsoever 20 of
them were killed, and the rest were pursued to the very Camp; but in revenge
the Turks were also beaten back, several of them being killed in their Retreat.

The same Day the Imperial Army advanced two Leagues farther toward Semblin,
where they posted themselves in such a manner, that the Danube was on their
Backs, and the left Wing guarded with Chevaux de Frize, which are a kind of
Turn-pikes to keep off the Horse from breaking into the Foot.

On the 12th the Army advanced in order of Battle, within Cannon-shot of the
Turks Retrenchments, The Armies near.
near to Semblin; being attacked on all sides by many Hundreds of the Enemies
Horse, which never stood any Ground, but retreated to their Camp, which was so
posted on a rising Hill, or Eminence, that the Generals judged it not to be
attacked without great disadvantage.

On the 13th, whilst the Army rested, a certain Page to the Major of the
Regiment of Piccolomini, who had been taken Prisoner formerly by the Turks,
made his Escape, and informed Prince Lewis, that the Turks had certainly made
an Attack on the Christian Army, had they not been dissuaded by the French, who
advised them not to lose the advantage of their Trenches, but to remain in them
in expectation of being assaulted therein by the Enemy, or at least until they
could draw out into a more advantageous Ground, or until the arrival of the
Tartars, which were hourly expected.

During this time the Officers and Soldiers of the Imperial Army, kept
themselves in a readiness to receive the Enemy; not stripping themselves of
their Clothes, for several Nights.

That Evening it was concluded at a Council of War, not to engage the Enemy on
that Ground, but to return back to Salankement, because that there being a
necessity to bring all the Provision from thence for the Army; the Convoys
could not easily be defended from the Enemies Horse, which in great and strong
Parties lay in continual wait for them: So that on the 14th in the Morning, by
Break of Day, Pr. Lewis marches back to Salankement.
the Trumpets and Drums were ordered to give warning to the Army to prepare for
a March, the Baggage being sent before, and in the mean time, until nine a
Clock in the Morning, the Army stood in view of the Enemy, who moved not out of
their Trenches, sending only a Party of Tekeli's Men to observe their motion.

On the 15th the Army lay still, and so did the Turks; and the next Day Prince
Lewis marched an Hour nearer toward Salankement: And on the 17th proceeding
one Hour farther, the Turks imagined that this Motion was a Flight, little
thinking that it was only in design to Encamp about Salankement, where they
remained near to their Ships laden with Provisions, and where they could choose
the most advantageous Ground for a Battle. The Turks encouraged with this
Imagination, marched after the Christian Army, and fell in the Rear of them
with several Thousands of Horse; but Count Stirum General, and Count Hoffkirken
Major General of the Horse, The Turks repulsed.
charged them so briskly, bestowing some Shot amongst them from their
Fieldpieces, as caused them to retire with loss, and to remain more quiet for
a while. Howsoever about Midnight a great Number of the Enemies Horse, Camels,
and Mules, having been stung by a sort of Venomous Fly, had broke their Halters
and Bridles, and with their Sadles, and Harnesses, An A^arm given.
came running into the Christian Camp, which gave an Alarm to the whole Army:
But that being over, it was expected, that the next Day a Battle would ensue,
which both the Imperial Officers, and Soldiers, did heartily desire. But the
Grand Vizier following the Advice of the French, who were about him in great
Numbers, would not adventure that Day to attack the Army; but instead thereof,
that they might cut off all Communication between the Germans, and Peter
Waradin, they marched half a League beyond them, and there posted themselves
with such haste and diligence, that in 24 Hours they had fortified their Camp
with Regular Walls of a Man's height, and Bastions on which Cannon was
planted, leaving only a narrow Passage for coming in, and going out from the
Camp.

The Germans in danger.
By these means the Turks had almost cut off all Correspondence between the
Imperial Army, and Peter Waradin, and so hindered the passage of all
Provisions, that the Germans had infallibly perished in this unfortunate
occasion, had not God Almighty visibly assisted them by His Omnipotent Hand.

To this another Misfortune happened, the News whereof was brought by a French
Deserter from the Turkish Camp; how that the Regiment of Dragoons of Count
Bucquoy, Commanded by their Major, Count D' Arco in all 1000 brave and well
mounted Men, together with 400 others, sent for Recruits to the Regiment of
Caprara and Hoffkirchen, contrary to the Order of Prince Lewis, were fallen
into the Hands of the Enemies; Count Bucquoy's Regiment cut to pieces.
the occasion whereof was, that these Soldiers preferring the security of their
Baggage before that of their Lives, resolved to take that with them; and so
marching very slowly, they came to stop about two Hours in a Place, distant
about a German League from the Imperial Army; where being attacked, and
surrounded on all sides by the Turks, they defended themselves with much
Bravery for the space of two Hours, The Christians lose all their Provisions.
but at length they were all cut down, not above 30 escaping of the whole
Number of 1400; the Major only was taken Prisoner, and the next Day after the
Battle, was found Chained Hand and Foot in the Enemies Camp.

Besides this the Turks took 250 Wagons carrying Provisions to the Imperial
Army, with a 100 Ships belonging to the Sutlers of the Army; the Men whereof
for the most part were saved, for joining themselves with the Rabble of the
Army, they fought stoutly for their Lives, killing great Numbers of the Turks.

This great Loss was very sensible to the Christians, who having lost all their
Provisions, without hopes of any other Supply, found no other Deliverance and
Safety, but in their Arms, and so resolved on a Battle: The Turks on the other
side growing Arrogant, and bold on these Successes, began now to contemn their
Enemies, and to look only on them as so many lost Men, whom they now condemned,
and sentenced to Destruction, resolving to give them no Quarter in the Field.

The Christian Soldiers thus armed with Despair, on the 19th of this Month of
August, by Break of Day in the Morning, having put themselves into posture of
Battle, 19th,
marched directly toward the Turks; and about Noon both Armies being drawn up,
they faced each other at a small distance. The Prince of Baden Commanded the
right, and Count Dunewaldt the left Wing.

The Turkish Army consisted of about 100000 Men, of which 60000 were the best
Soldiers in all the Ottoman Empire, besides 15000 of the best, The Disposition
of the two Amies.
and most experienced Janisaries; all which Force was advantageously posted,
having the Danube on their Back, and in their Front a deep Ditch, with Earth
thrown up behind them; but their left Wing was not so well fortified, but that
it lay something more exposed to the Christians, whose Army was likewise drawn
up in a Martial Posture.

The greatest part of their Infantry being divided into 20 Battalions; that is
to say, The Regiment of Ernest Staremberg four Battalions, of Souches three, of
Chizzola one, of Guido Staremberg three, of Salm one, of Beck one, of Otting
two, of Brandenburg three, of Caunitz one, of Vaudemont one; the which were
flanked with the two Regiments of Horse of Nieuburg and Holstein, with the
greatest part of the biggest Cannon: The rest of the Army was drawn up after
the usual form of Battle in a right Line opposite to the Enemy; and in this
Posture upon firing a Bomb, which was the Signal given, they all marched in an
equal Line, until they came within 200 Paces of the Enemy; and then the Cannon
on each side began to play: At the first it was intended to attack the Enemies
left Wing, before the right, to give room for the Foot, The Battle of
Salankement.
which was placed on the rising of a Hill opposite to the main, and strongest
Intrenchment of the Turks, which was fortified with 80 Pieces of Cannon; and
also to charge the Enemies Horse, which were drawn up below the Hill in the
Plains, with design that having Overthrown them, to force through the Camp,
unto that part where the Enemies were less fortified and secured. It seems that
the right Wing was something too forward, and began to engage before the left
could come up, being hindered by the high Grass and Bushes; howsoever here was
no staying or retreating for the right Wing; but, on they went, looking on the
Enemy before them, and proceeded to their very Ditches and Intrenchments; but
the Janisaries having a good Parapet, or Breast-work before them, fired so
furiously from thence, that many both of the Chief, and Subaltern Officers were
killed and wounded; and here it was that General Souches upon a numerous Sally
of the Enemy, was forced to give way, until the Foot came up, which was not far
behind; but in the mean time being sustained by the four Regiments of Nieuburg,
Holstein, St. Croix, and Darmstadt under the Command of the Dukes of Holstein
and Aremberg, they advanced to the very brink of the Enemies Retrenchments,
with which Example of Bravery both Horse and Foot, being again animated, the
Infantry made several Attacks on the Enemy, and though they were sometimes
repulsed, yet being relieved, and guided by those brave Officers both of Horse
and Foot; the Fight was continued from three a Clock in the Afternoon, until it
was Night, by which time all the Superior Officers of the Infantry were
killed, excepting only General Guido of Staremberg, and Prince Charles of
Vaudemont, though both of them were also wounded.

Nor was the rest of the Army in the mean time idle; for the Enemy attacking
them in the left Wing, and in the Flank with great fury, were as bravely
repulsed by the Brigades of Castelli and Hoffkirchen; but the Turks rallying
all their Horse into a Body, fell on with greater Fury, in despite of the
small and great Shot, and charged the Brigade of General Sarau, which was part
of the Right Wing: And the Turks being very numerous on that side, they so
over-powred this Brigade, that two of the Battalions were cut down on the
Ground where they stood, in which Action, the Battalions of Otting, Beck, and
also the Old Regiments of Staremberg, and Brandenburg, suffered very much; so
that until that time being about six a Clock, Fortune favored the Turks; and
things had such a dismal and desperate Face, that the Generals themselves began
to despair of saving one Man from this Bloody Action; The Christians in a
dangerous posture.
for here was no Retreat, or Sanctuary, nor Place to fly unto for Succor: And
thus both Officers and Soldiers armed with Despair, redoubled their Endeavors,
and in contempt of Death rushed on the Enemies Squadrons; the which being
observed by those who attended the Baggage, and remained for Reserves, how that
their Companions were beset on all sides, and in a continual Fire, were ashamed
to be Lookers on, and Spectators of this Tragedy, came in to the Succor of
those who were ready to turn their Backs, and with their Cries and Prayers,
gave a stop to their Flight.

Matters standing in this desperate State and Condition, the main Body of the
Army under the Command of the Brandenburg Generals, Barsus and Brandt, came
timely in to the Assistance of Count Sarau, who by these Succors rallied his
Men, and defended his Post, until about an Hour before Night, when the Brigades
of Hoffkirchen, and Castelli, with the left Wing, which at this time was
Commanded by the Prince of Baden in Person, were advancing toward that side of
the Turkish Army, which was not as yet Entrenched, The Christians enter the
Enemies Camp.
and so furiously assaulted them, that by the Divine Assistance, and Arm of the
God of Hosts, visibly appearing for them, they at last forced, and entered the
Enemies Camp, driving them from the rising Grounds where they had planted their
Cannon; which when the Hungarians and Rascians observed, they, who until then
had been something backward, and watched the time to Escape, came thundering
down with renewed Courage, and furiously entered the Turkish Camp, cutting down
all that presented before them; by which means a Way was opened for the right
Wing to advance; and so the Turks being brought into the middle, and attacked
on all sides in a narrow Ground between their Trenches and the Danube, were
entirely subdued, and overcome, and began to fly. And though the Turkish Cavalry
for the most part found a way to escape, through a void Interval laid open for
the right Wing, howsoever the Foot continued to defend themselves so furiously
and firmly in their Trenches, that though the Field was yielded to the
Christians, yet here they received their greatest loss; for this Action cost
the Life of the Duke of Holstein, with a Deluge of Blood, entirely to subdue
the already conquered Enemy.

The Anger, Rage, and Despair of the Turks on one side, and the Fury of the
Christians on the other, was such, that the first scorned to accept Quarter,
and the others not willing to give it; for which reason very few Prisoners were
taken.

The remainder of the Turkish Cavalry, amongst which was the Grand Vizier in
Person, were forced to break their way through the narrow Passages, and
Distances between the Lines, with their usual Cries of Allah, Allah, which is a
calling upon the Name of God: In this Passage many of them fell, and many were
mortally wounded, so that the Roads, to the very Save, were filled with dead
Bodies; and on the other side thereof, the Grand Vizier, with many other
principal Turkish Officers, ended their Days.

In this memorable Battle, which was the most Bloody of any that has happened
in several Ages, the Turks lost in all upwards of 25000 Men, and amongst them
the Grand Vizier; what Officers were killed on both sides, or wounded, appears
in the following List. The Turkish Fleet, bringing their Vessels close to the
Shore, and as near as they could to their Army, landed 5000 Men out of it,
which might have turned the Balance, had they come timely in unto the
Assistance of their Brethren; The Turks land 5000 Men out of their Fleet.
but finding the whole Army in Confusion, and all the Field in disorder, they
retired with much Precipitation Aboard their Fleet.

It would be impossible to describe all the Circumstances, Turns, Changes,
Passages, and Chances of this Battle, which was fought on both sides with
admirable Resolution and Courage; for which those of the Christian Army who
were slain, deserve for ever to be Chronicled in History; and those who
survive, are worthy of a lasting Fame, and Immortal Glory.

Much is owing by all Christendom to the Valor and Conduct of that Noble
General Prince Lewis of Baden; as also to the Marshal-General Count of
Dunewaldt, to Count Souches, General of the Artillery; to Count Stirum, General
of the Horse; and to Lieutenant General Barfus of the Brandenburg Troops,
besides all the Sergeants, Generals, and Officers, who behaved themselves with
that Bravery, Conduct, and Zeal in the Cause of Christendom, and of the Empire,
that they merit to be mentioned with all Honor and Respect, whenever this
Battle comes to be recounted in these present Days, or in future Ages: And so
bloody was this Battle, that the French King, to comfort the Turks, ordered his
Ambassador to tell them, That such another Victory would ruin the Emperor.

After the Battle the Imperialists became Masters of all the Enemies Artillery;
namely, 154 Pieces of Cannon of all sorts, great and small, great Numbers of
Ensigns and Colors; and amongst the rest of the Standard of the Grand Vizier,
with those of the Pasha's, and of the whole Spoil and Plunder of the Field,
with all the Camels, and Mules, and Beasts of Burden belonging to the Camp,
which amongst the Turks are vastly numerous: Also 10000 Tents, 10 Wagons laden
with Copper Money, found in the Vizier's Tent; in the Treasurer's 54 Trunks of
Copper, and 12 with Silver, and 24 Chests of Kaftans. Moreover all the
Standards and Colors belonging to the Regiment of Bucquoy, taken the Day
before by the Turks; 24 Ensigns, and four Horse-Tails were sent to Vienna, and
amongst them the Grand Vizier's Standard, which the Emperor sent to the Pope.

The Loss the Turks have had in this Action, appears irreparable; for about 10
or 12000 of their best Disciplined, and Veterane Janisaries being killed, they
have not as yet been recovered to this very Year of 1694; the which is evident,
for of all the Army they could make in that Year of Turks and Tartars, with
Thousands of raw, and ill composed Troops, consisting of Plow-Men, and
Cow-Boys, they could not make up an Army of 50000 Men; which indeed is
wonderful, and shows the strange Catastrophies of this unstable World; and
deserves our serious Contemplation of the Uncertainty of Humane Affairs? For
whereas the Ottoman Empire, which has been famed in past Ages for Multitudes
and Swarms of Men, by which, over-powering their Enemies by Numbers, rather
than by Valor, made all their Conquest from Basora, as far as Buda, are now
dwindled to a Condition, which many of our smaller Princes in Christendom are
able to equal.

All which we are to attribute to the Almighty Hand of God, who commiserating
the wretched Estate of Christendom, at a time when the Victorious Arms of
France were employed in ruining and laying waste one end of it, the Turks had
Invaded the other, and threatened an entire Desolation of all Germany.

The Killed and Wounded, on one side, and the other, are according to the
following Lists.

A LIST of the Dead and Wounded on the Emperor's side.
Of the Infantry, DEAD.
THE Duke of Holstein, Sergeant-General. Colonels. Count Caunitz. Count
Bucquoy. Lieutenant-Colonels. Count de Petting, of Col. Becks Regiment. Count
Stahrenberg of Chizzola's Regiment. Sergeant-Majors. Fingerman of Daun's
Regiment. N. Groans of Otting's Regiment. Kilch de Lorch of Vaudemont's
Regiment. Captains 15 Lieutenants 6 Ensigns 8 Subaltern Officers, and Common
Soldiers 1724 Sum of the Dead 1761

WOUNDED.
Count Souches General of the Artillery, who Died the 26th of his Wounds.
General-Major Count Guido of Stahrenberg. General-Major Count Aremberg, who
Died the 24th. General-Major Corbelli. Colonels. Prince Charles of Vaudemont.
Count Zacko of the Bavarian Regiment. Lieutenant-Colonels. Count Henry of
Stahrenberg. Baron D'Elmpt of Salms's Regiment. Marquis Bagin of Stahrenberg's
Regiment. Marquis Masler of the Bavarian Regiment. Count Herberstein of Souches
Regiment. Majors. Baron Winkehoven of Beck's Regiment. Wiltprat of
Stahrenberg's Regiment. Baron Lohen of Caunitz Regiment. Captains 33
Lieutenants 33 Ensigns 18 Subaltern Officers and Soldiers 2460 The Sum of the
Wounded 2557

Of the Cavalry, DEAD.
Lieutenant-Colonels. Count Zrin of Caprara's Regiment. Count Moulion of
Stirum's Regiment. George de Werth of Darmstadt's Regiment. Sergeant-Majors.
Permaitinger of Sarau's Regiment. Captains 8 Lieutenants 12 Cornets 3 Subaltern
Officers and Commons 829 Sum of the Dead 852

WOUNDED.
Lieutenant-Colonels. Baron Ketler of Dunewaldt's Regiment. Count Hohenembs of
Nieuburg's Regiment, who Died the 24th. Count Marcin of Holstein's Regiment.
Baron Chauvise of the Regiment of St. Croix. Sergeant-Majors. De Fortenau of
Darmstadt's Regiment. Fischer of Rabutin's Regiment. Captains 16 Lieutenants 20
Cornets 21 A Chaplain of a Regiment 1 Subaltern Officers and Commons 950 The
Sum of the Wounded 1014

Of the Artillery, Sixteen Men were Killed. WOUNDED.
Sergeant-Major Werner. A Captain, an Adjutant, and 15 more. In all 34

The Brandenburgh Troops, under the Command of Lieutenant General Barfus,
having behaved themselves most Valiantly in this Bloody Day, contributed very
much toward the Happy Event thereof, had also their Share of Dead and Wounded,
viz.

DEAD.
COlonel Baron de Bilau. Lieutenant Colonel Mr. Kalsteyn. Captains 3
Lieutenants 7 Cornets and Ensigns 3 Adjutant 1 Subaltern Officers and Commons
508 In all Killed 524 The Sum of all the Dead is 3161

WOUNDED.
Sergeant-Major Ruchat. Captains 10 Lieutenants 14 Cornets and Ensigns 10
Subaltern Officers and Commons 505 540

Of the Artillery.
Killed 4 Wounded 5 And of the Wounded Men 4136

The Turks on their Side, had a far greater Loss; which, though it cannot be
distinctly certified, however may be guessed at, by what will appear from the
following LIST of several of their Great and Smaller Officers, found Dead on
the Field of Battle, and which were known and Named by a Turkish Prisoner, to
be, viz.

THE Great Viziers Kapitschler Chihaiasi. Aly Beg, Chief of Caramania. A Sain,
or Baron of the Province of Begh Shehetr in Asia. Another Sain of the
Neighborhood of Sophia. A Captain of the Grand Vizier's Horse-Guard. A
Divan-Chiaus, who carries the Vizier's Orders. Thurnatschi Bassa, who is the
6th Person in the Command of the Janisaries. Aly a Ciorbassi of the 4th Oda, or
Company of Janisaries. Solomon Aga-Ciorbassi of the 6th Oda. Osman Ciorbassi of
the 21st Oda. Chalill Ciorbassi of the 15th Oda. Ismael Ciorbassi of the 25th
Oda. Aly Ciorbassi of the 77th Oda. Hassan Aga-Ciorbassi of the 66th Oda.
Chalill Aga-Ciorbassi of the 31st Oda. Chalill Aga-Ciorbassi of the 24th Oda.
Beker Aga-Ciorbassi of the 16th Oda. Beker Aga of the 61st Oda. Osman
Aga-Ciorbassi of the 8th Oda. Omer Ciorbassi of the 21st Oda. Veli Ciorbassi of
the 38th Oda. Aibad Ciorbassi of the 71st Oda. Together 17 Aga's of the
Janisaries. 21 Oda Bassi, or Lieutenants. 15 Pairackdar, or Ensigns. 10
Chiauses, or Fourriers of the Janisaries.
Several Principal Men more, and Officers of the Spahee's were found amongst
the Dead, but unknown to the abovesaid Turk; and besides those which were found
on the Field of Battle, great Numbers of Dead Corpse of all sorts were found on
the Road for Belgrade; which together with the dead Turks found on the Field of
Battle, are esteemed to exceed 25000 Men, beside the great Numbers of Wounded,
amongst which were the Grand Vizier, the Seraskier, and the Colonel of the
Janisaries, all which Died of their Wounds at Belgrade.

Informatione delli Stendardi.
I. QUesto Stendardo e del Gran Vesiro, che suole il Gran Signiore di Turchi
mandarlo al Gran Vesiro quando va alla Guerra, e deve esser nella Cima
differente dall'altri.

II. Questo Stendardo e d'un Serascher che doppo il Gran Vesiro suol esser
constituito; questo serve per direttore della Battaglia che sta alla sua mano
destra, dove assiste anco l'Agha di Gianizzari.

III. Questo Stendardo e propriamente dell'Agha di Gianizzari che fa la
Differenza dalli Pascia col pomo d'oro alla Cima.

IV. Questo e del Spahilar Aghasi.

V. Questo e del Chehaia bei che e la prima persona doppo l'Agha di Gianizzari,
quale vien temuto piu dalli Ciorbagi, e Gianizzari, and ha piu autorita in
Campagna, che l'istesso Agha di Gianizzari.

VI. Questo e un Stendardo del Pascia d' Alepo, o di Damasco.

VII. Visono doppo l'Agha di Gianizzari quatro supremi Generali
dell'Infanteria, sotto li quali Marchiano li Ciorbagi: L'uno detto Zaghargi
bassi del quale e questo Stendardo; il secondo detto Samsengibassi, il terzo
detto Turnagibassi, and il quarto detto Cap' Aghasi. Questi devono formar il
Campo di Gianizzari e sempre stanno alla testa della Militia.

VIII. Questo e del Samsengibassi.

IX. Questo e del Turnagibassi.

X. Questo e del Cap' Aghasi.

XI. Questo e il Stendardo setto il quale Marchiano li Volontarij che si
scrivono per primi nella Zuffa, e vien constituito un Bascia per loro Capo, e
Conduttore.

XII. Questo e delli Arabi.

XIII. Questo anco e delli Arabi.

XIV. Questo e d'un Ciorbagi di Gianizzari.

XV. Questo e d'un Bullukbassi di Seimani, cive d'un Capitano da Asia, che
conduce qualche cento Seimani. Si vedono quatro Tugh, o Code, che paiono del
Gran Vesiro e Soraschero.

Sopra li primi Stendardi si vede una repetitione quatro cinque volte il
simbolo delli Turchi in Arabo, quale se qualche Christiano lo pronuntiasse,
deve esser fatto Turco o amazzato, che dice; non est Deus, nisi Deus and ipsius
Legatus Propheta Mehmet; e nell'altri si vede una benedittione del loro
Alcorano.

And here I shall add this particular Passage.

That the Count de la Tour, Vice Chancellor of Bohemia, assured Mr. Ash, now a
Bishop in Ireland, That the Evening the Battle was fought at Salankement, Count
Zerins, (who was a Young Man, and the last of the Family) his Lady walking in
her Garden, with some other of her Friends, suddenly perceived their great Hall
illuminated as it was wont to be for Funerals; but upon search all disappeared.

The same Lady sitting down in an Arbor where she used to sit with her Husband,
she felt one hastily sit down by her; at which being surprised, she suddenly
started up, but found nothing. Soon after a Clap of Thunder and Lightning fell
on the Ancient Tomb of the Zerins, broke into the Vault, and burnt up all the
Bodies and Coffins that were there.

The same Gentleman asserts, That the very Evening the Battle was fought, and
as near as could be guessed, the very Moment the Turks began to Fly, an Old
Turkish Prisoner, kept in the Common Prison at Vienna, suddenly cried out with
a great Passion, We are Ruined and Undone, etc. And being asked, What was the
Reason of his Noise, he could give no other Account, but that he had an
Impulse, which forced him to cry out in that manner.

MEMOIRS OF Sir WILLIAM HVSSEY's Reception, and Negotiations at Belgrade, dated
the 30th of April 1691. To Chancellor Straatman.
AMET Pass of Dierbekir, and Seraskier in these Parts of the Save, has desired
me for the Common Good of the Poor Christians hereabouts so much oppressed, to
write to your Excellency, and interpose in their behalf the good Offices of His
Majesty of Great Britain, my Master; which I the more readily perform, as being
pursuant to the Orders of my King (equally a Friend to both Empires) to
contribute all possible Means, and apply my best Endeavors to the removing the
pernicious Effects of this so long and Bloody a War, and changing it into an
honorable lasting Peace.

Your Excellency may be sensible, that besides the Obligations of Christian
Charity, it is my Interest also to correspond and cherish (by good Offices) that
Confidence and Esteem which they here express for the King my Master, and
therefore I doubt not but your Excellency will comply herewith, as far as is in
your Power, and likewise solicit the Court for more ample and positive Orders,
to which Charitable Work my Lord Pagett (His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary at
Vienna) will (I am sure) be earnestly assistant.

I entreat your Excellency also to send this Original by a Staffettee to his
Lordship, that he may understand how well I have been received here, and give
an Account thereof to the King my Master.

As soon as I entered into the States of the Ottoman Empire, I was met by the
Beg, or Commandant of every Place, attended by the Militia, who furnished me
with all Necessaries both for my Journey and Subsistence: At Peter Waradin I
was Complemented by an Aga, sent from the Seraskier; and at the Mouth of the
Theysse, was met by many Barks, guarded by Janisaries, who conducted me to
Belgrade, where I was presently Complemented by the principal Officers of the
Seraskier's Court, who sent his own Horses to convey me and my Family to the
Tents, which were pitched on the Shore, and appointed to receive me.

The next Day I was received by the Seraskier in full Divan, composed of all
the Principal Officers both Civil and Military; where when I had given Thanks
for the Honors received, the Passa answered me, That such were the Ancient
Customs of the Ottoman Empire, which they were resolved to observe, and abolish
the Abuses introduced by the late Grand Seignior, and his Prime Vizier
Mustapha. Then the Seraskier, with much earnestness, did exaggerate the Unjust
Oppression which was practiced by Christians to those of the same Faith, who
Inhabited the Country called Syrmium, situate between the Drove, Save, and
Danube, who were barbarously spoiled of their Clothes, robbed of their Cattle,
and obliged to pay excessive Impositions against all Laws of Humanity and a
regulated Government; whereas on the contrary, their Sultan sent Money to be
distributed among the Poor Subjects, to buy them Cattle and Seed, thereby
showing himself a Father of the Miserable, and not a Tyrant; and this Charity
(continued he) which ought to be natural to you Christians toward one another,
need not hinder the Hostility of Soldiers when they meet and encounter, leaving
the poor Countrymen in Peace, who labor only for the Public Good, and the
Service of that Prince whom God shall place over them. I answered with
applauding such Pious Maxims, and that I hoped so good Dispositions would
incline them more favorably to hearken to what I was to propose in the Name of
my King, toward the ending this Bloody War between the two Empires; and that
as to the Particulars he mentioned, I being a Stranger knew nothing of them. He
then proceeded to charge Count Chizzaola (Commandant of Esseck) to have
deceived him on several Occasions after his Word given; a Crime (says he) which
will be punished by God; and if the Charity of my Emperor toward the Poor
Subjects and Countrymen had not restrained me, what would have hindered me this
Winter to have made Excursions even to Buda? But all I should have gained,
would have been only the Tears and Curses of the Miserable: I answered with
commending the generous Clemency and Mercy of the present Government; and our
Conference ended with the usual Ceremonies of Coffee, Sherbet, and Perfumes.

In the Afternoon I was called for by the Seraskier to a Private Audience, at
which only his Effendi, and my Secretary (who was instead of an Interpreter)
were present: I represented to him, that this perilous Journey I had
undertaken, and by a way so unusual to Ambassadors from England, was a Mark of
the high Friendship and Affection which the King my Master bore to the two
Empires of Germany and Turkey, who resenting sensibly the fatal Consequences of
so long and bloody a War, commanded me to pass by Vienna, there to receive the
Orders and Instructions of the Emperor of the Romans, toward the amicable
ending of it, to which good Work should not the Grand Sultan and His Ministers
likewise correspond, it might be justly feared, that the Mischiefs and
Desolations hereafter ensuing, would call down Vengeance from God upon the
Musselmen. The Seraskier applauding the King's Generous Design, took notice
that there never yet was between England and the Ottoman Empire, either War or
any alienation of Affection, but always perfect Friendship, which he begged God
would continue: He commended the Wisdom of the present Vizier, his Humanity and
Treatableness, and approved my Solicitous Earnestness to continue my Voyage,
leaving it to my Choice, either to go by Land or Water. I told him, I resolved
to go by Water as far as Rusgiuk, a Days Journey below Nicopolis, and to Travel
thence by Land: He again renewed the Complaints made in the Divan, in behalf of
the Poor Inhabitants of Syrmium, and pressed me to Write to your Excellency to
forbid the Plundering of Villages, and Excursions of the Heydukes, who behave
themselves more like Thieves than Soldiers; and that your Excellency would
order, that they who are Peaceable and Disarmed, may continue not only in
Repose, but also be protected to the Benefit of that Prince to whom God shall
give the Government. He assured me further, That whatsoever Expedient shall be
proposed by the Imperialists, toward the preventing such Violences, he will
readily agree to, and cause it to be rigorously observed; and in this so
Christian a Cause, entreated me to interpose the good Offices of my King. I do
therefore beseech your Excellency to Correspond herein with Amet Passa, either
by Letter, or by Deputies on both sides, to meet on the Confines, and to be
pleased to inform me of your Resolution herein, by an open Letter sent to the
Seraskier, with whom I also leave a Copy of this, as I will likewise do with
the Grand Vizier, not designing to expose the Confidence they have in my King
to the Hazards of any Accidents which might prove equally prejudicial to both
Empires.

I took this Opportunity to show my self equally Charitable toward the Poor
Christians taken in Orsoua, and made Slaves (as was reported) after they had
Capitulated to have safe Conduct into the Emperor's Territories. I was
answered, That they had Surrendered themselves with condition, That if Belgrade
were lost, they would be Prisoners of War, and that the Grand Vizier was not
capable of violating the Public Faith so shamefully. I demanded concerning
some other Prisoners, recommended to me by their Friends; but was answered,
That they were all the Grand Seignior's Captives, and without his express Order
they could not treat either for their Ransom or Exchange: He told me, That all
Officers were well treated, and kept without Irons in a Chamber apart, with
their Servants, at the Expense of the Grand Seignior. I left 100 Ducats of Gold
to be distributed by Capt. Runkel, to the Poorest of them, which was all the
Service I could do them, and of which I entreat your Excellency to give their
Friends an Account.

A Courier being dispatched to Constantinople, I have had Permission to Write
to the Grand Vizier, and Sir William Trumbal, giving Information of my Arrival;
I purpose suddenly to continue my Voyage with full intention to do all the
Service I can to both Empires, in execution of the Commands of my King, in
whose Name I continue to press (as desired) your Excellency, that some Means
may be found out to prevent the Rapines daily practiced upon the Poor Country
People.

The enclosed short Letter for my Lord Pagett, I entreat your Excellency would
transmit to him, as also this Original, that his Lordship being sufficiently
informed, may better know what to solicit from the Emperor, and what to
acquaint the King my Master. I am,

Belgrade, April 30./ May 10. 1691.

Sir William Hussey's Letters to the Lord Pagett at Vienna.
Adrianople, May 25. 1691. My Lord,
I Sent a full Account of our Arrival at Belgrade, April 30. S. N. From thence
we came by Water to Rustic, two Days lower than Nicopolis, and thence in eight
Days Land-Journey hither; whence we advanced forwards two Days, but met there
by my Secretary and Interpreter from Constantinople, with Letters and Advice
from Sir William Trumbal, that the Vizier was upon departure, and ordered us to
stay his Arrival at Adrianople. We returned back two Days past: I have been
received and treated in all Places with singular marks of Respect and Honor,
equal to any in the same Character. I send this upon Fortune to inform your
Lordship of our Arrival. As to our Negotiation, I must attend the Audience
before I can give you any Account, still in suspense. God be praised we are all
well, and my Secretary I brought from Vienna. The Turks pretend to have a great
Army, and design chiefly toward Transylvania. If this meets a quick
conveyance, I beg your Lordship to acquaint my Lord Nottingham of my Arrival. I
have wrote to the Dutch Ambassador for his Advice and Consideration, in respect
to me, and his Stay, or Journey hither, since I cannot be permitted to attend
him at Constantinople. How I shall proceed to Constantinople, stay here, or
follow the Campaign, your Lordship must expect hereafter. My Secretary has
added a few Lines, I enclose to your Lordship. My humble Duty to all the
Ministers. Nothing shall be wanting which is in my Power. I am, etc.


Adrianople, June 3/13. 1691. My Lord,
THE Vizier made his Entrance first, with no great Train, nor in the Public
Streets, but past direct to his Tents; half an Hours distance, the Grand
Seignior entered, on the 29th, with a fair show to us, but to others very short
of former Splendor; he was in a Litter, one of his Court with him at the other
end. The Vizier sent his Emeen Chewse, (the 2d in that Office) with eight more,
the same Afternoon he entered, that he being in haste, desired me to be ready to
come to Audience next Day. We were surprised, because our Druggermen in good
Manners thinking that Day due to his Repose, did not design to have carried my
Complement, and to desire leave of Audience till next Day; but I sent them
immediately to perform my Duty in congratulating his Excellency's Arrival, and
to concert Matters for next Day, also to desire it might be private, in regard
I was without Equipage suitable to a Public Appearance. The Chewse Bassa told
the Vizier, in regard I had no great Retinue, his Personal Attendance might be
waved, but he commanded him to come in Person: Accordingly on Monday Morning
June 1/11 about nine a Clock, we set forward in the best Accoutrements we
could: I was in my Embroidered Scarlet Coat, six English Footmen in my English
Laced Liveries, six in red Liveries al modo Turchesco, 18 Chewses in Van, two
Druggermen after them, then my self with the Chewse-Bassa on my right Hand, and
about 10 Gentlemen on Horseback following me, some of my own Company, others
that came from Belgrade with me, and several other Turks, that we made a large
Train, and drew Crowds of Spectators. In half an Hour we arrived at his Camp;
conducted into his Tents, we past one very large one, and through that into
another; his Officers were all drawn in Lines; they brought me a Stool to sit
on, and immediately the Vizier entered, sat down upon a Bed carpeted; his
People made a Prayer at his Entrance; he bid me welcome, and I acquainted him
with my Commission, delivering him the King's Letter and its Translation; after
this was over, the Tent full of Officers, and his two Sons standing on his
right Hand, I asked his Excellencies leave now, or when he pleased, to speak in
private; he told me, after Sherbet, Coffee, etc. the Turkish Treat, the Company
should retire, and he being in haste desired it now, when we discoursed
according to the Relation I send enclosed Verbatim, as nigh as we four could
remember, and to which we all put our Hands, viz. my self, Senior Marsigli, Mr.
Coke Secretary, and Senior Antonio Perrone chief Interpreter; there remained
none in the Room but the Vizier, as before mentioned, and one Druggerman more.
At Departure I was Vested and 11 more, all that I had of Quality, and conducted
back with some Respect. His Excellency was very courteous, and we had all the
Marks possible of a very kind Reception, with as much Honor as any in the
Character.

My Lord, The Point resolved was, That his Excellency would not own the Turks
at Vienna under any Public Character, would neither write to them, or send any
other: When I told him the Emperor had accepted the King of England and States
of Holland to assist, and was well disposed to a Peace, and if his Excellency
did incline also, I hoped there might be a happy issue; he replied, He was for
Peace, but upon Terms of Honor, and if I had Power to treat, would call for
Pen. I replied, It could not be expected I should have full Authority before
his Excellency's Mind had been known, and that Vienna was thought the properest
Place, in regard there had been some Overtures already made, and
Representatives of all Parties present: That to arrive at an end, there must be
a beginning; and that, if his Excellency permitted, I would send my Secretary
to Vienna, to persuade His Imperial Majesty to empower his General, that so his
Excellency being now upon departure for the Confines, they might treat there;
and if his Excellency judged my Person and Presence necessary to so blessed a
Work, I would wait upon his Excellency, and attend his Camp: He told me there
was no occasion I should take so much trouble; but said, Send your Secretary to
Vienna, that the Emperor send a Person according to custom, fully empowered to
treat here, or else that we are as we are: And to this he added two or three
Lines: To this there is no Reply.

My Lord, I spoke several times that the Commission was to me and the Dutch
Ambassador equally; which I did, and now repeat to avoid all Thoughts, because
the Vizier when he spoke, said, Let the Emperor send his Commission to me, not
naming the Dutch, and to this no Reply: It Is not an Ambition I desire, nor
shall I less communicate with the Dutch Ambassador, whose Counsel I shall
always desire.

My Lord, I am very glad I have the Opportunity of returning Count Marsigli,
who will supply by Parole what I may omit, or what is not convenient for a
Letter, and that your Lordship will transmit it to my Lord Nottingham: It Is
absolutely necessary that the Emperor resolves that he adjusts the Points with
the Allies, or treats without them, which the Turks would embrace greedily; but
since His Imperial Majesty will not relinquish them, nor they able to defend,
but must disgorge, and be swallowed up if alone; it is I think very reasonable
that the Emperor requires them to positive and convenient Conditions. The Turks
Nature is to do at once, and therefore considering well there must be a Power
entrusted. I shall be very ready to give all the possible assistance I can, and
if required, readily pass to the Camp, or Confines, for obtaining so pious a
Work, grateful, and most heartily wished by the poor Subjects of both Empires;
and I hope I shall have the better fortune for the many hearty Prayers and good
Wishes I have gained on both sides. God Almighty prosper and direct you to
complete it. What you send to me, pray let be clear, to avoid Replies, and that
Count Marsigli may be perfectly instructed, who knowing the posture and humor
of Affairs here, will, I hope, expedite their Counsels, and resolve them. The
Juncture seems very favorable, and the Allies, I believe, very pressing; this
Opportunity lost, God knows the Consequences. Senior Marsigli will tell your
Lordship some things I have charged to his Memory, and desire your Lordship to
send to my Lord Nottingham. My haste and length of Letters will not permit me
to use Cipher at present: I have presumed to write to His Imperial Majesty, and
most of the Ministers, to acknowledge my Obligations and readiness in their
Interests, which I humbly beg of your Lordship to deliver; and if the Bearer,
who goes directly to your Lordship be present, he can supply all that is
deficient. God Almighty prosper your good Offices. I am with all Respect,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Devoted Servant, William Hussy.


In the last Month of July we left the two Ambassadors Sir William Hussy, and
the Here Collier at Adrianople, where having received the News of the total
Defeat of the Turkish Army, with the Death of the Grand Vizier, a stop was
given to their present Motion toward Belgrade, with intention to proceed with
the New Vizier thither; and there to reassume the Mediation toward a Peace,
for which the present Conjuncture seemed very seasonable.

The New Vizier was called Ali Pasha, A New Vizier Ali Pasha.
had been Pasha of Scio, and Kahya, or Deputy to Kupriogli, the Grand Vizier
now slain in Battle: But whilst they were meditating of these Matters, and
preparing to accompany the New Vizier in 10 or 12 Days, as was given out, unto
Belgrade; The Death of the Lord Ambassador Sir William Hussy.
it pleased God, that the English Ambassador, Sir William Hussy, fell Sick,
and Died the 14th of September after 13 Days of Sickness at Adrianople: He was
a Person much lamented by all for his excellent Qualities and Experience in the
Affairs of Turkey, of which he had learned much at Aleppo, and there gained a
good Estate; with which returning for England, he Married the Daughter of that
Worthy Person and Citizen, Sir John Buckworth; after whose Death he was chosen
by the Levant Company, to be their Deputy Governor, in the Place of Sir John
Buckworth, his Father-in-Law Deceased; in which Office having acquitted himself
for some Years with much Honor, he was afterward sent by King William and
Queen Mary, to succeed Sir William Trumball in that Embassy: His Excellent Lady
resolving to accompany him in all his Travels and Dangers, patiently bore, and
sustained all the Fatigues and Inconveniences of a Journey over Land; which
was never performed before by any other English Ambassador designed for Turkey;
who were always Transported either in the Companies own Ships, or the King's
Men of War, by Sea: But now things had changed their Face, and as it was
dangerous, whilst the French were Masters of the Mediterranean Seas, to expose
those rich Ships to the danger of the Enemy; so it was thought most convenient
to hasten the Journey of the Ambassador by Land; and that taking the Imperial
Court at Vienna in his way, he might there receive such Instructions from the
Emperor and his Allies, the King of Poland, and the State of Venice, as were
most proper at that time in order to a Peace with the Sultan, of which King
William of England, and the States of Holland offered themselves, by their
Ambassadors, to be the Mediators: Upon this Occasion Sir William Hussy, with
his Lady, remained some Months at Vienna, before he could procure his
Dispatches; and then the Winter coming on, when the Danube was frozen up, he
departed not from Vienna, until the Spring, and arrived, as we have related
before in the Month of June of this present Year. And whereas the Mediation of
this Peace was of high Concernment to all Europe, we shall here insert the
Methods, Rules, and Instructions, which the Emperor and his Allies gave to the
English Ambassador in this Matter.

The first Paper given to Sir William Hussy at Vienna, was dated March 1691,
and called, Informations for the English Ambassador, designed to be Mediator of
the Peace at Constantinople, and which may serve to obviate the Objections
which the Turks may make.

Annotata ad informationem a Dominis Ablegatis Turcicis ultimo exhibitam, pro
informatione Excellentissimi Domini Legati Anglici, ad Portam Ottomanicam
proficiscentis.
MISSIS omnibus iis, quae Negotii tractandi substantiam alterare non videntur,
ad ea tantum respondere visum fuit, quae praedictam substantiam tangunt, vel
contra Legationis jura admissa praetenduntur a praefatis Portae Ottomanicae
Dominis Ablegatis ad concludendam pacem huc Missis.

Quorum in ordine primum occurrir, quod Domini Ablegati Turcici in praeterita
sua informatione de Colloquio inter Eminentissimum Dominum Cardinalem a
Kollonitsch and illos in Coenobio PP. Augustinianorum extra urbem instituto,
commemorant, in quo parum refert an Dominus Cardinalis a Kollonitsch illos
Ablegatos Turcicos, an vero hi praefatum Dominum Cardinalem a Kollonitsch ad
Colloquium illud invitaverint, in eo tamen substantia posita est, quod nunc
asseverent Domini Ablegati Turcici propositionem quam se Domino Cardinali a
Kollonitsch tum fecisse fatentur, non ex mandato Portae, verum propria mentis
occurrentia nunc demum se fecisse profiteantur; etenim saepe saepius per
literas interrogati, number super illa tractare sufficienter instructi sint? Non
tantum se, adaequata Plenipotentia provisos constanter responsoriis suis
affirmarunt, verum etiam patefactam sibi diffidentiam Ministerii Caesarei super
hac qualitate conceptam saepius repetitam aegre demum far coeperunt and
quaestiuncularum inutilium nomine appellantes moram principali negotio per haec
fieri questi sunt, quod si ab initio statim ejusmodi propositionem Domino
Cardinali factam non ex Portae mandato, sed sua tantum privata mente originem
ducere professi fuissent, Ministerium Caesareum vel ejusmodi propositionem
plane ab initio non recepisset, vel de modo legis timandae dictae propositionis
dictis Dominis Ablegatis temperamentum aliquod idoneum suggessisset, quam
circumstantiam cum tacuissent and tacere perseverassent Domini Ablegati
Turcici, eam nunc demum professi, satis constat, unde mora, and illorum
detentionis causa processerit, and cui consequenter imputanda sit, nam saepius
per literas interrogati, number puncta proposita Domino Cardinali a Kollonitsch
and ipsis copialiter transmissa menti suae conformia essent? Affirmative
responderunt, quamvis non super iis, quae Domino Cardinali a Kollonitsch
proposita fuerunt, aliquis Tractationis motus a Caesareo Ministerio ostensus,
sed tum demum fides rei adhibita fuit, cum hanc ob causam ad se misso
Secretario intimo Domino a Werdenburg puncta Domino Cardinali a Kollonitsch
proposita non tantum confirmassent, verum and Turcico idiomate exhibuissent,
and Latin ad calamum dictassent, tum demum animus his adjectus, and desuper
cum Dominis foederatis Serenissimo nimirum Poloniae Rege, and Serenissima
Republica Veneta communicari coepit: Quorum sensa, si prius delata fuissent,
prius etiam formaliter cum illis Dominis Ablegatis Turcicis ex part Caesarei
Ministerii, tractari coepisset, eo vel maxim fundamento, quod Domini Ablegati
Turcici, postquam ipsis clare scriptum fuisset, quod Sacra Caesarea and Regia
Majestas literis D. Foederatorum suorum de eo monita fuerit, quod Ablegatus
Chami Tartarorum ad Serenissimum Regem Poloniae missus clare edixerit,
Viennensibus Ablegatis Turcicis, mutato supremo Visirio nullam concludendae
pacis Plenipotentiam superesse, ii responderint, non se a Supremo Visirio ad
proponendam pacem, verum ipsomet regnante Turcarum Imperatore huc missos, nec
Plenipotentiam suam a Supremo Visirio, sed ab ipsomet regnante Imperatore
propria manu subscriptum attulisse and exhibuisse. Cui proinde vel fides
adhibenda vel propositiones ultimas ab iis exhibitas acceptandas non fuisse;
cum vero his propositis nulli tractantium partium conveniens videretur, culpam
non subsecutae Pacis sponte vel levi de causa in se suscipere, placuit
confidentiam in supra qualificatam Plenipotentiam Imperatoris Ottomanici potius
ostendere, quam leviter almum hoc negotium abrumpere; Communicatis igitur, ut
dictum, exhibitae propositionis capitulis praefatis Serenissimis Confoederatis
hactenus eorum sensa desuper expectata fuerunt, nulla ex eorum protracta
dilatione in Caesareum Ministerium resultante culpa protractae Pacis aut
Tractatuum, cum saepe saepius dictum and scriptum fuerit Dominis Ablegatis
Turcicis, Sacram Caesaream Regiamque Majestatem sine Foederatorum suorum
satisfactione almam pacem nec concludere velle noc posse, quare cum saepius
memorati Serenissimi Foederati sensus suos super propositis ex propinquo
ostendere coepissent, huc Pottendorffium Domini Ablegati revocati fuerunt, quod
vero nunc demum se facultate tractandi carere profiteantur and exinde
Tractationem Pacis prosequi non valiant, certe nullatenus. Ministerio Caesareo,
verum Dominis Ablegatis Turcicis ea, quae ab initio candide proferre
debuissent, studio tacentibus imputandum venit.

Quod porro Domini Ablegati Turcici praetendant, propositiones pacis Domino
Secretario a Werdenburg scripto editas and ad calamum dictatas ad conditionem
acceptationis intra december dierum spatium restrictas fuisse, provocatur ad
literam exhibitarum and dictatarum propositionum, ex qua, uti nihil de december
diebus dictum esse constat, ita nec hanc conditionem informationi suae nunc
demum adjectam subsistere constabit.

Quod vero facie rerum mutata, ut male praetendunt and priores conditiones
Pacis and posterius oblatas evanuisse praetendant, ignoratur, quo fundamento
hoc sustineri possit, eo quod factum infectum fieri nequeat, nec res in eum
casum reciderit, ut Parts belligerantes Pacem petere sibi conveniens
arbitrentur; vel nova and a prioribus and posterioribus conditionibus aliena
deponendi belli vel reducendae Pacis ratio adinveniri and excogitari possit,
cum materia, ob quam seu bellum geritur, seu Pax placitis utrinque
conditionibus reduci possit, ob sibi imaginatam rei mutatae faciem a Dominis
Ablegatis Turcicis nec suapte natura variet, nec immutari possit.

Alterum, quod priori in ordine succedit, est querela Dominorum Ablegatorum
Turcicorum, quod in longum hic detineantur; verum enimvero and toti Orbi and
ipsis constat, traditis Recredentialibus eos non animo detinendi hinc Vienna
dimissos, and Comaromium versus directos fuisse, verum enimvero cum per
propositionem, sc. De qua Sacrae Caesareae and Regiae Majestati absenti, and
tum Augustae praecipuis Imperii Romani negotiis implicitae, ante finem
Januarii, and jam tum Dominis Ablegatis Turcicis Vienna profectis, constare
potuit; Domino Cardinali a Kollonitsch factam novam suae retentionis causam
praebuissent, nec, ut supra dictum, alterutri partium Tractantium se praecipiti
abruptione Tractatuum ream Mundo constituere conveniret necessario, ubi tum
deprehendi poterant Domini Ablegati Turcici apud eosdem de subsistentia and
qualitate Propositionis factae inquirendum erat, hoc cum forte Comaromii
acciderit, nullo praemeditatae retentionis animo, sed forte id factum sibi
certo persuadeant, qui libere abivissent, nisi materiam novis suis
propositionibus redintegrandi Tractatus suppeditare conveniens arbitrati
fuissent.

Neque vero hac in re vel contra Legationis jura, vel contra Portae Ottomanicae
intentionem factum fuisse aliquid ex sequentibus constabit. Etenim quod prius
membrum spectat, ita cum Caesareis Legatis nunc Eminentissimo Domino Cardinale
a Goess, Domino Reninger pie defuncto, ac ipsismet Dominis Hoffman, Comite
Caprara, and Kunif tempore flagrantis belli prostantia exempla per Portam
Ottomanicam observatum fuissee clare demonstrant, quorum priores duo ex Portae
Ottomanicae ditionibus huc ad Confinia cum ipso Magno Vizirio and Exercitu
devecti, and custodiis undequaque circumsepti, Cardinalis a Goess sero
dimissus, Reninger autem retentus, and post cladem ad S. Gotthardum acceptam ex
abrupto Pacis componendae instrumentum fuit, Hoffman naturali morte apud eos
obiit, Comes a Caprara ad muros Viennae devectus, and been custoditus dimissus
quidem fuit, sed Kuniz retentus qui pari honor habitus repulsis ab Obsidione
Turcis ultro e Castris ad Urbem se recipiens prosiliit; alia sunt Legationum
jura tempore Pacis, alia belli tempore, quorum differentia, ut per se nota est,
ita longa deductione non eget, nec hac in part Dominos Ablegatos Turcicos
aliquid recipere, quod cum Ministris Caesareis observatum non fuisset, probare
poterunt, qui magno honor habiti and large alimentati ultra centum millia
florenorum aerario Caesareo absumpserunt, nullo sane alio, quam restrictae
liberae conversationis, quatenus tamen id jure Gentium and licitum and
necessarium est, incommodo affecti.

Intentionem Portae Ottomanicae quod attinet, quicquid Domini Ablegati Turcici
dicant, and se morum ac legum Portae Ottomanicae caeteris gnariores esse
asserunt, interpretesque literarum editarum se adstruant, clarum tamen est,
quod indubia interpretatione non egeant, and literae a Primo Visirio ad
Praesidem Consilij Bellici ultimo scriptae sic habent: Verum enimvero si
temporis ac status ratio impedimento sit, atque Negotii perfectio nequaquam
arrideat, hoc posito ibi existentes Plenipotentiarij ne diutius commorentur
sine causa, sed quam citissime nullo interposito die salvo passu and plena
incolumitate ad Excelsi Imperii ditionem traducantur. Ex quibus, ut satis
constat, non pure, sed hoc supposito, quod Pacis negotium conficiendum non
arrideat, revocatos fuisse, in aprico pariter est, quod propositione sua denuo
facta discutiendis conditionibus propositis novam occasionem suae detentionis
Domini Ablegati Turcici proprio facto suppeditaverint, praecipue cum ut saepe
dictum, Neutri belligerantium parti excussae Pacis fama conveniret, quam si
defectu Plenipotentiae porro tractare and concludere non possint, certum est,
quod culpa non subsecutae Pacis non in Caesareum sed Portae Ottomanicae
Ministerium vel ipsos Dominos Ablegatos redundet.

Tertium, Quod duo priora subsequitur, est querela Dominorum Ablegatorum
Turcicorum ob negatos sibi cursores, ut aiunt, formata; verum si res penitius
introspiciatur, nunquam sibi aliquem Cursorem petitum denegatum fuisse probare
poterunt Domini Ablegati Turcici, etenim recordabuntur, quam in Sessionibus
habitis gravissimis de causis, Ministri Caesarei eos adhortati fuerint, ut
Cursorem cum difficultatibus in Tractatu Pacis obortis ad recipiendas
instructiones expedirent, quantoque constiterit eos ad hoc persuadere, quem ubi
demum petierunt nulla mora interposita obtinuerunt, obtinebuntque toties
quoties illum clare petere placuerit.

Etsi vero etiam querantur, quod post propositiones posteriores super iis
mentem Ministerii Ottomanici rescire and indagare per Cursorem illis non fuerit
permissum, respondetur, tum eos Cursorem non petiisse, sed hoc quidem, ut
acceptatis conditionibus and transacta Pace alterutri illorum liberum foret ad
Portam Ottomanicam Tractatus conclusos defer, and liberum ratificandi
arbitrium Portae Ottomanicae reservatum expiscari; quanta vero distinctio inter
Legatum sic proficiscentem and Cursorem simpliciter mitti petitum intersit,
constat ex rerum naturali differentia, praecipue cum res ad statum acceptatarum
conditionum, and cum acceptatis mittendum alterutrum ex Legatis propter
defectum intentionis foederatorum eo usque pervenire non potuerit.

Caeterum, quae de sua hinc inde Translatione and incompetenti eorum
Tractatione D. Ablegati Turcici queruntur, non subsistere, ex supradictis
cuilibet constabit, quam praeterea omnium pariter Regnantium commune desiderium
latere non potest, quo quisque a se missos debite honorari cupit, and vel
propterea ad se missis congruentia honorifica non negat, quo in passu Sacram
Caesaream and Regiam Majestatem Religiosissimam and esse and fuisse semper,
omnium Principum Legati Ministri, qui ultro citroque hactenus commeati sunt,
attestabuntur; nec ipsi Domini Ablegati Turcici, sepositis, quibus jactari
videntur, animi passionibus, inficiabuntur.

Viennae, Martii, 1691.
Conditions and Instructions given by the King of Poland, to the English
Ambassador: Entitled, Conditiones ad Tractatum Pacis ex part Serenissimi
Regis and Reipublicae Poloniae.
I. TRACTATUS omnis and praetextus quocunque modo per fulgidam Portam
acquisitus ad Podoliam and Ukrainam, uti avitas and haereditarias Regni
Poloniae Provincias, ac recenter armis recuperatas, in perpetuum aboleatur,
Praesidiumque Turcicum ex fortalitio Camenecensi abducatur, cum integra ejusdem
fortalitii ac rei tormentariae ibidem existentis in manus Polonorum traditione.

II. Moldavia, quae jam magna ex part armis Sacrae Regiae Majestatis Poloniae
occupata: Et Valachia, quae utraeque olim Provinciae Serenissimorum Regum
Poloniae tributariae erant, juri and possessioni Sacrae Regiae Majestatis
Poloniae relinquantur, una cum omnibus istis ditionibus, quas Budziacenses and
Bialogradenses Tartari incolunt, ita ut limes sit Fluvius Danubius.

III. Hanus and Tartari Crimenses uti causatores omnium bellorum and damnorum
per fulgidam Portam ab excursionibus and inferendis damnis contineantur and
cohibeantur, ita ut quoties illata fuerint, fulgida Porta eadem resarciat and
refundat.

IV. Damna bellorum and Provinciae desolatae ac in cinerem redactae justo and
aequo valor compensentur.

V. Cosacis universaliter omnibus tam Ukrainensibus quam Zaporescensibus nullo
unquam praetextu Porta Ottomanica direct vel indirecte rebellionis fautoratum
aut protectionem praebebit.

VI. Boristenes Fluvius munitionibus and Praesidiis Turcicis tam vetustioribus
quam recentioribus ex purgetur and evacuetur.

APPENDIX.
Conditiones ex part Czarorum Muscoviae circa Tractatum a Serenissimis
Colligatis proponendae ut locum suum habeant, and a fulgida Porta acceptentur.

The Emperor's Articles and Instructions for concluding a Peace, given to the
English Ambassador at Vienna, February 15. 1691/2. Ad stabiliendam Pacem inter
Augustissimum Romanorum Imperatorem, Germaniae, Hungariae, and Bohemiae Regem,
sc. ejusque Confaederatos, Serenissimum Poloniae Regem and Rempublicam, ac
Serenissimam Rempublicam Venetam ex una? Et Serenissimum ac Potentissimum
Turcarum Imperatorem ex altera part sequentes conditiones a Caesareis ad hoc
Negotium Deputatis, pro Responso ad Propositiones per Ablegatos Turcicos die
15. Februarii, 1689, exhitas, reponuntur.
I. CUM ex part Portae Ottomanicae in praedictis Conditionibus offeratur
Cessio hoc bello recuperatorum, quae absque hoc avito jure ad Sacram Caesaream
Majestatem Regnumque Hungariae and ditiones ei ab antiquo annexas spectant, vel
abinde dependent, and fere omnes aut armorum successu, aut spontanea deditione
a Justitia Divina quasi Jure postliminii in potestatem suae Majestatis
redierunt, praetenditur ex part Sacrae Caesareae Majestatis ad tollendum omne
dissidium inter parts nunc belligerantes, futuris quoque temporibus
praecavendum, ut reliquae adhuc ditiones, populi and loca ab antiquo ut supra
dictum ad Regnum Hungariae, Ditionesque eidem annexas pertinentia ei pariter
supremo jure cedantur, and continuo evacuentur, cum omnibus ad ea antiquitus
vel hactenus spectantibus aut attributis territoriis and dependentiis, quorum
specificatio and Confinia per praesentem Conventionem determinabuntur, nulla in
iis sub praetextu tributorum, aut quacunque alia Portae Ottomanicae
praetensione Juris remanente; cassatis etiam and annullatis ex integro omnibus
prioribus Tractatibus quatenus de supra positis aliter, quam hic conventum
fuerit, disponunt.

II. Liceat vero Cuique partium paciscenti Confinia propria exstructione
Fortalitiorum and Munimentorum, vel alio quocunque meliori visum fuerit modo in
propriam securitatem and populorum quietem munire ac tuta reddere.

III. Incursiones hostiles, devastationes and depopulationes territorii
utriusque, Dominii, aut eorum, qui sub protectione Contrahentium Imperatorum
deinceps vivent, omnino and ita quidem prohibitae sint, ac illicitae maneant,
ut omnes Turcarum Confiniariorum vel Tartarorum in Caesareas proprias aut
praememoratorum suoram Clientium Ditiones factae incursiones, invasiones,
depopulationes, and exactiones pacifragii poenam incurrant, ac parti laesae
causam damni bello vindicandi justam and sufficientem praebeant, nisi ad ejus
requisitionem damna data resarta; and nomine eorum satisfactum, simulque
Authors damni dati exemplariter puniti fuerint.

IV. Maneat potro etiam illicitum futuris quoque temporibus receptaculum vel
fomentum dare malis hominibus Rebellibus, subditis aut utriusque paciscentis
Caesaris inimicis.

V. Libera sint utriusque partis subditis in omnibus and singulis utriusque
partis Imperiis, Regnis, Ditionibus, Provinciis, Territoriis and Portubus terra
marique Commercia, sine fraud and dolo peragenda, nullis Teloniorum and
Vectigalium exactionibus adstricta: Permissis etiam ut caeteris Nationibus,
quibus cum Turcico Imperio Commercium est, in locis ad hoc electis, Caesareis
Consulibus, jure Gentium, omni immunitate privilegiatis, and Caesarea
protectione gaudentibus.

VI. Captivati ex utraque part, sive per Turcas five per Tartaros capti
fuerint, existentes, libertati and propriis Dominis absque lytro bona fide
restituantur.

VII. Custodiam Sanctissimi Sepulchri and aliorum Sanctorum locorum in Judaea
circa Hierosolymam existentium antehac Christianis and Sacerdotibus
Franciscanis semper permissam, ac paucis demum abhinc annis iisdem ereptam,
Graecisque traditam restituet praedicti Ordinis Religiosis and Christianis
Romano-Catholicis Serenissimus ac Potentissimus Turcarum Imperator, servabitque
liberam and quietam praefatis Religiosis Franciscanis sub sua protectione
constantem possessionem deinceps non auferendam. Concedet insuper liberam
peregrinis Christianis Romano-Catholicis adeundi and redeundi facultatem, non
interturbato aut impedito iis in partibus Religionis Romano-Catholicae obeundae
exercitio.

VIII. Regula and norma Curialium in recipiendis, receptis honorandis and
tractandis Ministris ultro citroque commeantibus his pactis certa constituatur,
deinceps ab utrinque sancte and religiose secundum distinctam Characteris
missorum praerogativam inter Gentes observanda.

IX. Turcarum Imperator Sacrae Caesareae and Regiae Majestatis foederatis,
scilicet Serenissimo Poloniae Regi and Reipublicae, Et Serenissimae Reipublicae
Venetae competentem praestabit satisfactionem juxta Conventionem cum iis simul
and semel ineundam.

X. Moldaviae Territorium quoque a Tartaris in pristinas suas seeds ultra
Boristhenem ex Budziac translatis omnino evacuabitur, fietque Moldavis per
Tartaros erepti Territorii, deinceps non er^piendi, plenaria restitutio.

ANNOTATIONES.
I. PACEM hoc modo conclusam Ablegati and Plenipotentiarii Turcici a
Serenissimo and Potentissimo Imperatore^ and Domino suo, ad formam hic mutuo
placitam ratihabitum iri seque infallibiliter praestituros, ut solenne.
Ratificationis Instrumentum intra spatium triginta dierum a die subscriptionis
computandum, aut citius si fieri poterit, hic reciproce recteque commutetur, se
obligent, dictae ratificationis adventum hic praestolantes.

II. Pax ista, quamvis secundum propositas Conditiones conclusa, tum demum
robur Obligationis and debitae Observantiae vinculum accipiet and inducet, cum
in omnibus ac singulis, quae de locis evacuandis and tradendis, atque etiam de
Confiniis per Deputatos ab utrinque Commissarios constituendis secundum
praemissa stipulabuntur and acceptabuntur plenarie executioni demandata fuerit:
Qua in re ad accelerandam Pacis executionem and publicationem sistendamque
humani sanguinis effusionem placuit utrinque, ut designatis ad terminos
Dominiorum ponendos and exequendam Pacem ab utrinque Commissariis spatium
bimestre praefigatur, cujus decursu Confinia, prout conventum fuerit, statuant,
evacuanda tradant, and Articulo Pacis juxta sibi commissa exequantur.

III. Quia omnia, quae supradictis conditionibus Generalibus proposita fuerunt,
individualiter and localiter conceptis huius Pacificationis articulis
exprimere, and inserere necesse est, ideo de omnibus and singulis in specie
porro tractandi and conveniendi liberam sibi reservant Deputati Caesarei
facultatem.

IV. Nefandum Tokelii proditoris and Rebellis improbissimi, hujus cruenti belli
Authoris and execrandi Impostoris caput secundum Juris Gentium naturalem
Obligationem quondam a Turcis susceptam and male observatam, semota omni
tergiversatione post pacem conclusam mox noxae tradent, ad sumendas de eodem
meritas poenas, and statuendum violatae fidelitatis exemplum: Interim
captivando de ejusdem persona pace conclusa fideliter consignanda, ita se
securos reddent Ablegati Turcici, ut and Deputatis Caesareis securam and
sinceram stipulatorum executionem ostendere and persuadere possint.

Quae annotatio Caeteris omnibus in Tractatu praeponenda and de illa bona fide,
priusquam caetera pertractentur, conveniendum erit, cum sit conditio sine qua
non.

Now follow the Propositions which the Turkish Ambassadors gave to the Imperial
Court; with the Emperor's Answers thereunto; upon which a Peace might probably
have been established, had it not been obstructed by Men of different
Interests, who hoped to have benefited themselves by the War.

DECLARATIO ABLEGATORUM Portae Ottomanicae, IN Negotio PACIS. In Nomine Domini.
I. CUM, ut alma Pax inter utrumque Imperium reflorescat, ac Subditi utrinque
quiet ac securitate fruantur, necessum sit, ut manifestis limitibus Confinia
dividantur, quibus omnia disturbia and incursionum occasiones de medio
tollantur, magni Fluvii Danubius atque Savus pro limitibus ponantur.

II. Proinde a Porta ferrea usque ad Savi Ostium omnis cis Danubiana Ditio,
itemque ab Ostio Savi usque ad pristina Croatiae Confinia cis Saviana Regio
subjaceant Ottomanico Imperio restitutis Alba Graeca, and aliis locis
quaecunque in praedictis cis Danubium and Savum ditionibus Caesariis Praesidiis
tenentur, ita ut a pristinis Croatiae limitibus ad exitum Savi atque illinc ad
usque inferiora in Regionibus cis Danubium and Savum nulla remaneat Caesareae
Majestati praetensio.

III. Vice versa a Porta ferrea ad Ostium Savi, and ab Ostio Savi usque ad
pristina Croatiae Confinia ultra Danubiana and ultra Savana Regiones cum
restitutione Temesvarini and aliorum locorum, quae in partibus ultra Danubianis
armis Ottomanicis tenentur, subsint potestati Caesareae Majestatis, and nulla
fiat a fulgida Porta praetensio.

IV. Valachica atque Transylvanica ultra Danubiana versus Hungaricas parts
Confinia in pristino ante praesens bellum statu permaneant.

V. Transylvania in pristinum ante praesens bellum statum restituatur,
annuumque suum tributum integre fulgidae Portae solvat, and sub utriusque
Imperii protectione antiquis suis privilegiis fruatur.

VI. Confinia Croatiae maneant in eo statu, in quo fuerant ante praesens bellum.

VII. His Conditionibus vel suspensio armorum plurium aut paucorum annorum, vel
etiam Pax perpetua ineatur.

VIII. Ab utroque Imperio tales limits atque Coloni, atque sub talibus
Generalibus and Officialibus, quorum fides ac disciplina probata sit, ad
lubitum utriusque Imperatoris in Confiniis sibi subjectis collocentur, ita ut
Pacem integerrime colant nullisque disturbiis aut excursionibus communem
tranquillitatem interturbent.

IX. Quaecunque conditiones in antiquis sacris capitulationibus expressae usque
ad praesens bellum observatae sunt, nec praedictis octo punctis adversantur,
post-hac etiam colantur.

Responsio Caesarea.
PROPOSITIO, quam Domini Ablegati Turcici nomine Imperii Ottomanici offerunt,
illa ipsa est, ad quam tractando de Conditionibus Pacis sensim perventum
fuisset, si Domini Ablegati Turcici ad discussionem locorum, quam Caesare:
Commissarii ad hoc negotium Pacis consiciendum deputati saepius proposuerunt,
condescendissent, sed cum illi eam constanter deprecarentur and aliter negotium
Pacis confici non valeret, sero sed nec legaliter quidem ab initio Domini
Ablegati Turcici ad hanc Propositionem devenerunt, cujus velociori
manifestatione, and citius vetus amicitia restabiliri and multo humano sanguini
ob pacem dilatam hinc inde effuso parci potuisset, quod autem ad hanc
propositionem ex part Caesarea hactenus responsum non sit, eo factum est, quod
Sacra Caesarea Regiaque Majestas non nisi ex Condicto cum foederatis ex
Religione foederum, quae eidem cum ipsis intercedunt, responsum suum dare
potuerit, quod ob longinquitatem locorum moram aliquot Mensium causavit: Igitur

Ad I. and II.

CUM, ut alma Pax inter utrumque Imperium reflorescat, ac Subditi utrinque
quiet ac securitate fruantur, necessum sit, ut manifestis limitibus Confinia
dividantur, quibus omnia disturbia and incursionum occasiones de medio
tollantur, proinde trans Danubium finis and limes Caesarcae jurisdictionis and
Imperii sit Porta ferrea and Varadinum, Temesvarinum, Gyula, Jenova, aliaque
omnia, quae in partibus ultra Danubianis armis Ottomanicis tenentur, usque ad
eandem Portam ferream inclusive evacuentur and respective maneant Caesareae
suae Regiaeque Majestati, nulla in iis partibus remanente Portae Ottomanicae
juris praetensione vel jurisdictione.

Ad III. E contra omnis illa terrarum plaga cis Danubium and ultra Savum jacens
maneat Portae Ottomanicae, ita, uti fuit ante hoc bellum addicta, nulla
Caesareae Regiaeque Majestati Jurisdictione iisdem in partibus remanente.

Ad V. Transylvania Armis Caesareis occupata, and Avito jure quaesita maneat;
porro sub ejusdem Sacrae Caesareae Regiaeque Majestatis protectione, nulla
Portae Ottomanicae ibidem reservata Juris cujuscunque competentia.

Ad VI. Croatiae Confinia ita decurrente fluvio Unna terminentur, ut quae
terrarum spatio sinistrae manus ripae adjacent, Caesareae Regiaeque Majestati
addicta maneant, quae vero dextrae manus ripae ejusdem Fluvii alluuntur, Salva
Ottomanicae Portae permanebunt: Sublatis in cujusque Imperii competenti
Territorio partis alterius jurisdictione and juris Exercitio.

Ad VII. His Conditionibus fiant induciae ad triginta annos.

Ad VIII. Placet.

Ad IX. Quaecunque conditiones in antiquis Sacris Capitulationibus expressae
usque praesens bellum observatae sunt, nec praedictis punctis stipulatis, aut
liberrimo cujusque possidentium dominio and usui ejusdem adversantur, aut
praejudicant, post-hac etiam colantur, cassatis and annullatis vicissim iis,
quae supradictis repugnant.

Repetuntur praeterea, quae in responso Caesareo ad primam Ablegatorum Portae
Ottomanicae propositionem condition secunda de liberate Confinia utrinque
Obstructione Fortalitiorum muniendi: Item in tertia de inhibendis ex utraque
part incursionibus hostilibus, praesertim Tartarorum; and quarta de
receptaculis Rebellibus aliisque malis hominibus non praebendis: In quinta, de
liberate Commerciorum: In sexta, de mutua Captivorum absque lytro
restitutione: In septima, de custodia Sanctissimi Sepulchri aliorumque
Sanctorum locorum in Judaea circa Hierosolymam, Franciscanis and Christianis
restituenda, concedendaque peregrinis Christianis Romano-Catholicis adeundi and
redeundi facultate, neque ipsis Religionis Romano-Catholicae exercitio iis in
partibus impediendo; praeterea in condition octava, de constituenda certa
norma Curialium in recipiendis, honorandis, tractandis, remunerandisque
Ministris, ultro citroque Commeantibus; sicuti and in Annotatione prima ejusdem
responsi de Obligatione Ablegatorum Portae Ottomanicae ratificationes conclusi
tractatus intra spatium triginta dierum a die subscriptionis computandorum, hic
reciproce commutandi; itidem secunda de Pace hac non prius quam stipulata
executioni plene demandata fuerint, robur habitura praefigendoque ad dictam
executionem peragendam bimestri termino, and quarta de Tokelio proditore noxae
tradendo, contenta sunt.

Respublica Ragusea nullo a Porta Ottomanica tributo aut alia exactione posthac
gravetur, gaudeatque liberate Commerciorum terra marique.

APPENDIX.
NEGOTIUM circa Confoederatos cum sua Caesarea Majestate Principes remittitur
dispositioni ejusdem si velit, aut a pacis Tractatibus excludat aut includat;
si includere placebit, hoc item duplici ratione fieri posse videtur, sive in
puncto separato terminis generalibus ponatur, ut cum inter utrumque Imperium
Pax and amicitia renovara sit, Poloniae etiam Serenissimi Rex and Respublica
inter terminum quadraginta sive quinquaginta dierum honestis conditionibus
paciscantur, vel express ac specifice item in separato puncto declaretur, ut
Confiniis restitutis in statum, qui praecesserat bellum Obsidionis and
Occupationis Kaminecii and Confusionem rerum, in iisdem confiniis paulo ante
ipsum bellum, atque Constitutis in illo ordine, in quo erant, quando ante
dissidia illius belli firma amicitia and bona vicinitas inter fulgidam Portam
and Polonos intercedebat, alma Pax inter fulgidam Portam and Poloniarum
Serenissimum Regem and Rempublicam coalescat; Quoad DD. Venetos vero pariter
hoc specificari potest, quod retentis occupatis Pacem cum fulgida Porta ineant.

Ad APPENDICEM.
INHAERET porro Caesarea Regiaque Majestas iteratis suis declarationibus circa
inclusionem suorum Dominorum Foederatorum in hisce Pacis Tractatibus, nec sine
iis Pacem ullo pacto aut modo concludet, prouti etiam ea, quae in ultima
Dominorum Ablegatorum Portae Ottomanicae declaratione contenta sunt, iisdem
communicavit, e quorum responsis subsecuturis aequanimem eorum declarationem
Domini Ablegati Turcici fusius percipient.

Demum Caesarea sua Regiaque Majestas ultra dictos suos Dominos Foederatos
etiam Dominos Czaros Muscoviae cum eorundem Dominiis, jure amicitiae, ita in
praesenti pacificatione comprehendit, ut ipsis intra annum a dato hujus
Tractatus cum Porta Ottomanica conclusi eidem accedere, ejusque participes
fieri liberum sit.

The Turkish Ambassador's Complaints and Expostulations about their
Imprisonment.
Ottomanicae Portae Ablegatorum pro Informatione Aulae Caesareae Domino
Werdenburgio facta Declaratio.
SIVE ex literis Dominorum Caesareorum Ministrorum Nobis tum in Suburbio
Commaromii morantibus, tum Pottendorffium ingressis traditis, sive aliqua ex
part ex discursu Dominationis Tuae ita conjicimus, cum Dominis Caesareis
Ministris Tractatus cum fulgida Porta reassumendi quaedam inclinatio oborta
sit, ut a speciosa and honesta ratione exordium ducatur quibusdam tanquam
motivis fuisse persuasos. Verum enim vero, cum rem plane cognitam a Nobis
aliter se habere deprehendamus, sinceritatis, quam erga utrumque Imperium
profitemur, interesse duximus, ut solid declaratis indubiis, quae ad
praeassumptas suppositiones pertinent, circumstantiis, illisque penitus a DD.
Ministris perceptis, nec sibi, nec Nobis negotium facessat obscuritas. Etsi
autem ex ista nostra expositione aliqua displicentia suboriri posse
suspiciatur, nos tamen coram DEO testamur, ex mera integritate illam promanasse
and sane si penitius introspiciatur, Candorem nostrum laudatum iri speratur.

Primum itaque quo praetitulatos Ministros ductos fuisse cogitamus id esse
videtur, quod quae in colloquio cum Domino Cardinali ante discessum nostrum
Vienna dicta sunt, ea in longam Negotiationem protrahantur, and ingens pro
lubitu moles superstruitur, atque variae deductiones and Consequentiae
subnectuntur; status autem genuinus and exitus illius rei ita se habet: A nobis
equidem nemo ad Colloquium invitatus est, ipsi Domino Cardinali Nobiscum
colloqui placuit and sese exhibuit, ac tanquam a Caesarea Majestate instructus
facultate cum in Congressu Augustiniani Monasterii Pacis restituendae rationem
aliquam semetipsum indagabundum praebuisset, a Nobis quoque etiamsi praeter
ante declaratam in Solemnibus Confessibus rationem, nulla ulterius express a
fulgida Porta fuerit insinuata, menti tamen Nostrae observata and pro rerum
tunc temporis coincidentia visa possibilis altera quoque forma ad rem
componendam proposita fuit, utrinque vero tunc declarata fieri non posse
utroque Nostri perseveranter asserente, and alterutro allatas Propositiones
abnuente in ea ipsa sessione and Colloquium and disputatio soluta fuere and sic
Vienna discessimus, verum cum intentionem aliam subesse appareret and in
Suburbium Commaromii transvectos Deputati ad Nos usque ad Confinia comitandos
Ministri in aprico deserentes clam sese subtraxerint, de detinendis Nobis
Commissio liquidius innotuit, quod literae quoque and emissi subinde variis
Occasionibus venientes confirmarunt, quibus nempe per Commendationem Pacis ad
paciscendum adhortabantur: Cum igitur Naves, quibus devehi debebamus, nequaquam
appellerent, and detentio Nostra in propatulo esset, nihilominus ad Omnia
connivere coepimus and quascunque semitas, sive illegales, sive legales,
digressi ac divagati sumus, and in remotissima quoque almi Tractatus specie
multum fiduciae ponentes, nihil omisimus, quod sinceritatem and candorem
Nostrum explicare posset, atque cum superveniente Domino Werdenburgio conserto
sermon Nostrae menti oborta quaedam pro pace punctorum juxta rerum tunc
temporis coincidentiam forma eidem exposita fuit, nempe hisce sub
conditionibus, ut acceptationis a Caesarea Aula Responsio intra december Dies
redderetur, alterque Nostri ad fulgidam Portam dimissus ei acta referret,
Portae autem liberum relinqueretur ratificationis arbitrium.

His ita projectis, Communicationis cum Confoederatis, seu praetextu, seu
causa, semel iterumque ab Aula Caesarea bini Menses interjecti fuere, ast nobis
nequaquam permissum, ut remisso Cursore fulgida Porta certior fieret, itaque
Nobis voluntas aliqua suboluit ex punctis haud acceptatis captandae ex
industria dilationis: Interea vero DEO ita volente mutata rerum facie Occasio
etiam effluxit; and Propositiones tam priores in Consessibus pronunciatae, quam
Dominationi Tuae posterius insinuatae penitus invanuere, ut plane nihil Nobis
reliquum and integrum sit, quod in medium afferatur; Septimus jam labitur
Mensis, a quo iteratis literis Caesareae Aulae significatum esse candide
voluimus, nullum hic Nobis superesse Negotium and pro continuando ad Portam
itinere multiplices supplicationes porrectae sunt, preces tamen nostrae
nequaquam exauditae fuere: Certe in nihilum dilapsae Propositiones istius
Nostrae hucusque detentionis in causa esse minime posse videntur: Coelorum ne
Motus desiit? An ab illorum Opifice constituta revolutio Orbis cessavit? Ut
rerum Universitas eidem Cardini defixa desistat. Praeterea a moderno Supremo
Vizirio Domino Nostro nullas ad nos vel ex duabus Syllabis literas pervenisse
and Nostrae custodiae causa omnino reali rerum notitia nos carere, praeterito
etiam anno contestati, and post-hac nulla Nos aliquid dicendi audacia pollere,
ingenue fassi fueramus; ab illo vero tempore, cum jam ferme annuum tempus
clabitur, praedictis duabus de causis, multo minus aliquod verbulum Nobis
suppetit, quinimo etsi Nostram Cognitionem nullius rei notitia tetigit, tamen
quod a celeberrimi Crimensis Chani Ablegato in Polonia de Nobis prolatum est,
ab ipsis Dominis Ministris fuerat Nobis significatum, quid plura? Sicuti
custoditi sumus, ita a tribus annis rerum omnium and Casuum notitia sumus
orbati, quae uti sincere relata si ab Aula Caesarea pensitentur, veritati
omnino congruere deprehendentur.

Aula Caesarea alio quoque duci motivo videtur, quod nimirum erga Caesareos
Ministros eadem norma tractationis Ottomanica Porta usa sit, and pro lubitu suo
juxta rerum exigentium, illos circumduxisse feratur, per DEUM testamur, versus
Germanos Ministros nunquam talem quampiam formam admissam fuisse, vetera
facessant, sub initio praesentis belli a Caesarea Majestate ad tractandam pacem
duo Internuncii missi fulgidam adiere Portam, quorum alteri Baro Hoffmannus,
alteri Comes Caprara nomen erat, uterque sive Adrianopoli sive Constantinopoli
cum Imperatoria Aula commorati sunt, and in transmigratione Regiae aulae penes
simul iter and stativa habuere; Baro Hoffmanus Adrianopoli Constantinopolim
Comes autem Caprara Constantinopoli Adrianopolim proprio instinctu and
postulatu una cum Porta profecti, famulitii sui partem Mari, partem terra
transmisere, nemo vero euntibus obstitit, in Urbibus autem plures Domos
habitantes ad placitum circumvagati sunt and cum aliarum Gentium Legatis
conversati, and omni liberate usi recreabantur, omnimodaque rerum notitia
informabantur, servitio etiam eorum destinati Viziriani Aga and Regii Chausii
and Janizarii placitis illorum nequaquam reniti jussi ad amussim illos
coluerunt, atque obsecundati sunt, consueto etiam salario exact and ex
Consueto praestito, nemo a tergo prospiciebat, and Comes Caprara tandem cum
revocatus fuisset, illico dimissus and post brevem Budae moram quo interea
tempore Exercitus pergebant, sanus atque incolumis ad Caesarea Confinia
traductus est, Caesareus autem Residens in Porta qua affluentia in Imperatoriis
Castris vixerit, quave liberate famulitium ejus circumierit toto Orb cognitum
compertumque habetur.

Ecquis ex Ministris Caesareis receptus responsoriis literis ad integrum annum
detentus fuit? Aut solutis tractatibus nullum ulterius expetens aut expectans
responsum e via retractus est? Aut custodiae and detentionis tot loca
commutavit? Aut a Servis Portae enormibus verbis fuit compellatus and
obtrectatus? Ottomanica Porta modone promicavit? An non Caesarei Legati illam
frequentarunt? Annon ultro subsistentiam ibi suam protexere, and altero mortuo
nonne alter subsecutus est, uti Caesareae Aulae prout placuit, and ei e re
fuit, ita ex suomet instinctu agebat, quibus autem rebus Porta nequaquam
assuevit, qui ad eas invita compellitur? Negotia non asperitate, sed reciproca
moderatione and mutua satisfactione ad optatum finem deducuntur, adstitere ne
aliquando Residentes Ottomanici Caesareae Aulae, aut Legati ad plures annos
detentine unquam fuere? Nunquam a Veteri sibi calcata semita deflecti Portam
fieri poterit, ut nova in praesens norma instituatur; Esto nobiscum cum in
potestate aliena simus, ita sit actum, tamen Portae incumbit suam servare
consuetudinem, and ab ea ne latum unguem discedet, id tantum fiet, ut Nobis
supervacanea afflictio, cum Porta vero acerbitas inimicitiae magis augescat: Id
etiam motivum, quod Aulae Caesareae suggestum est, videant DD. Ministri,
cujusnam vigoris sit.

Ultimum tamen, quod DD. Ministris insinuatum esse videtur, tale quidpiam
videtur, quod cum nos fulgida Porta iterum atque iterum identidem non
revocaverit conjicitur, malle nostram hic moram quam reditum, ast vero haec
etiam aliter se habet and super ista relatione quaecunque construitur moles
labascit, Nos plane Portae mentem scimus, ejusque explicatio and elucidatio ad
Nos attinet; quisque sui Imperii mores been callet, rerum scientia and
multiplici cognitione imbuto animo praeditus modernus Imperii possessor
Supremus Vizirius amplissimus Dominus Noster ab hac delegatione multum
abhorrebat, propter aliquorum annorum in bellicis expeditionibus prosperitatem
qualiter excipiendam fore praevidebat ac praedicebat, cum vero postea ipsemet
supremam administrationem adornandam susceperit, videtur experimento
comprobatae sententiae constantius inhaesisse, atque aptioribus and magis
appositis rationibus Reipublicae regimen aggressus esse, ac disposuisse,
proinde Imperii vires noscens and a pueritia cum domi suae, quae plurium
Primorum Viziriorum nidus extitit, praxin gerendarum rerum publicarum adeptus,
quibus mediis Bellum and Pax agatur, populus Ottomanicus precatur, ut DEUS
imposterum etiam opem suam sociam illi adjungat.

Haec itaque est causa, quod neutiquam ad nos respexerit, verum si ulterius
interrogabitur, and cur express non revocaverit, istius etiam dubii solutio
clara est, cum in literis Imperialibus ad Caesaream Majestatem Scriptum fuerit,
ut quam citissimeremittamur, and pro eodem reditu Nostro in prioribus and
posterioribus ante supremam Imperii administrationem functi Primi Vizirii
literis inculcatum sit, Imperialibus ne literis aliquis respectus adhibitus? An
Vizirianis literis assensus praestitus? Legationi isti aestimatio tributa? An
almae Pacis merito aliquod temperamentum allatum fuit? An non spatio ferme
trium annorum Unici tantum Cursoris Expeditio concessa est? Et ipsemet
diuturnam passus detentionem ab itinere reprehensus fuit; Cum ita revera res
ista se habeat, qui Nos principales Nostri sive per literas sive per expressos
invisitant? An vero Nobiscum affligendum aliquem emittant? Testamur sincere
misertos infimi cujusque nullum ex suo famulitio ad nos misisse: Certe si ex
Nobis liquidum and candidum responsum expetatur, id est, si hic ad decennium
ita detinebimur, nemo ad Nos accedet, haeccine quae pronunciamus, plane
verissima sunt, quaesumus ne his vocibus quispiam offendatur, ut expressi ultro
citroque permeent, veterem inter Gentes consuetudinem reciproce literas
Commeatus observari religiose, cuicunque liberam permitti voluntatem, fontem,
qui a DEO ad extinguendum belli ignem erectus est, apertum esse necessum est;
quousque vero his in despectu habitis Nos in isto eodem statu perseveramus,
sane nihil ad bonum commune peragetur, sin vero in Aula Caesarea ambigitur, an
Nostram hic moram fulgida Porta velit, dimissio Nostra posthac fulgidae Portae
dispositioni remittatur and Cursoris in Portam, expeditio nobis concedatur:
Favente DEO Potentissimi Imperatoris Nostri quidcunque in animo est, nobis
revelabitur; speramus tamen sidem adhibendam esse nostrae contestationi, ita ut
iteratis Interrogationibus non opus sit, ac proinde nos neutiquam detinendos,
and si quid praeterea tempori praesenti consentaneum and Imperii Ottomanici
Magnitudini consonum proponendum videbitur, si placet, eo quoque pronunciato,
Nos quamprimum esse remittendos: Forte postquam nos salvi and incolumes and
contenti redierimus, almus aliquis aditus aperietur, and utrinque permanentibus
Ministris opportuno momento ac loco ex mutua propensione and satisfactione, si
ita Divinae Majestati placuerit, sacrosanctus Pacis Tractatus coalescat, ex vi
certe nullum emolumentum emanabit, haec ex sinceritate and integritate Nostri
erga utrumque Imperium promanant, testis est DEUS, nullam subesse hypocrism,
haeccine juxta inter Germanum and Ottomanicum Imperium intercedentes res in
quonam statu reperiantur facile ab Aula Caesarea de prehendetur, ne se incassum
defatiget.

The English Ambassador being Dead, an end was put to the Treaty, and all
thoughts of Peace were laid aside, on one side and the other; Treaties of Peace
are laid aside.
for after the Battle of Salankement the Circumstances of things were changed,
and there was a necessity of consulting again the Emperor and his Allies,
before any farther Measures could be taken on the former Instructions. In like
manner the Turks were in great Confusion and Distraction, not knowing which way
to turn themselves; sometimes it was thought necessary, that the Grand Vizier
should hasten to Belgrade to take the Care and Command of the scattered Troops,
which were now at a loss for want of a Chief Head, and a Place whereunto to
resort, and take refuge: Besides the Presence of a Vizier was esteemed of great
encouragement to the broken Army, and the only means to retard the Flight of
those who were ready to break up their Camp, and betake themselves to their own
Habitations.

Whilst the Vizier was consulting hereof News came that the Army at Belgrade
was all, or for the most part dispersed; that the small Number of the
Janisaries which survived, The Army at Belgrade dispersed.
were resolved not to remain longer at Belgrade, but were already on their
March toward Adrianople, in a Naked and Poor Condition, without Money, or
Clothes. In like manner it was reported, That the Spahees, who lately went to
the War with a good Epuipage, and well Mounted on Horseback, were now
returning back on Foot, miserably Despoiled, and Poor, without Money, Horse, or
Arms: Many of them who had Escaped with their Horses and Arms, were passing the
Dardanelli into Asia, and thence traveling into their own Countries, perhaps
as far as Iconium, Aleppo, Damascus, or some other more remote Countries; other
Spahees, who had neither Horses, or Arms, were marching toward Adrianople,
there to demand the Donative, which has always been given by a New Sultan at
his first Inauguration: The Misery of the Turkish Army.
This Pretension of the Soldiery, which amounted unto more than a Million,
stroke great Terror into the Minds of the Chief Officers; for the Exchequer
being wholly empty, and the Soldiery in the utmost Extremity, and armed with
Rage and Despair, no Man knew what these Miseries might produce; and the
Soldiers approaching every Day nearer and nearer, all People were affected with
the same Consternation, as if the Germans, and the worst of Enemies had been at
their Gates.

In few Days after, the Aga of the Janisaries, with the small remainder of his
Janisaries arriving at Adrianople, caused the Grand Vizier, the Mufti,
Kadileschers, (who are the Lords Chief Justices) together with the Prime
Officers of the several Ogiacks to be convened, A Consultation held at
Adrianople.
and amongst themselves they held a long Conference.

At which they concluded upon several Particulars.

First, It was resolved to Confirm, and Maintain Sultan Achmet upon the Throne;
it being esteemed a thing unworthy of the Grandeur, and Wisdom of the Sublime
Port to change so suddenly, and frequently, the Person of their Sultans.

Secondly, It was resolved, That the Grand Seignior should Winter that Year at
Adrianople.

Thirdly, That the Mint should diligently Work Day and Night, to make Silver
Money for Payment of the Soldiery.

And Lastly, It was resolved, that (cost what it would) Great Waradin was to be
Succored and Relieved.

The which Resolutions, especially that about Coining Money for Payment of the
Soldiery, gave a stop to their Mutinies, and Insurrections, which were daily
feared: But what more sensibly consummated all the Miseries of the Turks, was
the want of Bread, The Miseries amongst the Turks.
as well as of Money; there having never been known in those Countries so great
a Dearth of Bread, as also of all sorts of other Provisions, as at that time,
which joined to all these Misfortunes, farther News was brought, That there had
been another Grievous Earthquake at Smyrna: And that an Express was come out of
Asia, That all that Country was overrun, with Robbers, and Murderers, who were
assembled in a Body near Sebaste, the Ancient Nest, and Nursery of Rebellion.

In the mean time the French Ambassador labored by all means possible, to give
Heart, and Courage to the Turks, November. The French Ambassador encourages the
Turks.
to continue the War; assuring them, That his King would the next Campaign go
himself in Person to the War; and continue the same, as well in Winter, as in
Summer, which would make such a Diversion in the Empire, as that the Emperor
should not be able to make Head, nor so much as look the Ottoman Army in the
Face. Notwithstanding all which Assurances of the French Ambassador, He
scarcely escapes the People.
and Promises to furnish the Turkish Army with 30 able Ingineers; the People,
or Rabble, would give little or no Credence to all his Engagements, and
Assurances; and scarce could the Great Men in the Government, preserve him from
the Violence of the Soldiery and People.

After the first Conference held, as we have said, by the Prime Officers;
another was called, at which, the Resolution to continue the War, was confirmed
by all there present, except two Persons only; namely, the Kadilescher of
Rumelia, and the Chaimacam of Constantinople, Counsels held by the Prime
Officers.
who dissented from the others, being of an Opinion that a Peace was to be made
by reason that the War could not longer be Maintained; howsoever the major
Party carrying it to the contrary, Commands were sent by an Express into
Albania, to raise Forces in that Country; it being agreed on all Hands that
they were the best Soldiers in the Empire, and had done extraordinary Service
in the last Battle.

In like manner at this Congress great were the Complaints against Murad Ghirei
Han, Complaints against the Tartars,
who commanded the Forces of Tartary before Vienna, and shamefully ran away;
the which being proved against him, the Council chose another called Seffa
Ghirei, esteemed a good Soldier, and a Valiant Man, who was then at Jamboli,
not far distant from Adrianople; and upon this Election, he was immediately
dispatched away to take Possession of his Government; for the Grand Seignior
has a Power to Depose, and Set up any Prince of the Crim Tartar, provided he
continues him in the right Line of Sultan Galga: And for the Deposed Tartar to
avoid all Disturbances and Contests, he was exiled together with his Son into
the Island of Rhodes; and also Battir Aga, who was the Chief Minister, and
General of the Deposed Tartar, was Banished into the Island of Lemnos, situate
in the Archipelago.

After which diverse Pasha's, and Officers of the Army, were called to this
Congress, by whom several Complaints were made and exhibited against certain
Captains, And against other Pasha's of the Army
and Soldiers of the Army, who in the last Battle had ill behaved themselves
and Cowardly betook themselves to flight. In which Accusations, August.
single Allegations were sufficient to Convict any Man; and upon the sole
Testimony of one Person, many were proscribed, and in the Night privately
without Noise, were strangled, and in the Morning found Dead in their Beds; Are
Punished:
and amongst the rest was the Kahya of the late Deceased Vizier, put to Death
at Belgrade, upon a Suggestion, that so soon as he had seen his Master Wounded,
he betook himself to flight, and was followed by all the Pages of the Court,
who were well Mounted, and Armed, and might have done great Service had they
not followed the Ignominious and Base Example of their Master. The like Fate
attended the Spahilar-Agasee, or General of the Horse, who was said to have
been the first to turn his Back on the Enemy. And at Adrianople three other
Pasha's were put to Death, for the same Crime, or Default.

After these Executions done, the General of the Janisaries was Named for not
behaving himself well, but because there are some Points of respect reserved
for the Order of Janisaries, he was only dismissed from his Government, and
with a good Grace sent to be Pasha of Gaza, the meanest Pashaluck in the whole
Empire; and this would have been a Favor, had they not sent an Executioner
after him, and in his way taken off his Head, as is the usual Custom amongst
the Turks; with such Orders and Methods as these, the Turks reassumed something
of their Courage; dispatching without delay Commands for Listing and Enrolling
Janisaries, and other Orders of Militia, as also Timariots, Zaims, Segmen and
others; and that they would augment their Numbers, as far as to 100000 Men, or
at least to the same degree, as they were the last Year.

But before we proceed farther on the Turkish side, we must look a little back,
and see what the Germans are doing after so Signal a Victory.

August.
The 20th of this Month of August being the next Day after the Battle, some
Parties of Hungarians, and Rascians were commanded to Pursue the Enemy in their
Flight, which they did with such Expedition, The Turks pursued by the Rascians.
that they brought back with them, many of the Fugitives, dispersed, and
straggling through Private Ways, and unknown Paths; and reported, That the whole
Turkish Army were Flying in the greatest Confusion imaginable; and that a great
part of them had already passed the Save, and had broken all the Bridges behind
them; and that great Numbers of Dead Bodies, were found on the Roads, and
covered the Ground for some Distance from the Camp: For which great Victory Te
Deum was sang on the 21st, Te Deum sung.
with a Triple Discharge of all the Guns, as well of those which were taken
from the Turks, as those belonging to the Christian Army: And here on the 22th
the Christian Army reposed, and rested it self in the Field of Battle.

In the mean time before the News of the Victory, Colonel Mackeri, Governor of
Verovitza, with a Party of 1600 Men, attacked the Castle of Velicko, and having
thrown some Bombs into it, it was forced to Surrender at Discretion, having had
about 300 Men Killed, and not above 60 left Alive; the Booty was not great,
unless it were the Releasement of Christian Prisoners, of which 300 obtained
their Liberty.

The first Motion the Army made from the Field of Battle, was to Carlowitz,
where the Duke of Holstein was Buried. The next Day, being the 25th, they
marched to Peter Waradin, where the Dukes of Ahremberg, and Arschot, the
General Souches, together with several other Officers, Died of their Wounds,
the great Heats having contributed much to their Deaths.

On the 30th, a General Council of War was held in the Imperial Army, at which
it was resolved, That the Duke of Croy, Field-Marshal, with the Generals
Saurau, A Resolution at a Council of War.
and Hoffkirchen, and five Regiments of Horse, and as many of Foot, besides
Rascians and Hungarians, should March toward Esseck to cover that Country, and
Pass, and accordingly they began their March on the last of the Month, whilst
Prince Lewis of Baden remained in the Camp to secure, and cover them in the
Rear.

Of all which Matters the News being sent to Vienna, both as to the Victory,
and the Methods taken after it, we may imagine that all the Imperial Court, as
well as all Parts of Christendom, were filled with an extraordinary Joy for so
signal a Victory; and as the Emperor sent his Gracious Encouragements to all
the Officers; so more especially to the General Officers, declaring Prince
Lewis of Baden; Lieutenant General of the Imperial Army in Hungary; Pr. Lewis
made Lieutenant General.
where whilst these things were agitating, the News came of the Victory, which
King William of England had gained at the Boyne in Ireland, which served to
augment the Triumphs with another triple Discharge of all the Cannon in the
Army.

The Winter drawing near, the greatest part of the Turkish Militia, being under
great Discouragements, and having a long Journey Home, thought fit to leave the
Camp: So did the Tartars, Plundering all in their way, so did the Arnouts, and
Albanians, September.
and all the Soldiers whose Towns, and Houses were not at a far distance; so
likewise the Spahee's stole privately away, The Turkish Forces disperse.
and the Asiatick Horse made toward the Dardanelli, where they passed into
Asia; and in this manner did all the Forces disperse, that scarce any
appearance remained of an Army, or a Camp; and those few who kept to their
Colors, were possessed with great Consternation upon the News that the Poles
had actually Invaded Walachia, and brought great Destruction, and Ruin upon
that Province.

The Weather beginning now to be Cold and Wet, much incommoded the Soldiers of
Prince Lewis his Army in their March, especially the Foot, who trashing through
the Waters in a Country where was no Wood to Dry them, or Warm, and Dress their
Victuals, many of them fell Sick and Died. And indeed that Country, as I have
my self observed, has neither Timber, nor Underwoods; so that the Inhabitants
live in Caves under Ground, the Soil being of a stiff Clay, grows hard with
Fires, like a Stone; all their Fuel being Turf, of which, by the Laziness of
the Inhabitants, a sufficient store had not been gathered to furnish the
present use of the Army.

Whilst the Army quartered in this Barren Country, News was brought to Prince
Lewis, That General Veterani having heard of the Defeat of the Turks, had
Decamped from Dobra, and was marched to Lippa; where coming before the Town, he
sent his Summons to Surrender, which being refused, Lippa surrendered to
General Veterani
some few Bombs were cast into it, which brought the Garrison to a Desire to
Capitulate, but nothing would be granted but a Surrender at Discretion.

In fine, all the Men, being 216 in number, were made Prisoners, together with
three Pasha's, viz. Mahomet Bey, and one Ali Pasha (who had been sent thither
for a Place of Banishment by the Grand Vizier) and also another Bey, with a
Ziorbassi, or Captain. In the Town were three Guns, and two Mortar-pieces only,
with a good quantity of Ammunition, but little of Provisions. After which Count
Guttensteyn was made Governor of the Place, with some Hundreds of Men for a
Garrison: And whereas News was brought, That Tekeli, with five or 6000 Men was
Quartered about Temeswaer, it gave some Apprehensions of his Design to Invade
Transylvania; for which reason General Veterani kept his Station at Lippa to
observe his Motions.

In the mean time Prince Lewis continued his March to Segedin, where he
refreshed his Army for some Days: And here it was that a certain Turk came from
Belgrade under a Pretense to demand the Exchange of 4000 Turks against so many
Christians; Pr. Lewis continues his March.
but this Proposal seeming fictitious, he was suspected for a Spy, seized, and
committed to Prison.

It being thought fit to secure Lippa lately taken, the Prince sent his
Adjutant-General with 12 Saicks laden with Provisions, and some Money, by way
of the River Maroth to Lippa, to Mend and Repair the Fortifications of that
Place, Reinforces Lippa.
and raise new ones where the Works were defective; and for its better
Reinforcement, 2000 Rascians, and Hungarians, both Horse and Foot, were sent to
strengthen the Garrison.

The Prince likewise with the remaining part of the Army, marched to Zolnock,
where the Horse having passed the Bridge for that purpose erected, met on the
same Day of their Arrival, with the Field-Marshal Count Mansfelt, and
Major General Aversberg at the same place, A Party of Tekeli's Men defeated.
who had lately been detached in two Parties; the latter of which had the
fortune to surprise a Party of 600 Men belonging to Tekeli, of whom they killed
above 100, and made 32 Prisoners; which gave so great an Alarm to others of
their Companions, which were posted near Great Waradin, that in a precipitate
Flight and Confusion, they betook themselves to their Heels, carrying withal
their Bag and Baggage, with whatsoever else was portable.

Nor was Count Schlick who Commanded the Blockade of Great Waradin, less
successful; for having received Information, That some Hundreds of Oxen
belonging to that Garrison, were Grasing in the Meadows near thereunto; posted
himself with 400 Horse in a small Wood over against the Place, C. Schlick
defeats a Party from Gr. Waradin.
ordering some Hussars to drive the Oxen toward the Wood where he lay in
Ambuscade. The Hussars following their Instructions in driving the Cattle, were
pursued by the Garrison till they came near the Wood, when Schlick sallied out
upon them, and so vigorously Attacked them, that 400 Turks were killed on the
Place, many Prisoners taken, and the Oxen carried clear away to the great
damage of that Garrison.

This Success was followed by another of the like Nature, for Schlick having
understood from the Prisoners, that a considerable Body of Tekeli's Men were
Quartered in a Village on the other side of the City; he took the opportunity
of the Night to pass silently along, and without any Noise surprise them, and
killed most of them in their Quarters, after which he repassed with the like
Privacy back without the least opposition, to his own Camp.

It being now divulged that the Design of Prince Lewis was to turn the Blockade
of Great Waradin into a Formal Siege, Count Aversberg was Detached from the
Army with a Body of Dragoons and Pioneers, to Mend and Repair the Roads which
were become almost unpassable, especially for Cannon, and Wagons laden with
Provisions and Necessaries for the Army.

Count Schlick who was not as yet privy to this Design of the Prince, observing
by his Motion, That Great Waradin was to be formally Besieged, he privately
conveyed himself and Troops into some Islands between the Rivers Korosh and
Bozze, and drove away the Enemies Cattle, being about 900 Head, and took some
Prisoners from under the very Walls of the City, and brought them all to his
Camp. As Schlick returned, the Turks of the Place called to him, and the Pasha
desired a Parley with him in the open Field upon Parole, which Schlick refused
to do, until he understood that Count Marsigli, and his Chiaus were in the
Town, having been employed on the Negotiation of Peace; Count Marsigli and his
Chiaus at Great Waradin.
and then he yielded to an Interview with the Pasha, who declared to him, That
the loss of their Cattle droven from under their Walls, was not so much caused
by the Negligence of the Garrison, as by their attention to their New Guests,
whom they were entertaining with all Freedom and Friendship; and so would seem
to insinuate that for that reason, it would be but Just and Agreeable to the
Laws and Rights of War, that they should be again restored; but Schlick would
understand none of these Laws and Ceremonies, but retired without other Answer,
and Count Marsigli was suffered to go to the Camp of Prince Lewis.

October.
On the first of October, the Prince continued his March, and on the 10th
arrived within a League of Great Waradin, where the next Day he joined with all
the Foot, and received Intelligence, That Tekeli had released General Heusler
on Parole, whom he had some time before taken Prisoner; and that he was already
come as far as Hermanstadt: And from hence it was, that Count Marsigli, with
the Turkish Chiaus, was also dispatched to the English Ambassador at
Adrianople; of whose Death they had not as yet received any Report whilst the
Prince of Baden was making Preparations for a Siege before Great Waradin, the
Duke of Croy Attacked the Fortress of Brod in Sclavonia, in which there was a
Garrison of 300 Turks; who upon appearance of the Enemy before the Walls, put
out five Red Ensigns; and in a manner of Defiance and Scorn, Danced upon the
Ramparts; but this Sport continued not long; for the Duke that Evening took a
Post near the Walls with 400 Men, and immediately began to Work; and
notwithstanding the continual Fire of the Enemy, they finished a Battery before
One in the Morning, together with a Line of Communication, on which they
planted four Guns, and one Mortar-piece, and before Day began to batter the
Town: Brod des rted by the^ Turks;
The Turks affrighted hereat withdrew, and retired into a Fort on the other
side of the River, leaving two small Guns, and some Pedreros behind them; and
the Place unto their Enemy, who took possession of it, and therein placed 150
Germans to defend it. Howsoever the Turks continued to Fire out of their Fort
on the other side, but without any considerable Damage to the Germans; for they
remained not long there, before they deserted that Fortress also, being
terrified to see Percilie a Rascian Captain with 80 Hussars, And fly to another
Fort.
and about 100 Foot in small Boats to pass the Save; and hearing in the Night
the Sound of Trumpets and Drums, and all sorts of Instruments to play, they
were immediately struck with a fear, and apprehension that the whole Imperial
Army had passed the River with intention next Morning to Attack them, Which was
also deserted by them; and flying into the Woods, are for the most part cut off.
with which imagination affrighting one the other, they retired in a confused
manner out of the Fort toward the Forests and Woods, being in all about 1500
Persons, besides the Peasants of the Country, who with Arms in their Hands, but
without any Order fled into the same Forests; but being pursued by the Hussars
and some German Horse, they were cut down, and most of them Killed, very few
escaping alive.

In the mean time Prince Lewis was busied in preparing things, and putting all
in a readiness for the Siege of Great Waradin; and Commanded Count Stirum, with
a considerable Body of Men, and some Artillery to approach nearer to the City,
and soon after followed in Person with all the Horse and Foot, pitching his
Camp on the Banks of the River Korosch; and having planted a Battery on a
rising Ground, he shot into the Town, and raked the Streets from one end unto
the other: At the same time also two Mortar-pieces being well fixed threw into
the City several Bombs, which set Fire to the Houses, and burnt whole Streets.
In this Consternation the Besieged attempted nothing by Sally, but only plied
their Great Guns, and set Fire to the Hay and Straw, of which they had raised
great Stacks in their Gardens, and void Places of the City, least the Enemy
should serve themselves of it.

The Bombs continued firing, whilst Barfus General of the Brandenburghers, and
Count Guido of Staremberg, with nine Battalions, placed themselves in a deep
Ground, where they could not be overseen by the Enemy, from whence 1500 Men
issued in the Night, and opened the Trenches, whilst others were busied in
raising a Battery over against the Gate of the Palancha Ottorsi, Great Waradin
Attacked.
on the Right Hand of which, a Redoubt was made, between which, and the
Battery, a Line of Communication was drawn; by this time a Battery of six great
Guns was perfected, and began to play; which the Enemy answered with their Guns
from the Wall, firing without any intermission: The six Guns being at some
distance, did not the execution which was desired; and therefore the Night
following the Battery was brought nearer to the Palanca which was on the Right
Hand; and next Night a New Battery was raised to the Left Hand of it; on which
Guns and Mortar-pieces being planted, many Houses were set on Fire, and a great
part of the Palanca consumed by them: Howsoever the Turks laboring with all
Diligence possible, repaired what Damage and Ruin the great Guns had done,
which they easily did; for the Walls being for the most part made of a strong
sort of Timber, or Oak, which does not Shiver, or Splinter, the Bullet made no
greater Hole in the Walls than the size of the Shot; besides which, the Ditch
was very deep about them, and six Paces broad; howsoever by frequent firing,
the Holes became so wide and large, as gave Encouragement to make a Storm on
the Walls; the which was ordered for the 16th at Night. General Barfus, and
Count Staremberg Commanded the Attack, which was performed with the greatest
Resolution imaginable: The Musketeers with Hatchets in their Hands ran to the
Gates, in which the Guns having made several Holes, they cut them down with the
more ease. On the other side Col. Mollner's Heydukes, The Palanca of Great
Waradin taken.
stormed the Walls with much Bravery and Resolution; one of them Kneeling down,
supporting himself on his Hands and Arms, another stood upon him, whilst a
third climbing over both, with his Scymiter in his Mouth, threw himself into
the Palanca; and in this manner many of them having passed the Wall, began to
cut down all that were before them; with which the Turks being terrified,
abandoned the Fort, and fled over the Bridge into the City.

This place being thus taken, with the loss of very few Men, some Guns were
found in it, with one Mortar-piece only. Some Battalions being lodged in the
Palanca, Prince Lewis with his Army passed the Rivers of Korosch and Poze, and
Encamped on the other side of the Town, where that Night 1500 Men were
Commanded to open the Trenches, The Town Besieged.
which was performed with much diligence, and a Battery was raised, and another
also in the Palanca of Ollorsi now taken. The Hussars in the mean time Encamped
on the other side, to distress and streighten the City the more narrowly; and
now the Approaches being constantly carried on nearer, and nearer; and another
Battery raised, on which 11 Guns were planted, they began to fire from thence
and from the Palanca, with a like Number into the Streets which much annoyed
the Town. These Batteries fired so constantly on the Walls, that a sufficient
Breach was made, on which to make an Assault, and accordingly a Storm was
appointed for the 24th of this Month, which the Turks perceiving by the
Preparations that were made, had not the Courage to stand the Shock, but
setting fire to the City, which they believed they could not maintain, retired
to a Fort which they had raised between the City, and the Fortress; the City
being now on Fire, and no opposition on the Walls, the Germans crowded into it
with great Throngs, where they took much Cattle, and released some Hundreds of
Rascians, who were Inhabitants in that City, which the Turks, had they not been
prevented, had carried off with them. The resigning this Place, which was so
well fortified with several Retrenchments and Works one behind the other, was
to the great Wonder of the Germans, who hereby were well advertised, and
assured of the fear of the Turks; by which they took fresh Courage, and posted
themselves in the great City over against the Fortress, and in the space of two
Days, they advanced very near to the Ditch of the Fortress; and in two Days
more they finished a Work on which they planted 18 Mortar-pieces, and from
thence threw such quantities of Bombs into the Fortress, and with that effect,
that one of them falling into one of the Magazines of Powder, it blew up, and
showed a dreadful Spectacle of the Arms and Heads of Men carried into the Air.

The Turks having other Magazines of Powder and Provisions remained resolute in
their Defense; and on the other side the Christian Army continued to throw
Bombs into the Fortress, by which a Steeple took fire, which spread it self
through the whole Fortress, and in less than six Hours time one half thereof
was reduced to Ashes: In the mean time a Party of Tartars of about 600 fell in
upon the Foragers, and took both the Men and Horses, and Booty which they had
by them, but being immediately pursued and overtaken by the Hussars, all was
seized again and brought to the Camp with seven Heads, and three Prisoners.

November.
The Month of November being now entered, the Turks began to be of Opinion, that
the Christians could not continue long before the Place; for that the long and
wet Nights, Snow, and Frosts of that Country must needs force them to raise the
Siege; the Consideration of which moved the Pasha of the Place to refuse the
acceptance of the Prince's second Summons; saying, That there would be time
enough for that six Months hence. This Answer obliged the Besiegers to throw
their Bombs continually into the Fortress, to force the Turks, so soon as was
possible, to a Surrender: But in regard the bad Weather came on, and that
Forage became so scarce in the Camp, that many of the Horses died, though
Provision for Men was plentiful and cheap; it was concluded by the General
Officers, that the Season of the Year was too far advanced for continuance of
the Siege; and therefore it was esteemed most advisable to turn it to a
Blockade; but before the Germans bid a Farewell to the Place, they beat down a
great Tower with their Cannon, on which the Turks having planted several Guns,
did very much annoy the Germans.

On the 2d Instant the throwing of Bombs was continued, and a Great Fort was
raised for the securing of the Posts if the advanced Season of the Year, and
the Obstinacy of the Turks should oblige the Prince to raise the Siege, and to
leave the City narrowly Blocked up during the Winter.

On the 3d the Cannon of the Besiegers beat down a great Tower on which the
Besieged had several Guns which much incommoded the Germans.

The 4th and 5th the Guns and Mortar-pieces of the Besiegers continually fired
on the Turks. That Day a Polish Envoy, who came into the Prince's Army some
Days before, departed from thence for Tockay to expect there the Arrival of the
Plenipotentiaries both of the Allies and Turks, who had appointed to meet there
for the reassuming of the Treaties of Peace.

But about this time Forage begun to be very scarce to be had in the Army, the
Horse being obliged to fetch their Hay sive Miles off, for which reason many
Horses perished, but Provisions for the Army were plentiful and cheap enough.
Several of Tekeli's Men came over to the Prince before Waradin; all which
unanimously confirmed, That the Body of Turks, Tartars, and Rebels, (or
Tekelians) which hitherto were Encamped between Gena and Gyula, suffered
extremely for want of Provisions, being for the most part obliged to sustain
themselves with Wild Fruits, which caused them to Die in great Numbers; their
Horses wanting Forage, perished likewise in abundance.

On the 6th Instant cold Rains and Snow began, and continued until the 10th,
notwithstanding which the Bombing continually went forward; the Prince also
sent a Letter to the Basha-Governour, Summoning him to Surrender the Fortress,
which Letter the Basha would not at all receive, but told the Bearer it was not
yet time to speak of Capitulations or Surrendering that Fortress.

The 10th of November, November. 10th.
(on which Day the Rascian Lieutenant Colonel Antonio, returned back to the
Army with 400 Wagons, which he had taken from Tekeli as he marched homewards)
the great Fort distant five or 600 Paces from the Gate of the Fortress, was
finished and brought to its entire Perfection, which Fort was more elevated and
higher than the Walls and Batteries of the Fortress, in which 1000 Germans and
some Hundred were Commanded as a Garrison: Besides this Fort, a lesser was made
on a certain Eminence, from whence the Guns fired in the inside and Streets of
the Fortress which was provided with a proportionable Garrison. In the Great
City of Waradin, a far greater Garrison of Horse and Foot than that in the
Great Fort was ordered, and Colonel Mollner was Commanded to remain in the
Palanca Ollorsi with his Regiment of Hussars, and some Foot, which being thus
ordered, and by that means the Fortress so closed up, that nothing could come
out or go into it, there being also not the least appearance of any Succors to
relieve the Place, the Prince thought it more expedient to send his Army into
Winter Quarters in the Neighboring Villages, and Cities of Debrezin, and St.
Job, then to expose them to the hardships of the long cold Nights, Wet and
Snowy-Weather, especially since Count Tekeli was already decamped from about
Gyula, and marched with his ruined and fatigued Army of Turks, and Tartars, and
Rebels to Winter Quarters, as it was confirmed by upwards of 300 Tekelians
Deserted from him, and arrived at Lippa, Zolnock, Belnesch, or in the Army,
since that our Trenches also were carried on to the very Ditch of the Fortress;
that their Bridges over the said Ditches were beaten down, and most of the
Water drained thereout, that their Works were so ruined that none dared to show
himself, our Guns continually firing on the inside, that our Bombs, and the
noisome stinking Smell of some Fireworks, together with the restless State of
the Besieged, who were always forced to stand on their Guard, and continually
alarmed, having no shelter but some Sellars and Vaults, could not but oblige
them e're long to Capitulate, or Perish by Fatigues and other Wants: All which,
I say, being considered by the Prince of Baden, he having provided his Forts,
Palanca, and the City with Garrisons very commodiously placed, sent the rest of
his Army into Winter Quarters.

The Blockade being thus resolved, a Great Fort was raised for securing the
several Posts, being about the distance of five or 600 Paces from the Gate of
the Fortress; this Fort was built upon an Eminence or some higher Ground than
the Walls and Batteries of the Fortress; for defense of which, above 1000
Germans were appointed for the Garrison: The Manner of the Blockade.
Besides this, a smaller Fort was also raised on a rising Ground, and furnished
with a good Garrison, from whence they could shoot into the Streets and Houses
of the Fortress. Moreover the City it self of Great Waradin was maintained with
a more numerous Garrison, than what the Turks had in their Fortress; and the
Palanca of Ollorsi was Commanded by Col. Mollner, and Garrisoned with his
Regiment of Hussars, with some Foot.

Things being thus secured, and the Fortress on all sides closed up, that
nothing could go out, or come into it; the Prince judged it more necessary to
send his Army into Winter Quarters in the Neighboring Villages, Pr. Lewis
marches off
and Cities of Debrezin, and St. Job, then to expose them to the Hardships of
Long, Dark, and Wet Nights, and Snowy Weather, which began to fall in great
abundance. In which Resolution the Prince was the more confirmed by the Report
of 300 of Tekeli's Men, who had Deserted their Commander; and assured the
Prince upon Oath, That Tekeli with his Turks and Tartars, was already Decamped
with his Army about Giula, and marched into Winter Quarters.

So now we must leave the Prince and his Army also in their Quarters, and the
Fortress of the Turks straightly Blockaded, until about the Months of May and
June 1692, next ensuing.

Thus have we finished the Relations of the Successes in the Campaign for the
Year 1691; the which proved as Unfortunate to the Turkish Affairs, and Arms, as
most of the former Years since the beginning of this War; and when things go
Unluckily Abroad, we cannot expect that they should look very Smiling, or
Pleasant at Home.

The Sultan who had fansied to himself mighty things under the Auspicious
Conduct of Mustapha Pasha Kupriogli, such as an entire Victory in the Field
over the Germans, and as the Consequences thereof, the Surrender of Oseck and
Buda, and all other Cities and Fortresses in Hungary, which during these Wars,
had yielded themselves to the Victorious Arms of the Emperor, being now on a
sudden fallen from the hopes of all those things, (which with a strong Fancy
and Imagination he had figured in his Mind; by a quite contrary Event, he was
so Surprised and struck with the sudden News, That his Army was Defeated, his
General the Grand Vizier killed, with the Flower of the Turkish Militia, all
the Cannon taken, and the Camp exposed to the Violence and Rapine of the German
Soldiery; his Spirits so sunk within him, Sultan Achmet fallen into a Fever by
ill News.
that he did nothing but Sigh, and being possessed with a Lumpish Melancholy,
fell often into heavy, but not refreshing Sleeps; so that having his Mind
troubled in the Day, and his Fancy with Horrid Dreams in the Night, he fell
into a Fever, which endangered his Life; and gave occasion to the People to
Talk much of his Death, and setting up in the Throne Sultan Mustapha, the Son
of Sultan Mahomet IV, who had been Deposed: But this Passion of Mind which
possessed the Grand Seignior, passing over with a little Time, he being
Naturally of a Jolly Temper, He Recevers.
given to Music and Wine, his Fever quitted him, and he recovered. So also did
the Old Ali Pasha, who had been Chimacam at Adrianople; and upon the Death of
Kupriogli (as we have said) was made Grand Vizier, his Disease was the same
with that of the Grand Seignior, proceeding from Afflicting himself at the News
of the Rout of the whole Turkish Army, and the Apprehensions he had of new
Turbulencies arising thereupon amongst the Soldiery, the which had struck him
with a kind of Apoplexy, and a Stupidity in his Understanding; The Grand Vizier
sick, and recovered.
but it went off, so soon, as he perceived the Soldiery to return more mildly
Home than was expected, and then he began to revive, and take upon him the
Power and Authority of his Government. He was an Ancient Man, and of great
Experience, but he was neither esteemed for a Wise, nor an Undertaking Man,
which are two Qualities very necessary in a Grand Vizier. But the Mufti made
some amends for the Inabilities of that Great Minister; for being a Person of a
deep Understanding, and highly esteemed by all Parties for his profound Wisdom,
he became very helpful to the Grand Vizier, His Qualifications.
who had the good quality to hearken unto the Counsels of those who were wiser
than himself; it being one of his Infirmities to be irresolute, which shows an
Imbecility of Mind; and is a quality the most disagreeable to an absolute
Monarchy. But being pushed forward by his Friends, he governed well; for being
a Man not very Avaritious, (as few Turks but are) he preferred none but such as
were Men of Merit, and had signalized themselves by long Services, or some
great or good Actions; his Country was Bosnia, which has given many Valiant
and Stout Soldiers to the Turks, being reputed Men of Bravery, and Fidelity in
their Words and Actions.

Never had the Ottoman Empire, since it came to be an Empire, more need of
Able, Valiant, and Wise Men, than at present; and never were they more rare and
hard to be found: For what with the War which destroyed their brave, and best
of their Gallant Soldiers, and Commanders; and with their Seditions, and
Tumults at Home, in which their Principal Officers, both Civil and Military,
were cut off; none remained alive but only Upstarts, or some Leaders of the
Insolent, or Seditious Soldiery: And this was the State of the Empire, not only
oppressed by the Victorious Enemy on the Frontiers; but by a want of all things
at Adrianople, even to a Famine, which raised the Outcries and Clamours of the
People against the Government, which being joined to the Abuse of Copper-Money,
(than which, at that time no other was to be seen, or currantly passed)
discouraged the Countrymen from bringing Provisions to the Market, and caused
the People more earnestly to cry out for a Peace, and exclaim against the
French, for having now for four Years engaged them in a War the most Bloody,
the most Ruinous, and most destructive to the Ottoman Empire that was ever
known. The French Ambassador fearing that these Tumults, and the Inclinations
of some of the Ministers would at length prevail for a Peace, he bestowed his
Money very liberally, where he thought it might be well placed (for as yet the
French King wanted not Money, as he did some Years afterward) but he could not
as yet fix any on the Chimacam Chusaein Pasha at Constantinople, who always
told the Ambassador's Servants, that he wanted none of his Presents, being well
provided with what was necessary for his Maintenance, and Equipage. The
Difficulty of this Great Minister's Proceedings did not a little trouble the
Thoughts of the Ambassador, especially when he had understood that this
Chimacam had wrote to the Mufti to persuade to a Peace, The Chimacam of
Constantinop^e, an (...) my to the French.
the League with France being apparently destructive to the Empire; saying, as
it were, How long shall these People be a Snare to us? And hereof the
Ambassador was the more apprehensive when he heard that the Sultan was
returning to Constantinople for his Health; being persuaded by the Physicians,
That the Air of that City and the Sea, would be more conducing to his Health,
than that of Adrianople; by which he feared, that the Chimacam might have the
better opportunity to instill these Imaginations into the Head of the Grand
Seignior, than he could at a distance.

But before the Departure of the Grand Seignior from Adrianople for
Constantinople, a General Council of War was held by all the Chief Officers of
the Army: At which three principal Points were concluded.

The First was, Resolutions at a Council of War.
To do their best Endeavors, and use all possible means for the Relief of
Great Waradin: But on the other side it was considered, That the Militia on the
Frontiers was tired out, and become weak by their Labors and Disgraces of the
preceding Campaign; so that the Means for executing this Design was not
prescribed.

A Second Proposal was not to conside much in the Counsels of the French; but
to consult the Opinion of the Soldiery, whether they were inclinable to a Peace.

And Thirdly, In case the Soldiery should be averse to a Peace, that then
Preparations should be made with all diligence to raise Men, and make
Provisions of War for the ensuing Year.

But whilst Matters were disposing to quiet the Minds of the Soldiery, of which
great Numbers were passed over into Asia, much harassed and discontented; so
that some Insurrections were feared in those Countries: Tumults against
Copper-Money.
Behold on a sudden the People murmured against the base Allay of the Money,
which was nothing but Copper, or at best mixed with a little Silver, which was
a mighty prejudice to Trade, and caused a dearness of all Provisions, so that
the Poor were almost Starved; whereupon the Rabble, in a furious manner,
assaulted the Mint-Office, and Killed the Master who was set over the Coinage,
and committed many other Insolences, and were not appeased until an Order was
published, That the Copper-Money should be no longer Current; at which the
People dispersing, Silver-Money was issued from the Mint; where the Officers
worked Day and Night in Coining Aspers, and greater Money; and with Promises of
being paid shortly in this Money, the Soldiers were very much pleased and
satisfied; though the Discontents of the Asiatick Soldiers, gave great
Apprehensions and Fears to the Port of some Revolt or Insurrection in Asia;
which had it at that time happened, it had in all probability produced a Peace.
But this Blessing both to the Christians and the Turks, was reserved for a more
happy time; as we shall see, if God gives us Life, some Years afterward; with
which we shall put a Period to this History.

Anno 1692.
English Ambassador Sir William Hussy, designed to Negotiate the Peace,
together with Monsieur Colyer the Ambassador of Holland, between the Emperor
and the Sultan Achmet (as we have said) being Dead, an end was put for the
present to that Negotiation, and the Ambassador of Holland returned back from
Adrianople, without being able to effect any thing in order thereunto; the
Resolution of continuing the War, was the loud Report, and Discourse common in
the Mouths of all People; and that no Treaty should be set on Foot, The Turks
resolve to continue the War.
until the Recovery of Buda from the Germans, and of Morea from the Venetians;
and herein were the Turks more animated by the Assurances of the French
Ambassador, that his Master was sending two great Men of War from France, laden
with Bombs, Grenades, Carcasses, and with all sorts of Military Preparations,
and with them 200 French Engineers, and Gunners, of great Experience in the
Management of Fireworks, and other Warlike Instruments, fit, and proper both
for Sea, and Land: And farther to show his Zeal in this Cause, the Ambassador
promised to go himself in Person to the War.

To give more life to the Ambassador's Words, the Son-in-Law to Tekeli returned
from France, and in the beginning of this Year arrived at Smyrna, whence
immediately without any stop, or stay, he took Post for Adrianople, being fully
freighted with Letters, and Promises from the French King to the Sultan, and
presents to the Chief Officers of State to persuade them to Continue, and
Maintain the War; so that now all Thoughts and Imaginations of a Peace were
vanished, and laid aside.

Wherefore in order to a War, a Project was laid by the two Cadileskers, or
Chief Justices, to raise both Men and Money by a more easy way, and manner,
than had formerly been done; for these being the Chief Justices on whom all the
other Inferior Justices of the Empire depended, an Exact and Secret Calculate
was made of the true Number of the Spahees, and of the People in the several
Provinces, and Districts through the whole Empire.

This Calculate was secretly carried to the Vizier, and Mufti, where after it
had been very seriously debated, it was well approved, as a Means to ease the
Public Treasury, by a more equal Tax on all Villages and Towns, according to
the Number of the Inhabitants, and hereon a great Foundation was made of
raising many Thousands of Men, and much more Money than the last Year.

During all this time, the Turks remained in great apprehension of some sudden
Insurrection of the Arabs, and discontented Militia in Asia; and whereas the
greatest danger appeared to be in the Parts, A Teftish Pasha sent into Asia.
and Country of Sebaste or Sivas; a Teftish Pasha, or General Inquisitor was
sent with a strong Party of Horse, to enquire after all loose People,
Vagabonds, or such as could give no good Account of themselves, with a full
Power of Life, and Death, which the Turks commonly execute with all Rigor, and
Arbitrary Power imaginable. I have known a Teftish Pasha sent into Asia, to
enquire after Vagabonds, with a Party of 500 Men, who pitching his Tents near
some Town, or Village, into which he has sent some of his Men to take up such
Persons as the People should offer to them for disorderly Livers, the which
being brought before the Pasha, the Imaum, or Parish Priest has also been
cited; and setting the Persons before him in Rank and Order, it has been
demanded of the Imaum, Whether such a Person be a Good Man, or not? How he
Lives? What Trade he follows? Or, Whether he comes constantly to the Mosche to
Prayers, according to the Rules which the Alchoran requires? In case the Imaum
answers, that he knows him not, or his Way of Living; or that he is not a Good
Man, he is immediately, without other Process, Accusation, or Proof, Hanged up
upon some Tree, or Bough, which is near to the Pasha's Camp.

Howsoever this could not hinder two Princes of the Arabs, belonging to Arabia
Deserta, from Robbing, and Infesting the Countries about Damascus, who gave a
stop to all Mohammedan Pilgrims going to Mecca, until they had paid such Cafar,
or Head-Money for their Passage, as they demanded, and until the Grand Seignior
had paid them a very considerable Sum in Gold for what was in Arrears due
formerly from the Mohammedan Pilgrims.

In the mean time an Ambassador from Persia to the Grand Seignior, arrived at
Scutari, which is a Town in Asia on the other side of the Water, just opposite
to Constantinople, to which Place, upon the News hereof, the Chimacam sent over
four Commissaries to Entertain him. The Train, and Equipage of this Ambassador
was very Noble and Great, having an Attendance with him of 338 Persians bravely
Mounted on Horseback, and richly Habited, with 60 Camels laden with Presents
for the Grand Seignior, and his Court; consisting of very rich Persian Carpets
interwoven with Gold; A Persian Ambassador at Adrianople.
as also many Vests of Cloth of Gold, besides other Gallantries, and Rarities
of that Country, with an Elephant, and 12 White Camels.

This Ambassador stayed not more than a Night at Scutari, before he passed over
into Europe, and continued his Journey to Adrianople, where the 2d of the Month
of February, February.
he made a Solemn, and a Stately Entry; he was a Person of a Comely Stature, of
a Cheerful Countenance, Prudent, and Generous in his Behavior, which are
Qualities greatly taking in all Courts of the World. In his Retinue he had the
Sons of several Princes of Persia, which served to add unto the Splendor, and
Grandeur of his Embassy. He was Lodged, by Command of the Sultan, in that
Magnificent Palace of Kara Mustapha, the late Vizier, which was richly
Furnished for him; but there was no great need of any of the Turkish Movables,
for he had spread the Rooms with his own Rich Carpets, and other Coverings, the
like of which had never been seen in the Ottoman Court. Moreover all the
Kettles, and Utensils of the Kitchen were all of Silver, together with the
Tables, such as never any Ambassador had before: And for better Adornment of
this Noble Palace, there were certain Fountains which spouted Water as high as
the Upper Story of the House. The Original Intention of this Embassy was
designed at first to Congratulate the coming of Sultan Solomon to the Throne;
but the News of Solyman's Death meeting the Ambassador on the Road; and that
Sultan Achmet his Brother, had succeeded to his Place; the Ambassador staid on
the way for other Instructions, which were not altered at the Persian Court in
any other manner, than only to change the Name of Solomon in the Credential
Letters, to that of Achmet.

The Turks hastened the Return of this Ambassador so much as was possible;
howsoever his Departure could not be precipitated before the usual and common
time of other Ambassadors, to whom it is the Custom to show the Lutfe, or the
solemn manner of giving out the Pay to the Janisaries in the Divan, where the
Ambassador is Treated with a Dinner at the Vizier's Table; but this not being
to be performed until the 25th of March, the Turks, who had magnified so much
the Grandeur of their Empire to the Persians on all Occasions, were in a Bodily
Fear, least in the mean time some Unhappy and Dishonorable News should come
from the Frontiers; or that the Persians should discover the Weakness of the
Ottoman Force, who formerly used to boast of 2 or 300000, could now scarce
bring an Army of 60000 Men into the Field; howsoever the Arrival of this
Ambassador did not a little trouble the Minds of some principal Turks, who
being affectionate to their Country and People, would be very sorry to have the
Nakedness thereof discovered to their Insulting Neighbors.

The Day of the Ambassador's Audience being come, a Horse was sent out of the
Grand Seignior's Stable, for the Ambassador to Ride upon, richly adorned with
Furniture and Trappings, according to the Custom; likewise 47 Chiauses with
their Aga, were also appointed, with an Oda, The Persian Ambassador's Manner of
going to Audience.
or Chamber of Janisaries, with their Ciorbagee, or Captain, and likewise that
Aga which had been sent lately into Persia, to notify the Exaltation of Sultan
Solomon: Being now returned, they all with the Ambassador's own Retinue,
attended to conduct him to his Audience with the Grand Seignior.

Things being put into this Posture, the Ambassador in a Glorious Habit, and
great Pomp mounted on Horseback; the Presents were all sent before, valued in
Persia at 100000 Dollars, but being at Constantinople, might be esteemed at
double the Value; they were carried by Camels covered with Cloth of Gold, each
of them bearing two great Chests, in which were Clothes Embroidered with Gold,
and Cloth of Gold, the finest Linen of Persia, some Pieces of them were worked
with Golden Thread: Besides there were Persian Girdles very rich; Turbants of
the finest sort proper for Princes; some Bows and Quivers with Arrows Richly
Inlaid; some great and large Pieces of Amber, with a good quantity of Lignum
Aloes, the most Precious sort of any in India, of which much is consumed in the
Grand Seignior's Seraglio; some Strings of large Pearl of the biggest Size,
with many other Gallantries, and Curiosities of India; Five very fine Persian
Horses, covered with Cloth of Gold: Sixty large Camels, of which 30 were laden
with Persian Carpets woven with Silk and Gold-Thread, with various Colors
rarely mixed: These Camels were sent before by 30 Persians on Horseback, very
richly Clothed.

The Ambassador himself was Clothed with the most Rich Tissue and Weighty
Cloth of Gold that could possibly be made; On his Head he had a Cap in form and
Manner of a Crown, with Seven Feathers, the Handles of which were studded with
Jewels and Precious Stones; the like Habit the Vice-Ambassador wore, being
appointed to succeed in the Embassy, in case the first should fail by any
Accident; and before him five Horses were led. Next followed the Secretary with
the Credential Letters in a Bag of Cloth of Gold, which he carried in his Hand
lifted up as high as his Head, on which he wore a Turbant Embroidered with
Gold, with four Feathers. On one side of the Ambassador rode the Chiaus-Bashee,
and on the other the Vice-Ambassador, and by his side, the Aga who was returned
from Persia; these were immediately followed by two Persians with Beards, well
Mounted, and richly Habited, who were the Masters of the Horse, each carrying a
Scimetar in the Scabbard richly adorned with Jewels, and carried under the Arm
after the Turkish Fashion: Next followed the Attendance of 60 Men on
Horseback, with Beards cut short after the Persian Fashion, all well Habited,
amongst which was not one, whose Beard was not grown, for the Young Youths were
left at Home, being Scandalous to show them Abroad.

When the Ambassador and Vice-Ambassador were come into the Divan, where the
Grand Vizier was present, March.
they caused them to sit down in the Rank with the Viziers of the Bench,
amongst which the Chimacam of Adrianople, was reckoned; but he who carried the
Letters stood all the time during the Lutfe, or Payment of the Soldiers; after
which, according to the usual Custom, they all sat down to Dinner, where the
Grand Vizier was present: After which they were richly Vested, but without
Sables, and with them 60 others of the Retinue had Vests, which is much more
than what are given to the Ambassadors of the Emperor, the Kings of England,
France, or Holland; to the first of which, as I remember, are given 35 Vests,
and to those of the two Kings 22 a piece, and to that of Holland 19; by which
we may observe the Value which the Turks put on the Persian, before those of
the Christian Powers. After the Audience with the Grand Seignior was performed,
they returned to their Lodgings in the same manner as they came from thence.

This Audience being over, the Turks hoped that the Persian Ambassador would
immediately, and without farther delay return back to his Master, the King of
Persia; but the Ambassador had other Intentions in his Mind: For being desirous
to be a Spectator of the Confusions amongst the Turks at Home, The Persian
Ambassador continues at Adrianople against the Inclination of the Turks
and the Weakness of their Army on the Frontiers, he pretended to renew the
Ancient Capitulations, which had been made between the Persians and the Turks,
which was a good Excuse to delay Time: And though notwithstanding the Report
caused to be spread Abroad, That the Indians had declared War against the
Persians, it little moved the Ambassador from his Purpose of delaying his
Departure, that he might the better discover the Weakness and Nakedness of the
Turks, whose Affairs could not go well Abroad, whilst they were governed by an
unable Head at Home; for the Grand Vizier was Old, A Character of the Grand
Vizier. The Artifices of his Son.
and Choleric, and had it not been for his Son, who was a Person well in
Years, Diligent, and Considerative, who Discoursed, and Prepared all Matters,
weighed, and consulted them with Persons of Experience, and Understanding, he
could never have carried them to any Maturity, or remained long in that Sublime
Office. Besides, he was Naturally Cruel, that upon the least Suspicion, or
Murmurings of any Pasha, or great Man, he without the least noise sent the
Bow-string for him, and privately cut him off: Amongst the rest, there was one
Omer Pasha, who having in several Fights signalized himself by his Bravery,
seemed to aspire unto some high degree of Preferment; whereof the Vizier
growing Jealous, he sent and took him off. But what most confirmed him was;
that he promised the Militia to deliver out their Pay to them, at the end of
every three Months in good Gold and Silver, and not in Copper-Money, against
which there had been such Outcries, and Tumults amongst the People; to perform
which Promise, (for there was no dallying with the Licentious Soldiery) the
Gold and Silver-Smiths were commanded to shut up their Shops, and prohibited to
Work or make any Vessels of Gold, or Silver, The Arts by which the Grand Vizier
with kept in his Office.
but to bring the Gold and Silver which they had in their Hands, into the Mint,
there to be Coined into good Money, which so altered on a sudden the manner of
Traffic in Buying and Selling, that none of the Copper-Money would pass in
Payments under three or four for one; by which Artifices and Projects, he kept
up, and secured the Government to himself for some time: To which we may add
one thing more, which reconciled the Minds of the Mufti, and of the Ulama, and
Religious Votaries to him. For whereas his Predecessor, who was a Man of a
Gentle, Moderate Spirit, and not so Cruel, and Barbarous, as this, had granted
Licenses to the Christians to sell Wine, (by which a considerable Revenue
arises to the Grand Seignior.) This Vizier to show his Hatred to the Christian
Religion, issued out most strict Proclamations against the use of Wine, making
it Death, either to Sell, or Buy, or Drink it; which much affected the Hearts
of those, who were the most Superstitious, and Hypocritical; and gained him
great Credit in general with the Musselmen, or Mohammedan Believers.

About the time that the Persian Ambassador made his Entry into Adrianople, and
received his Audience of the Grand Seignior, Count Tekeli arrived there also,
attended with 30 Officers of his own Creatures, and Confidents; Tekeli at
Adrianople.
he entered with great State, and Pomp, and was conducted to his Lodging in the
Palace of Isaac Efendi, where the greater Honors were shown him by the
Instigation of the French Ambassador.

The Day following being conducted to his Audience with the Grand Vizier, he
appeared very Rich and Stately in his Habit, wearing, after the Hungarian
Fashion, a large Plume of Heron's Feathers on his Head, the bottom of which,
where they were fixed, being set and studded with Precious Stones of great
Value; he staid above an Hour in Conference with the Grand Vizier, being
treated with Caresses, and Kindness beyond the Manner which is usual amongst
Turks: His Audience with the Grand Vizier.
After which he received a Coftan lined with Sables, as is given to the
greatest Pasha's, and with him 15 of his Officers were also Vested; at this
Conference Tekeli advised the Grand Vizier to provide two great Armies, one to
act on the Frontiers in Hungary, and the other in Transylvania.

The French Ambassador visits him.
After this Audience which Tekeli had with the Grand Vizier, the French
Ambassador having first obtained License for the same from the Vizier, made him
a Visit; at which the usual Ceremonies passed, with great Protestations of
Friendship, and Promises of Assistance from the King his Master.

The Turks were very uneasy all this time, during the Abode of the Persian
Ambassador at the Ottoman Court, least he should discover, as we have said, the
Weakness of the Turks in Hungary, and the Commotions of the Arabs against the
Ottomans; so that every thing was Whispered, and Concealed with all the Secrecy
that was possible; and accordingly what Letters came either from Hungary, or
the Eastern Parts; they were committed to some of the Renegade Christians to be
read, who having been Educated in all the Learning of the Seraglio, were
capable to Interprer them, and being confined within those Schools, had no
means of Conversation with People without the Seraglio.

Tekeli, Tekeli and the Tartar dispatched away.
and the Tartar Han having finished their Business at Adrianople, and agreed on
all the Methods they were to act for the ensuing Campaign; they were dispatched
away, the first toward Hungary, and the other to the Crim.

It being now time to prepare and provide for the War, several Changes and
Alterations were made amongst the Officers. The Captain Pasha was put out of
his Office, Change of Officers.
and the Treasurer of the Grand Seignior's Private Cash, was put in his Place,
a Person wholly ignorant of Maritime Affairs, but preferred as an Old Servant,
and for his Merits in other Employments; and his Predecessor Missiroglu, who
had been always bred up a Seaman at Tripoli in Barbary, was ordered for
Hungary; as was also the Chimacam of Constantinople. The Aga, or General of the
Janisaries, had also been deprived of his Office; and being a Man of good
Esteem amongst the Soldiery, many adhered to his Party, which began to create a
strong Faction amongst the Soldiery; to prevent the increase of which, many
Officers amongst the Janisaries were secretly Strangled in the Night, whereby
all those Plots were overthrown which were designed to promote that General of
the Janisaries, who had the Esteem for his Courage, and good Conduct, to the
Sublime Office of Grand Vizier; by which the Christians received a considerable
Prejudice, he being a Friend to the Peace; and an Enemy to the French. But to
keep the Turks fixed, and steady to the War, the French Ambassador assured the
Turks; The French Ambassador encourages the Turks.
That his Master the King had dispatched already from France. 200 Officers
expert in the War, who might arrive in very few Days, and that amongst them
were some famous Engineers, skilful in throwing Bombs and Grenades, and making
all sorts of Artificial Fireworks. And moreover he assured them, That every
Day he expected two Men of War laden with Bombs, and Arms; and all sorts of
Military Instruments, with some Thousands of Muskets to Arm the Janisaries.
Moreover this Ambassador offered the Port, in the Name of his Master; to
maintain three Regiments of Janisaries; and to Cloth them all in Blew Vests;
but this piece of Generosity looking too mean and disagreeable to the Grandeur
of the Turks, March.
was refused with some Indignation, and Disdain: Howsoever the French
Engineers, upon their Arrival were accepted, and Enrolled amongst the other
Gunners; over which, the Master of the Artillery was a Turk.

The Spring coming now forward, great Preparations were making both by Sea and
Land for the approaching Campaign. At the Arsenal, the new Captain Pasha was
very diligent to forward the Naval Preparations; of which twelve great
Mahoones, Preparations for the War.
or Galleons, and two new Galleasses were preparing, with six new Frigates,
besides the Galleys belonging to the Beys of the Archipelago, which are
commonly 36 in number. Moreover, great Quantities of Biscuit and Ammunition,
were preparing to be sent on Saicks by the Danube for the use of the Army. Nor
were the Preparations, and Recruits for the Land Army neglected; for a Door,
(as they call it) was opened for making Janisaries; of which they pretended to
form for this Year 25000, and to have a greater Army this Year, than they had
the last, before the Battle of Salankement, in which the Turks were the more
animated, and made to believe better of their own Condition than it really was,
by the Applications which the Christian Ambassadors made to Mediate a Peace;
Instances for a Peace promote the War.
believing that neither the Emperor, nor the Venetians would press so hard for
a Peace, were they able to maintain the War.

But what gave some stop to the Warlike Preparations, were the Factions amongst
the Turks themselves; by which the Mufti was suspended, and sent into
Banishment; and a Pitiful, Decrepit Old Fellow, who had been Imaum, or Chaplain
to Old Kupriogli, put into his Place, of whom we have given a Character before,
and that he was unconstant in all his Resolutions.

The Persian Ambassador still continuing at Adrianople, the Turks knew not in
what manner to be rid of him; they wished for his Departure, not so much to
save the daily Charge which they bestowed upon him, The Persian Ambassador
continues at Adrianople.
as to be quit of a Spy, who looked as if he came to see the Nakedness of the
Land. It was not seemly to order him to be gone, but it was thought that he
would not stay long after the Horse-Tail was set out, (which is a Sign that the
Grand Vizier resolves in 40 Days to take the Field) upon which it was given
out, That he was to be at Sophia about the 7th or 8th of May, whence in a few
Days he was to proceed, and to expect the Forces of Asia at Belgrade.

In order hereunto all Preparations possible were made for the War; the Grand
Vizier designing to be in the Field before the Christians, Preparations for the
War.
several Brigantines were dispatched for the Danube by way of the Black-Sea,
with Saicks for Asack laden with Ammunition and Provisions for the War, most of
which Vessels were designed up as high as Belgrade.

But for all this haste which the Turks made, the Factions amongst themselves
retarded their Expeditions, and caused every thing to move slowly. We have
already given a Character of the Grand Vizier, Factions in the Court.
as a Man infirm both in Body and Mind, and endued with no other Abilities to
conserve himself, and his Government, besides a Cruelty natural to him, by
which he conserved himself by the destruction of others; he had, as we have
said, put many of the Chief Officers to Death; and had caused the Mufti to be
displaced and banished; he also proceeded so far, as to take the Kuslir Aga
from the daily Service of the Sultan; and in despite of his great Power in the
Seraglio, to send him into Banishment: After which there remained but one
Person, of whom he conceived any Fear, or Jealousy, and that was the Chimacam
of Adrianople; and until he was taken off, The Grand Vizierseeks the Life of
the Chimacam.
he could conceive no Quiet within his own Breast, nor could he think himself
secure after his departure to the War, unless he first saw his Competitor under
the same Fate with his other Enemies, and his Son placed in his Stead and
Office: With these Thoughts this wretched Vizier went boldly to the Sultan to
demand license to give the Fatal Blow to the Chimacam, the which recoiled upon
himself; for he being much in Favor, and in Esteem with the Grand Seignior for
his Prudence and Dexterity in Affairs, He is ruined thereby.
and for the Truth which he had always told him: The Sultan no sooner heard him
speak against the Chimacam, but putting himself into a Violent Passion, called
immediately for his Band of Black Eunuchs to remove him away out of his
Presence, and to strangle him as a Faithless and an Unworthy Minister.

But it seems the Eunuchs, contrary to their Natural Temper, taking Compassion
of an Aged and Decrepid Person, fell down at the Feet of the Sultan, imploring
his Mercy and Commiseration toward an old Servant, whose Years might plead for
his Pardon.

The Sultan being a Prince of an Easy Temper, hearkened to their Petitions,
and causing him to be put into an inward Room for a while, sent immediately to
call for the Chimacam to come to him; who all Pale and Wan, fearing least his
Enemy the Vizier had prevailed with the Grand Seignior against his Life, came
all Trembling, and cast himself down at the Feet of the Sultan; but he was soon
put out of his Fears, by the comfortable Words of the Grand Seignior, declaring
him Vizier, and therewith a Vest of Sables was thrown over him, and the Seals
delivered to him. But he being a Person of Prudence, The C^imacam refuses to be
Vizier.
and Experience of the uncertainty of that Sublime Office in such a Conjuncture
of Time, as was at present; began before the Grand Seignior, much to bewail his
hard Fate, which hurried him into an Honor too high and weighty for him to
support; declaring, That he only desired to live in the Degree of Chimacam,
that he might never depart from the side of his Lord and Master.

With these, and such like Words as these, he moved the Sultan to Compassionate
his Case, and to grant his Request: And in his Place was named Halil Pasha,
Another Vizier named.
at that time Pasha of Diarbekir in Mesopotamia, who had been Chief Chamberlain
to Kara Mustapha, when he lay in the Siege before Vienna.

To execute this Great Affair, two Aga's were dispatched immediately away by
the Post, to bring this Halil Pasha to Adrianople; and in the mean time all the
Affairs of the War remained at a stand, which was very strange at such a
Season, when the Armies were ready to take the Field; and that all things must
give way to the Consideration of a single Man, who was to be fetched at the
distance of above 1000 English Miles from Adrianople; as if no Man could be
found like him equal to that great and heavy Charge.

In the mean time the Deposed Vizier, was Banished to the Castles of the
Dardanelli; The Old Vizier Banished,
the which proved not all his Punishment; for his Estate, according to the
Custom of the Turks, was Arrested; 500 Purses of Money, with half a Million of
Dollars, were seized for Service of the Sultan, And his Estate seized.
with about 18000 Soltanini, or Gold Ducats, belonging to the Vizier's Son; the
Kahya also was put into Prison, of whom nothing more having been heard, it was
believed that he had been put to Death.

Upon the News hereof the Soldiery at Belgrade Conspired together to present
before the Grand Seignior, Halil Pasha their Seraskier, or General at that time
of their Army, The Soldiers at Belgrade offer to prefer another, but denied.
as the fittest Person for the Office of Grand Vizier, and the most able of any
to contend with those great Difficulties, which oppressed the Empire: But in
regard that Post was already filled, the Port refused to hearken thereunto; and
least such a Denial should cause any disturbance. Halil Pasha was sent to
Negropont, where he formerly had shown great Bravery, and good Conduct; and
thus all things remained at a stand, until the Arrival of the New Vizior, till
which time also the Persian Ambassador could not be dispatched; nor did he
hastily desire it, being taken up with Admiration and Pleasure to see so many
Tragical Changes, and Confusions, The Persian Ambassador pleased herewith.
far different from those Days, when the Ottoman Union, and absolute
uncontrouled Power gave a Terror to Persia, and all the Eastern World.

In the mean time for want of the Grand Vizier all things were at a stand; for
the Tartars refused to move until they received Instructions from the New Grand
Vizier, All at a stand until the Vizier's coming.
and the Asiatick Troops which were upon their March at this time, and ready to
pass into Europe, retarded, and slackned their Pace, until they knew what new
Orders this Vizier would give them. Howsoever the Officers both of Horse and
Foot, which were already in Europe, were hastened on their March with all speed,
that at the Arrival of the Grand Vizier, the whole Army might be found in a
good posture on the Frontiers near Belgrade: And the Preparations for the Sea
in the mean time went forward with all Cheerfulness, it being designed, that
the Maritime Force should be equal to that of the last Year, being reinforced
with many Vessels from Tripoli, Tunis, and Algier; in all which Expeditions the
Chimacam of Adrianople was very vigilant and active.

At length, about the beginning of May, the Grand Vizier arrived at Adrianople,
near which Place he was met at Hafsa, about three Hours distant from thence, by
many of the Principal Officers, The Vizier arrives, and received by the Grand
Seignior.
and at an Hours distance from the City, by the Mufti, and Chimacam, and
others; who in great Pomp and State conducted him to the Presence of the
Sultan, by whom he was graciously received, and the Seals delivered to his
Hand; after which being Vested with a Coftan lined with Sables, he made a short
Prayer, and withdrew himself from the Presence of the Sultan, and being come to
the Vizier's Palace, he bestowed Coftans on all the Pasha's, and Officers of
his Court, confirming the Old Ones in their Places, and declaring New where
they were vacant.

Having taken some Refreshment that Night, the next Day he held a Solemn
Council, at which it was concluded, what Methods were to be taken, for the
future; A Counsel of War, May 1692.
and it was agreed, That on the 31st of this Month the Vizier's Tents were to
be pitched at the usual Place without the City; and also the Janisar-Aga's; and
that the Day following they were both in Person to March out into their Tents;
and that on the 6th of June they were to begin their Journey toward Belgrade;
The Vizier marches toward Belgrade.
accordingly the Janisaries led the Van, as was usual, and proceeded a Day
before the Vizier, and the Spahee's; but they had not marched a Day before that
being united with the other Militia, they began to Mutiny, exclaiming for their
Pay, and protesting that they would not proceed until first they had received
their six Months Pay in Arrear, The Janisaries mutiny for Pay,
with their Vests of thick Cloth, as also the Donative due to them at the
Inauguration of every New Sultan: To content these People, the Grand Vizier
issued out to them with all speed their six Months Pay; and with fair Words and
Promises, he so pacified them, Are pacified.
that they quietly marched forward to Belgrade, protesting howsoever, not to
pass the Save without their Cloth and Donative.

With this Pacification the Grand Vizier taking a little Breath, began to
consider of the manner how to establish himself; and because an Able, and
Faithful Chimacam, who remains near the Person of the Grand Seignior, is always
a great support to a Vizier, he sent for the Pasha of Aleppo, named Mustapha,
to come to him, who in the Time of Solomon the Grand Vizier, had been
Seraskier, or General against the Poles: This Person being come to him, he made
him Chimacam, A New Chimacam made.
and displaced the other (who, as we have said, refused lately the Vizier's
Office) and sent him to remain Pasha at Erzirum, which is in Armenia Major.

One would have imagined that this Vizier might have thought himself secure
with that Chimacam, who had refused, (as we have said) the Vizier's Office, so
fairly and so lately offered to him by the Sultan, so that a little kind
Aspect, and few obliging Words might have made him entirely his own; but there
is a Fate amongst the Turks, that neither the Grand Seignior is constant to his
Viziers, and Chief Officers, nor they to the Inferior Ministers, who act under
them, never believing themselves secure, but with those who are their own
Creatures, by which continual Revolutions all things remain in distraction, and
a Vizier has scarce learned, or become Master of his Trade, before he is
disgraced, and thrown down from his Sublime Office, with all his Kindred and
Dependances, to the Abyss of Misery, and Ruin, of which we have discoursed at
large in another Treatise.

Upon which Maxim this Vizier called for his own Creature to make him
Chimacam, and recalled the late Mufti, whom the preceding Vizier had Exiled,
The Mufti recalled.
which was the more easily done, the Place being vacant by the Death of the
Mufti who was last made.

All these Embroils and Changes could not do less than hinder the Proceedings
of the main Business; for the Budziack Tartar refusing to follow the Command of
the Tartar Han, the Grand Seignior sent one Messenger after the other to hasten
the March of the Tartars, commanding them with 3 or 4000 Horse to carry on each
a Sack of Wheat, or Meal, for the Relief of Great Waradin, Waradin in great
distress.
from whence frequent Letters came, that they being reduced to the Extremity of
Famine, could not longer subsist, but should be forced to deliver themselves up
into the Hands of the Enemy, unless speedily succored.

In this manner unthought of Accidents fell out full of Disappointments, by
which neither the Forces at Land, nor at Sea amounted to half the Power they
were of the last Year.

Thus far in this Year of 1692, have we shown the State of Affairs in Turkey,
whilst at Vienna things were in preparation for the following Campaign, and
many Counsels of War were held by the General Officers, in Presence, and with
the Assistance of Prince Lewis of Baden.

We being now in the Month of May, May.
all the Endeavors were bent for taking Great Waradin before the Turkish Army
should take the Field, and come to relieve it, of which there was now no great
probability, in regard that from all sides Advices came, that the Town labored
under the last Extremity of Famine; the which was not only confirmed by Letters
from thence to Adrianople; but by a Messenger dispatched with Letters to Giula
and Temeswaer from the Besieged, to give an account of the miserable Condition
of the Place, the Circumstances of which were reported to be so wretched, that
in all probability the Place could not hold out much longer.

But because many times Reports are false, and that Men do often, especially in
War, magnify, or diminish things according to their Humor or Interest; it was
judged fit not to expect until Famine had forced the Besieged to surrender, for
that might prove still the Work of some Months, and in the mean time give the
Enemy means to relieve the Place; wherefore it was resolved to force the
Surrender, and the care thereof being committed to General Heusler, he with all
Expedition and Diligence having drawn his Troops together from their
Winter Quarters, and adjacent Places, posted himself near the Old Fort, in
which the Heydukes had kept a Garrison during the Winter Season, from whence he
sent a Summons to the Turks to Surrender, Heusler Summon's the Town. They
refuse to yield.
and deliver up the City; which they resolutely refusing to do, he began the
Day following to open the Trenches, and raised two Bulwarks exactly opposite to
the Bulwarks of the Enemies, called Zingar, and Capudon; and caused a Bridge to
be laid from the Palancha Oloschi, reaching to the Old City. To disturb these
Works, the Turks plied their Great Guns continually, and made a furious Sally,
but were repulsed with some loss. In like manner also the Besiegets drew
another Line on the other side of the River, The Turks make Sallies, and are
repulsed.
so that the Town was now environed on every side, and the Christians lodged at
the Ditch of the City.

On the 7th the Turks made another Sally, but were repulsed: And on the 8th,
made another, with much more Bravery than they had done the Day before, but
were repulsed with like Loss: Upon which the Janisaries went to the Pasha to
consult with him what was to be done in this present Exigency; and all agreed,
To hold out some Days longer in expectation of the promised Relief; during
which time, both sides employed themselves to ply their Cannon, and throw their
Bombs incessantly.

On the 11th some Hundreds of the Besieged showed themselves without the
Fortress, but withdrew without farther Attempt; on which Day 11 Heydukes were
killed, and 15 wounded.

On the 13th the Turks made another Sally on the Heydukes, but were briskly
received, and soon repulsed.

The 16th, 17th, and 19th, little or nothing of moment was done, by reason of
the continual Rains; but by this time the more heavy Cannon being come, the
Breach was made wider and larger; so that General Heusler supposing that the
Enemy might be terrified thereby, Continue resolute to maintain the Town.
he sent a Trumpeter to make them the last Summons, threatening them in Default
thereof, to give no Quarter either to Man, Woman, or Child; but as yet the
Turks showed no fear of the Menaces pronounced against them; and an Old, Grave
Turk showing himself on the Walls, called to the Besiegers, and admonished them
to withdraw their Troops from under the Walls of the City, which they should
never take, the Besieged being resolved to Live and Die together in the same.
This declared Resolution of the Turks, quickened the Operations of the General,
so that throwing Fire into the Town, and plying the great Guns continually Day
and Night, the Breach was made much wider than it had been some few Days
before, and ready for Storm, which was designed for the 28th of the Month: The
Turks seeing the Troops in a readiness for an Attack, their Hearts began to
fall; and thereupon a White Flag was displayed, Howsoever they Capitulate.
and five Deputies were sent to the Army to treat, and Hostages being given on
both sides, these Articles were agreed on, and an Instrument drawn up in this
Form following.

The Pasha of Waradin, His Address to the Emperor.
MOST Happy Caesar, Emperor of the Romans, in whom resides the Height of
Majesty, Honor, and Glory, and of highest Esteem amongst the Christian
Princes; We the Soldiers and Musselmen of Waradin, having been straightened and
oppressed by a long and tedious Siege, and being at last reduced to the last
Extremities by your Imperial Army Encamped against us, and being not able
longer to hold out, do cast our selves at the Happy Feet of the Imperial
Majesty: And being at length constrained to yield unto Fate, and Destiny, we
fly unto your Clemency, and most Pious Benignity, which is a Ray, or Emanation
from the Most Sublime Creator; declaring that voluntarily, and of our own
proper Motions, (since God will have it so) to save our Lives, we have Pawned
and Surrendered this our Fortress, with all the Ammunition therein; that is,
Cannon, Muskets, and other Arms, and Military Instruments, to your Commissary,
the Most Honorable, and Most Excellent Heusler. And confiding in the Grace and
Favor of an Emperor who governs so many Nations, that he will not permit, or
suffer these our Musselmen to be damnified, or robbed, or despoiled of their
Goods, or Baggage which they carry with them; but be Protected, Conducted, and
Convoyed safe from the Fortress of Waradin, to the Neighboring, and Adjacent
Places on the Danube, that is to the Palanca called Panzova, and to command,
That in our Way thither, no Christian of what Nation soever, shall take our
Goods from us either by Day or by Night, nor damnifie us either Privately or
Secretly: All which we offer to the Benignity and Clemency of the Imperial
Majesty, in these Sixteen Articles following.

The Articles of Surrender.
I. THAT the Turks and their Goods be taken from the Palanca's of Paimeso, and
Solmeso, and that they may in Safety be Conducted, and Convoyed to the same
Place with those of Waradin.

II. That we may be safely Conducted through all the Passages and difficult
Passes of Erdurich and Zanat, until we arrive at the Palanca called Panzova.

III. That to this intent 1200 Carts, and 200 Horses shall be given us; and
that five Days time shall be given us to sell our Goods, and that they may have
time to buy what Goods they please, according to their Convenience.

IV. That all Men and Women Slaves, who are desirous to remain in the
Christian, or Turkish Faith, shall not be hindered.

V. That such Rebels or Malcontents as are taken in the Fortress, shall not be
detained, but permitted to remain with us.

VI. That the Besieged may carry their Ensigns, and Arms with them.

VII. That they may carry all their Writings and Registers with them.

VIII. That in case on the Way any Wagon should chance to break, another shall
be given in the place thereof; and the Goods shall not be stolen, or broken
open.

IX. That no Money, or Charges, shall be demanded on the Way for Lodgings.

X. That no Child, or Youth, Male, or Female, shall be taken from us; nor shall
Money, or Expense be demanded of us on the Way, but our Charges shall be
Defrayed, with all necessary Provisions, until we come to Panzova.

XI. That when we are proceeded out of the Fortress, until we come to Belgrade,
neither Subjects, or others, shall stop, or detain any of us on Pretension of
Debt.

XII. But that all of us shall be permitted to proceed freely with all safety.

XIII. That for the more convenient Passage of the Carts into the Fortress, a
Bridge shall be made.

XIV. That care be taken to punish all the Insolences of those who shall
forcibly rob our Goods.

XV. That the Turks, who have by Order of the Grand Seignior, served for
Officers in the Garrison, shall receive no Molestation.

XVI. That all Strangers of different Nations who are with us, shall not be
Pillaged, or Plundered; and herein a particular care is to be had to Waggoners,
and other Pilfering Fellows.

Given the 20th of the Moon, called Ramazan, in the Hegeira 1103; which is the
3d of June 1692. Seifullah Cadi di Varadin. Abdulatif Pasha and Chief Governor
of Waradin. Ibrahim Pasha, the late preceding Governor of Waradin. Osman Agha.


An Inventory of what was found in the Fortress.
FIve Thousand Measures of Barley. 1000 Measures of Wheat. 300 Sacks of Rice.
50 Fats of Flour. 50 Brass Guns, most of which were German. 22 Mortars. 70000
Pounds of good Powder: And 723000 of old decayed Powder. 3500 Cannon Bullets.
30000 Pounds of Iron: And 4300 Pounds of Wrought Iron.
The Articles being thus signed on the 3d of June, June.
the Day following the Bridge was repaired, and the Turks marched out of the
Fortress, to the Number of about 1200 Fighting Men, and in all 12000 Souls, The
Turks march out of Waradin.
which were ranged in good Order on a convenient Ground without the Town, where
they remained until the German and Rascian Militia, which was in Garrison in
Pescabara was released, and which the Turks had detained there contrary to the
Capitulations.

And thus ended the Siege of this Important Place, the Conquest of which served
much toward the Security of Transylvania to the Emperor.

The Turks being desirous of a Revenge, detached a strong Party from Belgrade
toward Esseck, June.
intending by that way to make an Incursion into Sclavonia; but the Rascians
having notice of this March, Attacked them at Unawares, The Turks repulsed by
the Rascians from Titul and Titz.
and cut down 200 of them, and took 40 Prisoners. Another Party of Turks also
embarking at the same time on three large Boats, fortified with diverse Guns,
with which approaching near Titul, wherein was a strong Garrison of Rascians,
they defended the same wi h so much Courage, that many Turks being Killed and
Wounded, they were forced to quit the Design, and return back with Disgrace,
and some Loss; and in the Town, the Captain of the Rascians was killed, with
about 20 Men.

Nor better Success had the Turks on Titz, which was defended by a Garrison of
1200: The Turks Embarking themselves on 50 Ships, made a furious Assault
thereon, which lasted for several Hours; but they were so well received, that
they were repulsed, and forced to retire with the loss of some Hundreds Killed,
and 30 Prisoners taken.

The Croats had still better Success upon the Turks on the other side the River
Unna, which Country they had often Invaded; and particularly about the
beginning of July the Governor of Novi advancing with 3 or 400 Horse as far as
Behatz; The Croats take Behatz from the Turks.
the Suburbs whereof they Attacked with the Sword in their Hands, Entered and
Plundered, and then Burnt the Place; putting all to the Sword, except about 20
Persons of Quality whom he made Prisoners; besides other Booty he took 100 Head
of great, and 500 of smaller Cattle.

After this Action the same Troops Attacked Ostrosatz on two sides, and totally
destroyed it, notwithstanding the vigorous Resistance which the Turks had made.
About this time also a violent Storm cast away 35 Turkish Barks on the Danube
laden with Corn, Flour, Rice, and other Provisions, and did much other Damage
by Thunder and Lightning.

Such small Matters as these passed, before the Vizier was in a capacity to
take the Field; The Turks in confusion by changes.
nothing went well at Home, nor prosperous Abroad. For after the Vizier had
changed the Chimacam, he sent to call a certain Person named Mustapha Pasha,
who had continued for a long time Seraskier at Baba in the War against the
Poles; and being a Person of great Experience, and good Conduct in Civil, as
well as in Military Affairs, the Vizier judged him the more proper for this
Office, by which it was greatly in his Power to do him Services with the Grand
Seignior during his Absence at any time from the Person of the Sultan; and of
such a Faithful Friend as this, the Vizier had more than ordinary occasion at a
time when he had lately discovered a New Faction Combining against him, which
being necessary to be suppressed before he marched into the Field, Conspiracy
against the Vizier.
or withdrew himself from the Presence of the Sultan, he seized on the
Principal Conspirators against him; namely, the Chimacam, and the Aga or
General of the Janisaries, and though he was then in a readiness to begin his
March, yet he Arrested him, and deprived him of his Office, placing in the same
I^mael Pasha, who had lately been Chimacam of Constantinople, and before that
time had been made a Prisoner by General ^enevolt; and from his Youth having
been always Educated in great Places, he was esteemed the more capable of any
Employment: in this Secret Plot, the Tef^erdar or Lord High Treasurer, was one
of the Conspirators, whom the Vizier also deprived of his Charge* with diverse
others of principal Note; but what most sensibly touched him, was the
Disobedience of the Janisaries, which is always the Forerunner of Misfortunes
to Great Men; the Apprehension of which cast the Vizier into an Indisposition
of Body, which continued upon him for three Days, but afterward recollecting
himself, and taking Courage, he raised up his Spirits, and in a handsome manner
appea^ed the Janisaries; howsoever he lived in a continual fear of their
Mutinies at Belgrade, having rendered himself Odious to the Soldiery and
others, by his Unsatiable Avarice, which he had learned from the Principles and
Methods of his Old Master Kara Mustapha, by which Vice he had suddenly fallen,
had he not been supported by his Creature, Ismael Pasha the Chimacam, whom he
had raised to that Dignity.

Had it not been for these, July.
and the like Rubs and Confusions, the Turkish Army would have been before this
time in the Field, though not so strong perhaps as the last Year; for the
Asiatick Militia came slowly in, and those in small Numbers; The Grand Vizier
marched not with more than 10000 Men from Adrianople, and the Albanians (the
best of their Soldiery) were sent to Negropont to guard that Island, upon a
Report, That the Venetians had another Design on that Coast. Another Detachment
was also made of certain Pasha's, with some Tartars to the Number of 6000, who
were under one of their Sultans appointed to drive the Poles out of Moldavia,
and regain the Places which they possessed, and amongst these, the late
Janisar-Aga, who was dispossessed of his Office, was made Seraskier, or General
of those Forces. During this Weak Estate and Condition of the Turks, an Unhappy
Misfortune befell the Turkish Fleet, which lay in Nicopolis, and Widin, where 35
great Boats laden with Wheat, and Flour for the Army, were cast away by Storm.

The Persian Ambassador, who had continued longer at Adrianople, than the Turks
desired, it being neither consistent with their Policy, nor their Riches, to
entertain a Guest, whose Business was chiefly to discover the Decay, The
Persian Ambassador takes his Conge of the Grand Seig^ior.
and Nakedness of their Country, did now about the end of this Month of June
begin to think it time to return unto his Master, being well enough informed,
as he imagined, of the true Estate of the Turkish Affairs; received his
Audience of Conge from the Sultan privately in a Garden, where the Imperial
Letters were delivered, and the Capitulations mutually exchanged; and a Present
made to him of a Horse richly adorned with Royal Caparisons.

These and such like Troubles retarded the Grand Vizer's March toward
Belgrade; by which Disappointments the Marquis of Lorand had the Fortune to
arrive timely at Constantinople, The Marquis of Lorand, arrives from France.
and to Disembark secretly, or incognito, from a Tartana, and thence in a Day
or two he proceeded to Adrianople, with the Equipage of a Trumpeter, and 10
Servants, all richly clothed, and his Table nobly furnished with Plate. In few
Days after his Arrival, he received his Audience of the Grand Vizier in Company
with Monsieur de Chateau-neuf, the present residing Ambassador, at which
(according to the usual Custom of the French at all their Audiences) their
Business was to extol the Greatness and Power of their Master; and to report
unto the Turks, That their King had furnished King James with a Mighty Fleet,
His Reports made to the Turkish Court.
and 30000 Men to Invade England, which were all ready at the time of his
Departure to Embark, and consisted with Men of War, and Transport Ships of more
than 600 Sail; the which joining in England with the contrary Party to that
which then Governed; would no doubt carry all before them in that Country, and
consequently cause great Confusions in Holland, and amongst all the Allies.

Moreover that his King was ready to enter into the Field in Person, with a
most formidable Army, (as he had promised the Sultan) against the Emperor, of
the Success of which they would speedily hear ftom their fortunate King who had
ever been Prosperous in all his Enterprises: Moreover he added, That all these
great things the King had done, were to support the Ottoman Empire, which would
certainly have been staggering under that Mighty Power of the Allies, had it
not been supported by the French, and their Forces diverted from the Ottoman
Dominions in Hungary; The Vizier promises to continue the War.
all which the Grand Vizier heard with Pleasure and Attention, assuring the
Marquis, and the Ambassador, that he never had any Design, or Imagination of
making a Peace with the Emperor, without the Concurrence of the French.
Howsoever the Marquis not knowing how constant and firm to their Resolutions
the Turks might be, in case that things should succeed ill in the Turkish Army,
or that the Imperialists should take Belgrade; The Marquis permitted to go to
Belgrade.
he obtained License from the Vizier to accompany him to the War, during this
Campaign, where he might be ready at hand to oppose all Proposals tending to a
Peace, in case any Endeavors should be made therein. And in this manner the
Grand Vizier departed the 30th of June from Adrianople, toward Belgrade;
having pointed out 32 Days March from one Place to the other, besides Days of
Otorack, or Days of Repose.

But before the Vizier's Departure, two Mirzes, or Tartarian Noblemen, with six
other Tartars, arrived at Adrianople, bringing News, That Batter Gherei, one of
the Sultan Tartars, had entered into Volhinia a Province belonging to Poland,
and had carried away Captive above 30000 Souls; Reports from the Tartars.
which Rumor was spread abroad to encourage the Turks, when in truth there
were not above 2000 taken; and farther to give Life to the Soldiery, it was
reported, That Adil Gherei the Younger Brother was remaining within the
Confines of Valachia, attending his Elder Brother, that they might with a joint
force March into Hungary.

Howsoever to secure the Tartars, the Grand Vizier before his Departure from
Adrianople dispatched away three Capugi-Bashees, with pressing Commands to the
Han of Budziack, to march with all speed to Belgrade, and not to delay their
time as they had done the last Year, and that they should have a care not to
deceive him, for that he depended much on their Forces; but herein the Vizier
was not well informed, for the Budziack Tartar could not furnish more than 3000
Men; and as to the Noghai Tartar, they were Numerous; but withal, they were
such a sort of Salvage Creatures, Rebellious, and Disgusted by the Turks; July.
that no great account could be made of them. Nor yet of Sultan Galgha Prince
of Crim Tartary, who was engaged in a War against the Cossacks, and had enough
to do to defend himself against such a Stout and an Active Enemy. Moreover to
make the Assistance of the Tartars the less considerable this Year, the Tartars
rebelled against their New Han, in their March toward Belgrade: At first this
Mutiny appeared only in some Dislikes, which the Principal Tartars showed
against their New Sultan, the which daily increasing, came to such a height,
that the whole Army forsook and left him, and returned in a Body back to
Budziack, and were followed soon after by the Han himself, with some of his
Menial Servants; the News hereof being brought to the Grand Seignior, and Grand
Vizier, they knew not how to carry on the War for this Year; so that all the
Remedy which remained, was to re-establish the Old Han, Selim Gherey, in his
Place; the which though it pleased the Soldiers better, yet by this time the
Season was so far spent, that nothing of moment could be expected to be put in
Action for that Year. Some small Matters indeed the Turks did attempt, but
always with loss; in July they Attacked a small, but a strong Fortress, called
Portsea, near Peter-Waradin; the which was so well defended by a Garrison of
Rascians, that the Turks were several times repulsed; The Turks repulsed from
Portsea.
and at last hearing that some Imperial Heydukes, and Dragoons, had passed the
Save, and had cut down great Numbers of Turks, they quitted their design on
Portsea, and returned back to Belgrade: Howsoever upon better consideration,
concluding that the Place was of so high importance, that they might be called
into question for quitting the Siege, they returned back again, and on the 5th
of August made another Attack upon the Place, and resolved to carry it by force
of Arms; but News coming, That a strong Body of the Imperial Troops were sent
to relieve the Place, and were already in their March, they quitted the Siege;
and being Attacked in the Rear, they left many Dead and Wounded Men behind them.

The Ban of Croatia Attacks the Turks.
About the same time the Vice-Ban, or Lieutenant General of Croatia, having got
together a strong Body of 5500 Croats and Rascians, made an Incursion toward
Meydan, in which Expedition, he not only had the good fortune to release 400
Poor Christians, who were Condemned to Die, and should have been executed the
next Day (had they not been seasonably relieved by the Croatians) but to return
back with a considerable Booty of Cattle, and Movables, together, with some
principal Turks of Quality and Note, August.
whole Houses and stately Buildings they Burnt and Destroyed little or nothing
more remarkable farther passed all this Campaign, unless it were a Matter of
two considerable Convoys sent to Temeswaer, the latter of which consisted of
several Thousands of Turks, conducting 100 Wagons and many Camels laden with
all necessary Provisions; and so having provided the Town for the whole Winter,
they returned back to Belgrade. At the same time a Body of Rascians broke into
the Morava, The Rascians take great Boeties.
and there attacked and beat another Turkish Convoy, which carried 200000
Dollars to the Turkish Army, which was a brave Booty for the Rascians; for though
the Grand Vizier upon the News thereof, had Detached a Body of 10000 Arnauts
after them, yet the Prey had given them Wings, and they escaped safe into their
Towns and Garrisons of Refuge.

Some later Actions passed besides, but none of great consequence, expecting
that the Turks having a mind to look big, and put a good Face on it toward the
latter end of the Campaign, passed the Save, to recognize the Imperial Camp at
Salankement; but so soon as the News thereof was brought to the General, a
strong Party of Heydukes and Imperial Dragoons, were Detached to meet them; at
the noise of which the Turks Retired, and therewith the Campaign ended in
Hungary: For the Janisaries being debased in their Courages by the ill Success
of the last Year, refused to return into the Field, complaining of the
Cowardice of the Spahees, by whom they had been exposed in open Field, and
given up to the Fury of the Enemy, whilst the Spahees fled, and saved
themselves in Belgrade; and the Tartars not returning to the War, gave the
Janisaries just cause to put an end more early than was accustomary, to this
Years Campaign; who according to the Military Constitutions of the Ottoman
Empire, may be obliged to continue in the Field until the 28th of October, The
Campaign of the Year 169^ ends.
but not longer; for in such case, if not provided with Winter Quarters by that
Day, the Janisaries may leave the Camp, against the Will and Command of their
Generals, and shift for themselves.

Though the Campaign was ended in Hungary, yet something of Action continued in
Poland, where on the 27th of September, the Turks Attacked a Fortress called
Soroka with an Army of 30000 Men, Commanded by the Seraskier Mustapha Pasha;
Poland.
the same consisting of 8000 Turks, 2000 under the Pasha of Silistria, 6000
under the Hospodar of Valachia, 2000 under the General of the Cossacks, with
12000 Tartars: With this Army, (as we say) Mustapha Pasha Invested this small
Fortress, which was defended by a Garrison of 600 Men, with most of which, the
Governor made a Sally on the same Day that the Enemy came before it, and
killed about 80 of the Besiegers, and so returned to the Fort, having first
burnt the Suburbs, to prevent the Enemy from taking Shelter therein. So
inconsiderable a Fort as this, which might have been taken by this Powerful
Army with open Breasts without the Methods of Trenches and Approaches, The
Turks vigorously Attack So^oka.
was now Invested with all the Formalities of a Siege: For the first Night the
Turks began their Trenches, and to throw Bombs into the Place, and to raise a
Battery of Great Guns, which they plied for three or four Days and Nights
continually.

On the 1st of October they advanced their Trenches to the Ditch-side; the
which having filled up, they stormed the Fortress, but were repulsed with the
loss of 600 Men; notwithstanding which, they made a second Attempt, and entered
the City, and Burnt it; but being again beaten out of it, they continued the
following Day to Fire without ceasing for the space of three or four Days; Is
well defended.
by which time, though great Breaches were made, yet the Besieged with
indefatigable Industry repaired in the Night, what the Enemies had ruined in
the Day.

On the 5th and 6th the Turks took Post in the Ditch, and endeavored to
fortify themselves there; but the Besieged Sallying out, dislodged them from
thence, the Turks howsoever recruiting themselves with fresh Forces, recovered
their Post; and having drained out all the Water from the Ditch, they
encompassed the Fortress round on all sides, throwing thereinto Bombs,
Carcasses, Stink-Pots, and other Artificial Fires: But neither these, nor
Batteries availing to terrify the Besieged, the Turks applied themselves to
sink Mines; which the Besieged having discovered, made some of them useless by
Countermines; howsoever the Turks intending to Storm the Place on the 9th of
that Month, fired one of their Mines early that Morning, which threw down part
of the Wall, and immediately they began to Storm the Place, October.
which the Besieged withstood for four Hours together, driving the Turks from
the Walls, as often as they advanced, and planted their Colors thereupon. In
this Action the Besieged took three Standards, The Turks repulsed.
and killed 800 of the Enemy; and prosecuting this Success, they drove them out
of most of their Posts and Lodgments, with the loss of 1000 of their Men; and
having gained six Ensigns, they returned with Joy and Triumph to their
Fortress. October.


This Vigorous Defense so astonished the Turks, and caused them to despair of
taking the Fortress; that silently in the Night they raised their Camp with so
much Precipitation, Raise the Siege.
that they left behind them two Great Guns, and three Mortar-pieces, with much
Ammunition and Provisions.

The next Morning being the 11th of the Month, the Besieged Sallying out, found
no Enemy near them: The Action was very strange, and almost Miraculous,
considering that the Turks had lost more than 4000 Men, and the Christians had
150 Killed, and 120 Wounded; the Turks had an Army of 30000 Men to oppugn the
Castle, and the Christians no more than 600 to defend it: And with this Action
the Campaign ended, as well in Poland, as in Hungary.

After the Death of Sir William Hussy, who Died, as we have said, the last
Year at Belgrade; William King of England, etc. immediately dispatched away Mr.
Herbert, in Quality of Ambassador to the Grand Seignior, with Orders to
reassume the Mediation of Peace between the Emperor, and his Allies, with the
Sultan, and not to lose the present Opportunity, which looked favorable in
regard to both sides.

Mr. Herbert had very little time given him to provide himself for so great an
Undertaking and Journey over Land; Mr. Herbert sent Ambassador to the Turks.
and though he was often afflicted with the Gout, and not very well at ease, when
he begun so long a Journey, yet being a Man of a great Spirit, he forced
himself, that he might not lose the Merit and Honor of being the Instrument of
procuring that Peace between the Emperor, and the Sultan, in which all Europe
was concerned: the Turks being then very low, and much debased in their
Spirits, seemed flexible and inclinable to a Peace: And not to lose this
favorable Conjuncture, the Journey of Mr. Herbert was pressed with all the
haste imaginable; but what with the Fatigue of the Journey, and the Unquietness
of his Mind for being obstructed in a Negotiation so much desired by him, he
became so violently Attacked by the Gout, that he was forced to yield unto his
Distemper, and lay himself up for some Months at Frankfort, so that it was
March before his Arrival at Vienna, and far in the Month of April before his
Departure from thence; during which time I received two Letters from him, Mr.
Herbert's Letters to the Author.
the chief substance of which was to complain of his want of Health, and of the
little appearance of a Peace between the Emperor and the Turks; they despising
(as he said) all the Overtures that had been made to them, which had served
only to exalt the French Ambassador, and to keep the Turks from a Peace, who
imagined that such Instances would never have been made for Peace, had the
Christians not been droven to Extremities and want of Power to support and
continue a War: Howsoever Mr. Herbert, in Obedience to His Majesty's Commands,
resolved to proceed, and try his Fortune; and being furnished by the Emperor,
the Venetians, and the King of Poland, with their Conditions respectively, on
the which they were contented to establish the Foundation of Peace, he took his
way down the Danube, which was the most convenient Passage for a Person
laboring under his Distemper: And on this occasion, I have thought fit to
Insert the Propositions offered from the Allies unto the Turks, which are these
which follow.

PROPOSITIONS For a Lasting PEACE, Offered at the Sublime Port, by Mr. Herbert,
the English Ambassador, 1692.
Propositions Offered by the Emperor.
In Nomine Dei. Inter duos Imperatores pro fundamento almae Pacis prolatae
Propositiones.
Prima Propositio. NE futuris quoque temporibus inter utrumque Imperatorem
aliquod intercedat dissidium, sed firma Pax coalescat, Caesarea Majestas
occupatorum aliquam partem restituens, reliqua vero retinens moderationem, and
aequanimitatem ostendat, si autem abnuerit, retentis occupatis foederi terminus
temporis praefigatur. Secunda Propositio. Sub patrocinio fulgidae Portae
existens sitaque prope Confinia Caesareae Majestatis Christianae Regio
Transylvaniae in pristinum ipsius statum restituatur, annuumque suum tributum
Ottomannorum Imperatori solvat, atque prout declaratur in Sacris antehac
confirmatis Diplomatibus sub protectione utriusque Imperialis Majestatis quieto
statu fruantur ejus incolae. Tertia Propositio. Arcium, quae hucusque tenentur
a fulgida Porta, viae quaecunque interceptae and oblocatae sunt, operiantur,
neve in territoriis and attinentiis earum aliqua fiat interturbatio seu
praetensio. Quarta Propositio. Multum hic morati sumus, qua de causa, nescimus,
jam veris tempus adventat, in Negotio Tractatus and Conclusionis de Pace multae
difficultates oboriantur, quae menti obversari non poterant: Pro enodandis
omnibus difficultatibus, reque-stabilienda quies ab armis esse necessaria
videri coepit, ne interrumpatur almi and Sacrosancti istius negotii
continuatio, armistitii necessitas apparet, pro quo honestum and conveniens
temporis spatium praesigendum occurrit.
The Articles Proposed by the Venetians, for a Peace with the Turks.
I. LO Stabilimento del suo Dominio Vecchio e nuovo, e sotto questo s'intendono
gl'acquisti fatti per i quali sendosi. II. Impatronita del tutto Regno di Morea
colla presa di Napoli di Malvasia, pretend lisiano ceduti, li scogl'ed
Isol'aggia, centi, e qualche Territorio fuori del stretto di Corintho verso la
Livadia and Atene, a Lepantho ed a luoghi sopra 'l Golfo di Corintho i suoi
Territorii, cosi alla fortezza della Prevesa il suo Territorio ed a luoghi, che
sono sopra 'l Golfo della Prevesa, come dipendenze di St. Maura. III. L'
Territorio attorno della Valona. IV. Nella Dalmatia pretend per Confini i due
fiumi Obroazzo e Bojana, col mar' aggia, cente e le Montagne della Bosna. La
facolta di fabricare fortesse nel proprio Territorio. Che non si pretenda dalla
part de Turchi 'l pagamento per 'l Zante, ma questo rest' affatto abolito anco
per l'auvenire. Regolamento del Commercio a regolarsi, quando si venisse a piu
stretti Trattati co' Turchi.
Sacra Caesarea and Regia Majestas Dominus noster Clementissimus, ut sincero
affectu and magno aestimio Serenissimi and Potentissimi Magnae Britanniae Regis
and Praepotentium Dominorum Generalium Ordinum Foederati Belgij ad promovendam
pacem cum Porta Ottomannica officia sibi oblata acceptat, ita quemadmodum summa
etiam in fortuna, and geminatis victoriis pacem honestam and tutam aequis
conditionibus inire desideravit and etiamnum inire parata est; Nos jussit
Excellentissimum Dominum Legatum Angliae ad Portam Ottomannam proficiscentem
super hoc negotio Pacis Viennae jam inchoato, de ejusdem processu, and ubi
haerere coeperit, plene informare, simulque ejusdem Caesaream mentem circa ea
quae adhuc facienda restant, ut Pax intentata coalescere possit adaperire.
VENERUNT huc Turcae pacem offerentes circa finem anni millesimi sexcentesimi
octuagesimi octavi, quae tum proposuerint, propositio Caesareis Commissariis ad
hoc negotium deputatis, ab ipsis Ablegatis Turcicis tradita, hic sub A.
apposita fusius demonstrabit, sic eamque Domino a Werdenburg postea dictatam
and Turcico idiomate compositam exhibuerunt, and sponte ad singula cedenda vel
retinenda specifice devenerunt, juxta eandem propositionem illorum posteriorem
Excellentissimo Domino Legato C, communicatam. Et quia haec Propositio Turcica
posterior generalem dictorum locorum cedendorum vel retinendorum continet
specificationem, omnia vero de locorum appertinentiis, forma ac modo cedendi
reticet, certum est, and hanc ipsam Propositionem ulteriorem singulorum
discussionem requirere: Super quo cum sufficiens tractandi materia restaret, ad
facilitandam dicti tractatus reassumptionem cum Turcis, post factam praedictae
Propositionis Turcicae Foederatis communicationem and expectata desuper eorum
sensa, Caesarei Commissarii, revocatis ad hunc finem Pottendorffium saepe
dictis Ablegatis Turcicis, responsum suum ad latus dictae Propositionis
Turcicae sub nominato C. scripto exhibuerunt: Quod responsum saepe memorati
Ablegati Turcici eo praetextu quod nihil novi in se contineret, and tam prima
quam posterior eorum Propositio olim exhibita, mutata interim rerum facie
evanuisset and sibi nulla amplius tractandi and concludendi tractatus facultas
superesset, acceptare recusarunt; reprehensi postea desuper se responsum
Caesareum suscepturos, absque tamen eo quod and illi desuper iterum
responderent, se offerre; praeteritum vero errorem per id excusare coeperunt,
quod gravius sibi visum fuerit, acceptare Caesareum responsum, and ad id non
replicare, quam deficiente sibi tractandi facultate illius acceptionem ab
initio statim deprecari.

Quoniam vero rebus his in circumstantiis positis, duo indispensabiliter
necessaria se produnt; Primum, quod si pacem Turcae Practicabilem velint,
utrique imperio tutam and honestam, necessario distinctis limitibus utriusque
Imperii Dominia ab invicem separari and distingui debeant; quare intermixtis
Territoriis, nec Pacem nec armistitium tute and honest coalescere posse, pro
infallibili axiomate statuendum and observandum est: Alterum, quod ut ad
distinctionem confiniorum realem and solidam deveniri possit, praecise
requiratur, ut Porta Ottomannica congruis mandatis and ad facultatem tractandi
and concludendi idoneis Ablegatos suos hic degentes instruat, juxta quae illi
hinc inde respective cedendorum, retinendorum, vel permutandorum discussionem,
modum cedendi vel appertinentias singulorum definire, and sic concordatis
utrinque placitis conditionibus, Pacis vel armistitii tractatus inire, and cum
fructu prosequi ac concludere possint. Ad hunc ergo obtinendae novae
instructionis and facultatis pro saepe dictis Ablegatis Turcicis scopum, summa
Negotiationis Excellentissimo Domino Legato Angliae creditae dirigenda, eoque
omni possibili conatu allaborandum est, ut facultatem super praefata ultima
Caesarea Propositione tractandi Ablegatis Turcicis a Porta Ottomannica
mittendam obtineat, nec inde facile recedendum, cum non sit in promptu, omnia
materialia, quae his Generalibus continentur, de loco ad locum specificare and
Excellentissimo Domino Legato Angliae suggerere, multa enim ab oculari
situationum inspectione dependent, de quibus haud aliter transigi poterit; Et
hoc ad Articulum Primum and Secundum Caesarei ultimi responsi.

Ad Tertium Art. Nihil Caesareae Propositioni addendum vel demendum venit, eo
quod distinctio Confiniorum Caesarei Dominii ab Ottomannico ibidem clare
exposita habetur: Multis in contrarium facientibus argumentis and rationibus
amore Pacis sepositis: Et ea propter in favorem Portae Ottomannicae admissa.

Ad Quartum Art. Caesarei responsi de tractu Valachiae and Moldaviae nihil
habetur in Caesareo responso; non equidem propterea quod ad praedictum tractum
jus fundatum desit, sed quod nec novis tricis pacis negotium involvere, nec
Foederatorum cuipiam in eo praejudicare visum fuerit.

Ad Art. Quintum. Transylvaniae Negotium omni dubio procul erit in tractatu
Petra Scandali, ad quam Jure Avito ad Regnum Hungariae spectantem Armis
Caesareis, suffragante spontanea Magnatum and Populi submissione, occupatam and
possessam, Turcis cedendam, The greatest difficulty in all this Treaty was this
5th Article about Transylvania.
nihil est quod Sacram Caesaream Majestatem compellere queat, nec faciet
unquam; Ut tamen perficiendae pacis nullus modus a Caesarea Majestate
intentatus relinquatur, si Turcae nullo modo Caesareae supra citatae contra
Propositioni C. locum dare vellent, sed olim Proposito interdicto Uti
Possidetis pacem coalescere mallent, Caesarea Majestas nec id comprehensa and
in sua possessione relicta Transylvania aspernabitur, verum non obstante multo
sibi cum Ottomannica Porta communi incommodo exinde resultante, tractatum Pacis
propter ea abrumpi non patietur, tum ut Serenissimo Magnae Britanniae Regi and
Dominis Foederati Belgii Ordinibus Generalibus Pacem cum Ottomannica Porta
sum desiderantibus, quantum fieri potest, deferat, tum etiam ut pro sua
naturali pietate and clementia essusioni Sanguinis humani parcat, and qua licet
possibilibus conditionibus sistat, quinimo, ut possibili modo realem pacis
incundae promptitudinem supra memoratis potentiis sibi Foederatis testatam
reddat, si Turcae per oblatum and hactenus in pacificationibus cum Porta
Ottomannica fere semper observari solitum interdictum Uti Possidetis, inclusa
Transylvania, pacem inire non posse mordicus tuerentur and hujus temperamenti
Caesarea ex part ineundi spem ab Excellentissimo Domino Legato Angliae Turcis
pro obtinenda pace injici posse permittit, scilicet si restituta Transylvania
Juniori Apafi: Quem status elegerunt and cum Caesar tum Porta Ottomannica
confirmavit: In perpetuum tamen abinde excluso proditore Tokelio, suis antiquis
juribus, libertatibus and privilegiis, sub aequali utriusque Imperii
protectione and commodo deinceps libere vivere sinat; Contra, Porta Ottomannica
trans Danubium, Varadinum, Temesvarinum, Gyula, Jenova, Lippa, aliaque omnia
loca quae armis Ottomannicis in ultra Danubianis and Tibiscanis partibus
tenentur and partium Hungaricarum nomine audiunt, ad Portam Ferream usque
inclusive, simul etiam quae inter Danubium and Savum ultra Dravum momentanea
and dubia possessione tenet, Sacrae Caesareae Majestati in statu quo munita
cedat, nulla ibidem Portae Ottomannicae remanente praetensione.

Ad Art. Sextum, Nihil dicendum occurrit, sed omnia ad contenta hoc Art. Sexto
Caesarei responsi comprehensa deducenda sunt, propterea quod de iis alio modo
supposita honesta and tuta pace ab utrinque facienda transigi non possit.

Ad Art. Septimum. Caesarei responsi nihil dicendum cum per se clarus sit and
Caesaream intentionem sine omni aequivoco explicet.

Quae vero Articulis, Octavo and Nono, Caesarei responsi comprehensa leguntur,
vix est quod Pacis Negotium morentur, eo duntaxat excepto, quod Art. Nono de
libere muniendis Utriusque Imperii placitis consiniis stipulandum proponitur
quod nullatenus alterari vel omitti potest, eo quod utriusque Imperii securitas
in hoc potissimum sita deprehendatur.

Ad Appendicem Caesarea ex part praesupponitur quod, Turcis in suis
exhibitionibus respectu Foederatorum Serenissimorum Regis Poloniae, and
Reipublicae Venetae exhibitis permanentibus, magna Pacis facilitandae ratio
apparitura sit, quamvis desuper cum iis potissimum transigendum maneat.

De quibus omnibus pacis ineundae and facilitandae temperamentis, suo ordine
gradatim proponendis, ut Excellentissimus Dominus Legatus Angliae cum Portae
Ottomannicae Ministris and Magno Vizirio praecipue colloqui, spemque
obtinendorum a Caesareis commode facere poterit, ita meminerit, dictorum
temperamentorum proponendorum ac desuper Turcarum ad Pacem inclinatorum, vel ab
ea aversorum sensum penetrandi liberam, ut supradictum, sibi facultatem quidem
creditam, verum ipsius negotii Pacis conclusionem, Augusto Imperatori, Domino
Domino nostro Clementissimo reservatam habere and ita remanere debere, ut super
propositis and acceptatis temperamentis demum hic Viennae tractatus formaliter
concludi debeat, cum vel maxim id praeterea observandum, quod Caesarea
Regiaque Majestas sine Foederatis suis Serenissimo Poloniae Rege and
Serenissima Republica Veneta Pacem, uti saepius declaravit, nec factura sit nec
facere possit; Quare ad se ponendum inter Caesarem Augustum and Turcarum
Imperatorem currens bellum praecise requiritur, ut and cum Caesareis Foederatis
praememoratis, de pacificatione ipsorum quoque tractetur, and ad tractandum cum
ipsis Ablegati Turcici convenienter instruantur.

Suggerendum praeterea occurrit Excellentissimo Domino Legato Angliae quod
Sacra Caesarea Majestas his conditionibus ultra finem Junii circiter se
adstrictam permanere non intendat.

Porro si supremus Vizirius per praesentes Portae Ottomannicae Ministros
tractatum continuare nollet vel alios submittere vellet, nullam ex part
Caesarea hac in re difficultatem experietur.

Et quia saepe memorati Ablegati Turcici varias male fundatas querelas and
actorum exculpationem, nomine sincerae cujusdam informationis sub D, huc ad
Aulam

Desideratur hoc praeterea ab Excellentissimo Domino Legato Angliae; ut nihil
nomine Caesareo sed omnia quasi ex mandato sui Serenissimi Regis hic in aula
Caesarea penetrata proferat and agot, simul etiam quam Proposito apud Portam
Ottomannicam ad sanciendam Pacem vel continuandum bellum dispositionem
repererit, expressis and festinis Cursoribus nunciare non gravetur.

PERPENSIS Instructionibus, quae mandato Sacrae Caesareae Majestatis
Excellentiae Vestrae 31 Martii, Dominis Legato and Ablegatis Serenissimi and
Potentissimi Magnae Britanniae Regis and P. P. Dominorum Ordinum Foederati
Belgii impertire voluere respondent:

Accepta esse Sacrae Caesareae Majestati dicti Magnae Britanniae Regis and D.
D. Ordinum ad promovendam cum Porta Ottomannica pacem officia, per
Excellentissimos Dominos Hussy and Collier, ad Portam Ottomanicam Legatos
oblata and ipsis concredita, se grato animo percepisse, utque jam tantum
negotium eo efficacius aggrediantur, de aliquibus communicatis and tractandis,
quo before informari possint, decenter rogant.

In Propositione ab Ablegatis Turcicis data, (Litera C.) reclusa fulgidae
Portae sententia de satisfactione Foederatis Imperialibus praebenda, Regi
scilicet Poloniae and S. Reip. Venetae, proferri videtur, cui nullum datur
responsum, quamvis in replicatione ejusdem expectatio suggeritur, ideoque
praedicti Legatus and Ablegati nonnihil mirantur Articulum tanti momenti
tacitum praeteriisse Excellentias Vestras, eo magis quod ratio productae Domini
Legati Commorationis credebatur esse Foederatorum responsi expectatio, quod and
etiam ita fuisse dicebatur, and de quo proculdubio Foederati praedicti Oratores
suos hic residentes, quantum ad ipsorum praetensiones attinet, certiores
fecere. Perpendere velint Excellentiae Vestroe express in Instructionibus
Legato and Ablegatis concreditis slatui, ut nihil omnino, priusquam Foederatis
satisfiat consentiretur, atque igitur materia illa non lucidata incapaces plane
se putant Legati servitia huic tractatui utilia praeslare, cum facile nimis
exponi viderentur dignitas Regis and DD. Ordinum, aliqua etiam ratione Sacrae
Caesareae Majestatis Consilia and Excellentissimorum Dominorum Legatorum
character; non probabile enim est, fulgidam Portam velle de concilianda pace
agere, priusquam resciverit, quibus legibus cum Foederatis tractari possit,
just suspicante Visirio, ne tractatu inito ipsiusque ita mente perspecta
Sociorum aliquis postmodo iniquas and non approbandas exigendo Conditiones a
quibusvis pactis recedere, nullisque unquam stipulationibus teneri queat, hac
soluta difficultate Excellentissimi DD. Legati alacri animo opus promptissimi
aggredientur. Qua ergo par est instantia Excellentias Vestras orant Legatus and
Ablegati, ut before materia ista aperiatur, quae Considerationi Excellentiarum
Vestrarum remittitur, and cui necessarium creditur, ut respondeatur.

De remittenda Transylvania Principi Apafi cum omnibus Privilegiis, etc.
tributoque quod petunt Turcae promittendo, si arrogati pro hac cessione
territorii partem tantum aliquam concedere immoretur Visirius, an pertinaciter
Propositioni Imperiali insistendum sit, petitur.

Si velit Magnus Visirius tractatum inire, ea condition, ut unicuique Imperio
maneant acquisita, quomodo se gerere debeant Legati, nulla Foederatorum
mentione facta, quaeritur.

An terminus, qui ad finem Junii offluit, non sit extendendus considerationi
Excellentiarum Vestrarum exhibetur; aut si post illud tempus omnis ulterioris
tractatus Propositio rejiciatur.

Instructions for the English and Holland Ambassadors, in respect to the Three
Allies, Vienna, April 12th. 1692.
Collaudato Excellentissimi Domini Legati Angliae and Dominorum Ablegatorum
Angliae and Hollandiae de Re Christiana been merendi syncero studio and
prudenti de amovendis obstaculis quae negotium creditum morari vel turbare
possent, suscepta cura ad puncta oblata respondendum duxerunt Deputati ad hoc
Caesarei Ministri.

Ad Primum.
IN Caesareo ad Turcicam Propositionem ultimam concepto responso Articulum de
foederatis tractantem nullarenus omissum fuisse, sed aliter quam ibi reperitur,
propter ea concipi non potuisse, quod Serenissimus Poloniae Rex and Serenissima
Respublica Veneta, etsi in prosequendo bello Sacrae Caesareae Majestati foedere
sociati, and pariter ad pacem seorsivam non faciendam, nec aliter quam simul
sanciendam obligati sint, nihilominus tractandarum suarum conditionum Pacis
arbitri manserunt; quare permissa ipsis singulorum cum Turcis complanatione de
iis, quae eosdem foederatos tangebant, non nisi per generalia loquendum erat;
Caeterum Ablegatus Poloniae Dominus Prosky communicationem suarum conditionum
cum D D. Ministris Angliae and Hollandiae non quidem abnuit, sed ulteriorem
tractationem and conclusionem non aliter, quam hic Viennae

Ad Secundum.
Constat, intuitu Officiorum a Serenissimo and Potentissimo Magnae Britanniae
Rege and Praepotentibus Dominis Generalibus foederati Belgii Ordinibus
oblatorum Caesaream Majestatem temperamenta scripto Excellentissimo Domino
Legato Angliae, and Dominis Ablegatis exhibita, non ad ipsam concludendam
Pacem, sed potissimum ad introducendam dispositionem ad tractatum Pacis hic
Viennae reassumendum proposuisse; quare si Magnus Visirius restituta Apafio
Transylvania sub aequali prorectione and Commodo utriusque Imperii cum suis
juribus and Privilegiis petita territoria non omnia, sed tantum eorum partem
concedere vellet, nullarenus ipsi assentiendum, sed desideratis impense
inhaerendum fore, cum absque cessione petiti Territorii nihil sit, quod Sacram
Caesaream Majestatem ad restitutionem dictae Transylvaniae permovere, vel
obligare possit; verum quia ejusmodi tractatus graves and momentosi non uno, ut
dici solet, ictu perficiuntur, ubi Domini Legati Angliae and Hollandiae
certiora de Turcarum intentionibus ad nos perscripserint, commodior tum de
porro faciendis vel omittendis deliberatio institui poterit.

Ad Tertium.
Foederatorum satisfactionis debitae, cum sine ea Pax coalescere non possit,
semper erit facienda mentio and remonstranda Turcis cum iisdem Foederatis
desuper ulterius tractandi necessitas, hoc tamen verum est, quod complanatis
inter Sacram Caesaream Majestatem and Portani Ottomannicam ad prosequendum
tractatum dispositionibus Sacra Caesarea Majestas omnia officia adhibitura sit,
ut and tum Foederatos suos ad justas and honestas Pacis Conditiones acceptandas
deducat.

Ad Quartum.
De prorogatione termini in Obligatione ad has Conditiones persistendi
sapientissime monuerunt Excellentissimus Dominus Legatus and Illustriss. Domini
Ablegati Angliae and Hollandiae, quia tamen res in continuo motu constitutae
naturaliter and facile alterantur, ideoque difficile est, ad temperamentorum
propositorum acceptationem se indefinite obstringere and simili vinculo absque
ulla restrictione inhaerere, ideo dicto Mensi Junio totum Mensem Julium
denominando substituere visum fuit, quem intra si dispositio saepedicta ad
reassumendos tractatus, rejecta huc Viennam ejusdem conclusione, apud Portam
Ottomannicam induci non posset, non equidem propterea de iis porro tractandis
cessandum foret, sed ita de iis agere continuandum ut subsecuta rerum notabili
alteratione de eadem complananda missis Cursoribus necessariae quaestiones inde
emanatae proponantur, quae dicta rerum alteratio, si Caesareis armis, ut in
Deum confiditur, prospera foret, omni conatu de eadem Legatos Angliae and
Hollandiae certiores reddere, and monere non intermittetur.

Viennae, 12 Aprilis 1692.
The following Papers; though in order of Time they should have been inserted in
1690, and 1691, having relation to the Transactions now on foot, were thought
fit to be inserted here.

Summa Portionum in Hungaria, Transylvania, ac Partibus Regno Subjectis ab Ann.
1683, usque ad Ann. 1690. solutarum.
Anno 1683 HAbuit Hungaria Inferior Portiones 70000: facit per 7 Menses Flor.
3185000 1684 Hung. Inferior Port. 50000: Fl. 2275000 Superior 45000: Fl.
2047500 1685 Infer. and Super. 80000: Fl. 3640000 1686 Hungaria cum Partibus
100000: Fl. 4550000 1687 85000: Fl. 3867500 Transylvania Portiones: Fl. 1200000
1688 Hungaria 90000: Fl. 4095000 Transylvania 39000: Fl. 1774500 1689 Hungaria
50000: Fl. 2275000 Solvit Transylvania per parts: Fl. 1200000

Summa itaque Portionum solutarum, praeter Regnum Croatiae, and Parts
Conquistas; ac infinitos Militum ac Officialium excessus, and extorsiones,
atque transmigrationes facit ad Minimum Flor. 30106500.

Id est,
Triginta Milliones, centum sex Millia, and quingentos Florenos.
Deus sit vobiscum, mi Domine.
ACCEPTIS his Dominatio vestra veniat ad me Quinque Ecclesias; habeo enim
aliqua, quae conferam cum Dominatione vestra pro bono vestro: Assecuro autem
Dominationem Vestram de omni securitate, liberoque itu and reditu.

Datum quinque Eccles. 14 Febr. Ann. 1690. L. S. TULLIUS MIGLIO, Commissarius
Caesareus.

Literae Praedicantibus quibuslibet in Barovia transmissae.
Deus sit vobiscum.
QUONIAM ego quibusdam de causis negotium suae Majestatis Concernentibus
vestros Praedicantes huc ad Commissionem Caesaream accersivi, illi autem
comparere prorsus recusarunt; idcirco impero, and demando vobis, ne illos in
pagis vestris persistere permittatis, quin imo consortes liberosque eorum
Praedicantium statim ejiciatis, and numquam eos, familiasque eorum
Praedicantium immittere audeatis. Nam si contrarium meo mandato feceritis,
mittam ad vos, tamquam ejusmodi obedire nescios, ducentos milites Muscatarios,
qui in pagis vestris pro discretione sunt victuri. Ne ergo damnum and injuriam
suae Majestatis incurratis, in omnibus huic meo pareatis mandato, and
praespecificati Praedicantes intra quatriduum compareant ante suae Majestatis
Caesareae Commissarios audituri edictum. Deus vobiscum.

Datum quinque Ecclesiis, die 21 Febr. Ann. 1690. L. S. TULLIUS MIGLIO,
Caesareus Commissarius.

Literae Comminatoriae Veresmarthiensibus, Szolosiensibus, Kosepseiensibus,
Euzaiensibus, and Karanesiensibus incolis transmissae. Ex Hungarico idiomate in
latinum genuine transsumptae.
Deus Benedicat and Convertat vos.
VIDEO, quod nolitis mihi obtemperare, ideo quicumque veram Romanam fidem
amplecti noluerit, (sine qua impossible est salvari) eum in Episcopatu and
ditione mea degere nolo.

Dominus Commissarius, and Dominus Episcopus Sirmensis cis Danubium and Dravum,
and in districtu Essekiensi, Praedicantes omnes vel incaptivant, vel eliminant.
Id etiam vobiscum agetur, si vel Sacerdoti Szalontaiensi, vel Patribus Jesuitis
quinque Eccles. non confessi fueritis. sin autem carnem ex vobis aliquis
ederit, gravi luet poena. Sequenti Dominica Judices cum codicibus fide dignis
ingrediantur.

Datum Bavars-szolos, die 28. Febr. Ann. 1690. L. S. Vester bonus Dominus,
MATTHIAS RADHONAI, Episcopus quinque Eccl. and supremus Comes.

Literae Szavaiensibus, Guriensibus, Vistoiensibus, Sterdaliensibus,
Koracshidaiensibus, Marsa, Ferchegiensibus, and aliis districtus illius
Calvinistis exaratae, etc.
Deus Benedicat, and Convertat omnes Calvinistas in Districtu Siklos degentes.
UT jam antea crebro vos verbis and literis admonui, neminem haereticum,
praedonem, Judaeum, Calvinistam, Thracem Schismaticum, scortum, and
scortatorem, aut sceleratum alium, and in Deum calumniantem in Episcopatu
servaturum, and perpessurum; eo magis si quem invenero Praedicantem: Profecto
docebo, and interrogabo, ex cujus nutu and voluntate in Episcopatum meum
venerit animas ad tartara dejicere, Filii Dei Sanguine pretioso redemptas.
Idcirco scribo de novo, and demando, qui velit manner sub Episcopatu meo, fidem
veram Romanam, (sine qua impossible est salvari) amplectatur, and de omnibus
suis peccatis poeniteat, omnes unanimi voto Deum laudaturi and adoraturi. Qui
autem animum ad haec non induxerit, eo, ubi haeresis tolerabitur, concedat:
Reperiam ad parata obedientes, Deum timentes, and verae fidei homines, quos
subsidere faciam in locum ipsorum, qui in vera fide nolunt Deo Servire.
Praedicantes autem resipiscere nolentes Episcopatu meo illico excedant, si
velint, ne cum ipsis more Praedicantis Nadasdiensis and Mohacsiensis, and
aliorum agatur.

Actum Ocsard die 2 Martii, 1690. L. S. Vestrae Conversionis Cupidus; MATTHIAS
RADHONAI, Episcopus quinque Ecclesiensis and supremus Comes.

Literae Szavaiensibus, Garaiensibus, Czarnoraiensibus, Bissoviensibus,
Judiensibus, Totfalusiensibus, Harsanii, Nagi Harsaniensibus, Venczviensibus,
Odnogarensibus, Vitoiensibus, Magiens. Gordisaviens. Haboczaiens. Babonanaiens.
Crehiensibus, Szerdahelyensibus, Vizloiensibus, Czepeliensibus, Kemetkiensibus,
St. Martoniensib. Hederheliensib. Baskiensibus, Zaletiensibus, Zeyens. Quinque
Ecclesias. Siklos, Bile, Basky, and Bigetvar districtuum Calvinistis incolis
transmissae.
Lettres du Roy Tres-Christien a Monsieur Castaigneres.
Monsieur de Castaignere,
J'AY receu vos Lettres des 27 Avril, 7 and 27 May, avec les Lettres du Grand
Seigneur, and du Vizir; le Decret, ou barat, pour les Religieux Francs de
Jerusalem, and toutes les autres pieces, qui y estoient jointes. Vouz ne devez
pas Douter, que je ne sois tres satisfait de la conduite, que vous avez tenue
dans tout cette affair, and de l'heureux succes, qu' elle a eve. Je ni assure
aussi, que s'il se recontre quelque obstacle dans l'execution des ordres, que
la Port a done sur ce sujet, vous n' obmettrez rien pour les fair lever, and
pour maintenir les Religieux Latins dans la paisible possession des Saints
lieux. 305. 406. 324. 256. 228. 26. 54. 167. 53. 136. 403. 331. 38. 288. 76.
352. 294. 54. 347. 41. 77. 193. 15. 98. 38. 232. 53. 3. 159. 301. 88. 8. 288.
98. 278. 76. 167. 51. 260. 337. 167. 50. 290 71. 195. 199. 401. J approuve
pareillement tout ce, que vous avez fait pour 47. 405. 44. 118. 341. 98. 50.
245. 181. 53. 232. 152. 288. 29. 15. 205. 401. 71. 212. 53. 197. 198. 51. 260.
2. 195. 272. 14. 51. 267. 202. 388. 206. 3. 83. 45. 215. 65. 14. 50. 401. 198.
53. 243. 50. 311. 54. 277. 195. 86. 56. 57. 98. 83. 197. 208. 80. 202. 311. 56.
288. 257. 59. 288. Mais ce n'est qu'a condition que 78. 66. 198. 88. 291. 193.
3. 6. 205. 71. 2. 44. 98. 68. 402. 347. 32. 3. 60. 88. 193. 14. 98. 331. 38.
286. 167. 51. 403. 245. 103. 53. 232. 167. 65. 54. 337. 324. 119. 59. 54. 177.
50. 166. 202. 35. 83. 104. 114. 51. 2. 185. 20. 88. 298. 233. 301. 298. 80.
337. 314. 119. 27. 53. 401. 252. 237. 2. 59. 223. 60, 53, 270. 202. 45. 118.
86. 56. 57. 98. 83. 311. 301. 53. 185. 198. 60. 195. 146. 347. 403. ne se doit
point etendre 266. 277. 185. 106. 32. 192. 109. 14. 266. 277. 185. 89. 185.
347. 15. quand a la 45. 118. 288. 8. 298. 80. 347. 35. 193. 202. 355. 39. 202.
15. 167. 50. 245. 54? 254 59. 89. 50. 57. 401. 177. 56. 118. 8. 321. 188. 38.
222. 51. 401. 72. 256. 86. 53. 188. 266. vous deves 235. 84. 403. 381. 38. 276.
27. 56. 98. 337. 235. 257. 195. 98. 54. 218. 59. 51. 311. 11. 97. 193. 98. 302.
59. 39. 401. 233. 202. 195. attachements aux Interests de 405. 232. 152. 288.
30. 14. 205. 21. 2. 53. 103. 5. 205. 51. 3. 99. 9. 335. 37. 405. 53. 97. 83.
284. 42. 59. 83. 388. 166. 78. 193. 281. 202. 245. 202. 308. 59. 51. 256. 51.
202. 218. 38. 114. 50. 2. 198. 98. 298. 98. 50. 302. 106. 38. 138. 2. 59. 86.
41. 60. J'ay assez de raison dene pas souffrir 3. 60. 341. 256. 3. 59. 56. 98.
178. 337. 185. 301. 308. 205. 337. ff 4 ff. 403. 337. 32. 337. 44. 118. 288.
73. 2. 298. 80. 337. 195. 154. 199. 119. 59. 54. 3. 27. 56. 323. 14. 202. 256.
167. 53. 84. 185. 167. 26. 63. 347. 32. 256. 35. 83. 3. 26. 57. auparavant que
405. 252. 3. 109. 53. 167. 50. 401. 119. 59. 54. Je ne crois pas, qu'on doive
fair beaucoup de fondement sur 60. 256. 208. 243. 26. 6. 195. 2. 53. 228. 88.
38. 311. 347. 256. 33. 83. 104. 114. 3. 108. 83. 166. 142. Je ne juge pas a
propos di 133. 50. 302. 3. 59. 341. 39. 83. 104. 114. 146. 2. 99. 8. 260. 347.
35. 83. 177. 9. 234. 202. 84. 185. 167. 26. 63. 258. 188. 247. 321. 167. 298.
80. 305. 183. 331. 38. 109. 83. 11. 88. 2. 60. 291. 202. 355. 59. 118. 39. 256.
Il suffit, que vous continuez a parler dans le sens que je vous ay prescrit par
mes precedentes depeches a la relation que des vous envoie de and la Victoire,
que ma slotte a ramportee sur celle de mes Ennemis vous donnera encore de
nouveaux moyens de fair voir aux Ministres, que 78. 53. 222. 26. 99. 76. 261.
93. 14. 51. 352. 234. 59. 98. 50. 63. 228. 8. 311. 68. 202. 86. 53. 161. 53.
71. 337. 79. 53. 83. 277. 118. 76. 298. 98. 50. 202. 154. 53. 181. 54. 53. 78.
53. 331. 38. 298. 286. 14. 77. 185. 164. 2. 99. 9. 109. 20. 99. 59. 51. 401.
71. 223. 50. 86. 288. Sur toutes nous faites leur bien comprendre, que 78. 53.
256. 222. 26. 99. 76. 167. 53. 244. 98. 234. 38. 202. 50. 337. 202. 217. 27.
14. 60. 50. 54. 3. 38. 256. 14. 54. 185. 167. 26. 62. 198. 213. 53. 198. 133.
106. 65. 71. 52. 173. 71. 337. 274. 2. 311. 337. 195. 138. 11. 141. 53. 97. 98.
278. 5. 205. 228. 51. 195. 56. 118. 256. 78. 198. 348. 88. 352. 402. 212. 233.
341. 33. 288. 68. 27. 38. 228. 51. 106. 38. 278. 6. 245. 401. 2. 185. 98. 59.
266. 80. 352. 267. 53. 82. 54.

Ne manques pas de me fair scavoir par vos premieres depeches, a quoy montent
les effects, que le feu Seignior Vouir a laisses. Il y ade l'apparence, que le
53. 401. 265. 54. 202. 185. 331. 59. 51. 202. 317. 2. 99. 8. 9. 183. 202. 149.
formez vous de nouvelles difficultez a la 405. 59. 38. 338. 202. 167. 27. 62.
247. 341. 205. 14. 98. 133. 245. 317. 97. 53. 401. 71. 245. 368. 166. 311. 185.
256. 119. 59. 54. 11. 97. 167. 53. 83. 177. 12. 234. 50. 212. 84. 358. 308. 59.
57. 311. 347. 119. 60. 53. 198. 88. 197. 53. 208. 5. 195. 277. 402. 185. 89.
38. 311. 50. 72. 185. 331. 38. 9. 225. 98. Sur ce je pry Dieu, qu'il vous ait
Monsieur de Castaigneres en sa Sancte guard. Ecrit a Versailles le 31 Juillet,
1690.

Sign, Plus bas. LOUIS. COLBERT.

Monsieur de Castaigneres,
J'A Y receu votre Lettre datte de Constantinople du 15 Juin avec celles, que
le Grand Seigneur and son premier Ministre m'ont ecrites au sujet du
Retablissement des Religieux Latins dans les Saints lieux e je vous ay desia
temoigne la satisfaction, que j'ay du succes, que vos soins ont eu dans la
poursuitte de cette affair. Quelque sujet que vous ayez de 402.119.59. 54.
202. 233. 14. 51. 352. 275. 52. 337. 245. 121. 59. 51. 368. 41. 76. 15. 8. 108.
288. 53. 3. 59. 154. 199. 71. 337. 195. 53. 99. 288. 88. 268. 403. a fait
porter diligentement des 406. 2. 3. 38. 12. 108. 276. 44. 195. 401. Il n'y a
pass lieu nean moins de croire, que 410. 63. 40. 420. 185. 167. 26. 63. 198.
207. 26. 54. 198. 84. 133. 32. 173. 2. 99. 9. 198. 53. 3. 32. 205. 14. 68. 232.
256. 167. 50. 57. 71. 245. 368. 202. 185. 59. 57. 98. Vous pouvez meme 1. 407.
3. 54. 228. 98. 50. 195. 154. 199. 337. 401. Je scay de bonne past, que la 98.
218. 225. 298. 80. 2. 193. 14. 45. 108. 198. 302. 195. 351. 202. 33. 173. 202.
84. 98. 56. 88. 38. 9. 234. 50. 195. 207. 202. 328. 347. 32. 2. 83. 284. 83.
202. 301. 202. 185. 108. 109. 14. 98. 202. 106. 88. 89. 277. 65. 202. 116. 98.
50. 228. 51. 185. 282. 26. 99. 41. 406. tout le rest de la Campaign 71. 202.
116. 266. 51. 185. 139. 202. 266. 53. 188. 202. tout ce qui est necessaire pour
188. 282. 15. 402. a moy les Turcs ne doivent pas craindre de trouver des
grandes obstacles aux entreprises qu'ils voudront former: e comme mes arms par
terre, and parmer ne seront pas moins formidables l'anne prochaine, que
cellecy, ce Ministre peut s'assurer, que s'il fait des efforts un peu
confiderables, il aura la gloire de retablir l'Empire Ottoman au meme etat,
qu'il etoit avaunt cette guerre, and mes ennemis la confusion d'avoir perdu tout
ce, qu'ils avoient acquis avaunt que de se brouiller avec moy. Je ne donte pas
neantmoins, qu'ils ne fassent beaucoup valoir au pays on vous estez le succes,
que le Prince d' Orange a eu en Irlande. Mais comme avec une armee de 40000
hommes de navoir eu a combattre, que 4 on 5000 hommes des mes trouppes, and
environ 15000 Irlandois, gens ramassez, sans discipline, and fort mal armez, on
ne doit tirer au lieu, ou vous estez, aucune consequence de ces achevemens.
D'autant plus, que mes troops se sont retirez a Limbrick sans aucune peste
considerable; and on peut juger de l'avenir par les grandes Victoires, que mes
arms ont ramportez tant sur mer, que sur terre, sur le grand nombre d'Ennemis,
que j'ay a combattre.

Je vous ay desia ecrit, que je ne 252. 197. 26. 76. 202. 177. 38. 208. 80. 2.
60. 152. 288. 29. 14. 205. 71. 337. 324. 256. 335. 2. 65. accord 352. 20. 88.
298. 233. 301. 298. 80. 53. 33. Lors qu'il possedoit le 405. 185. 45. 185. 311.
202. 106. 38. 104. 56. 68. 71. 277. 185. 65. 202. 50. 3. resister aux arms de
l'Empereur, ainsi c'est sans fondament, que l'on vent 202. 355. 38. 202. 185.
177. 38. 208. 80. 14. 12. 401. 9. 264. 15. 232. 288. 35. 54. 232. 53, 270. 71.
-- Je vous 282. 202. 108. 83. 167. 14. 51. 3. 59. 212. 56. 152. 258. un order
expres de moy, vous permettant seulement au cas, que 78. 53. 97. 96. 53. 83.
possession actuelle 410. 53. 420. 202. 185. 388. 72. que par l'appuy que 260.
335. 252 88. 245. 103. 232. 167. 65. 54. 185. 65. 83. 57. 98. 331. 286. 277.
235. 267. 218. 59. 99. 108. 38. En ce cas, and non autrement, vous 86. 38. 104.
124. 14. 68. 2. 84. 167. 15. 50. 278. 76. 3. 59. 199. 327. 59. 224. 35. 352.
378. 374. 2. 185. 331. 38. 341. 50. 88. 38. 311. 352. 40. 96. 32. 14. 341. 54.
337. J'avois permis au 212. 56. 53. 270. 202. 35. 44. 215. 65. 14. 50. 277.
311. 56. 203. Ne voulant pas, que vous 167. 53. 208. 14. 68. 311. 56. 288. 218.
35. 86. soit au 154. 199. 41. 60. 3. 59. 224. 36. en sort que ce que je serai
oblige de 403. 254. 50. 2. 225. 38. 71. 3. 185. 59. 56. 98. 256. 65. 311. 202.
167. 54. 83. 308. 59. 57. 245. 212. 53. 40. 96. 32. 14. 341. 53. Je ne desire
pas, que vous vous donnies aucun movement, pour empecher, que le Seignor
Chandos ne soit reconnu a la port en qualite d' Ambassadeur d'Angleterre, 37.
406. 2. 136. 337. 119. 59. 54. 256. 218. 66. 14. 68. 3. 53. 228. 98. 202. 237.
335. 84. 98. 253. 198. 50. 245. audience. 53. 83. 311. 56. 288. 327. 205. 288.
and vous ne devez pas ainsi vous mettre en peina de la 352. 298. 256. 14. 232.
53, 56. 128. 35. 191. 32. Surce je pry Dieu, quil vous ait, Monsieur de
Castaigneres, en sa Sancte guard. Ecrit a Versailles le 9 d'Aoust 1690.

Sign, Plus bas. LOUIS. COLBERT.

Excellentissimi ac Illustrissimi Domini.
Domini Gratiosissimi,
QUALITER Maritus meus Ecclesiae Evangelicae Polanii quondam Minister, non
obstante eo, quod ibidem omnes sint nobiles, and libera Religionis Evangelicae
facultate ab antiquo fruantur, ex inquieta Cleri subordinatione (de quo contra
auctoritatem suae Majestatis Serenissimae inferendo nec cogitare quidem umquam
quisquam potuerit) aliqui vagabundi Hungari plusquam more praedonico, nocturno
quietis tempore, cum sclopetorum displosionibus irruendo, cum little propter
ejusdem loci inhabitatorum confluxum and tumultum capi non potuisset, brachiali
tandem Germanorum militum assistentia, nocturno pariter tempore, per eosdem
Hungaros, and certos Cleros, misere captus, vinculatus, huc and illuc ad
diversa loca, ad instar canum; deductus, pede tenusque suspensus, and
ineffabilibus cruciatibus afflictus, omnibusque bonis privatus, ad diros
Eminentiss. D. Cardinalis a Kolonitz carceres Sabarienses, in despectum status
Evangelici, publico spectaculo expositus, lamentabiliter deductus sit, quin
Excellentiis Vestris jam innotescat, non dubito. Quo propter praedicationem
Verbi Divini, a sua Majestate Serenissima diaetaliter clementissime concessam,
satis crudeliter capto, vinculato, durissimisque aliquot centenarum plagarum
verberibus multis vicibus afflicto, and omnibus bonis privato: Ego in misera
jam sort constituta, eoque magis, quod jammodo sub praetextu homicidii contra
fanam Conscientiam a nonnullis apud Augustam Aulam ipsi innocentissimo Sanguini
adscripti, (ac si, inquam, tempore prioris tumultus, aliquis ex illis nocturnis
latronibus, quod alias omnes omnino omni jure promeriti fuissent, interfectus
fuisset; cum illi ex adverso ipsos inhabitatores potius ejusdem loci globo
trajecerint, and sauciaverint:) Et in praesentiarum in Eminent. D. Cardinalis
carcerum Sabariensium squalore, ad instar principalium notabiliumque latronum
vel bestiarum, pedibus manibusque concatenatis and vinculatis, sine ulla
crudelitatis remissione detineatur, and tractetur, nec non durioribus
verberibus, minisque variis aggravetur, and territetur, sicque ad fidem
contrariam amplectendam, contra diploma Regium indies crudelius compellatur:
Sed vel maxim, quod jam nec liberi, imo nullus nostrum accessum ad eum sub
gravi animadversione and indignatione amplius habere possint, panemque piorum
Christianorum Commiseratione ostiatim mendicando acquisitum, nec per alium
aliquem ipsi porrigere permittant Et quod majus, centum adhuc imperiales multis
minis and terriculamentis extorquere a misero non desinant: Omnium solatiorum
medio destituta, and jamjam desperabunda, spe adhuc in Gratiosa Excel.
vestrarum Commiserationis dexteritate reposita, cum miserrimis meis liberis
derelictis preces nostras ad earundem Excellentiarum Vestrarum sinum
Misericordiae genu flexo dirigimus, per viscera misericordiae Divinae, and
vulnera Christi, omni subjectionis humilitate orantes, dignentur nos, omni jam
eliberationis and solatiorum medio destitutos, and misere derelictos,
propterque praedicationem verbi Divini sic pressos, in eundem misericordiae
sinum gratiose suscipere. Et cum nec Sacrae suae Majestatis haec fuerit
intentio, ut Ministri Evangelico-Ecclesiastici verbo suo Regio priori
Religionis professioni and exercitio revocati, and integre restituti,
clandestina tyrannica aliqua modalitate vel crudelitate persequantur, and ad
normam multorum jam Praedicantium his quoque praeterlapsis temporibus captorum,
and ad mutationem usque Religionis duriter tractatorum, omnium cruciatuum
generibus iterum, iterumve affligantur, dissipentur, and exstirpentur: Verum ut
afflictio eorum nova gaudii vicissitudine suppleatur, sub benignisque
Serenissimae suae Majestatis Alis quietam vitam, and functionis,
professionisque libertatem securius habere possint, pro sublatis ulterioribus
excessibus, dissensionibus, and malis, in negotio Religionum suboriendis,
auctoritatem complanationis sibi diplomatice quam clementissime reservarit, and
non alicui Contra-parti vindicationem concessit: Ex ea etiam fiduciae
certitudine eaedem Excellentiae Vestrae gratiosa apud suam Majestatem
Serenissimam interpositione miseriis nostris succurrere, jugumque pressurae
contra auctoritatem Regiam tam crudeliter illatum tollere, and maritum meum in
carcerum squalore ita lamentabiliter patientem, per eandem Dei misericordiam
and salutem eliberationis solatio sublevare ne graventur. Propter quod genus
misericordiae summus ille misericors Deus ex summa Deitatis misericordia,
misericorditer ut iisdem Excellentiis Vestris cumulatissime benedicat and
prosperet. Eundem fundendis precibus nostris assiduis implorare non simus
intermissuri.

Earundem Excel. Vest. Humillima Ancilla, Praedicantis Possessionis Polanii
moestissima Censors, cum miserrimis liberis, gratiosam praestolaturi
resolutionem.

Excellentissime Domine.
Domine mihi Gratiosissime,
BENIGN recordabitur Excellentia vestra querulosae ac genuinae expositionis
afflictissimae sortis meae, eidem Excellentiae vestrae ante complures dies
medio supplicis libelli humillime factae: Qualiter nempe Praepositus
Sabariencis circa festum S. Joannis Baptistae non pridem transactum, missis
certo numero ad locum ordinariae Residentiae meae in Possessione Polanii (alias
more nobilitari) habitae Germanicis militibus, datisque mandatis, me capi,
diversimode excruciari, percuti, pedibusque suspendi, sicque ineffabilibus
cruciatibus affectum ad Arcem Sabariensem sub jurisdictione Eminentissimi
Principis Cardinalis a Kolonitz constitutam, deductum, ac compedibus vinctum,
aliquot centenarum plagarum verberibus sauciatum, manibus fractis, aliisque
corporis mei membris concussis ad squalidos carceres conjici curasset, ubi
impraesentiarum miserrime detineret.

Dum autem juxta quorundam benevolorum affidatione beatam desideratissimae
liberationis meae horam momentaneae exspectarem, deteriora experiri cogor: Ubi
his non long praeteritis diebus cum praesenter concluderem, aerumnosus ego
homo deductus in portam arcis, nisi me per unam vaccam redemissem, aliquot
plagas suffere coactus fuissem. Accepi jam, Excellentissime Domine,
quadringentas plagas; gloriam tamen tribuens Deo meo, quod me dignum fecerit
pati pro nomine suo. Imo hoc me maxim angit, quod, qui captivum me detinerent,
and qui contumulant me carcere exemptum, and (salvo honor) inter canes coacte
sedentem, gravi sub comminatione, libratis videlicet ad caput meum ferreis
clavis, adigerent, dicentes, Canito, canito, inquiunt, scivisti equidem in
stabulo, id est in templo, boar, rugire, and clamitare. His and similibus sine
intermissione aures meae onerantur, and gravantur, adque fidem Religioni meae
contrariam omni severiore modalitate, imo brevi me ad triremes mittere velle,
and aliis terriculamentis compellerer.

Ob id iterato scripti hujusce humilitate Excellentiae Vestrae demisse
supplico, humillime ac per viscera Misericordiae Divinae orans, quatenus ex
Zelo Misericordiae dignetur afflictissimae sortis meae misereri seque debetis
in locis gratiosis suis partibus interponere, and me ex his squalidis
carceribus eliberari facere. Quam gratiam Excellentiae Vestrae perpetua animi
devotione, grataeque mentis recordatione quam demississime demereri omni studio
conabor, tanquam

Ejusdem Excellentiae Vestrae Humillimus Cliens Petrus Nemus, quondam
Possessionis Polanii Helveticae Confessionis Praedicans, nunc Sabariae in
Eminentissimi Cardinalis carcere patiens.

Sacratissima Caesarea Regiaque Majestas.
Domine, Domine nobis Clementissime,
FIDEI and Conscientiae nostrae Dominium unice praepotenti Deo earundem
directori, intemeratae vero fidelitatis nostrae obsequium Majestati Vestrae
Sacratissimae, qua post Deum summo in his terris Monarchae, Regique ac Domino,
Domino nostro Clementissimo, nos omnino debere, effato divino edocti, dum huic
conformi, parendi studio inexplicabilibus turbinum fluctibus agitatae,
incomparabilibusque procellis, periculosis scopulis allisae, indeque concussae
and lacerae status nostri Evangelici Naviculae, inter ancipitia, summaque
discrimina jamnum versantem miserrimam sortem supra biennium, a diaeta nimirum
Posonsensi, ad usque anni praeteriti discessum, Majestatis Vestrae
Sacratissimae Augustam-Vindelicorum constitutum, medio certorum hominum
nostrorum, copiosissimis supplicibus libellis nostris, in omni subjectionis
humilitate, eidem Majestati Vestrae Sacratissimae repraesentassemus,
confractarumque tabularum memoratae calamitosissimae Naviculae nostrae
Evangelicae reparationem, priorique suae redintegrationi ad mentem Articuli I.
Ann. 1608. ante Coronationem editi, mediante alias diplomate Regio Ann. 1647.
in suum genuinum and nativum sensum redacti and declarati, subsequenterque
etiam Ann. 1659. pari Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae diplomate ad Conditionem
sextum Articuli I. quin and Articulo 25, 1681. diaetae Soproniensis per
expressum confirmati, per determinationem intimi sui Consilii dignandam
restitutionem, a Majestate Vestra Sacratissima de submississimo genu impense
efflagitassemus: Fatemur equidem, nos haud parvum subiisse gaudium, posteaquam
sub praememoratum Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae discessum per Ser. Principem
a Dittrichstein, supremum Augustissimae Majestatis vestrae aulae Praefectum
praeattacti homines nostri Clementissimam Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
imploratae medelae ex intimo suo Consilio factam determinationem jam extra
datam, manibusque Eminentissimi Principis Cardinalis a Kolonich, tamquam
Excelsae Delegatae Caesareo-Regiae Commissionis supremi Praesidis debitae and
indilatae Expeditioni and effectuationi mancipandam, assignatam esse, adeoque
abinde concupitam expeditionem nostram, post saepe repetitum discessum
Majestatis Vestrae, ipsismet expectandam venire affidati fuissent, nosque
eatenus per eosdem etiam certiores redditi fuissemus. Ast ubi ex debito
obtemperandi obsequio altetitulati Principis a Dittrichstein factae amandationi
i^dem homines nostri condignum morem gerentes suam Eminentiam Principalem
praerepetitae Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae extra datae benignissimae
determinationis convenientis expeditionis elargiendae causa quam devotissime
requisivissent, aque sua Eminentia ad Ill. D. intimi Consilii Bellici
Secretarium a Krapff, cujus officii and muneris esset eosdem juxta
praedeclaratam Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae determinationem expedite,
remissi fuissent, per suam tamen Illustritatem, ut ut condecenter requisitam,
saepe saepiusque interpellatam, in tantum protractum est praementionatae
expeditionis nostrae negotium, ut altememoratae suae Eminent. Principalis
Cardinalis a Kolonich quoque inopinatus discessus Romam supervenerit, eoque
ipso ruptum, ac tandem diversis certorum necessariorum Actorum, praeviae
expeditioni accommodandorum, non reperibilium, and fors per suam Eminent.
Principalem, vel inclytam Cancellariam Hungaricam, eo tum absentem, and ad
latus Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae existentem, reclusorum protelationibus
interjectis, maxima omnium nostri cum infelicitate, and summa Conscientiarum
nostrarum, liberique Exercitii nostri Evangelici cum coangustatione, ad
praeattactae suae Eminent. Principalis reditum relegatum, in suo priori turbato
statu remanserit impraesentiarum, citra ullam cordialium desideriorum nostrorum
effectuationem, and Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae pientissimam Ordinationem.

Et cum vel maxim ex cognitione absentiae and longae distantiae Majestatis
vestrae Sacratissimae medio tempore plurimi dominorum Catholicorum eo
liberiorem in nos grassandi, contraque novissimos Diaetales Articulos ulterius
quoque impune nos injuriandi sibi sumpsissent licentiam, adeo, ut Tokaini, loco
alias articulariter denominato, templo perprius jamnum vero parochia, per
Evangelicos ex fundamento exstructa, una cum universis proventibus
Conservationi Ecclesiae eorundem dicatis (in quorum continuo and actuali usu
fuissent, ad mentemque 26 Articuli, Ann. 1681. diaetae Soproniensis pro
actualibus eorundem possessoribus usuanda relinqui debuissent) per Dominos
Catholicos occupatis, ac ejusdem loci Ministro expulso Evangelici liberum
eorundem Religionis exercitii interruptum querularentur cursum. Itidem
Comitatus Zempliniensis Oppidum Thallya, praevio modo Articulari indulto
gaudens, capto suo Praedicante Evangelico, Cassoviamque deducto, ubi de facto
captivus detineretur, sui insimul exercitii and accessoriorum Evangelicorum
orbatum suspiraret statum. Comitatus adhaec Abauyvariensis oppidum Sepssy,
aeque sicut praementionata loca, in possessione sui templi, parochiae, and
scholae Articulariter relictum, iisdem non tam pridem privatis, inque exilium
Ecclesiae suae Ministro and Rectore Evangelicis pulsis, ulteriorique exercitio
ibidem quoquomodo imposterum usuando severe inhibito, suam lamentaretur
violenter ademptam indemnitatem. Comitatus porro Szathmariensis privilegiatum
alias oppidum Felko Banya dictum, Templi, parochiae, and Scholae, in quorum
continuo usu and possessione ante, in and post diaetam Soproniensem fuisset,
per inclytam Cameram Sepusiensem, ante circiter tres Menses factam violentam
occupationem, Praedicantisque sui deploraret expulsionem. Ejusdem identidem
Comitatus Szathmariensis possessio Totthfalu nuncupata, Praedicantis etiam sui
Evangelici privata auctoritate Residentiae Nagybanyajensis Patris Jesuitae
Pravasz nominati factam injuriosam incaptivationem, vinctique ad carceres
Szathmarienses, ubi etiam nunc asservaretur, curatam deductionem conquereretur.
Et supra haec praevii omnes, sicut and alii etiam Superiorum Hungariae partium
Evangelici ratione harum and similium aliarum illatarum gravium injurianum
suarum, Majestati Vestrae Sacratissimae supplicandi severam interminationem
ingemiscerent.

Post auspicatissimum proinde and felicissimum Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
reditum sum omnino necessarium duximus, (nixi innata Majestatis vestrae
Sacratissimae Pietate and Clementia, quae tantis importunitatibus nostris, ex
infinitis perpessis, Majestatique vestrae Sacratissimae mediantibus
demississimis Memorialibus nostris fusissime alias deductis injuriis subortis,
gratiosissimam nobis impertiturae sunt veniam;) praerecensitam infelicitatem
nostram, citra expectationem nostram, cum gravi impensorum sumptuum and
fatigiorum dispendio, multarumque millenarum Conscientiarum oppressione
remoratae and protractae, clementissime alioquin per Majestatem vestram
Sacratissimam, uti supra attactum, propter bonum domesticae Pacis and Unionis
Articulariter restituendis nobis determinatae and ordinatae expeditionis
nostrae, Commiserativo Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae qua Regis and Domini,
Domini nostri benignissimi sinui, solitae nempe justitiae nostrae sedi, medio
supplicis hujus libelli nostri, profundissima animorum nostrorum cum demissione
insinuare: Repetitisque prioribus universis gravaminibus nostris, iisdemque
adjunctis supplicibus Memorialibus, Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam
ardentissime, ut fideles subditos addecet, exorare, quatenus post tam longi
etiam temporis patientissimam praestolationem nostram, praescitae Communi
omnium nostri calamitati and adversitati misereri, condignaque medela
auctoritate sua Imperatoria and Regia, vigratiosissimi sui decreti, ex intimo
Consilio clementissime elargiendi, adhibita, universos nos, qua nimiopere
laesos, injuriatos, and damnificatos, quoad justissima postulata nostra jam
tandem in integrum restitui, afflictumque statum nostrum Evangelicum pristinae
and firmae suae securitati, in qua juxta gloriosissimorum Praedecessorum
suorum, ac etiam Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae Diplomata Regia, Verbo Regio
confirmata, legalesque Regni Sanctiones, constituti eramus, quam propensissime
collocari facere non dedignetur.

Quam Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae gratiam ut Deus Opt. Max. non solum
Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae, sed and Augustissimae suae Domui Austriacae,
copiosissimis and gloriosissimis de hostibus suis triumphis, longaeva item
Augustissimi Caesareo-Regii sui, ac desideratissimorum prolium, indubitatorum
successorum suorum, Throni ampliatione and firmatione, largissima, omnigenaque
Celesti sua benedictione compenset, incessantes fundemus preces. Clementem
opratamque exspectantes resolutionem, manemus,

Ejusdem Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae, Humillimi perpetuoque fideles
subditi Superiorum and Inferiorum Regni Hungariae Partium, Comitatuum,
Regiarum, ac Liberarum, Montanarumque Civitatum, Oppidorum item ac Pagarum
Universi Evangelici.
Exhib. suae Majest. die 17 Martis 1690.
Sacratissima Caesarea Regiaque Majestas.
Domine, Domine nobis Clementissime,
MAJESTATI vestrae Sacratissimae tot ac tantis S. R I. Regnorumque suorum
pacandorum curis alias implicitae, rebusque publicis Christianis conservandis
pattern intentae, subinde ac subinde importunos nos esse debere fatemur,
erubescimus: Verum justo dolor assiduos gemitus querimoniasque nostras
exprimente, urgentissima necessitate cogimur and compellimur, dum jam supra
duos annos integros and medium hic apud Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
Augustam Aulam multifariam contra Articulos Sopronienses laesae Religionis
nostrae negotium continua quasi action medio certorum hominum nostrorum quam
humillime sollicitamus: Neque vero eatenus ad innumera fere memorialia nostra
eidem Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae, ejusdemque summis Ministris in omni
submissione porrecta adusque quicquam certae and solidae resolutionis obtinere
potuimus, praeter quod proxime ex relatione Celsissimi Principis a
Dietrichstein Supremi Aulae praefecti intellexerimus, Majestatem vestram
Sacratissimam praeattactos Articulos Sopronienses de negotio Religionis
conditos sancte omnino and illibate conservare, iisdemque firmiter inhaerere
velle. Interea nos obscura quadam ac a long petita interpretatione eorundem
Articulorum plura, quam iidem continerent, and admitterent, petere. Hinc
conformia nos iisdem postulare, adeoque Gravamina nostra juxta evidentissimas
continentias eorundem Articulorum edocere debere, sicque etiam nos convenienter
expediendos fore gratiosissime resolvisse and declarasse.

Cui Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae benignissimae Resolutioni nosmet in omni
humilitate obsequiosissime accommodantes, (quamvis satis superque Gravamina,
and injurias nostras ad manifestum Articulorum Soproniensium sensum ac tenorem
deduxerimus) ut jam tandem clementissimam Caesareo-Regiam Resolutionem adeoque
ad desideria nostra concupitam expeditionem assequi valeamus, praesenti iterata
dictorum Articulorum Soproniensium per contigua eorundem membra formalis
contextus primum partitione and consignatione, tandem multiplicium grandium
injuriarum, tam per ordinatas Commissiones Regias, quam earum homines, ac alios
etiam ingerentes diversimode exquisitis sub praete^tibus nobis illatarum, juxta
quodlibet memoratorum Articulorum membrum, perspicua declaratione and
remonstratione, justissimae denique, and per omnia clarissimo Articulorum
sensui conformis Instantiae nostrae luculenta deductione and elucidatione nos
iisdem Articulis, donec futurarum diaetarum occasion ex toto in integrum
restituamur, stare, nec transversa aliqua interpretatione, quam iidem
expressissimis verbis se solos clare explicarent, aliud, sed nec plus, quam
permitterent, petere: Sumpto fiduciali ad Gratiae, Clementiae, and Justitiae
plenissimum Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Thronum recursu nostro Majestati
vestrae Sacratissimae in profundissima subjectione recapitulatis Gravaminibus
nostris repraesentandum conveniens duximus, and quidem modalitate sequenti.

Primo, quoad Articul. XXV. Ann. 1681. Diaetae Soproniensis, ejusque Primum
Membrum, cujus formalis Continentia haec est.
ET quia propter bonum Pacis, Tranquillitatemque Regni publicam, in Negotio
Religionis quoque sua Majestas sese benign resolvere dignata est, ideo eandem
etiam Resolutionem Articulis Regni status and Ordines inserunt. Ac imprimis
quidem, cum liberum Religionis exercitium jam antea in Anno 1606. vigore
Pacificationis Viennensis concessum, his motibus a part nonnullorum
interturbatum fuisset, consirmato hic loci Articulo I. dictae Pacificationis,
idem Exercitium omnibus and ubique per Regnum (salvo tamen jure Dominorum
terrestrium) juxta Artic. I. Ann. 1608. ante Coronationem editum, liberum
permittitur.

Contra hoc Membrum primum in eo nos injuriatos resentiscimus, quod cum
benignissima hac Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae resolutione, and tenore hujus
Articuli membri primi liberum Religionis Exercitium, priorum annorum sub
tumultibus a part nonnullorum interturbatum, generaliter omnibus and ubique
per Regnum, nullo regnicolarum, cujuscumque tandem status and conditionis
esset, sed nec ullo etiam loco Regni Castrensi, Comitatensi, Civitatensi,
Oppidano, Confiniario, and Villano exceptis, ad mentem praeallegatorum
Articulorum denuo liberum permissum, and nec ad hunc, vel illum locum
restrictum, quin tali generalitate confirmatae libertatis coactio
amplectendarum Religionum penitus sublata esset.

Excelsae nihilominus Commissiones Regiae, ad Superiores and Inferiores Regni
Hungariae Parts diversis temporibus Annorum praeteritorum emissae, partim per
se, partim vero per homines privatos tali libero Exercitio Religionis libere
alias and manifest, etiam in privatis aedibus, per totum Regnum, non tamen
simpliciter, verum medio ministrorum ante and post diaetam Soproniensem
exercito and usuato, non solum.

Primo, complures liberas, Regias, ac Montanas Civitates, signanter in
inferiori Hungaria, Pusztiensem, Kuszeghiensem, Szent-Gyorgyensem, Baziniensem,
Tyrnaviensem, Szakolczensem, Veterozoliensem, Carponensem, (de nomine alias in
Articulo 26. specificatam) and Breznobaniensem. In Montanis Civitatibus vero,
Schemnicziensem, Libethbaniensem, Belobaniensem, and Uybaniensem: Et in
superiore Hungaria, recentissime Nagybaniensem, contra expressas Articulares
Sanctiones, and eorum permissiones, and quidem

I. Citati primi* Membri ad verba: Ideo confirmato hic loci Articulo I. dictae
Pacificationis idem Exercitium omnibus and ubique per Regnum liberum permisit.

II. Ibidem Consirmatae Pacificationis primi Articuli ad expressa verba:
Nimirum, quod omnes and singulos Status and Ordines, tam intra ambitum Regni
Hungariae solum existentes, tam Magnates, Nobiles, quam liberas Civitates,
Oppida privilegiata immediate ad Coronam spectantia: Item in Confiniis quoque
Regni Hungariae Milites Hungaros in sua Religione and Confessione nusquam and
numquam turbabit, nec per alios turbari and impediri sinet, (scilicet sua
Majestas Sacratissima) verum omnibus praedictis Statibus and Ordinibus Regni
liber Religionis ipsorum usus and exercitium permittetur.

III. Itidem ibidem allegati and confirmati, Ann. 1608. ante Coronationem editi
Articuli I. aeque expressa verba: Quantum itaque ad primum Constitutionis
Viennensis Articulum attinet, deliberatum est per Status and Ordines Regni
Hungariae, ut Religionis Exercitium tam Baronibus, Magnatibus, and Nobilibus,
quam etiam liberis Civitatibus, ac universis Statibus and Ordinibus Regni, in
suis and Fisci bonis: Item in Confiniis quoque Regni Hungariae Militibus
Hungaris, sua cuique Religio, nec non oppidis and villis eam sponte and libere
acceptare volentibus, ubique liberum relinquatur, nec quisquam omnium in libero
ejus usu ac exercitio, quoquum modo impediatur: Quinimo, ad praecavenda inter
Status and Ordines aliqua Odia and dissensiones, quaelibet Religio suos
superiores, seu superattendentes habeat, statutum est,

Citra ullam considerationem, quod Liberae, ac Regiae, and Montanae Civitates,
adeoque ex ordine Statuum cum reliquis civitatibus quartus Regni liber status
essent, parique cum iisdem liberate gauderent, inque confirmatis hisce
Articulis generaliter comprehenderentur, ex eo solum capite, quod de nomine in
Articulis Soproniensibus specificatae non essent, gravi cum earundem injuria,
and extrema Religionis internecione, amotis earundem Ecclesiae Evangelicae
Ministris, frequentatione item locorum, ubi Religionis exercitium vigeret:
Prout and omnium Actuum Ministerialium ibidem fruitione, admissione adhaec
quorumcunque Praedicantium ad infirmos suos, and in agone constitutos,
consolandos, and communicandos absolute vetita: Quin ut in his, and similibus
praecise introductorum Catholicorum Plebanorum and Parochorum opera utantur,
seria injunctione facta, cum aggravatione Conscientiarum omnimode constrictas,
ex integro privarunt: Verum

Secundo: Comitatus quoque quamplurimos: Uti Posoniensem, Mossoniensem ex toto,
Nitriensem, Trenchiniensem, Arvensem, Lyptoviensem, Turocziensem, Zoliensem,
Barsiensem, Honthensem, Soproniensem, Castriferri, aliosque infinitis eorundem
templis Evangelicis occupatis, Ministrisque insimul suis relegatis in simili
Religionis eorundem libero exercitio, aeque contra praemissorum Articulorum
apertissimam Constitutionem turbarunt, ac ad duo saltem obscurissimorum pagorum
inconvenientia loca, exquisita quasi opera, adhuc extra eosdem pagos in campo,
erectioni novorum Templorum, Scholarum, and Parochiarum, Exercitioque
Evangelico ibidem tenendo destinata, and excisa, totidemque Ministros, and non
plures intertenendos, restrinxerunt, quibus aegrotantibus, nullo potiri possent
exercitio.

Villanis vero, seu Rusticis, qui a praerepetita Generalitate juxta saepe
allegatos Articulos excludi nequirent, vi nimium praejudiciosae, inque
exterminium Evangelicorum adjectae clausulae: Salvo jure Dominorum Terrestrium
(quae tamen non jus Dominii in conscientias, quod solius Dei proprium esset,
sed jus servitutis Corporalis respiceret) indiscriminatim totali Evangelico
exercitio, ejusdemque Ministerialium Actuum usu ubilibet locorum abstinendo,
inhibuerunt, ac ad Ecclesias Catholicas frequentandas, harumque Ministerio and
ritibus in omnibus utendis, alioquin per vim and fortia compellendi venirent,
strictissimo edicto coarctarunt.

Tertio: Reliquas etiam civitates, quamvis Articulariter (juxta nempe Artic.
26. membrum quintum) in specie, uti, Posoniensem, Modrensem, and
Trenchiniensem, in inferiori Hungaria: Et in Montanis, Cremniczensem, and
Novizoliensem; ac in superiori Hungaria in genere denominatas, quales essent
Cassovia, Leutschovia, Bartpha, Epperies, Cibinium, Keimarkinum, (ad quas
Nagybania quoque in Comitatu Szathmariensi situata civitas pertineret: Noviter
tamen post inclytam Commissionem Preynerianam, suo permisso libero exercitio,
ut infra declarabitur, integre privata) quibus post ademptionem omnium
templorum liberum Religionis exercitium est permissum, certorum aedificandis
Templis, Parochiis and Scholis locorum (non tamen plerisque adeo commodorum and
convenientium, ut infra Articuli 26. Membro secundo innuetur) excisione and
assignatione circa essentialia Religionis Evangelicae requisita, plane extra
continentias Articulorum Soproniensium inconvenientibus conditionibus.

1. Ut nonnisi duos Praedicantes ipsis intertenere liceat.

2. In casu obitus unius alterum in ejusdem locum introducere ipsis vetitum sit.

3. Ne Ministri eorundem vicinorum; aut etiam aliorum peregrinorum locorum
Evangelicis quibuscunque actibus Ministerialibus, ac etiam sacris, quoquo modo
subservire, sed nec etiam eorundem infirmos and agonizantes visitare audeant.

4. Cehae and Collegia Evangelicorum Opificum ut processionibus intersint
Catholicorum, consuetaque vexilla sub amissione privilegiorum ipsisment fieri
curent.

5. Scholas tantum triviales aliquantuni legere and scribere decentes teneant.

6. Ut Parochis and Plebanis Catholicis ex publico proventu Civitatum Salarium,
Evangelicis vero Ministris and Scholarum Rectoribus ex propria Evangelicorum
pecunia pendatur.

7. In Xenodochiis plures mendicos Catholicos, quam Evangelicos interteneant.

8. Officiales Evangelicos, ut ut idoneos, ab officiis amoveant, and quoscunque
Catholicos subordinent.

9. Officia Civilia magna and praecipua saltem Catholicis conferant, aliisque
circumscripserunt: Sed and

Quarto: Illos insuper Comitatus, qui in actuali usu omnium fere templorum,
horumque accessoriorum Evangelicorum* tempore conditorum Articulorum
Soproniensium fuerunt, ac etiam in reali eorundem Dominio (vi 25 Articuli
inferius allegandorum tertii and sexti Membrorum) relicti sunt, and relinquendi
erant, adeoque a similibus Commissionibus immunes omnino declarati, deque
nomine specificati essent, uti Szaladiensem, Veszprimiensem, Jauriensem,
Comaromiensem, Abauyvariensem, Saarosiensem, Zempliniensem; Ughocziensem,
Bereghiensem, Thornensem, Gomoriensem, Borsodiensem, Honthensem, Nogradiensem,
Szolnokiensem, and Hevessiensem; nec non Pestiensem, Pilisiensem, and
Solitensem unitos: Item Szabolczensem, Unghensem, and Szathmariensem, majori ex
part potioribus suis templis and accessoriis, integralique libero exercitio
cum expulsione Ministrorum, indiscriminatim orbarunt.

Quae omnia confrontatione ad praemissum Membrum primum hujus Artic. 25.
inibique citatos, and expressissimis verbis allegatos, facta cum praeviae
confirmatae libertatis generalitati ad omnes and singulos Status and Ordines
Regni, adeoque omnes Magnates and Nobiles, Civitates, omnia etiam confinia,
oppida and villas evidentissime se extendenti e diametro opposita essent,
actuque ipso ex libera Religione non liberam, ex non turbanda studio turbatam
and turbandam facerent.

Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae demisse supplicamus, quatenus aequa
sapientissimi judicii sui lance pensitata:
Primum; Praespecificatarum quatuordecim Civitatum totali liberi sui exercitii
beneficio contra manifestas memoratorum Articulorum Statutiones (vigore quarum
ipsis quoque qua liberis, and montanis Civitatibus, adeoque quarto Statui Regni
liberum apud se, and ubique suae Religionis exercitium habere permissum esset)
privatarum summa injuria eisdem (non obstante, quod nominatim in Articulis
Soproniensibus non exstent, quippe istiusmodi liberate in genere permissa
sufficiebat, duas, tres, quatuorve Civitates, uti sequenti Artic. 26.
ejusdemque Membro quinto fit, pro exemplo denominare, cum denominatio and
positio unius alteriusve Civitatis non esset reliquarum a praemissa liberate
exclusio; alioquin sequeretur unius conditionem alterius condition esse
deteriorem) aeque sicut aliis congrua, and (reflexione habita ad caput verborum
26 Articuli Soproniensis pro Commoditate Evangelicorum aedificandis Templis,
Parochiis, and Scholis, etc.) omnino commoda exscindenda loca demonstrari and
assignari curare, eoque ipso hactenus sublatum liberum Religionis ipsarum
exercitium rursum integre reassumere, medioque Ministrorum suorum pro
beneplacito vocandorum exercere, and continuare, ex indulto Articulari,
auctoritateque sua Regia benignissime permittere.

Tandem, habita Comitatuum quoque praemissorum constrictorum condigna ratione,
cassatis praememoratis extra pagensibus obscuris and inconvenientibus
designatis locis, ipsis templa in articulariter denominatis pagis existentia,
ubi alias vix duo vel tres Catholici, alibi vero vix unus quidem reperirentur,
nec etiam duo templa, duas Parochias, duas Scholas, duplices etiam Ministros
diversarum Religionum in tam exiguis and obscuris pagellis, dum duplici horum
intertentioni non sufficerent, tenere, vel ad evitandas aemulationes and
scandala ex diversitate rituum facile enascenda, congruum esset restitui
facere, omnibusque in medio sui existentibus cujuscunque status and conditionis
hominibus, juxta vigorem praescriptorum Articulorum, and Paragraphum ipsius 25
Articuli Soproniensis: Omnibus and ubique per Regnum, rescissa contra nutum and
voluntatem Evangelicorum adjecta clausula: Salvo jure Dominorum terrestrium;
ejusdemque exotica interpretatione, per Clerum and Dominos Catholicos ad
conscientias abusive extendente, indeque Dominium in conscientias, quod solius
Dei, non vero hominum esset, sibimet vendicante, Religionis suae exercitium
medio Praedicantium suorum ubique libere exercendum, nec quanquam invitum ad
contrarias Ceremonias quoquomodo amplectendas compellendum permittere.

Posthaec praenotatarum pariter Articulariter denominatarum liberarum and
Montanarum Superiorum and Inferiorum partium Regni Civitatum incircumscriptae
admissae libertatis condition considerata, easdem in praespecificatis
memoratarum Commissionum praejudiciosis conditionibus and limitationibus, de
quibus praevii omnes Articuli omnino silerent, nec liberum Religionis
exercitium quoquomodo circumscriberent: Alias enim non liberum, sed restrictum,
atque adeo captivum esset hoc exercitium, de plano absolutas reddere.

Denique praeenumeratorum similiter Comitatuum in Actuali possessione, usu, and
Dominio Templorum, and omnium accessoriorum Evangelicorum, vi Articuli 26.
relictorum, ad conformitatem datae gratiosissimae Resolutionis Majestatis
vestrae Sacratissimae dijudicata speciali exemptione, justa and effectiva
omnium ademptorum templorum, appertinentiarum, and accessoriorum, haecque
concomitantium liberi exercitii, and Ministrorum suorum restitutione, eosdem in
pristinum eorundem jus, and possessionem praemissorum ad mentem
praedeclaratorum Articulorum reduci curare, Clementissime dignetur.

Contra Secundum Membrum, quod sic sonat.
Praedicantibus quoque and Scholarum Magistris, alias vel proscriptis, vel
propter certas Reversales munia suae professionis exercere non valentibus,
liber in Regnum reditus, liberaque Religionis suae professio and exercitium,
cassatis eatenus etiam ipsorum Reversalibus, conceditur.

Ut ut lucidissime vi membri hujus non modo illi Praedicantes and Scholarum
Magistri, qui tempore diaetae Soproniensis in sua in Regno habitatione, and
libera Religionis Professione sunt stabiliti, verum simul illis etiam, qui
quavis de caussa tum e Regno exulabant, libera in Regnum redeundi, ubilibetve
in Regno libere subsistendi, and Religionis suae exercitium ac munia peragendi,
data sit facultas, adeoque qualescunque etiam datae vel dandae Reversales
Articulariter sint abolitae and cassatae.

Huic tamen in contrarium dictae Commissiones passim ubique per Regnum duobus
saltem Praedicantibus in singulo Comitatu, ac uno vel altero in quibusdam
Civitatibus permissis, reliquos omnes ex caeteris omnibus civitatibus,
oppaedis, confiniis, and villis, partim sub decursu quindenae, partim tridui
spatio, uti in Comitatibus Lyptoviensi, Arvensi, Thuroczensi, Zoliensi, and
Honthensi, aliisque factum, removerunt, partim vero extortis ab iis strictis
Reversalibus super abdicatione officii, ad privatos angulos relegarunt.

Insuper Gymnasia and Scholas Evangelicorum ad Trivialia, aliquantum solum
legere and scribere discere restrinxerunt, unde ob carentiam harum, earumque
docentium ex part sui nil amplius sperandum haberent, quam impendentem
respectu juventutis suae barbariem.

Inde sumpsit occasionem Eminentissimus Princeps Cardinalis a Kolonich quinque
Evangelicos Praedicantes, uti Puchoviensem, Nozdroviczensem, Ledniczensem,
Bakabayaiensem, and Kochkoviensem, anno praeterito 89 capi, and ad arcem
Ledniczensem deduci curare, ibique strictissima incaptivatione ad
subscriptionem inconvenientium Reversalium, statutionemque sub onere 200
Imperialium certorum fidejussorum adigere.

Alios insuper tres Praedicantes, puta, Nemes Hollosiensem Helveticae and
Szentbenedekiensem ac Dobrajensem Augustanae Confessionis A. similiter
antecedente 89. in absentia Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae incaptivatos, and
Sabariae squalidissimis carceribus dirissime excruciatos ad defectionem
Religionis cogere.

Reverendis. item D. Archiepiscopus Strigoniensis Georgius Szekeni Possessionis
Hodos in insula Czallokoz adjacentis Praedicantem Samuelem Bickay medio
destinatorum hominum suorum binariis vicibus expilandi, perque Plebanum
Szerdakellyiensem tandem capiendi, and Posonium ad residentiam suam 22.
praeteriti Mensis Martii anni currentis, ceu praedonem vinctum deducendi,
compedibusque constrictum in carceres conjiciendi, ac ibi tam diu miserandum in
modum emacerandi ac percutiendi, donec ad renunciationem Religionis and
Ecclesiastici sui officii abominandis reversalibus eum compulisset: Asserendo
express, sicut hunc, ita caeteros etiam omnes Praedicantes Evangelicos, qui
extra loca in Articulis specificata viverent, and munia suae professionis
exercerent, a Majestate vestra Sacratissima proscriptos esse, hinc in omnes
pari processu desaevire velle.

Residentiae pariter Nagybanya Pater Jesuita Ravasz nuncupatus possessionis
Totthsalu in Comitatu Szathmariensi situatae Praedicantem aeque capiendi, and
Szath^ marinum ad carceres deferendi, ibique ad praesens detinendi, ad similem
defectum a Religione, and depositionem Ministerii sui, reversalibus
praejudiciosis constringere miserum intendens; and quae alia aliorum plurima
essent attentata.

Quae siquidem directissime contrariarentur Articuli hujus Membro secundo,
Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam proni oramus, quatenus Regia sua prohibitione
quorumcumque Praedicantium and Scholarum Rectorum Evangelicorum per quoscunque
tandem quoque modo turbandorum, persequendorum, damnificandorum,
incaptivandorum, and ad quascunque Reversales dandas cogendorum, ad omnes suos
fideles Status and Ordines Regni decretaliter extendenda (antelato interim
misero Totthfalusiensi Praedicante Szathmarino Capto e suis carceribus libere
ad suos dimitti mandato) juxta claram Membri hujus secundi mentem omnibus
Praedicantibus and Scholarum Magistris libere in medio nostri permanendi, and
Professionis suae munia atque exercitia extra quamvis limitationem,
Scholariumque facultatum restrictionem peragendi facultatem attribuere.

Et siquidem omnes tales Praedicantes ad duo, ut supra attactum, excisa loca in
Artic. 26. denominata collocari non possent, relaxata and sublata juxta
uberiorem modo citati Articuli Membri octavi, inferius deducendi sensum, and
Indultum in oratoriis Arcensibus and Residentialibus Dominorum Magnatum and
Nobilium exercendi Religionis exercitii inhibitione per praefatas Commissiones
facta, ut similes extra Parochiales Praedicantes ibidem in privato accommodari
valiant, gratiosissime admittere velit,

Contra Tertium Membrum tenoris sequentis:
Et nullus Regnicolarum in libero suae Religionis exercitio amodo imposterum
quoquo modo turbetur.

Quamvis tertii hujus membri generalitate nullum Regnicolarum, nec
Ecclesiastici, nec seculares status, adeoque nec Magnates, nec Nobiles, nec
Cives, nec Rusticos in libero Religionis suae exercitio, nec in Persona, nec in
Ecclesiis, sed nec in Ministris suis ullo modo peramplius turbandum venire
apertissime caveretur:

Hoc nihilominus praeviae Commissiones Regiae, and privatae quaeque personae,
non curato, exquisitis sub praetextibus and modis, quibus exprimendis vix verba
nobis sufficient, ex Cleri and Status Catholici Sententia, quamplurimas
Ecclesias in praemisso primo Membro specificatorum Comitatuum and Civitatum
expulsis, and e Regno ire jussis corundem Ministris, tanquam causis exercitii
exercendi instrumentalibus, sine quibus alias nullius sane Religionis
exercitium exerceri quiret, in libero exercitio turbarunt.

Sic Magistratus modernus Catholicus Civitatis Epperies mox ex mandato
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae, mox titulo Dominii Terrestris praetextum
vendicatae sibi licentiae prae se ferens, omnes omnino trium Nationum
Evangelicos Praedicantes e Civitate, alias loco Articulariter denominato, adhuc
Ann. 1688, ipso festo S. Bartholomaei Apostoli, expellere, territorioque
ejusdem prohibere, Ecclesiamque Articularem libero suo admisso exercitio, quo
jam nunc careret, ipso facto privare non est veritus.

Ita nihil pensi duxit non rampridem moderna Commissio Praineriana in superiore
Hungaria Civitatis Nagybanya (unius nempe ex ordine, ut praemissum caeterarum
Superiorum, partium liberarum Civitatum, per commissionem alias anticipativam
Czahianam in permisso suo libero exercitio Evangelico ad instar aliarum
Articularium libere usuando relictae) cives and incolas Evangelicos amandatione
Praedicantium, and Scholae Rectorum suorum cum severa interminatione omnium
actuum Ministerialium alibi locorum praeter Catholicos Nagybanyensium
usuandorum, totali suo exercitio, cultu and Ministris orbare Comitatus item
Szathmariensis oppidum Felsobanya, quod in possessione and continuo usu sui
Templi, accessoriorum, and horum proventuum ante, in, and post Diaetam
Soproniensem ad annum usque praesentem fuisset: Prout and Comitatus
Abauyvariensis aliud oppidum Sepsy, in possessione alias templi sui, and omnium
appertinentiarum vi 26 Articuli Soproniensis, Membri tertii and sexti relictum,
pariformi abolitione Praedicantium and Scholae Rectorum Evangelicorum,
praemissorumque, uti Nagybanyae, strictissima injunctione integrali corundem
exercitio viduare.

Aliis plurimis plurium, uti Reverendissimorum Matthiae Radonay quinque
Ecclesiensis Episcopi, and Francisci Jany Pechvaradiensis Abbatis in superiori
and inferiori Barovia circa quinque Ecclesias in Nadasdiensibus and
Klanyokiensibus Praedicantibus, aliisque earundem partium, praecipue in
Veresmartiensibus Incolis, supra immanitatem fere Turcicam attentatis
excessibus, peculiari memoriali Maiestati vestrae Sacratissimae fusius
repraesentatis, brevitatis causa hic praeteritis.

Cum haec and similia contra tam manifestam Articuli hujus constitutionem
militarent, nec etiam hoc ipso liberum exercitium esse, aut dici posset, si
causa, sine qua non, inhibeatur.

Apud Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam quam profundissima humilitate instamus
quatenus praescriptorum specifice in Membro primo appositorum, and in hoc
quoque tertio generaliter commemoratorum Comitatuum and Civitatum optimo and
fundamentali jure, quod circa admissum liberum Religionis exercitium, vi omnium
trium Membrorum Articuli hujus haberent, eodem vero non citra parvam injuriam
privati essent, clementissime considerato, eosdem and easdem tam quoad
exercitium reassumendum, quam quoad exturbatos Praedicantes and Rectores suos
rursum recipiendos, non solum integre restituere, verum in specie praelibatae
etiam Civitatis Epperies Evangelicos suos expulsos Ministros ad sua munera
Ecclesiastica obeunda iterum reducendi, vel loco horum alios, citra ullam
coarctationem and limitationem certi numeri, verum quotquo^ ob intervenientiam
fortuitorum casuum, adhaec frequentiam etiam civium intertenere possent,
vocandi and surrogandi plenariam potestatem gratiosissime impertiri.

Adhaec memoratae quoque Civitatis Nagybania, sicut and praedictorum Felsobanya
and Sepsy oppidorum Evangelicis, illis quidem prohibitum eorundem exercitium
cum revocatione ejectorum Praedicantis and Rectoris, ex integro reassumere: His
vero adempta sua Templa, Parochias, and Scholas cum accessoriis, and remotis
Ecclesiarum suarum Ministris ac Rectoribus priori suo statui ex vi praemissorum
Articularium suorum jurium rursus restitui facere, benign demandare, sicque
praeviis omnibus Articulariter accommodatis ulteriores Regnicolarum and
Religionis exercitiorum turbationes gravi sub animadversione and poena per
Clementissimum Decretum suum ad Universos Comitatus and Civitates missiliter
transmittendorum, accedente Gratia sua Regia, serio inhibere non dedignetur.

Contra Quartum Membrum hujus Contextus:
Sed neque Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni addicti ad Caeremonias suae
Confessioni contrarias compellantur.

Licet Membri quoque hujus Generalitas antecedentia confirmaret, clareque
inferret, ullius status and conditionis Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni
addictos homines ad Confessioni eorundem ritus contrarios compelli debere.

Eo tamen non obstante praeviae Commissiones omnes vel maxim Membro primo
allegatas Civitates exercitio Evangelico privatas ad omnes actus Ministeriales
ritui ipsorum contrarios amplectendae Religionis Catholicae causa omnino
adigendas Plebanis Catholicis indifferenter mandarunt, ac passim Catholicis
gubernia gerentibus Cives and inhabitatores suos, quibus potirentur, potissimum
opifices and Mechanicos Evangelicos ad Vexillorum Processionalium
Comparationem, ac ipsas etiam processiones, cogendos pronunciarunt.

Hinc inibi aegrotantibus and agnonizantibus Sacraque Eucharistia uti
volentibus Evangelicis nulli Praedicantes ex quibuscunque tandem locis
permittuntur. Neonati infantes alibi locorum Evangelicorum baptizari
prohibentur. Puerperae etiam exactis suis Hebdomadibus ab introductione,
copulandi a copulatione, mortui ab inhumatione similium locorum accipiendis
penitus arcentur, and non admittuntur: Sed praecise Ministerio Parochorum and
Plebanorum Catholicorum in his and aliis uti inviti compelluntur.

Unde ipsi quoque Domini Patres Jesuitae Ann. praeterito 89. circa initium
Octobris eo processere licentiae Posonii, quod juniorem Praedicantem
Posoniensem Joannem Vider hospitale ejusdem loci, miserae cujusdem provectae
alias aetatis, and jam agonizantis feminae Evangelicae consolandae and
communicandae causa accedentem cum suo pane for as ire comminatorie
praeceperint, ac abinde amandarint, ita ut misera Mulier sine communione and
solatio animae ultimum suum claudere debuerit diem, nec jam amplius licitum sit
tali in casu Praedicantibus Posoniensibus idem Hospitale ingredi, minus
diversarum Religionum copulandas Personas, quarum una Catholica, altera vero
Evangelica esset copulare: Sed nec talium conjugatorum proles baptizare, vel
etiam inhumare, sub alioquin citationis ad sedem Metrapolitanam Tyrnaviensem
Comminatione, and gravis poenae incursione per Parochum Posoniensem iisdem
significata.

Non absimili Coactionis licentia abutitur quoque modernus Parochus Civitatis
Leutschoviensis Casimirus Miners Ord. Praemonstr. praepositus contra ejusdem
Civitatis universos Nobiles pariter and Ignobiles, cives and incolas
Evangelicos, horumque Praedicantes libero Religionis suae exercitio indultu
Articulari alias fruentes, quippe quos a Communione ac omnibus aliis actibus
Ministerialibus quibuscunque exteris Evangelicis quocunque tandem modo
administrandis, haec omnia sibi vendicans severe arceret. Peregrinos etiam
quoscunque Evangelicos copulandos, si, licet Leutschovienses, vel e converso,
qui Leutschoviensium alterius loci Evangelicas ducerent uxores, praecise apud
se copulandos adigeret. In casu vero funerandorum Evangelicorum ad suas
Caeremonias prae demortuorum aedibus suo ritu peragendas, adeoque in
deductionibus etiam usque portam Civitatis concomitando capessendas,
inconvenientis solutionis exigendae ergo actu cogeret: Insuper copiosissimam
earundem duarum nationum, Germanicae nimirum admodum frequentis, and Sclavicae
in tertialitate Minoris Ecclesiam ad duorum saltem ministrorum intertentionem,
unicuique nationi unum saltem admittendo, cum Germanicae vix tres sufficerent,
auctoritate sua coarctaret.

His accederet Comaromii, Gyongyosini, alibique incolas Evangelicos per Clerum
loci, rusticos vero ubique fere per Regnum tam mandato praemissarum
Commissionum Regiarum, quam jussu quorumcunque Dominorum Catholicorum
Terrestrium, ad frequentationem Catholicorum Templorum, horumque omnium
Caeremoniarum and rituum usuationem compelli.

Quae quum per omnia huic clarissimae statutioni Articulari adversarentur,
Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam per omnia sibi chara humillime petimus,
quatenus relaxatis omnibus praemissis violentis coactionibus circa
caeremoniarum, rituum, ac Religionum contrariarum usuationem and acceptationem
maximo conscientiarum cum gravamine indiscriminatim cuicunque Evangelicorum per
quoscunque Dominos Catholicos quocunque modo impositis, abolitis insuper
omnibus inhibitionibus, in libero Religionis exercitio qualitercunque factis,
unicuique fidelium Regnicolarum suorum Evangelicorum citra ullam Religiosae
praescriptionis praescriptionem in hoc vel illo, id vel illud faciendi, aut
omittendi, liberum suum exercitium, prout uniuscujusque admitteret conscientia,
ex integro ubilibet, libere ad mentem saepe mentionatorum allegatorum
Articulorum usuandum and exercendum, ex Caesareo-Regia Gratia and Clementia
quam propensissime concedere dignetur.

Secundo, quoad Artic. XXVI. ejusdem Anni and Diaetae, primum Membrum hoc
innuit.
AD haec templa quoque per Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni addictos
aedificata, and ritu Catholico necdum reconciliata per certos Commissarios
eisdem assignanda.

Articulari hac Constitutione quamquam per expressum exstante, ac Evangelicis
suis sumptibus aedificata, rituque Catholico necdum reconciliata Templa and
Capellas excidenda, assignanda, and relinquenda venire pronunciante;
Commissiones nihilominus eaedem nullo habito hujus respectu in Comitatu
Thurocziensi, in Possessionibus Bella, Zatureza, and Pribocz, similia Templa,
and in Comitatu Lyptoviensi in Possessionibus Kirally, Lehota, Pothurnya, and
Virbieze, similiter Capellas per Evangelicos and Dominos terrestres
aedificatas, rituque Catholico ante conditum Articulum necdum reconciliatas,
alibique in aliis Comitatibus habitas and repertas, indifferenter occuparunt,
ab earumque usuatione and ibidem peragendo cultu Evangelicos strictissime
inhibuerunt, and ad duo saltem loca, uti praememoratum, ubi Templa aedificari
permissa sunt, aliquot mill hominum incapacia, imo propter distantiam
incongrua, periculosa, difficiliaque, relegarunt, and restrinxerunt.

Unde tot millium Evangelicorum in Comitatibus potissimum calamitosa, proli
dolor! sors eo devinit, ut propter indifferentem ademptionem Templorum, and
amotionem Ministrorum suorum, maximum sine communione, plurimi vero infantes
absque baptismate decedant.

Quae cum contra permissionem Articularem, and dictamen etiam Communis
justitiae suum cuique tribuentis, Evangelicis essent ablata: Proinde
restitutionem and reassignationem talium Templorum and Capellarum ad mentem
hujus Membri primi memoratorum Comitatuum, aliorumque, Evangelicis pro
exercendo Religionis suae cultu legaliter fiendam a Majestate vestra
Sacratissima suppliciter petimus.

Secundum Membrum hoc decernit.
In aliis vero locis juxta benignissimam suae Majestatis Resolutionem loca pro
aedificandis Templis, Scholis, and Parochiis erigendis, pro commoditate
eorundem Augustanae and Helveticae Confessioni addictorum, per eosdem
Commissarios designanda decernuntur.

Etsi Constitutio haec loca pro Commoditate Evangelicorum aedificandis novis
Templis, Scholis, and Parochiis erigendis omnino commoda and congrua designanda
aperte ordinasset, exindeque eaedem Commissiones huic ordinationi conformiter,
potissimum vero in Regiis, Liberis, and Montanis Civitatibus, quibus, Templa,
Scholae, and Parochiae, aliaque sunt adempta, se accommodare, citraque aliquam
exterorum locorum coarctationem, in ipsis Civitatibus, intraque easdem (juxta
genuinum, fanum, and literalem Articuli etiam hujus sequentis Membri quinti
express ita sonantium clausularum sensum: Ac tandem in liberis and Montanis
Civitatibus, etc. Ac in Superiore Hungaria omnibus itidem Civitatibus, etc.
Quae interiora, non exteriora Civitatum loca declararent:) Convenientia and
commoda loca exscindere and assignare debuissent: Commissio tamen Regia ad
Superiores Regni Hungariae parts exmissa, medio Cameraticorum and his
adjunctorum hominum inter caeteras Civitates Epperiessini Evangelicis,
Germanicae Nationi prope Carnisicis pratum, cadaveribus deglubendis destinatum,
Hungaricae erga Civitatis patibulum, and Sclavoniae in Fimeto, locis sane extra
desolata Suburbia long dissitis, campestribus, iisque contumeliosis
existentibus: Cassoviae vero aeque tribus similibus nationibus pariter extra
solo aequatum Suburbium in squalido and sum lutoso campo, ad officinam
tegulariam erga itidem patibulum situatam, constituto maximo Evangelicae
Religionis cum despectu erigendorum novorum Templorum, Scholarum,
Parochiarumque loca indecentia, and incommoda designavit.

Quocum ob sacrum etiam finem Sanctissimo Deo dicanda Templa and accessoria
aedificare piaculum omnino esset, adeoque despectuosa hujusmodi designatio
praeviae quoque Articulari Sanctioni nimium praejudicaret.

Pro eo virtute legalis Constitutionis Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam pro
Commemoratorum obscoenorum and squalidorum, ex privato privatorum quorundam
hominum erga Religionem Evangelicam affectu, excisorum locorum totali
cassatione, aliorum vero commodorum and condecentium in iisdem Civitatibus,
earumque moeniis (ita citra ambiguitatem sensus innuentibus praeallegati hujus
Articuli Membri quinti expressis verbis) ubi sat commoda and capacia haberentur
loca, ipsis Epperiensibus and Cassoviensibus Evangelicis gratiosissime
impertienda excisione and assignatione, devotissima cum subjectione exoramus.

Tertium Membrum hoc statuit:
In aliis vero Comitatibus, veluti in Szaladiensi, Veszprimiensi, Jauriensi,
Comaromiensi, Abauyvariensi, Saarosiensi, Zempliniensi, Ughocziensi,
Bereghiensi, Thornensi, Gomoriensi, Borsodiensi, Honthensi, Nogradiensi,
Szolnok, and Heves, nec non Pest, Pilis, and Soldt unitis? Item Szabolcziensi,
Ungh and Szathmariensi, siquidem de praesenti essent in actuali usu omnium fere
Templorum ibidem habitorum. Ideo eadem pro actualibus eorundem possessoribus
usuanda relicta sunt.

Hi de nomine specificati Comitatus (qui omnia sua castra, oppida, and villas,
seu possessiones cum omnibus suis Templis, Sacellis, Oratoriis, Scholis, and
Parochiis involverent) dum etiam juxta manifestum Membri hujus statutum,
praemissa ex ratione, quod tempore conditi hujus Articuli in actuali usu omnium
fere Templorum and accessoriorum fuissent, in reali possessione, liberoque and
pacifico eorundem usu relicti, and caeterum etiam taliter imperturbate
relinquendi declarati essent, adeoque ab omnibus quorumcunque occupationibus
Templorum and appertinentiarum suorum immunes omnino and integri esse
debuissent.

Hac tamen Articulari Declaratione posthabita partim saepedictae Commissiones
per se, and diversos substitutos Mandatarios, partim inclytae Camerae, partim
Officiales Dominiorum, partim Clerus in plerisque Comitatibus; in Szaladiensi,
in Confinio Legrad, in Comaromiensi, in Possessione Mocza, in Abauyvariensi, in
Oppidis Regecz, Szanto, Seply, and inferiore Meczenzeff; possessionibus item
Bodoko, Ujifalu, and Fony, in Saarosiensi, in oppido Saaros, and possessionibus
Tolkzek, Asgutth, and Soovar; in Zempliniensi, in oppidis Thokay, Tarczal,
Kereszthur, Maad, Liszha, Thallya, Tolzua, Benye, Patak, Borsy, Ujihelly, and
Bottyan: In Ugoczensi, in oppido Nagy Szolos: In Bereghiensi, in oppidis
Munkacz, Beregszas, Vari, and Beregs: In Tornensi, in possessione Almas: In
Honthensi, in Civitatibus, oppidis, and villis existentia Evangelicorum Templa,
Parochias, and Scholas, excepto unico exili Templo in contemptissimo pago Drino
dicto, non tam pridem per Evangelicos aedificato, Evangelicis relicto: In
Unguariensi, in oppidis Unguar, Naghy-mihally, and Vinna, ac Possessione
Sztara: In Hevessiensi, in oppidis Gyongyos, Jaszbereny, ac possessione Maklar:
In Pestiensi, in oppido Vacz, and possessione Thotfalu: In Szathmariensi, in
oppido Felsobanya, and possessione Giroth-Thotfalu, and Tarpa, aliisque,
Evangelicorum Templa, Parochias, and Scholas violenter occuparunt, amotisque
eorundem Ministris totali Religionis suae exercitio privare praesumpserunt, ut
ut praerecensiti Comitatus Articulariter in possessione praemanibus habitorum
praescriptorum Templorum relicti fuissent.

Quorum inconveniens occupatio, cum similiter Articulari huic adversaretur
statuto, Majestatisque vestrae Sacratissimae Regio Indultui, quapropter
Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam pro effectiva praespecificatis in Comitatibus,
eorundemque denominatis oppidis and possessionibus occupatorum Templorum,
Parochiarum, and Scholarum, prioribus suis possessoribus Evangelicis ex
attributo jure fienda restitutione and reassignatione, qua possumus animi
devotione supplices oramus.

Quartum Membrum hoc concedit:
Praeterea in Consiniis Regni, and quidem in Generalatu contra Canisam, in
Szent-Groth: In Generalatu Jauriensi, in Tikany, Vazony, Papa, Vesprim,
Jaurini, and Comaromii: In Generalatu Superioris Hungariae in Puthnok, Onod,
Szendro, Tokay, Kallo, and Szathmar: In Generalatu Antemontano Levae, Carponae,
and Fulekini.

Quamquam vi Concessionis hujus evidens esset, Augustanae and Helveticae
Confessioni addictis in praedenominatis Confiniis liberi Exercitii, and
Templorum, ac Accessoriorum ibidem habitorum, temporeque hujus conditi Articuli
possessorum realem usum relictum, and stabilitum esse:

Regia nihilominus Commissio ad Inferiores Regni Hungariae parts Ann. 1688.
ordinata, Carponae de nomine hoc in Membro specificata Civitate, occupatis
Templo, Parochia, and Schola Evangelicis, remotisque Praedicantibus and Scholae
docentibus, totale exercitium a memoria hominum ibidem continuo usu libere
semper practicatum and habitum, ac etiam eodem in usu praevio modo
Articulariter relictum, maximo exercitii Spiritualis nullam moram patientis cum
praejudicio, optimique juris Articularis, verbo and indulto Regio confirmati,
derogamine severa cum Comminatione inhibuit, and eodem penitus abstinere
universos Nobiles and Ignobiles ibidem habitantes, qua praesidiarios, qua
incolas, and Cives Evangelicos coegit, eosdem ad ulteriorem Majestatis vestrae
Sacratissimae benignissimam eatenus obtinendam Resolutionem and Gratiam
relegando.

Comaromii porro, ubi pariter vi hujus Articuli libera Augustanae and
Helveticae Confessionis exercitii praxis, quam etiam parium duorum Templorum,
Parochiarum and Scholarum pacifica possessio and usus esset confirmata, in iis
utriusque Confessionis incolae, stipendiarii item milites Hungarici, ibidem
existentes imperturbate ad fatales usque praeteritorum Annorum belli tumultus,
and insperatam, Ann. 1683. totius ejusdem oppidi, Templorum, Parochiarum, and
Scholarum Conflagrationem perstitissent; ob praefatos vero casus tam Civibus
Evangelicis, quam eorum Ministris hinc inde dispersis, tale liberum exercitium
Religionis quodammodo intermitti contigisset, dum supervenientibus jam fatis
clementioribus dispersi Evangelici rursum rediissent, ac virtute praescripti
hujus Articuli publicum Religionis suae exercitium reassumere, Praedicantesque
and Scholae docentes suos reducere, Templa adhaec, and Parochias, and Scholas,
in consuetis suis de facto desolatis exstantibus locis reaedificare voluissent,
ac etiamnum vellent, per Excellentiss. Dom. Comitem a Hoffkircher, dicti
confinii Commendantem, sicut and clerum loci talia effectuare gravibus sub
minis arcentur, inhibito iisdem totali exercitio quoquomodo usuando, prout and
precibus in privatis aedibus alias peragi solitis, superaddita severa
interminatione etiam ad circumjacentia loca devotionis peragendae caussa
cuiquam Evangelicorum exeundi sub incaptivatione and aliis gravibus poenis
incurrendis pulsu tympani per plateas confinii Anno praeterito publicata.

Thokaini, loco and confinio aeque Articulariter denominato identidem per
Provisorem and Clerum loci occupatis Templo and Parochia sumptibus
Evangelicorum ex fundamento aedificata, piis item legatis and proventibus
dotata, exturbatoque abinde suo Praedicante, libero exercitio prohibentur.

Quae loca cum nomine tenus Articulo hoc specificarentur, inque usu liberi sui
exercitii, imperturbatoque Dominio Templorum, Parochiarum, and Scholarum,
horumque accessoriorum permanenda decernerentur, neque tali eorundem jure
privari quirent, tamen, ut praemissum, per praevios privata essent,
prohiberenturque effective.

Hinc firmissime inhaerentes Articulari and Regiae huic Concessioni
Carponenses, Civitatenses, and Thokayenses oppidanos Evangelicos eorundem
libero Religionis exercitio, cum Templorum, Parochiarum, Scholarum, and horum
accessoriorum ademptorum plenaria restitutione, remotorumque Praedicantium and
Docentium suorum integra reductione, pristino suo statui and ordini
gratiosissime reddi.

Comaromiensibus vero Cassata Praetitulati Dom. Comitis a Hosskircher
praeinsinuata inhibitione reassumptionem Religiosi sui exercitii,
Ministrorumque Ecclesiasticorum, sicut and Scholae Docentium reductionem,
adeoque Templorum etiam and appertinentium in extantibus horum designatis and
excisis locis reaedisicationem clementissime admitti, ac etiam impertiri a
Majestate vestra Sacratissima demisse imploramus.

Quintum Membrum hoc constituit:
Ac tandem in liberis and Montanis Civitatibus, ut pote Trenchiniensi,
Modrensi, Cremnieziensi, and Novizoliensi, ac in Superiore Hungaria omnibus
itidem Civitatibus, similiter loca pro aedificandis Templis, Scholis, and
Parochiis assignanda conceduntur.

Quid hinc clarius and directius inferri potest, quam quod in singulis liberis
and Montanis quoque Civitatibus (quales sunt ordinis sui gratiae recensendae,
in Inferiore Hungaria liberae Civitates: Sopronium, Kuszeginum, Rust, Posonium,
Szent-Gyorginum, Bazinga, Modra, Tyrnavia, Szakoliza, Trenczinium,
Veterozolium, Carpona, and Brezna; and in Superiore, Cassovia, Leutschovia,
Bartpha, Epperies, Cibinium, Kesmarck, and Nagybanya: In Montanis vero,
Neozolium, Schemniczium, Cremniczium, Libethbanya, Bakabanya, Belobanya, and
Ujibanya) pro quarum modalitate (reflexione habita ad antecedentis Articuli 25.
primi Membri, inibique citatorum Articulorum praemissam generalitatem permissae
libertatis fusius deductam, quo se hic Paragraphus quoque referret)
distinctione and diversitate quadam, proque exemplo, ex utroque ordine
liberarum videlicet Inferioris Hungariae binae, uti Trenchinium and Modra; and
Montanarum similiter binae, nempe Cremniczium and Neozolium Civitates
recensentur, and denominantur, Superiorum vero Hungariae liberarum Civitatum
generifica fieret mentio, dum omnes una eademque libertatis praerogativa
perfrucrentur, nec conditio unius sequior esset alterius, similiter loca
commoda, and quidem in Civitatibus ipsis, sive in medio ipsarum, ad genuinam
mentem verborum Membri hujus: In Liberis and Montanis Civitatibus, etc. In
Superiore Hungaria: Omnibus itidem Civitatibus, etc. Quae non specificatae
etiam a libertatis suae generalitate hic sano sensu intellecta, and
comprehensa^ion excluderent aedificandis Templis, Parochiis, and Scholis
assignanda venirent. Commissiones vero Regiae extra attacto hoc Membro quinto
denominatas Civitates, reliquas omnes quatuordecim Liberas and Montanas
Civitates a designatione and excisione locorum excluserunt, omnique exercitio,
and quidem adhuc cum certa (ut Superius in Articuli 25. Membro primo
repraesentatum) incancellatione privarunt.

In Superiore porro Hungaria potissimum Epperiessini and Cassoviae plane
abominanda loca (ut Membro praecedenti secundo repraesentatum) designarunt.

Quae quum cum sancito hujus Articuli, and ad initium Membri primi Art. 25.
allegatorum, horumque recto sensu, adeoque ipsa etiam sana ratione non
convenirent, nixi ob id talibus fundamentis Articularibus Majestatem vestram
Sacratissimam pari gratiosissima uti caeteris Denominatis, ita praedeclaratis,
non specificatis, hincque ex missis and restrictis Civitatibus, locorum
commodorum aedificandorum novorum Templorum, Parochiarum, and Scholarum
deservientium demonstratione, liberique Religionis eorundem exercitii, cum and
alias tali benignissimo Indultu Regio ipsis etiam, uti aliis libere perfrui fas
omnino and aequum esset, nec eodem quoquo modo privari deberent integra
admissione; praeattactis vero Cassoviensi and Epperiensi Civitatibus aliorum,
ob sacrum finem Deo dedicandorum convenientium locorum intra casdem Civitates,
Suburbiis plane carentes, reperibilium designatione and assignatione fiendis,
perquam humillime rogamus.

Sextum Membrum hoc sancit:
Templa demum, in quorum actuali possessione idem Augustanae and Helveticae
Confessioni addicti de facto sunt, modo praevio prae manibus eorundem, una cum
Parochiis and Scholis, proventibusque eorundem propter bonum Pacis, ut nimium
quiet and pacifice vivant, relinquuntur, usu Sepulturae and Campanarum pro
Catholicis ibidem degentibus aeque ac ipsis relicto.

Quam evidens etiam esset hoc Membrum sextum, antecedensque hujus Articuli
tertium explicatiori declaratione Evangelicos in actuali and pacifica
Templorum, Parochiarum, Scholarum, and proventuum suorum, prae manibus, tempore
hujus conditi Articuli habitorum possessione, Campanarum insuper and Sepulturae
Communi usu relictos, and relinquendos stabiliret, and confirmaret.

Eo tamen repudiaro tam memoratae Commissiones Regiae, quam inclytae quoque
camerae, and officiales quique, prout and Clerus, in Comitatibus, praescripto
Membro tertio fusius enumeratis, talia Templa una cum Appertinentiis and
Proventibus universis, contra dictamen hujus Articuli, occuparunt, and haec
concomitantia, liberum nimirum exercitium, and functionem Ministerialem,
ejectis Ministris, prohibuerunt, Campanarum etiam and Sepultura communem Usum
fere ubique Evangelicis interdixerunt.

Sic exemplificandi caussa Commissio Regia in Comitatu Honthensi, qui unus
esset ex praescriptis Membro tertio enumeratis, quive tam ex vi hujus sexti,
quam etiam praefati tertii Membrorum a simili Commissione immunis esse debebat,
omnia Templa, unico excepto, eoque parvulo Mediante Vice-Comite ejusdem
Comitatus occupari, and Praedicantes amoveri fecit.

Ita in Comitatu Hevessiensi Mandatione Reverendissimi Domini Archiepiscopi
Strigoniensis Georgii Szeckenii, and Illustrissimi Dom. Comitis Georgii Erdodii
oppidum Gyongyos Helveticae Confessionis, qui in continua semper possessione
Templi, Parochiae, and Scholae, Accessoriorumque ipsorum a longis temporibus
Ante, in, and post Diaetam Soproniensem fuerant, iis una cum omnibus suis piis
legatis and proventibus, undecim praecipuis vineis, quinque Molendinis, uno
Macello, and una Domo, adhaec aliquot centenis urnis vini per Joannem Almasy
Hevessiensis, and Franciscum Sutter Pestiensis Comitatuum judices Nobilium die
22 Maii, Ann. 1688. sunt privati, amotioneque Ecclesiae, and Scholae docentium,
totali eorundem Evangelico exercitio, etiam in privatis aedibus continuando,
prout and Sepultura ac Campanarum usu inhibiti, possessione horum omnium Clero
loci tradita.

Pariter in Comitatibus Abauyvariensi and Zempliniensi, signanter in Dominio
Ragocziano, oppida Thallya, Maad, Szanto, Kcreszthur, Tarczal, Liszka, Bennye,
Tolchva, Patak, Ujihelly, Borsy, Regacz, and Thokay, aliaque, quae aeque in
actuali and pacifico Dominio Templorum, Scholarum, Parochiarum, and
accessoriorum, horumque proventuum, tam ante hunc conditum Articulum, quam
conditionis ejusdem Tempore fuissent, de caeteroque praepossessione horum
relinqui debuissent, omnibus his per officiales ejusdem Dominii sunt privata,
ac libero Religionis exercitio, vel in privata etiam Domo usuando, severissimis
sub minis inhibita.

Non absimilitet in Civitatibus Cassoviensi and Epperiensi quoad proventus
Ecclesiasticos omnia Evangelicorum pia legata; Cassoviensibus quidem quatuor
Domus, unus adhaec hortus, certae item terrae arabiles, and in promontorio
Tokay una vinea Varga dicta; Epperiensibus vero certae insimul vineae, diversis
in Promontoriis partium Superiorum situatae cum suis reditibus, per Magistratum
loci Catholicum utrobique via facti sunt ereptae: Quibus Campanarum quoque and
Sepulturae communis usus absolute denegatur. Funerum adhaec intra moenia
Civitatum cum solitis suis caeremoniis condecens deductio etiam cavetur, and
non admittitur.

Quibus similibus cum express contra Artic. hunc injuriati essent memoratorum
locorum Evangelici.

Exinde Sanctissimae eatenus declaratae Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
Resolutioni and Articulari Concessioni firmiter inhaerentes, a Majestate vestra
Sacratissima horum omnium, and praeattacto etiam Membro tertio Commemoratorum
Comitatensium locorum occupatorum Evangelicos praecise concernentium Templorum,
Parochiaram, Scholarum, and accessoriorum, omnium adhaec legatorum, indeque
subsecutorum proventuum, campanarum item ac Sepulturae usum, contra mentem
hujus Articuli and Membri violenter ademptorum, suis antiquis possessoribus
Evangelicis reali cum effectu fiendam benignissimam Restitutionem and
redintegrationem de genu flexo desideramus.

Septimum Membrum determinat:
Interea vero nec Catholici Ministris Augustinae and Helveticae Confessioni
addictis, nec vero horum sequaces Plebanis Catholicis ad mentem Articuli
undecimi 1647. solvere obligentur.

Hujus Membri statutione clarissima licet, and perconfirmati etiam Artic. 11.
1647. per expressa verba: Ne Evangelici status Catholicis Plebanis, and e
converso status Catholici Evangelicis Ministris ad ullas solutiones praestandas
sint obligati:

Imo subsequentis Articuli 12. ejusdem Ann. 1647. explicatiora: Ubi vero
Parochias non haberent auditores Evangelici, solutionem pendant suae Religionis
Ministris, cujus videlicet Ministerio, seu opera, usi fuerint: Sicut and
Catholici Parochis Catholicis. Ubi autem auditores Evangelici hactenus non
solvissent plebanis Catholicis, imposterum etiam ad nullas solutiones
praestandas ullo sub praetextu cogantur ad solvendum, prout nec Catholici
Evangelicis.

Adhaec quoad Stolarum proventus and pensiones allegati 12 Articuli Ann. 1647.
immediate subsequentia formalia:

Stolares autem proventus, seu solutiones, in quibusvis locis Plebani Catholici
and Ministri Evangelici a suae Religionis auditoribus totaliter percipiant:
Adhuc magis elucidatiore existente, ac unicuique partium convenientes suas
pensiones attribuente, adeoque Evangelicos ab omni prorsus solutionis
obligamine, Clero and Plebanis Catholicis fienda absolute exemptos pronunciante.

Minus tamen nihilo Commissiones Regiae ubique in Comitatibus (extra duo saltem
in quovis Comitatu designata loca) omnes solutiones Plebanis Catholicis
addixerunt: In Civitatibus vero, ubi etiam liberum exercitium permissum, ut ex
Fisco, seu Communi Civitatum aerario (ad quem respectu pluralitatis
Evangelicorum Catholici minimum quantum contribuerent) ipsis Plebanis, seu
Parochis Catholicis solutio fiat, and Evangelici tam Ministris, quam etiam
Scholae doctoribus suis extraordinary ex propriis prospiciant, contra
praescriptum manifestum Articulum constituerunt, cui abusivae Constitutioni
ubilibet locorum ipsi Plebani and Clerus potenter insisterent, and via facti
quaslibet solutiones, ac universos stolares proventus pro se indifferenter tam
in Comitatibus, quam etiam omnibus Civitatibus exigerent.

Inde Officiales etiam saepe fati Dominii Rakocziani in Superiori Hungaria
indiscriminatim nobiles pariter, and ignobiles Evangelicos brachio quoque
militari ad solutionem Plebanis in eodem Dominio pendendam omni conatu adigunt.

Quae cum contra positivam Articuli hujus determinationem facta essent, adeoque
cum maximo etiam ejusdem and inibi allegatorum abusu per Plebanos Catholicos
erga Evangelicos universim practicarentur.

Inde hoc in passu ad praescriptum Articulum and suas leges provocantes apud
Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam demississime instamus, quatenus virtute harum
omnes Evangelicos ab omni prorsus solutione Parochis Catholicis praestanda
immunes pronunciare, ac ut quilibet status suos sibi servientes interteneat,
and exsolvat, iisdem etiam suos pendat stolares proventus, Clementissima,
justitiaeque consona ordinatione decernere dignetur.

Octavum Membrum hoc ordinat:
Omnibus porro Magnatibus and Nobilibus in Regno degentibus, in Arcibus and
solitis Residentiis, pro ritu cujusvis Professionis, Oratoria and Sacella
exstruere, and dotare liberum sit.

Virtute membri hujus licet omnibus Magnatibus and Nobilibus Evangelicis in
Arcibus and residentiis suis Oratoria and Sacella exstruendi and dotandi
permissa sit libertas, quae liberam omnino in iis Religionis suae professionem,
sacrorum and accessoriorum celebrationem, Ministrorum item intertentionem,
tanquam causam sul Principalem, and sine qua non, respicerent, and secum
ferrent; alioquin absque his elusoria plane and supervacanea foret haec
Articularis Concessio.

Praetitulatae tamen Commissiones Regiae praxin hanc post occupationem
Templorum vi praescriptae Articularis Ordinationis per Comitatus in Arcibus and
Residentiis Magnatum and Nobilium longo tempore usitatam and acceptatam, in
plerisque Comitatibus, signanter Lyptoviensi, Turocziensi, Arvensi,
Trenchiniensi, Zolensi, Honthensi, aliisque totaliter inhibuerunt, and contra
praeinsinuatum sanum Articuli sensum in similibus locis liberum Religionis suae
exercitium per peculiares Ministros exercendum penitus vetarunt, and nonnisi
(quod si celebratione cultus sui in Residentiis suis uti vellent) alterutrius
duorum designatorum in Comitatu locorum Ministri, nullatenus vero alterius
accersendi, and ejus opera utendi, hoc que etiam praecise, per cujusque propria
and familiae suae, non vero ullorum vicinorum necessitate, sub poena alioquin
militaris invasionis similis Praesidentiae facultate admissa, Articularem hanc
libertatem mira circumscriptione coarctarunt.

Unde in Comitatu Lyptoviensi Parochi and Plebani aliquot talium, Nobilium
Domos per Milites Arcis Lykava invadi and expilari curarunt.

In Comitatu Trenchiniensi Anno praeterito 89 Nobiles Familiae Nozdrovizky
Praedicantes in residentia sua pro administratione exercitii sui intertenentes,
similiter instinctu Plebanorum per milites Regiminis Mersiani damnificati sunt,
Ministro ad carceres Arcis Lednicze raptato, and strictissima incarceratione ad
subscriptionem sum praejudiciosarum Reversalium pro sui eliberatione adacto.

Quae cum direct repugnarent praeattactae legalitati, nec etiam Magnates and
Nobiles (quibus tamquam Secundi and Tertii Liberorum Statuum and Ordinum Regni,
liberis personis, liberum suum exercitium ubique, sive in propriis Residentiis,
sive in fundis suis, sive sub Dio, aeque libere, intertentione, si modo
potuerint, and usu Ministerii exercere liberum esset, Religiosa hac eorundem,
eaque Articulari in liberate restringi quirent.

Quocirca apud Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam pro relaxatione, and sublatione
praeviae Commissionalis inhibitionis, and circumscriptionis, e converso juxta
indultum hujus Articuli, ejusdemque sanam mentem, omnibus Magnatibus and
Nobilibus in Regno, in Capellis, and Oratoriis eorundem Arcensibus and
Residentialibus, per quoscunque peculiares Ministros, quos intertenere possent,
liberi exercitii, omniumque Accessoriorum, quibuslibet Regnicolis libere
exercendi gratiosissima admissione ardentissime efflagitamus.

Nonum Membrum hoc perhibet:
Posthac vero nullae Templorum, Scholarumque and Parochiarum occupationes, vel
Exercitii turbationes ab utrimque, sub poena in Articulo 8 Uladislai decreto 5,
expressa, fiant.

Expressa lege licet cautum sit, (quolibet Regni statu propter bonum Pacis and
Tranquillitatem Regni publicam in praescriptis suis Articularibus terminis
possessionum Templorum, Scholarum, Parochiarum, liberique Religionis suae
exercitii relicto) amplius quaeque Templa, Scholas, and Parochias Evangelicorum
occupare, horumque libera exercitia quoque quoquo modo interturbare;

Non tamen desiit, sed ne nunc quidem desinit Status Catholicus eatenus miseros
Evangelicos indiscriminatim per totum Regnum exquisitis sub coloribus (ut jam
supra fusius repraesentatum) per vim and fortia, citra ullius poenae formidinem
and incursum impune sane infestare, eosque religiosa eorundem legitima privare.

Quare si contra eundem tamquam praemissis manifestissime contravenientem
effectiva designatae poenae desumptione procederetur, polliceretur equidem
status Evangelicus sibimet in praemissis pacificam and imperturbatam
permansionem, tollereturque omnis dissidiorum fomes.

Quae cum non siant, quantumcunque nobis etiam lamentantibus, querulantibus,
and injurias nostras repraesentantibus, circaque harum sublationem, and nostri
accommodationem, Articularem Medelam implorantibus, crevit exinde, and adhucdum
crescit status Catholici eo liberior in nos grassandi audacia, contraque omne
jus and aequum libertatibus nostris nos exuendi licentia.

Hinc ut tales and similes violentae occupationes and interturbationes
praemissorum omnimode praecaveantur, praescriptam legem strictissime contra
transgressores praevios, ac etiam futuros quoslibet suis viis and modis
observandam, and prosequendam iri a Majestate vestra Sacratissima solicit
petimus.

Accederet praemissis quoque adjungendum quoad Libertatem vel Maxim Civilem
Politicam.
ARticulo 11. Soproniensi praememoratae novissimae diaetae gratiosissima
Regiarum and liberarum, Montanarumque Civitatum Communium privilegiorum
confirmatione, desuperque ibidem allegatarum, and passim conditarum Legum
renovatione per expressa verba:

Liberarum quoque, ac Regiarum, Montanarumque Civitatum non exiguae fuissent
querelae, quod in jure liberae electionis Magistratus Civilis, necnon jure
patronatus, etc. ac aliis suis immunitatibus, partim a part Camerae Hungariae,
partim vero ab Officialibus bellicis contra privilegia ipsorum, and regni
leges, turbatae and impeditae exstitissent; ideo confirmatis eatenus ipsorum
privilegiis and immunitatibus, etc. Articuli etiam Regni, ut sunt Anni 1659.
Art. 129. 1649. Artic. 16. 1647. Art. 83. 1638. Art. 35. ac alii superinde
conditi renovantur, ac tam per Cameras, quam Officiales bellicos, ac alios
quoscunque strictissime observentur, neque in libero Magistratus Civilis jure,
ac aliis privilegiis ipsorum longo usu roboratis a quopiam quoquo modo
turbentur.

Constitutum esse easdem leges, and Articulos, tam per Camerales and Bellicos
Officiales, quam quoscunque etiam Regnicolas ex omni part servandos venire, id
quod ex consensu omnium and Catholicorum and Evangelicorum aequali in usum
quoque deductum erat per Civitates.

Nihilominus praevia Excelsarum Commissionum, ut superius memoratum, in omnibus
Regiis, Liberis and Montanis Civitatibus Evangelicorum amovendorum, and
Catholicorum in Magistratum surrogandorum Nomine Majestatis vestrae
Sacratissimae Regio facta praescriptione, vel maxim in superioribus partium
Regni Hungariae Civitatibus, Cassioviensi, Epperiensi, Bartphensi, aliisque
inclytae Camerae Scepusiensis inde sumptae occasionis ingessione, praecitato
alias Articulo 83. 1647. etc. prohibita, eo processit dictarum Civitatum
Magistratus reformatus Catholicus licentiae, ut jam omnes Cassovienses,
Epperienses, and Bartphenses, aliosque, tam in Senatorii, quam Communitatis
ordinum Evangelicos, ad publica Officia, and dignitates Civiles gerendas been
meritos and aptos, ex mero duntaxat privato affectu erga Religionem contra
manifestas praefati Articuli, ibique citatorum, signanter Articulorum 13. 1608.
ante Coronationem, item 44. 1609, ac 12. 1647. annorum Constitutiones, notabili
Evangelicorum cum oppressione, a publicis dignitatibus, honoribus, and officiis
civilibus removerit, and horum loco aut minus idoneos, aut obaeratos, aut
negotia Civitatum nihil intelligentes, magisque privata curantes Catholicos
summa dictarum Civitatum cum ruina and damnificatione surrogaverit, and
constituerit.

Quae siquidem cum apertissimo Confirmatarum Communium Libertatum, and
privilegiorum civilium praejudicio facta essent, ac fierent impraesentiarum,

Quamobrem, Primo, Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae, pro liberi Magistratus and
Communitatis Civilis eligendi juris, hactenus, ut jam praeinsinuatum,
diversimode per diversos interturbati, ac ex part Evangelicorum penitus
eversi, unice and mere penes easdem ac quascunque Civitates, earumque utriusque
Religionis Catholicae and Evangelicae Juratos benemeritos Cives permanendi
priori suo statui admittenda reductione, solidaque conservatione.

Secundo: Civilis mutuae concordiae conservandae, nocivarumque dissensionum,
and simultatum amovendarum gratia, eorundem Magistratuum and Communitatum
Civilium, absque ullo Catholicae and Evangelicae Religionis discrimine, ex
honestis, benemeritis, nullaque labe maculatis, iisque aptis Juratis Civibus
liberae electionis, officiorumque, and quarumvis aliarum dignitatum Civilium ad
mentem praespecificatorum Articulorum 13. 1608. ante Coronationem, and 44.
1609. sienda indifferenti and coaequali collatione, mutuaque ad honores civiles
publicos promotione.

Tertio: Observandae alternatae aequalitatis, bonique Civitatum publici causa
Judicatus, and Tribunatus Officiorum, juxta modo citatorum, and 12 Articuli
1647. Anni sensum, alternatim and mixtim gerendorum, gratiosissima annuentia,
and permissione, clementissime ordinanda, profundissima animorum cum humilitate
supplices nostras deponimus preces.

Et haec sunt, Sacratissime Imperator, inter caetera praevio modo Articulariter
Sancitarum, and ad genuinum ac literalem Articulorum Soproniensium sensum
membratim perspicue deductarum Religiosae and Politicae libertatum nostrarum
consensu totius Regni permissa beneficia:

Quae quum ita clara and illustria, ut nullam explanationem patiantur, nisi
quis illos Articulos manifest obscurare velit, and nos cum reservata juxta
etiam praecitati Articuli 26. Soproniensis ultimam clausulam:

Per hancque Articularem Concessionem iisdem Augustanae and Helveticae
Confessioni addictis ulterior praetensionum suarum via in futuris diaetis
instantias suas promovendi (non obstantibus Cleri and aliorum secularium
Catholicorum contradictionibus) minime praecludatur.

Salvis semper eatenus legibus Regni diplomate Regio firmatis.

Ampliores Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae propensae Caesareo-Regiae
Clementiae gratias, etiam extra diaetales conventus (dum extra hos Majestati
vestrae Sacratissimae vulneribus nostris convenientes Medelas adhibere
impossible non esset, ad subsequentes vero diaetas nimium infestantibus, ac
nullas leges, nullas constitutas poenas curantibus Clero, and Dominis
Catholicis, exspectantibus nobis facile Religionis nostrae totale evenire
posset exterminium) petendi and urgendi facultate, in illos novissima in diaeta
Posoniensi Consenserimus, fieri nequit, ut jam nunc supra quam concedunt,
expostulare praesumamus.

Nihil illegalitatis, nihilque novitatis, verum legibus regni benignissime
confirmatis Soproniensibus Articulis conformem praementionatorum Gravaminum and
injuriarum nostrarum praemisso modo Articulariter ac distinctim deductarum,
evidentissimisque adversantium exemplis illustratarum complanationem, quae ad
asserendam Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Regiam Auctoritatem and
pientissimam Verbo Regio ratificatam voluntatem, tranquillam item Regni and
Civitatum permansionem, ac bonum Pacis publicae vergit, incessantibus precibus
nostris jam supra december semestria, magna cum impensione sumptuum, demississime
petentes, ne ulterioribus etiam lamentis nostris, de caetero quoque Majestatem
vestram Sacratissimam ejusdem Augustissimam Aulam onerare oporteat.

Eandem Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam per immensam Dei Misericordiam, cujus
vices agit in Terris, per Regale solium, quod divinitus Majestati vestrae
Sacratissimae est datum, perque felicitatem suam, apud Regium Justitiae
Tribunal, prae moerore and dolor prostrati, ima cum demissione obsecramus,
quatenus jam tandem tot and tantarum humillimarum precum, justissimarumque
Instantiarum nostrarum, ex innata oppressos vel maxim juvandi clementia
miserta, Articularia and legalia haec Postulata nostra per intimum suum
Consilium gratiosissime revideri facere, perque ejusdem avidissime exspectatam
Consolatoriam Resolutionem and definitionem cuilibet praedictorum Articulorum
Membri, Regia sua auctoritate, a qua sola (post Deum) salus and permansio
nostra dependet, nos erigere, liberumque Religionis nostrae Exercitium cum
Ministrorum nostrorum Evangelicorum imperturbata, and non restringenda nostri
in medio permansione, and vocationis ipsorum, ubilibet, libera administratione,
adhaec injuriose a nobis ademptorum reali and effectiva restitutione,
introductorumque abusuum totali abrogatione in pristinam, quoad statum etiam
Civilem politicum, Libertatem Articularem benignissime asserere, inque eadem
sartos and tectos semper conservare clementissime dignetur.

Quam Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae gratiam and clementiam perpetuis
fidelitatis nostrae obsequiosissimis servitiis sanguinis etiam profusione
contestandis, quam subjectissime demereri adnitemur.

Benignissimam praevie petitorum Determinationem praestolantes, manemus

Ejusdem Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae

Humillimi perpetuoque fideles subditi

Superiorum and Inferiorum Regni Hungariae Partium ac Comitatuum, Regiarum,
Liberarum, and Montanarum Civitatum, Oppidorum, Confiniorum, item and Pagorum
Universi Evangelici.
Exhibita suae Majestati Sacratissimae Laxemburgi, die 27 Mensis Maii, 1690.
Exemplum alterius Libelli Memorialis Caesareae Majestati a Legatis Saxon. and
Brandeburg. Electorum pro Protestantibus Hungaris Augustae Vindelicorum
exhibiti.
Serenissime, etc.
IN recenti Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae memoria est, quid nos a. d.
6/16 Januar. cum ad Caesariam and Regiam Majestatem vestram public admissi
essemus, nomine utriusque Electoris Saxonici and Brandeburgici, Dominorum
nostrorum Clementissimorum, inter alia de Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis
vestrae Regni Haereditarii and Provinciarum incolis Evangelicis submississime
proposuerimus; and inprimis de libera toties ab universis Evangelicis Ordinibus
invictis argumentis repetita Tefferekensium ita appellatorum incolarum
emigratione, and in Feriolensi ditione retentorum infelicium liberorum
restitutione, liberoque discessu permittendo, humillimis precibus petierimus.
Quemadmodum igitur Clementissimi Domini nostri, ambo praefati Electores, certam
illam spem de Caesareae and Regiae Majestatis vestrae Christianissimo
benignissimoque animo conceperunt, fore, ut Caesarea ac Regia Majestas vestra
submississimis hisce precibus faciles sit aures praebitura and tot millium
pressas and afflictas animas quaesito solatio refectura: Ita nonnullas aliis de
rebus clementissimas resolutiones a Caesarea Regiaque Majestate vestra
impetravimus tam ante, quam post Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae ex illa
urbe discessum: Verum de Negotio Hungarico nihil omnino obtinuimus. Quapropter
justissimis Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae oculis rursus eorundem
infelicium in Hungaria Evangelicorum Miserrimum statum, novis indies
oppressionibus aggravatum, uti ex annexis liquebit, humillime subjicere ausi
sumus, nulli dubitantes, quin Caesarea ac Regia Majestas vestra, quae Divini
nobis in terris Numinis imago est, afflictorum tacta miseratione, qui
suppliciter Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae throno advoluti sunt,
infelicium illorum preces clementissime acceptura, and miseriam sublevatura
sit: Simul and gratiosissime imperatura, atque curatura, ne nupero Recessu de
integro Confirmatum liberum Religionis Evangelicae exercitium, contra Caesareae
ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae Clementissimam animi intentionem, amplius
laedatur, interrumpaturque: Verum contra ea suae cujusque conscientia
libertati, tranquillitatique permittatur, atque restituatur: Ipsi vero
gravaminibus suis, praesertim ratione abusus clausulae: Salvo jure Dominorum
terrestrium, (quae quidem querelarum praecipua caussa est) liberentur, atque
exsolvantur. Quamvis autem Clementissimae istius Resolutionis (pro qua interim
humillimas gratias agimus) Clementissimorum Dominorum nostrorum Electorum
nomine explicationes aliquot obscurioris sensus demississime rogare habeamus,
his tamen ad tempus postpositis, illud praecipue obnixis precibus a Caesarea ac
Regia Majestate vestra petimus, humillimeque obsecramus, ut, quoniam res
liquida and clara est, atque celeberrimae expeditionis, concessam gratiosissime
emigrationem Tefferkensium liberorum declarare dignetur, miserisque parentibus
liberos suos devehere ipsis liceat, remque suam familiarem expedire, concessis
in hunc finem, quae requiruntur, literis commeatus: Utque hac ratione vinculum
illud naturae sanctissimum, quod parents liberis and hos illis, mutuo nexu
adstrinxit, integrum, illaesumque conservetur. Quae res uti Electoribus Dominis
nostris Clementissimis long Maximani animi allatura est voluptatem, ita eosdem
magis magisque devinciet, atque Caesareae ac Regiae Majestati vestrae
obstrictos reddet, velut suam ipsorum in gratiam concessa, omnibusque
submississimae venerationis and obsequii officiis rependenda. Nos autem pro
nostri muneris debita obedientia humillima cum veneratione perpetuum erimus

Caesareae Regiae Majestati vestrae Devotissimi and Humillimi Elect. Sax. and
Brandenb. Plenipot. Legati, N. E. Baro von Gersdorff. S. I. von Dankelman.


Exemplum libelli Memorialis Sacrae Caesareae Majestati a Legatis Saxon. and
Brandeburgicis Augustae Vindelicorum in gratiam Hungarorum Protestantium
exhibiti.
Serenissime, etc.
QUEMADMODUM res a Caesarea ac Regia Majestate vestra in Hungaria adversus
Christiani nominis hostem felicissime gestae, recuperataeque post tam diuturnum
sub barbaro jugum regnum illud, nemini plus voluptatis attulerunt, quam
clementissimis Dominis nostris Electoribus, caeterisque etiam Imperii Romans
Ordinibus ac statibus Evangelicis laetissimo fuere gaudio: Praesertim quod and
ipsi pro viribus ad tutandam Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae
magnitudinem arma sua Caesareis enixissime conjunxerint, quo Divina favente
gratia, prout hoc summum ipsorum votum est, barbarus ad accipiendam decoram
Nomini Caesareo, certamque and constantem Pacem constringatur, cogaturque: Ita
and ulterius hoc suum votum extendunt, ut Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis
vestrae indefesso and patrio erga sibi subditos amore, nobilissimum illud
regnum in pristinum restituatur florem, vigoremque: Subditisque illius incolis
fidelissimis atque obedientissimis justissimo Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis
vestrae imperio atque patrocinio, quoad privilegiorum immunitatumque veterum
conservationem ad spem optimam excitatis, multo quam antehac firmius and tutius
cum Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae provinciis, tum Imperio Romans sive
potius universo orbi Christiano sit propugnaculum. Quoniam vero Caesarea ac
Regia Majestas vestra hunc in finem jam Ann. 1681. and 87. in Comitiis
Soproniensibus and Posoniensibus optima tranquillitatis publicae jecit
fundamenta, neque ullum dubium est, quin, si Caesarea ac Regia Majestas vestra
pro cognitissima sua Gratia ac justitia illud solummodo praestare dignetur, ut
ibidem conclusi, conventi, atque concessi Articuli, praesertim quoad liberum
Religionis Evangelicae exercitium, and illius cultores incolas, ab delegatis in
eam rem Commissariis and Ministris bona side observentur, neque vel per ipsos,
vel per ipsis succedaneos, tam Ecclesiasticos, quam feculares (uti proh dolor!
gravissimis comminationibus nonnulli eorum miserrimos Evangelicos contra
Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae clementissima jussa, decreta, atque
interdicta multimodis ac saepissime terruere) violentur; propositum bonum
pacis, tranquillitatisque regni publicae feliciter subsecuturum sit: Memorati
ambo Domini nostri Clementissimi Electores, etiam nunc eum in finem, sicut and
saepe antea ab aliis factum Imperii Ordinibus Evangelicis, nobis in mandatis
dederunt, uti dictos eorundem sacrorum participes Hungaros Caesareae ac Regiae
Majestati vestrae humillime commendaremus, atque pro iis apud Caesaream ac
Regiam Majestatem vestram intercederemus. Qui quidem Domini nostri
Clementissimi eam in Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae innata lenitate
atque justitia spem and fiduciam collocarunt, ut non dubitent, quin Caesarea ac
Regia Majestas vestra quietem publicam, (quae in causa Religionis in eodem
Regno secundum Regni Constitutiones hactenus satis tranquilla and immota fuit,
verum pauculos ante annos turbari, laedique coepta est) cultoribus Evangelicae
Religionis sartam tectamque praestitura sit, libertatemque conscientiae
integram and illaesam, Ecclesias, Scholas, exercitium Religionis publicum,
inviolata cunctis and singulis permissura, insultus ac violationes severissima
coercitura, and insimul Evangelicorum Electorum, Principum, atque Ordinum in
recuperando, and a Turcico jugo liberando Regno Hungarico lubentissimis animis
navatam fidelissimam operam, submissaque valida auxilia, clementissima
respicere atque considerare dignatura sit. Praecipue vero Clementissimorum
Dominorum nostrorum Electorum deprecatio in hunc scopum collimat, ut, quum
Caesarea ac Regia Majestas vestra hac and aliis de causis Regios delegabit
Commissarios, istiusmodi ilios cum mandatis delegare dignetur, quae ipsos
clementissimam exsequi Caesareae ac Regiae Majestatis vestrae voluntatem,
sanctamque observare justitiam cogant, neque suis servire affectibus, Zolumque
Religionis summo cum rigore, saevitiaque, adversus afflictos Evangelicos
exserere permittant. Hanc Caesareae and Regiae Majestatis vestrae gratiam, ac
favorem summum, Clementissimi Domini nostri Electores plurimo cum animi
solatio, voluptateque accepturi sunt, summaque fide atque devotione
constantissima, caeterisque gratae mentis demonstrationibus ostensuri, nihil
sibi a Caesarea and Regia Majestate vestra gratius accidere potuisse. Nos
autem, quae nostra est tenuitas, submississime atque humillime nosmet profitemur

Caesareae ac Regiae Majestati vestrae Devotissimos and Obedientissimos
Sereniss. D. D. Electorum Saxonici and Brandeburgici hic commorantes legatos,
Von Gersdorff. B. von Zinzendorff. Baro von Friessen. S. I. von Dankelman. N.
B. von Dankelman.

Augustae Vindel. a. d. 6/16 Jan. 1690.
ANNEXA.
EA species est Ann. 1681. in Comitiis Soproniensibus per Catholicum statum,
insciis tamen Evangelicis, de negotio Religionis conditorum, and per ipsos
Articulis quoque Diaetalibus insertorum duorum Articulorum 25. and 26, ac si
hac ratione Evangelicis Hungariae Regni incolis, aliquot mill Ecclesiarum,
Scholarum, and appertinentiarum ereptione nulla facta foret injuria, verum
potius res grata and accepta, plurium locorum enumeratione ac designatione in
quibus liberum ipsis Religionis exercitium concederetur. Quod si vero iidem ad
Meridianum solemn inspiciantur, and justa exactaque rationis trutina
expendantur, minus ipso nihilo Hungaris concessum videbitur, permissumve, nisi,
quae sequitur, damnosissima clausula cum illius interpretatione and extensione
reapse inde deleatur, tollaturque. Quidquid enim Concessum videtur, per Cleri
and Dominorum Catholicorum exoticam interpretationem, and potissimum nimium
praejudiciose in totale Evangelicorum, eorundemque Evangelici Exercitii
exterminium adjectam clausulam: Salvo jure Dominorum Terrestrium: (Contra quam
clausulam tamen Evangelici proceres prima vice Sopronii, atque post illa in
Comitiis Posoniensibus omnibus modis protestati sunt: Protestationem vero hanc
ultimam Hungaricus Personalis D. Stephanus Urbanus, contra quam ipsum decuit,
non admisit:) Omnino subversum, and irritum factum est. Nam licet dictorum
Soproniensium Comitiorum 25 Articulus generaliter, and in universum liberum
Evangelicae Religionis exercitium cunctis and singulis permittat, nec huic,
illive loco alliget, aut adstringat, verum potius ad mentem confirmatae
pacificationis Viennensis Ann. 1661. Artic. 1. and praecipue Ann. 1608. itidem
Artic. 1. ante Coronationem (qui in memorato 25 Art. Comitiorum Soproniensium
confirmati sunt) omnibus and ubique per Regnum, nullo loco excluso, multo minus
indigena cujuscunque conditionis, dignitatis, status, ac natalium fuerit,
libertatem concedat public suam Religionem exercendi: Eam nihilominus Domini
Catholici sinistram sibi sumunt and arrogant interpretationem, acsi haec liberi
Religionis exercitii concessio non aliter accipienda sit, multo minus permissa,
nisi sub ista clausula, Salvo jure Dominorum Terrestrium: Quod jus terrestre
(quod jus tantum servitutis corporalis respicit) ipsi ad jus and Dominium in
Conscientias quorumcunque, soli Deo competens, omnimodo trahunt, and extendunt,
sibique actu ipso in toto Regno violenter vindicant. Sic illo utitur
Strigoniensis Archiepiscopus Georgius Szechenius in universo suo territorio ac
Dioecesi, tamquam Dominus Terrestris, and Episcopus Strigoniensis, adversus
omnes absque ullo discrimine ordines, Nobiles, Ignobiles: Iisque non solum
pleno Religionis exercitio interdicit, verum etiam vehementissime eos
persequitur, Ministros Verbi Divini Evangelicos per suos ejiciens, expellens,
spolians, in vincula conjiciens, and in iis Contumeliosissime detinens: Donec
tandem vel Religioni priori valedicant, vel plane se Ministerii Evangelici
munere semet abdicaturos validissima manus propriae testatione ac syngrapha
spondeant. Eandem vim Eminentissimus Dominus Cardinalis sibi sumit, and usurpat
Collonitius, sine ullo discrimine personarum, non modo in Javarinensi
administratura atque Comitatu, sed and tutorio Orphanorum Rakotzhianorum
nomine, in eorum in Superiore and Inferiore Hungaria Dominiis, adversus
Ecclesiasticae and Civilis, Nobilis and Ignobilis conditionis atque ordinis
Evangelicos: Praecipue autem in Javarinensi, Soproniensi, Eisenburgico, and
aliis Comitatibus: Nec non in Lebnicensibus, Rachoczianis terris, in
Trenchiniensi Comitatu; ut and in Superiore Hungaria in Zempliniano, Hevezano,
and Abauyarensi Comitatibus, in XII. oppidis privilegiatis, quae sunt Thuoa,
Mar, Szantho, Keretzthur, Tarczal, Liska, Benxe, Tholizva, Patak, Ughelly,
Borsy, and Tokay; aliisque item in locis plurimis: Ubi omnium Reformatorum
partim de integro condita, partim e ruderibus redintegrata Templa, Scholae,
Domus pastorum Parochiales, cum suis appertinentibus (quorum omnium tempore
conditi Articuli Soproniensis reapse fuere possessores, quaeque ipsis juxta
Articuli contentum relicta sunt) vi ipsis erepta sunt, Ecclesiarumque Ministri
munere suo depulsi, atque deturbati: Ut silentio vis ipsis eorum personis
illata* atque etiamnum indesinenter exercitae injuriae, atque violentiae
transmittantur.

Quin and hujus clausulae praetextu Omnes alii Episcopi, Praepositi, and
Abbates suis in ditionibus, in primis autem in ditionibus Tockelianis quondam,
nunc Turcae ereptis, ubi plurimi habitant; ac commorantur Reformati, abutuntur:
Imo vero and omnes Magistratus, ac nobiles quicunque, and Ecclesiastici suis in
Territoriis: Adeo ut and Civitates nonnullae, interque eas Catholicus urbis
Epperies Magistratus, sub praetextu Dominii Terrestris, ex Urbe illa, quae per
Articulum illum disertim libertatis fruebatur privilegio, Ecclesiastas
Evangelicos expulerint, and in exilium egerint; caeteros usu liberi Religionis
exercitii privarint, nullo alio jure, quam quod illius clausulae abusus, and
iniquissima interpretatio suggessit, and suppeditavit: Quae revera omnis ad hoc
usque tempus exercitae persecutionis unica scaturigo est.

Oration ad Caesarem Leopoldum Maximum, Wiennae in speciali audientia die 22
Junii, Ann. 1690. circa horam 8. Vespertinam habita, pro statu Evangelico
Hungarico, and nominatim pro Comitatu Thurocziensi, per Generosum D. Paulum
Okoliczani dicta and instituta, adstantibus egregiis Joanne Scredy, and Paulo
Sallay, ejusdem status Evangelici Ablegatis.
ADMISSI ad Augustum Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae conspectum, quod ipsi
afflictiones nostras proprii oris Ministerio in benignum sinum effundere
possimus, primum hoc nomine nobis gaudemus: postea, quod Majestatem vestram
Sacratissimam salvam and incolumen nobis, infimis licet, attamen fidelibus
subditis intueri, contemplarique Deus concessit, nomine Principalium nostrorum
Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae in laetitiam effusi gratulamur. Oramus etiam
ejus Divinam Majestatem ut, qua Omnipotenti Coelica open hactenus universis
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae adfuit Regiis negotiis, eadem imposterum
quoque victricibus armis, and fortibus militibus adesse velit, ut conculcatis
universis ad ultimum hostibus, tandem ad tranquillum amoenae Pacis portum ex
belli fluctibus cum fidelibus populis suis emergere possit.

Tertius jam vertitur annus, Augustissime Imperator, ex quo homines nostri
universorum scilicet statuum Evangelicorum Hungaricorum, demissorum fideliumque
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae subditorum, humillimi Ablegati, qui hic mecum
adstant, ad Augustam Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Aulam continuis quasi
excubiis haesitantes Sacrum Majestatis vestrae pectus de liberate oppressae
Religionis Evangelicae assiduo pulsant, and sollicitant. Quibus
sollicitationibus, and ipsi etiam Religionis oppressioni, Commissarii
Majestatis vestrae in hoc negotio ad mentem Articulorum exmissi, ac ante
biennium procedentes, dederunt, praebueruntque vel maximam ansam atque
materiam: Quippe illi extra benignam Majestatis vestrae instructionem, and
contra sensum Articulorum, ea, quae ibidem clarissima sunt, peregrina quapiam
interpretatione ad libitum pro obscuris habuerunt, and quae ibidem non
habentur, adjecerunt, nobisque Sacro Majestatis vestrae nomine portanda
imposuerunt. Quemadmodum haec omnia tot Memorialibus nostris per istos dimissos
Ablegatos nostros a dicto triennio, vix non quotidie porrigi solitis, exact
clareque liquidavimus.

Ad quae omnia, and imprimis ad id, quod die 27 Maii in Laxenburg benignis
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae manibus supplices porrexere, dum nosmet
relegamus, Majestatem quoque vestram supplices provocamus, per Deum immortalem
obtestantes, ut jam tandem benign sese ad ea resolvere, and ex Commissionibus
ortam dubietatem auctoritate sua Caesarco Regia tollere non dedignetur. Sed
quia Majestas vestra Sacratissima toto hoc triennii tempore, aliis etiam Regiis
Curis obruta, necdum sese benign resolvere potuit, Adversarii nostri hinc
arrepta occasion novos contra nos assumunt animos, and in vulgus jactant;
Majestati vestroe miseram sortem nostram, quam ipsi augent, cordi non esse: Nos
a Regia gratia, benignaque Protectione prorsus abjectos esse: Adeoque ipsis
quodlibet in nos licere. Contestari sumus saepenumero, Invictissime Caesar,
brevi fore, nisi cohibeantur, illorum insolentiam in apertam vim, effusionemque
innocentis Sanguinis nostri erupturam; and jam hujus rei tragicae quoddam
praeludium in Comitatu nostro Thurocziensi persentiscere cogimur, quando certo
Majestatis vestrae mandato nobis neque citatis, neque auditis, ex inclyta
Hungarica Cancellaria emanato, facti sumus quasi catharmata ad immolationem
destinata. Unde ego, fidelis Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae subditus,
peculiariter missus ad Regium Majestatis vestrae Thronum, supplex compareo, spe
plenus, me non tantum clementer auditum iri, sed simul ad Principales meos
vitam, salutem, and libertatem, pro innocentia nostra, a Majestate vestra
reportaturum esse. Attulerunt videlicet Domini Plebani Catholici certum
mandatum contra nos, cujus vigore non jam juris processum, sed violentam rerum
nostrarum direptionem, and personarum arrestationem minitantur: Imo jam ipso
facto exequuntur.

Petiimus equidem instantissime Paria istius Mandati, sed non aliud responsum
tulimus, quam quod a Majestate vestra Sacratissima, vel a quopiam alio,
interdictum sit illis, ne Paria ejus nobiscum communicentur: Quo pacto non modo
Sacro Majestatis vestrae nomini injuriam faciunt, sed and trahunt in
suspicionem, quasi vero Majestas vestra Sacratissima talia ibi subscripserit,
quae in apricum devenire indecens esset. Dum tamen legeretur, and publicaretur
idem Mandatum, quantum animadvertere potuimus, in hoec verba esse observavimus:
Intellexisse nimirum Majestatem vestram quomodo Proedicantes nostri (quos illi
ita per contemptum vocant) per Arces, per Castella, per Domos, and sic
consequenter evagentur: Quomodo in Parochias eorum involent: Quomodo sacra
eorum turbent, and suo ritu Evangelico populis administrent: Quomodo (quod
scelus nefasque est, nostra Religione indignum) Nobiles oeque ac ignobiles ad
seditionem disponant, and hinc nos Magnates, Nobiles, and Ignobiles concitatos
neque Templa frequentare velle, neque festa celebrare velle, neque aliquid
illis solvere velle, imo susque deque contra Articulos, contra ordinationem
Commissionis facere omnia. Quorum enumeratorum veluti minima levissimaque pars
certo respectu and consideratione legum vera esse potest, ita potior eorum pars
falsa and sinistra est. Verum id quidem est, nos illis nihil solvere, sed id
non facimus temere, verum beneficio sacri diplomatis and Articulorum
Soproniensium, qui express dictant: Evangelicum Catholico, and contra
Catholicum Evangelico nihilo teneri. Quod celebrationem festorum sinistrum est,
quippe siquid propria laus valeret, auderem dicere Majori nos Communia festa
celebrare observatione, quam illos, qui saepe (and si illos accusatum non veni)
levissimo munusculo corrupti diebus festis crassos permittant labores. Non nego
unum alterumve esse festum, quod Religio nostra non recepit; tamen and his
diebus a crassioribus abstinendo laboribus consulto ita nos gerimus, ne illis
nos criminandi ansa supersit. Porro ubi de non frequentatione Templorum ajunt,
verum dicunt, quia omnia ademerant: Ne unum quidem ergo cum sit, quod
frequentare permittant pro liberate nostrae Religionis, inter reliquos divinos
ritus nostros pro incolumitate Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae sub dio etiam
orare solemus. Quod de seditione dicunt, quemadmodum Maximum ac sinistrum est,
ita injuriosissimum, ac nisi docuerint, quae accusant, talione poenae
compensandum. Nuper in Generali Congregatione, ubi Clerus, nostri accusatores,
frequenti numero aderant, public protestati sumus, ut, quis sit ille
seditiosus, denominent, nos esse futuros primos, qui capiemus, and quo Majestas
vestra Sacratissima jusserit, aut ducemus, aut justo juris ordine servato
puniemus. Sed nonnihil tacentes postea public professi sunt, se de seditione
apud Majestatem vestram neminem accusasse. Ad extremum, non ut contra Articulos
Sopropnienses quidquam patraremus, quin potius propterea haec omnia patimur,
quod Ordinationibus Commissionum non acquiescentes a tenore and beneficio legis
nos abstrahi non permittamus.

Haec illa sunt, Augustissime Imperator, conficta crimina, quorum caussa neque
citati, neque auditi, a Majestate vestra Sacratissima tamen capi jubemur.

Quae cum non vera esse constanter assevero; simul de genu flexo pro
Principalibus meis Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae humillimis fidelibusque
subditis supplico, dignetur Majestas vestra Sacratissima Clementi nos oculo
respicere: Dignetur in periculo constitutis adesse: Dignetur illos, siquid
contra nos praetensionis habent, ad juris viam, non potentiam, relegare;
illisque suapte natura in nos persequendos proclivibus Mandati sui occasionem
tollere, idemque cassare. Eripiat nos Majestas vestra Sacratissima ab
insultibus and libidine Inimicorum nostrorum, paratos, siquid peccavimus,
Ordini juris nos ubicunque sistere. Faciat Majestas vestra Sacratissima ut
persentiscant, Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam aeque nobis esse benignissimum
Regem, atque illis: Quam benignitatem de omnium gentium jure exposcimus:
Siquidem non minore fidelitate, non minore promptitudine, quam illi, universa
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae pro quavis necessitate serimus onera, and
praestamus Regia serviria.

Ad haec Caesar reposuit:

Percepi Orationem vestram nomine omnium Inclytorum statuum Evangelicorum, and
comitatus nostri Thurocziensis, fidelium subditorum nostrorum, per Te factam:
Quemadmodum ante hac saepe, ita nunc Nos resolvimus, quod sicuti unice
intendimus, ut penes Articulos ultimarum diaetarum conservaremini, ita numquam
erat intentio nostra, ut vos ex Gratia and Protectione nostra excludamus.
Confidite igitur. Quae autem hic verbo reposuistis, ea perlecto etiam hoc
supplici libello nunc nobis porrecto considerabimus, captoque consilio,
quidquid juxta benignam Intentionem nostram, aequitatemque justitiae conveniens
fuerit, faciemus, habebitisque congruam resolutionem.

De caetero Vobis, vestrisque Principalibus, Caesareo-Regia Gratia nostra
propensi manemus.

Haec elocuta sua Majestate Sacratissima vicissim Ablegatus ait:

Serenissime Imperator, periculum nostrum, in quo jam Principales mei facto
ipso conflictantur, moram non patitur; ac proinde per omnia Dei Sacra, and per
omnia jura regalia obtestor, ut Majestas vestra Sacratissima benign, and
quidem cito succurrat.

Imperator respondit: Jam, jam erit.

'His flexo poplite discessum.

Sacratissima Caesarea Regiaque Majestas.
Domine, Domine nobis Clementissime,
NIXI Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae benignissima Resolutione nupera in
Personali audientia Hominibus nostris jam a triennio apud Augustissimam
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Aulam, in calamitosissima jam agonizantis
Religionis nostrae Evangelicae Materia, maxima cum profusione sumptuum
degentibus, ac ejusdem Regio-auctoritativae opitulationis legalem medelam
toties ac toties suppliciter implorantibus, clementer impertita, ut ut fiducia
pleni juxta (uti certo inaudivimus) qua scripto tenus, qua etiam ore tenus, jam
subsecutam and extradatam Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae clementissimam nos
Articulariter omnino accommodandi Declarationem, and Resolutionem, ejusdem
realem effectuationem de die in diem avidissime praestolaremur; nihil tamen,
quod huic nostrae exspectationi responderet, adusque maxima nostri cum
infelicitate obtinere potuimus, sicut nec possumus: Quin (jussis and mandatis
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae, uti anno praeterito ante discessum suum
Augustam Vindelicorum, ita nunc quoque nescimus, quibus cunctationibus in
majorem nostri adflictionem ipsa morte acerbiorem citra ullum essectum
suppressum cuntibus) indies major ac major, nimia insolentia cleri
universaliter in Regno ad libitum in Evangelicos grassantis, nihilque Leges and
Constitutiones Regni curantis; sed omnia ex arbitrio suo agentis, nos subit
calamitas.

Hic etenim (brevitatis causa) ejusdem illegales, Articulariterque vetitorum
certorum Salariorum ab Evangelicis indifferenter sibi pendendorum praetensas
solutiones, hactenus indiscriminatim in Comitatibus, maxima Magnatum and
Nobilium, horumque subditorum Evangelicorum cum oppressione, brachio quoque
militari extortas praetereuntes (ejectis perprius ante circiter biennium e
Civitate Superioris Hungariae Epperies, loco alias Articulari Ministris trium
Nationum Evangelicis, Scholaeque docentibus, jamnum iterum ibidem Majestatis
vestrae Sacratissimae nomine (quo nimium praejudiciosa abuteretur) docentem
quoque puerorum and puellarum cosdem in Lectura, Scriptura, and Arithmeticis,
aliisque convenientibus pietatis studiis informantem, sub poena relegationis
severe inhibere, temere audens.

Recentissime adhaec in Regia Superioris itidem Regni Hungariae partium
Civitate Nagybanya (quae etiam una e Reliquis Civitatibus and locis
Articularibus libero Religionis Evangelicae exercitio, and Commissionali
excisione locorum, aedificandorum novorum Templorum, Parochiarum, and Scholarum
Articulariter insimul dotata: Jam vero Anno praeterito 89. circa initium Mensis
Novembris interventu Commissionis Prainerianae tali beneficio citra ullam
legalem causam instinctu solum Dominorum P. P. Jesuitarum exquisito sub
praetextu violatarum quarundam Reversionalium per minas and terriculamenta
Excellentissimi Domini Stephani Csaky, Anno adhuc 1674. dudum praeterito
extortarum; virtute tamen 25 Articuli Soproniensis cassatarum, iterum ex
integro privata and orbata esset) Reverendissimus Pater Franciscus Ravasz Soci.
Jesu, assistentia ejusdem loci commendantis, inclyti regiminis Houchiniani
locum tenentis, coetum Evangelicum praemissa publicatione, Ne quisquam diebus
festis ullos labores exerceat: Ne neo-natas proles aliorsum extra civitatem
baptizandas esserat: Ne audiendarum concionum Evangelicarum, cultusque sui
exercendi caussa ad circumjacentia extera loca exeat: Ne horum familia
domestica domi cantet, legate, oretque, etc. Ad caeremonias Religioni ipsorum
contrarias, sub duri alioquin Arresti comminatione, gravibusque pecuniariis
extorsionibus cogere and compellere: Evangelicorum domos, festivis diebus medio
Musquetariorum perlustrare and rimari, eosdem in vincis, and promontoriis
insectari, and vel ex minima suspicione, utut etiam nihil operarum fecissent,
citra ullam distinctionem perso^arum captivare, inque squalidum locum arresti
includere, ac abinde non prius nisi deposita, a Commendante denuntiata, 10, 20,
30 Florenorum (si eo pauperior etiam esset) summa dimittere: Neonatos liberos
suos ad extera loca medio Confessioni suae addictorum Ministrorum baptizandos
efferentes, post perpessos squalidos carceres ad libitum lytrare. Miseris
mendicantibus ex Hospitali Evangelico ejectis, inque stabulum quoddam se
receptis, nisi Templum Catholicorum frequentaverint, Caesionem e Civitate per
Carnificem fiendam apertissime indicere. Studiosos quoscunque, quamvis etiam
patricios ab ingressu Civitatis, and visitatione parentum Consanguineorum,
Cognatorum, and amicorum suorum contra ductum naturae omnimode arcere, and
siqui per inanimadvertentiam Civitatem intraverint, immediate capere, hinc inde
raptare, verberibus foedare, arresto includere, tandemque desumpta arbitraria
taxatione, tamquam praedonem and adulterum per Germanos milites Civitate
expellere: Uno verbo, omnium afflictionum generibus eosdem acerbissime
affligere, and angere, ausu proprio praesumens, passim ubique omnia susque
deque omnino proterve ageret.

Et quae alibi locorum his similia alia, aut etiam majora ejusdem cleri, sicut
and secularium Dominorum Catholicorum, uti novissime Domini Sigismundi
Esztherhazy Jazygum Vice Capitanei, and Francisci Sutter, substituti Vice
Comitis Comitatus Pestiensis, cum eorundem famulitio, Evangelicos oppidi
Jazbereny, ante tres circiter septimanas improvise adorientium, captisque
perprius potioribus Evangelicis, ac Carceri ejusdem oppidi iisdem injectis,
inque praesentiarum detentis, eorundem Templum sumptibus propriis exstructum,
Turrim adhaec, and campanas occupantium, ac ibidem securitatis causa in
deposito existentia bona diripientium, insuperque omnia Pia legata majori ex
part ex rebus aureis and argenteis constantia, fide mediante extorquentium,
and auferentium, tandemque Templum funditus diruentium, essent violenter
attentata.

Hinc afflictissimae Religionis nostrae calamitas, and in paterna Majestatis
Vestrae Sacratissimae erga miseros nos fideles suos subditos propensione locata
fiducia hanc nobis imposuit necessitatem, ut repraesentata ingravescentium
indies aerumnarum nostrarum mole, qua a clero, sine intermissione premimur, ad
Majestatis Vestrae Sacratissimae, Clementia, Misericordia and justitia
plenissimum thronum tali in coangustatione and oppressione spirituali
constituti, inde sinentibus pronis precibus nostris confugientes Regiae
Auctoritatis suae vindicias, secundum libertatem nostram Articularem demisso
hocce Memoriali nostro iterum atque iterum imploremus.

Quare habita reflexione ad praemissas iteratas nostras articulariter deductas
supplicationes, Laxenburgi die 27 Maii, and Viennae 22 Junii praeteritorum
Mensium sub personali audientia Hominum nostrorum Majestati vestrae
Sacratissimae humillime exhibitas, denuo ad pedes Majestatis vestrae
Sacratissimae, qua summi Justitiarii nostri, Legumque Assertoris Maximi
provoluti, per salutifera Christi vulnera, profunda submissione Majestatem
Vestram Sacratissimam exoramus, quatenus tot ac tantis geinitibus, lamentis,
and querulationibus nostris Regio suo Cordi sumptis, nos plane depressos per
dudum exoptatam, totque memorialibus humillime expetitam per Intimum Consilium
suum; non vero Judicatum Cleri (nobis alias infensi, exterminationemque nostri
minitantis, and ob id etiam jussa and mandata Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
ocyus exsequenda studio protrahentis, majorique calamitatum labyrintho nos
inducere satagentis) determinandam Resolutionem Regia auctoritate erigere,
afflictissimumque statum nostrum ab omnibus adversitatibus Cleri vindicare,
inque legalem, securam, and mill votis desideratam Conscientiarum
tranquillitarem jam tandem locare, and constituere non dedignetur, quo illaesa
conscientia Deo, Illibataque fidelitate Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae debita
servitia nostra eo pacatiori and alacriori animo praestare, sicque sub
auspicatissimis Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimoe tutelaribus Alis tranquillam
semper una cum posteris nostris transigere possimus vitam. Quam impetratam
gratiam perpetuis fidelitatis nostrae obsequentissimis studiis, omnibus viribus
demereri conabimur. Clementissima praestolata Resolutione permanemus

Ejusdem Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Humillimi perpetuoque fideles
subiliti Superiorum and Inferiorum Regni Hungariae, Partium, Comitatuum,
Civiratum, Oppidorum, Confiniorum, and Pagorum Universi Evangelici* Exhib. die
2 Aug. suae Majest. Sacr.

Sacratissima Caesarea Regiaque Majestas.
Domine, Domine Clementissime,
DICTU fere inexplicabile, Sacratissime Imperator, jam ab integro triennio apud
Augustissimam Majestatis vestrae Aulam, maximo gravium sumptuum cum impendio
laborantibus nobis, quot and quanta lamenta, quantas item querulationes, and
supplices preces nostras, nimium turbatae articularis Religionis nostrae
Evangelicae in materia, ad Sacratissimos Caesar. Majestatis vestrae pedes,
profundissimo de genu, quam humillime deposuerimus, hac indubia spe freti, nos
jam tandem in tanta Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae perbelle cognita calamitate
and oppressione nostri, Conscientiarumque nostrarum coangustatione,
Categorico-Consolatoriam Regio-auctoritativam per Intimum Consilium suum
determinandam obtenturos resolutionem. Ast nedum quicquam scire possumus, An
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae amore, an vero odio digni habeamur? Cum a
praescripto tempore citra omnem exspectationem, and toti animo pendentes
detineremur, and plane ancipites relinqueremur impraesentiarum: Interea vero
(percrebescente in Regno tam infelici Constitutione nostra) indies eo liberior
clero nos majoribus ac majoribus oppressionum injuriis lacessenti, cresceret
audacia, and afflictissimarum animarum nostrarum augeretur moles; (cujus rei
inter alia recentissima in Superiori Hungaria in Dominio Rakocziano districtu
Hegyallia vocato, and in Regia Civitate Nagybanya, alibique, miseranda sane
testatum facerent exempla,) misera etiam and lacera Evangelica Navicula nostra
aestuantis ejusdem Oceani turbinum fluctibus agitata, and periculosis scopulis
allisa, sicque tota ipsi naufragio ad interitum submergenda, nullo vero aliquo
prospero Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Clementiae afflante Favonio
secundata, hocque modo in felicem securitatis portum promovenda, ibique priori
integritati suae restituenda, submitteretur.

Proinde, quandoquidem post Deum, in Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
naturaliter congenita Regia Clementia, and misericordia, unicam nostram,
salutis, vitae, and fortunarum nostrarum servandarum spei anchoram defixam
haberemus, nec desit in tantis Calamitatum fluctuationibus anxie clamantibus,
ac Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae opem and liberationem avidissime
implorantibus nobis, Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae potentia hujusmodi
ferventes turbinum procellas ipsius Cleri, seria Regiae auctoritatis suae
demandatione, tranquillandae talis tempestatis, sedandi, nosque juvandi, and
felici exitu ad specialis Regiae suae Gratiae Serenissimum portum benignissime
deductos integre conservandi, ac spiritualis vitae liberate, Articulariter
alias gratiosissime impertita, ulterius quoque clementissime donandi: Constanti
demissae supplicationis obtinendae Articularis justitiae nostrae proposito,
iterum atque iterum ad Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam quam subjectissime
recurrentes, eandem per immensam Misericordiam Dei, perque viscera salvatoris
nostri Jesu Christi obsecramus, dignetur jam tandem se nobis exorabilem
reddere, nosque compatibilibus Regio-paternae misericordiae suae oculis
benignissime intuendo, a tam acerbissimis Cleri insultibus and persecutionibus,
(antecedentibus supplicibus libellis nostris satis superque Majestati vestrae
repraesentatis,) vindicare, neque permittere, ut Sanctissimo Verbo suo Regio
firmato, Articulisque Regni admisso, and stabilito libero Religionis nostrae
Evangelicae, cultusque Divini exercitio, ejusque accessoriis, ruptis contra jus
gentium and diplomate Regio, and etiam omnibus solemnibus mutuae tolerantiae
Articularibus pactionibus, privemur, adque insuetas caeremonias, and Sacra
Religioni nostrae contraria, reluctante conscientia praestanda, violentis
mediis compellamur: (Hujusmodi siquidem cultus Deo plane esset invitus,
proestantibus periculosus, statui vero Catholico, and ejus doctrinoe
contumeliosus: Cum Christus Dominus neminem ad suorum numerum, nisi voluntarium
militem adscribi voluit, ut divinus jussis sponte obtemperans oeternam salutem
consequatur: Ita perhibente Tridentina Catechesi in Doctrina de baptismo: Nec
enim Evangelici rigorosis and adversis illis modis, quibus per Clerum ad
amplectendam Religionem Catholicam divexari solerent, ac etiamnum divexantur,
adigi venirent, insigni and prope singulari, aiente Huetio Prop. 9. c. 8. de
Gentili superbia ac morum feritate per vim Evangelii deposita; Christi Jesu,
ejusque sectatorum, charactere, mansuetudine and lenitate existente: Armaque,
quibus bellum gereret Christus, essent verba spiritus, Justitia and Fides,
inquiente eodem Huetio Demonstrat. Evang. Propos. 9. cap. 65. hoec vero a
spiritu Dei ex ejus verbo proficisci, and non per compulsiva media generari
solerent. Hinc etiam gladio spiritus, verbo nempe Dei, non vero gladio
corporali and formali, qui S. Petro suoe vaginoe recondendus, sub gravi
Comminatione a Christo Domino demandatus esset, ad devincendum eos, opera per
clerum impendenda foret, merus alioquin incrudesceret Atheismus, si omnium
Evangelicorum and Reformatorum cultum proterere studuerit, oegritudineque animi
suspicarentur quam multi, si jam reluctante Conscientia Deo serviendum esset,
non esse, qui curam rerum agat humanarum:) Quin Clero suis contentum vivere
finibus, non vero Dominii sui fimbrias ad Evangelicos Augustanae and Helveticae
Confessioni addictos coetus (dum nullam Juris and Dominii Spiritualis
proprietatem in eos haberet, ipseque aeque atque illi Majestatis vestrae
Sacratissimae potestati, Dominatui, and obsequio parendi subditus esset)
extendere, Regiae suae auctoritatis decretali praescripto, per universum Regnum
benignissime publicando, in consolatorium omnium nostri, Libertatisque nostrae
Spiritualis stabilimentum, nostram restitutionem, conservationem, and securam
permansionem, ultimum jam clementissime determinare, sicque ulterioribus
querulationibus and lamentis nostris cohibitione praemissorum enormium Cleri
excessuum, and ardentissimis petitionibus nostris Caesareo-Regii intimi
Consilii sui dudum concupita quam propensissima Resolutione erga effectivam
Articularem satisfactionem fienda suum finem quam gratiosissime imponere, ac eo
ipso contestari actu, Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam Regem, Dominum, and
Patrem nostrum esse Clementissimum, benignissimum, and Misericordissimum,
adeoque nos magis amore Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae quam odio dignos esse.
Pro qua ergo nos depressos exserenda Gratia Regia, D. Opt. M. and Caesareo
Regium ejusdem Thronum, and Augustissimam Domum suam Austriacam omnigenarum
felicitatum ubertate, cumulatissimaque benedictione affluenter beabit.
Clementissimam praestolantes Resolutionem

Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Humillimi, perpetuoque fideles Subditi
Superiorum and Inferiorum Regni Hungariae Partium, Comitatuum, Regiarum, and
Montanarum Civitatum, Oppidorum, Confiniorum, and Pagorum Universi Evangelici.
Exhib. die 28 Men's. Aug. 1690. Viennae in personali audientia.

Monsieur,
LE vingtieme du mois pass arriva icy devant la ville une Tartane de
Marseille, avec des Lettres expressement depechees de la part de la Cour de
France pour l'Ambassadeur d'icelle, qui reside icy. Le dit Ambassadeur fit un
peu apres scavoir au Caimacam Pascia, que l'armee Royalle sons la conduite du
Duc de Luxembourg avoir touta fait battu l'arme des Etats des Provinces Unies,
avec la perte de tout leur bagage, artillery, and ammunition de guerre: Combien
qu'elle fut un peu au paravant renforcee de vingt mill Alemans: Et que la
Flotte Froncoise, apres avoir cherchee and trouvee l'es Flottes des Anglois and
Hollandois combinees dans le Canal, les avoit attaquees and mises en fuitte,
avec la perte de vingt vaisseaux de guerre, pris ou ruinez. Il y adjouta encor
beaucoup des autres nouvelles inventees, receues de Allemagne, Angleterre,
Ecosse, Irlande, and Savoye: Les quelles furent debitees enter la populace avec
une tell vray semblance, que la pluspart les creurent etre absolument
veritables.

En suitte de cela demanda le dit Ambassadeur la permission de fair
publiquement des feux de joye: and la commodite de la posse pour un
gentilhomme, qu'il disoit etre expressement envoye du Roy son Maitre; pour
communiquer ces nouvelles au Grand Vizir. On luy accorda l'un secrettement, and
l'autre ouvertement: and parce que je n'avois receu le moindre avis de tout
cela, ny de l'etat des autres affairs de la Chretiente, je ne pouvois rien
far contre le debite de ces nouvelles. Mais cette joye ne dura pas longtems;
mais seulement jusques au 22. quand il arriva icy un express du Grand Vizir:
and peu apres le Caimacam Padiscia me fit tenir deux de vos Lettres tres
civiles du 4 and 6 du mois pass d'Aout, bien Seellees and conditionnees, avec
les Lettres des Messieurs les Etats Generaux, and des autres. Par cellescy
j'appris la conquete absolve d'Irlande, and la treraitte du Roy Jaques en
France. Je ne doubt pas, si le Roy Guillaume pourroit encor cette etee employer
ses forces contre la France, que cette campaign se termineroit heuresement pour
les Alliez.

Les Batailles ont ete assez rudes and difficiles: Mais puisque le Prince de
Waldecq a remise l'armee des Etats en meilleur etat le 24 de Juillet, qu'elle
ne fut devant la bataille, and qu'il meme en a done avis aux Etats, qu'il
vouloit le 27 chercher l'ennemy, and luy livrer bataille de nouveau: and, que
les Flottes d' Angleterre and d' Hollande sont en etat de se remettre bien tot
en mer, j'espere, que nous en aurons en peu de tems des bonnes nouvelles, comme
aussi des armees des Alliez, principalement de cella de Savoye, que je croy and
considere comme la principalle.

Je suis en cela du meme sentiment, que V* Excel. que la France succombera tot
ou tard, qu'elle se remue, tant qu'elle veuille; and principalement, quand
toutes les Forces d'Angleterre se jetteront sur elle. J'ay fait une ouverture
de tout cela, and de tout ce, qui me parut etre utile aux nos affairs, au
Grand Vizier: and je l'ay exhort dienvoyer plein pouvoir aux Ministres de la
Port, qui sont a Comarom, de traitter and conclurre la Paix, ou la trefue,
avec les Imperiaux: En quel ces je l'assurois, que V. Exc. and l'Envoyed'
Angleterre diregeroient selon les ordres du Roy and des Etats l'affaire de
tell sort, que cette guerre si sanglante seroit bien tot houreusement
terminee d'une on d'autre maniere, avec satisfaction and au contentement des
Parties. J'adjoutois encor a tout cela la feiblesse de la France, and le grand
peril, que ce Roya-Court: and j'ay luy remontre de nouveau, and assure, que le
Roy, pour eviter sa totale ruin, solicit continuellement sous main le Pape
and la Republique de Venise, pour obtenir la Paix par leur intercession: and
par Consequence, qu'il soit tems, que les principaux Ministres de la Port
ouvrent enfin les yeux, and que se ressouvenans de la perfidie des Francois
tant de fois eprouvee contre tous les contracts faits avec la Port, ils ayent
enfin une horreur de cette nation perfide and trompeuse, qui ne cherche rien
d'autre chose, que son prope interet, and qui ne se soncie point des plaintes
des leurs Alliez, formees sur le dementy de leur parole, honneur, and sermens,
quand elle peut Seulement parvenir au bout de leur desseins. J'ay aussi done
avis au grand Vizir de la restitution and du renforcement des Armees des Etats
par terre, and par mer: and l'ay parfaitement inform del etat des Armees des
Alliez sur le Rhin, and la Meuse, dans le Pays Bas, la Savoye, Catalogue, and
le Milanois, and principalement de la victoire remportee en Irlande. J'ay
envoye cette lettre par post au Camp des tures: and j'en attens la reponce
avaunt encor que je ferme celle cy, afin de la communiquer a V. Excel.

Le Caimacam Pascia me demanda, aux quelles conditions je croiois qu'on
pourroit fair unc Paix: Sur cela je luy remontray le vray interet de son
Maitre, and dis, que j'attois d'opinion, qu'on feroit la treve a cette
condition, que chacun retiendroit, ce, qu'il possede. Ce Caimacam est assez
port pour la paix, mais il depend tout du Grand Vizir: C'est pourquoy qu'il
faudra attendre sa reponce sur ma derniere, pour scavoir sa resolution la
dessus. Mais je ne m'imagine pas, que cette cour fera quelque chose dans cette
affair ay, devant que la Campaign sera finie; parce que les trouppes des
Imperiaux dans ces quartiers la sont si peu considerables, and celles des Turcs
fort nombreuses, d'autant plus, que le Grand Vizir ait desia mis le Siege avec
son Armee de vant Nizze, and que le Tokely joint avec les Turcqs ait fait une
invasion dans la Transylvanie avec une terrible Massacre des Trouppes
Imperiales, and la prise de leur General Heisler, du Marquis Doria, and du
Comte Magni, avec beaucoup des autres Officiers: Joignez-y la prise de Widin.
Tout cela causera un tres grand changement dans les traittez de Paix, and dans
les affairs. On a au commencement traitte cette Nation, comme tout a fait
abatue, and vaincue: Jusques a ce, qu'on osoit pretendre d'elle le tribut: Ce
qu'irrita les Turcs de tell sort, qu'etans au desespoir ils se sont portez a
une vigoureuse defense: and on aura a fair de les remettre a la raison, si la
Campaign se termine pour eux si heureusement, comme elle et commencee.
Connoissant donc, combien il importe au Roy d' Angleterre and aux Etats, que
cette guerre soit finie, je ne laisseray pas d'avertir V. Excel. de tems en
tems de tout ce, que s'y pass.

Le 25 du mois pass, quand toutes les preparations etoient faittes par
l'Ambassadeur de Francoise pour les rejouissances publiques, le Caimacam, etant
mieux inform, fit defense aux Musiciens de s'en aller au palais du dit
Ambassadeur: and ainsi disparut toute cette joye Francoise; de sort qu'on
alluma seulement quelques centaines des lamps, and qu'ondechargea trosfois
quelques pierriers retirez des barques Francoises, mis dans la basiecourt du
dit hotel. Cette Ceremony se finit a huit heures du soir: and le jour suivant
l'Ambassadeur fit oter tout cet appareil a l'instance Serieuse du Caimacam:
Mais il ne peut pas digerer cela, sans en montrer son mecontentement, and
chagrin.

A Pera di Constantinopoli, ce 14 de Sept. 1690.

AYANT acheve calle-cy jusques la, and destitue d'unc occasion favorable de
l'envoyer a V. Excel. je receus le 29 par mon dragoman, qui revenoit du
Campement Turcq une Lettre du Grand Chancelier de cett' Empire. Il in ecrit,
que le Premier Vizir avoit receu ma Lettre avec les Relations, qui y etolent
jointes, du 25 d' Aout, and qu'il l'avoit leave avec beaucoup de plaisir and
satisfaction, sans s'expliquer d'avantage: Mais il y adjoute seulement, que le
Grand Vizir me pry de luy fair ce plaisir de l'informer doresenavant de tems
en tems de tout ce, qui se passera dans la Chretiente. Cette reponce me fait
juger (sauf un meilleur jugement) que le Grand Vizir attendra jusques a la fin
de cette Campaign, and qu'il prendra ses mesures, selon le succes de ses
entreprises, and de celles des Armees des Alliez: and qu' apres il formera la
dessus ses resolutions de fair la Paix, ou de continuer la guerre.

Le 9 Sept. se rendit la ville de Nizza par accord au Grand Vizir: and le 16.
l'Armee decampa and marcha verse Semendria. On m'a averty, que le Grand Vizir
voyant le miserable etat des Trouppes Imperialles qui se trouvent sur les
frontieres, etoit de resolution d'attaquer Belgrado. V. Excel. jugera
aisement, ayant connoissance parfaitte de l'humeur and naturel des Turcqs,
combiens les affairs se changeront par ces heureus succes. Je feray neanmoins
tout mon possible de disposer le Grand Vizir a embrasser la Paix, aussitot
qu'il Sera de retour dans les Quartiers d'hyver. Mais j'ay besoin pour cela des
nouvelles instructions. Quelque avantage remporte sur les Francois
contribueroit beaucoup pour mettre cette Nation a raison. Si cela se peut
fair, il sera tresutile, que V. Excel. m'avertisse de mois en mois par la
voye d'Hongrie de tout ce, qui se pass dans la Chretiente, envoyant la
duplique par Venise. Quand les Trouppes Turcques seront dans leurs Quartiers
d'hyver, j'espere, que j'auray la Commodite d'entretenir cette correspondance
avec V. Excel. par la voije de la Valachie. Je demeure, etc.

De V. Excellence le Treshumble Serve. COLYER.
A Pera di Constable. ce 3 d'Octob. 1690.
Voicy une Lettre, qui m'est envoyee du Camp Tureq: Dans la quelle V. Excel.
trouvera beaucoup des particularitez.

Sacratissima Caesarea Regiaque Majestas, Domine Domine Clementissime.
Augustissime Imperator,
CUM gravissimo satis Cordolio necessitor Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae
humillime detegere, quomodo and qualiter afflictissimum Hungariae Regnum in
ultima sua gemat calamitate, ubi jam a viginti and amplius annis haec miserrima
patria tot bellorum motibus adeo exhausta; and desolata, and conquassata est;
ut, si singula notarentur, in eorundem enumeratione non horae, aut dies, verum
anni cum magnorum voluminum conscriptione requirerentur: Jam ex infinitis Regni
hujus calamitatibus solummodo haec pauca subnecto: Quod, postquam Anno 1683.
ante Septennium evoluto Christiani nominis hostis Turca totam Hungariam
exceptis aliquot arcibus in fidelitate Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
persistentibus sui juris fecisset, ac ipsam Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
residentiam, urbem inquam Viennam, obsedisset, explicari non potest, quot
millia animarum in Comitatibus Mosoniensi, Soproniensi, Jaurinensi,
Veszprimiensi, Comaroniensi trucidaverit, aut in diram abduxerit captivitatem.
Oppida and pagos centenos incineravit; Arces, castella, curias igne consumpsit;
verbo; milliones damnorum fecit. Quibus peractis, cum Do adjuvante, victricibus
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae ac aliorum Principum Christianorum armis idem
hostis a Vienna repulsus fuisset, quaenam damna amicus quoque exercitus
Hungariae intulerit, nemo etiam disertissimus satis describere valebit. Nam
plurimi pagi totaliter incinerati; incolae omnibus bonis spoliati ac trucidati
sunt: and quod acerbius fuit, illi iidem, qui propter fidelitatem a Turcis in
nihilum quasi redacti fuere, ad solvendas tamen contributiones, and sustinenda
hyberna quarteria adacti sunt: Quum tamen vicinae Austriae similiter ruinatae
ad aliquot annos exemptio data sit: Quo beneficio Hungariae partibus a Turca
observatam fidelitatem totaliter incineratis praeter unicum Mosoniensem
Comitatum frui non licuit, sed ad instar aliorum contribuere debuerunt, prout
hoc in toto illo tractu supra Sopronium sito factum est. His accessit fames
horribilis, ubi comprobari potest, homines fame enectos a Sociis inaudito
hactenus exemplo devoratos fuisse. Post haec secuta est immensarum portionum
solutio: Ubi solvi etiam debebat pro iis, qui numquam in rerum natura fuerunt:
Quae in tantum excrevit, ut postquam omnem suam substantiam miseri incolae
proportionibus solvissent, filios suos, and filias Turcis vendere coacti sint,
ut ab exsecutione militari se liberarent: Qui omnes ad Othomannicam perfidiam
transiere. Sed cum nec hoc sufficeret, tandem afflictissimi subditi charas
conjuges suas and filias militibus ad illas violandas praebuerunt, and
vendiderunt, ut saltem aliquod liceret eisdem habere respirium. Hinc adulteria,
stupra, virginum violationes, innumerabiles sunt consecutae. Sed nec his
contenti fuere portionum Exactores, cum summa praetensa omnes incolarum vires
and facultates superaret. Itaque ad extrema remedia conversi deplorandi incolae
foetum quoque in utero materno existentem taxarunt: Sed and animalia
praegnantia taxata fuere ad solvendas contributiones: Quod in Comitatibus Pest,
Pilis, and Solz contigisse ipsimet exactores fassi sunt. Super haec non pauci,
dum hanc nimiam contributionem solvere non possent, prae desperatione laqueo
vitam finiverunt: Alii occisis prius prolibus ac uxore sibimet mortem
intulerunt violentam: Qui casus in Comitatu Trenchiniensi, ac in Superiore
Hungaria contigit. Praeterea millenae animae, non valentes tam immensum jugum
supportare, ad alias regiones transmigrarunt, vacuam and desertam relinquentes
patriam: Ob quae super alios innocents facta est executio militaris. Miles
itidem nullam servat disciplinam militarem, sed omnia libere agit, totum Regnum
depilando, and devastando. Cum vero per aliquam regni partem transit, non
aliter ac cum hostibus agit; and ubi currus, aut equos pro vectura sufficientes
habere non potest, nobiles and rusticos onerat, velut jumenta: Sicque eos
horribiliter verberando ad onera portanda propellit: Quod factum est in
Comitatibus Soproniensi and Castriferrei. Et passim in aliis innumerabiles
pagos combussit, nobiles personas vulneravit: Etiam non paucos occidit: Prout
hoc cum duobus innocentibus Nobilibus Scholaribus Tyrnaviae accidit. De quibus
Caesibus etsi saepius querela apud eos, ad quos pertinebat, exposita fuerit,
nulla tamen data est desuper satisfactio: Quin potius tales querulantes novis
afficiebantur injuriis: Adeo, ut justitiam prorsus exulasse nemo non videat.
His accedit, quod Commendantes locorum occupatorum long lateque in circuitu
and districtu illo imperitant, and miseros subditos sibi contribuere cogunt.
Item Administratores Camerales ad vecturas, gratuitos labores, Contributiones,
aliasque infinitas exactiones pendendas cum executione militari super omnes
portionum solutiones afflictam plebem impellunt, talique pacto incolas ad
ultimam adigunt desperationem. Et sane haec inaudita contributio ad tantam
excrevit summam, ut ab Ann. 1683. usque ad hunc 1690, triginta Millione*
^^perat data solutio, praeter Transsylvaniam and Conquista. Super haec autem
quanti constent militum excessus, solus ille scire potest, ante cujus
conspectum nihil occulti est: Parts quoque antea Turcis dedititiae unto ore
fatentur, se intra hos septem annos Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae, plus
debuisse solvere, quam centum annis immani Christiani nominis hosti Turcae.
Quinimo a quo Hungaria stat in fide Christiana, tanta onera, quanta modo,
numquam supportare coacta fuit. Et quod plane mirandum est, respectu vicinarum
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae Provinciarum nulla proportio servatur: Verum
Hungaria, quae alias etiam seeds belli est, majoribus oneratur
contributionibus. Unde apparet ex praemissis, quasi intentio sit, ut Hungaria
sit hominibus penitus vacua, ac ferarum habitaculum; quae tamen a tribus and
amplius seculis pro defensione reliquae Christianitatis suum fudit Sanguinem;
ac generose contra Turcas dimicando vicina regna Christiana protexit. Hinc quid
amplius faciant miseri incolae, qui jam ultimum sanguinem suum cum tota
substantia dederunt? Non habent, quod contribuant. Itaque efflagitant respirium
aliquod, ut saltem vivere illis cum uxoribus ac prolibus liceat, and possint
post tam insupportabile jugum ad aliquam pervenire requiem; cum alias etiam vix
ulla detur in orb natio* quae talia cogitur supportare onera.

Nihilominus etsi totaliter ruinati sunt miseri patriotae, videntes tamen
hostium Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae accessionem, ecce parati erunt arma
capere, and cum exercitu Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae se conjungere, ac in
hostem proficisci. Unde spero, quod sex millia hominum, equitum videlicet and
peditum ex part regnicolarum prodibunt, si Majestas vestra Sacratissima
futuram hanc hybernarum portionum solutionem ipsis clementissime relaxare, and
in hanc militis conductionem, and intertentionem commutare dignabitur: Quibus
si adjungantur milites confiniarii, facile december millia virorum efficere
poterunt: Qui omnes utile sane servitium praestabunt, and ad modum ac normam
Regiminum ordinari, and hac hyeme exerceri deberent: Essentque december formalia
Regimina, quinque equitum, and quinque peditum, qui in Hungaria ad liberam
Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae dispositionem applicari possent. Neque vero
iisdem diffidendum est: Ipsi enim hactenus quoque in debita fidelitate
perstiterunt tam diu, quam diu immanis Turca non totam occupavit Hungariam: Ubi
resistere nemo potuit; cum and arma quoque Majestatis Vestrae Caesareae
recesserint. Augustissime Imperator, existimo hoc servitium spontaneum
afflictissimorum regnicolarum pro servitio Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae
utilius fore, quam portionum solutionem; quae utinam non ad ultimam
desperationem adigat patriotas miseros: Unde si Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae
benign placuerit haec modalitas, oportet, ut intra breve tempus cognoscam
clementissimum Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae assensum; and tum dispositionem
quoque facere possim super contribuendis militibus: De cujus modalitate
Majestatem vestram Sacratissimam etiam, hic Viennae humillime informare non
intermittam. Et sane, Augustissime Imperator, cum necessario miles Germanicus
in Hungariam migrare pro hac hyeme debeat, miles Hungaricus hac condition
offertur, ut praelibatus miles Germanicus proprio vivat sumptu, tam in
transitu, quam in quartirio: and non onerentur loca non cincta actuali
quartirio, cum sint alias etiam sufficientissima and capacissima loca, in
quibus magna Armata potest optime collocari: Quae etiam, si Majestas vestra
Sacratissima clementissime mandaverit, paratus sum in aliqua conferentia
proximis diebus instituenda demonstrare; humillime iterum atque iterum
supplicando, Majestas vestra Sacratissima dignetur ex innata Caesarea Regiaque
Clementia sua Nationem Hungaricam, eidemque annexos incolas paterno affectu suo
prosequi, and humillimos suos subditos sublevando benignissime consolari. Pro
qua Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae, gratia Deus Opit. Max. longaevum ac
felicissimum concedat Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae ejusdemque Augustae
domui, Regimen: Haec erant, quae Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae velut Regni
Palatinus summa cum demissione repraesentare volui. Viennae 7 Novembr. Ann.
1690.

Sacr. Caesar. Regiaeque Majestati vestrae Humillimus perpetuoque fidelis
Servus PAULUS ESZTERHASY.


Deus Benedicat.
EX querela Commissionis Caesareae suae Majestatis been animadverti, quasi vero
ego essem caussa, quod vestri Praedicantes coram Commissione Caesarea non
compareant. Eo facto volebat emittere ad vos ducentos milites Musquetarios: Sed
institi pro dilatione exmissionis illorum, dicens: Quod ex vestris hominibus
percepi vos injunxisse Vestris Praedicantibus, aut coram Commissione suae
Majestatis compareant, aut vero nolentes abscedant. Quae vestra obsequiatis
accommodatio valde fuit ad placitum Commissionis Caesareae: Vosque adhortatur
serio modo inclusarum, sub poena damni maximi pagis meis infligendi ad
parendum, damnumque evitandum. Quocirca ne mandatum Commissionis Caesareae suae
Majestatis ego quoque contemptim negligere insimuler, eadem a Commissione
Caesarea vobis indicta impono peragenda, sub mulcta ducentorum thalerorum; and
in omnibus ita pareatis, ut damna vobis insequentia praecaveatis: Quae si
intervenerint, non nostra sed vestra culpa factum esse putetis. Deus vobiscum.

Quinque Ecclesiis die 15 Febr. An. 1690. Dominus vester terrestris Franciscus
Jani Abbas Pecsvaradiensis.
P. S. Relationem a vobis de acceptis his meis Literis eo facto expectabo,
excusaturus me coram Commissione suae Majestatis, nullamque propter vos
jacturam passurus.



Literae, Veresmarthiensibus, Ciuzaiensibus, Sepsciensibus, and Karaneziensibus
incolis transmissae.
Exemplum literarum Domini Referendarii Regni Szezuka ad Residentem Caesareum
Szymoinsky.
LITERAE Illustriss. Dominationis vestrae tam Sacrae Regiae Majestati Domino
meo Clementissimo, quam mihi, redditae sunt per Cursorem circiter vel ultra
octiduum. Post quas siquidem promissum Dominationis vestrae Illustriss.
adventum subsecuturum indies sperabam, commendatum ab ipso negotium
differebatur ad praesentiam ejusdem.

Dum vero rursus de 6 Febr. gratissimas Illustriss. Dominationis vestrae
accipio, communicavi easdem quam primum Sacrae Regiae Majestati Domino meo
Clementissimo. Cujus mentem and studia erga Augustissimum, prout semper, ita
etiam and nunc ardentissimis affectibus exuberare cognovi, licet non absque
summo angore animi hucusque hic detineatur, ob nullam resolutionem Neoburgo ad
hoc ipsum momentum, nec sciat, quomodo ulterius rebus suis and dispositionibus
insistere debeat. Si enim quamcunque Neoburgo categoricam accepisset notitiam,
jam non modo in itinere, sed Varsaviae pridem fuisset. Accedit ad ejusdem
Sacrae Regiae Majestatis gravissimam molestiam, quod ne Vienna quidem hucusque
ullam firmitudinem habeat de quantitate jungendarum quomodo and qualiter
copiarum, Augustissimi cum suis pro futura belli expeditione, qua jam vix unico
a nobis mense distare videtur.

Sed nec in Moscoviam pridem destinari promissus hucusque comparet Ablegatus,
de cujus adventu Sacra Regia Majestas jam dudum certa proprium etiam Aulicum
ablegare jam designaverat. Interim in Moscovia continuus aliquis percrebescit
rumor suspiciones vel timores hostium ciens. Vel si hoc deesset periculum,
donec perveniat desideratus Ablegatus, donec aliquid suasum effecerit, Vernum
tempus transibit, adeoque illa auxilia vel nulla, vel post bellum.

Legati etiam a Palatino Moldaviae illuc pervenisse certo dicuntur cum
conditionibus Pacis a Porta proponendis. Quae omnia dum Sacra Regia Majestas
Dominus meus Clementissim. Illustriss. Dominationi vestrae exposita esse
voluit, desiderare videtur, ut tamquam optimus Minister publicae Communis, ac
Reipubl. Christianae felicitatis percupidus, Augustissimo Imperatori ita
repraesentare velit, quomodo expeditior rerum omnium, ac negotii futurae
bellicae expeditionis fieri valeat determinatio.

Quantum spectat propositum negotium respectu Conditionum Pacis cum Porta per
Angliae and Hollandiae Ablegatos communicandarum, jam id Sacram Regiam
Majestatem Dominum meum Clementissimum ante quatuor forte septimanas
praestitisse, punctaque earum Conditionum in Manus Domini Ablegati, Residentis
sui, transmisisse, necessum est constare Illustriss. Dominationi vestrae, aegre
licet in id ipsum consentiente Senatu Leopoli pro tribunali Thesauri Regni
assidente, ob eam vel maxim rationem, quod per Ministros externos, nec ullum
commercium in dicto negotio nobiscum habentes, res devolvatur.

Effecit tamen Sacra Regia Majestas Dominus meus Clementissimus quo sine mora
praedictae Conditiones, quarum hic annecto copiam, Viennam mitterentur, ut re
ipsa exhiberet, quantum etiam in arduis voluntati Augustissimi obsecundare
contendat: Cui quod me commendandum promittat, intra fortunam vitae reputabo,
si saltem nomine tenus innotuisse Augustissimae Majestati Domino Clementissimo
licuerit: Qui etiam mortibus duorum fratrum meorum patruelium ad Belgradum
redimere annixus sum memoriam mei. Quod reliquum est, obsequia mea
Illustrissimae Dominationi vestrae plurimum commendo, mansurus semper, etc.

Zolkiewiae, d. xiii. Febr. Anno 1691.
Conditiones ad Tractatum Pacis cum Fulgida Porta Othomannica ex part
Sereniss. Regis and Reip. Poloniae Constantinop. designandae.
I. TRACTATUS omnis and praetextus quocunque modo per Fulgidam Portam
acquisitus ad Podoliam and Ukrainam, uti avitas and haereditarias Regni
Poloniae Provincias, ac recenter armis recuperatas, in perpetuum aboleatur,
praesidiumque Turcicum ex fortalitio Camenecensi abducatur, cum integra ejusdem
fortalitii ac rei tormentariae ibidem existentis in manus Polonorum traditione.

II. Moldavia, quae jam magna ex part a Sacr. Reg. Majest. Poloniae occupata,
and Valachia, quae utraque olim Provincia Serenissimorum Regum Poloniae
tributaria erat, juri and possessioni Seren. Reg. Majest. Poloniae
relinquantur, una cum omnibus istis ditionibus, quas Budziacenses and
Bialogrodenses Tartari incolunt: Ita ut limes sit Fluvius Danubius.

III. Hanus and Tartari Crimenses, uti causatores omnium bellorum, and
damnorum, per Fulgidam Portam ab excursionibus and inferendis damnis
contineantur, and cohibeantur: Ita ut, quoties illata fuerint, Fulgida Porta
eadem etiam refundat.

IV. Damna bellorum, and tot provinciae desolatae, ac in cineres redactae,
justo and aequo valor compensentur.

V. Cozacis universaliter omnibus tam Ukrainensibus, quam Zaporosiensibus,
nullo umquam praetextu, Porta Othomannica direct vel indirecte rebellionis
fautoratum, aut protectionem praebebit.

VI. Borysthenes Fluvius munitionibus and praesidiis Turcicis, tam
vetustioribus, quam recentioribus, expurgetur, and evacuetur.

APPENDIX.
Conditiones ex part Czarorum Moscoviae circa tractatum a Serenissimis
Colligatis proponendae, ut locum suum habeant, and a Fulgida Porta acceptentur.

Sacratissima Caesarea Regiaque Majestas, Domine Domine nobis naturaliter
Clementissime.
DEMISSE repraesentare cogimur Majestati vestrae Sacratissimae quod quamvis
Majestas vestra Sacratissima tempore gloriosae Inaugurationis and Coronationis
Neo-Regis nostri Josephi, in Comitiis Posoniensibus, inclytis Statibus and
Ordinibus Regni Hungariae hoc ipsum proponi curaverit: Quod videlicet bona
Neo-acquisita, ac victricibus armis e faucibus gentis Othomannicae gloriose
erepta, eripiendaque, denuo Regno huic Hungariae benign incorporare, iisdemque
legibus, and non novis gubernare, in suis immunitatibus and libertatibus
conservare vellet, ac niteretur: Ac insuper Articulos quoque Sopronienses super
Religionis exercitio conditos 25 and 26 in iisdem Comitiis gratiose
confirmasset: In quibus Templa omnia, in quorum tempore conditionis eorundem
Articulorum actuali possessione status Evangelicus extitit, una cum Parochiis
and Scholis, ac earundem proventibus, prae manibus eorundem relinqui ac
permanere gratiose resolvisset, and quod imposterum nullae Templorum,
Scholarum, and Parochiarum Occupationes, vel exercitii turbationes fiant, in
hoc Regno Hungariae, sub poena ibidem expressa, severe inhibuisset: Nihilominus
tamen postpositis istis and postergatis omnibus, Reverendissimi Domini Matthias
Radonai, Episcopus quinque Ecclesiensis, and Franciscus Jani, Abbas
Peczvaradiensis, qui in partibus nostris in superiori and Inferiori videlicet
Barovia, circa quinque Ecclesias, e faucibus immanissimi hostis Ottomannici
victricibus armis vestrae Majestatis gloriose ereptis, non ut liberum
Religionis exercitium imperturbatum relinquerent, quin imo diversis
modalitatibus and viis, quoslibet excessus in praejudicium praefatorum
Articulorum ac verbi Regii licenter and pro placito attentarent. Cum enim,
Augustissima Imperatoriaque Majestas, iidem praefati Domini Clerici, non, ut
men's and intentio vestrae Majestatis esset, Regnum in statum priorem e desolato
reducere intenderent; quin imo in eo quoque, quo nunc esset, omni studio
evertere and desolare, miserrimos partium nostrarum incolas bonis and avitis
possessionibus privare, and si eorundem intentionem assequi nollent, omnes post
Turcas relegare non vererentur: Imo ex eo, quod confiteri noluissent, variis
excogitatis sub praetextibus incaptivarunt, nonnullis in formam crucis defixis
and alligatis hostia ori vi intrusa fuit, plenaeque possessiones integrae
expilantur, ut haec manifesta violentiae exempla in Civibus Varkoniensibus,
Joanne nimirum and Andrea Czoma, plusquam mill talleras imperiales valenti
possessione ob caussam Religionis despoliatis, satis superque edocent. Ac
insuper ut haec talia conamina praedictorum D. D. Clericorum perseque felicius
possent, Commissarium vestrae Majestatis Sacratissimae ad parts
Neo-recuperatas exmissum, Illustrissimum videlicet Tullium Miglionem* extra
sphaeram suae instructionis, nescitur quibus exquisitis mediis, pro fautore
sibi adsciscendo, qui denique certos Praedicantes, ut Nadasdiensem and
Manjokiensem, aliosque cives and incolas partium nostrarum, variis ac variis
sigillo suo munitis Commissionibus citatos, eosdemque de libero itu and reditu
assecuratos, iisdem D. D. Praelatis inauditis processibus vexandos tradidit,
pro uti haec omnia ex unis literarum citatoriarum paribus ejusdem D. Tullii
Miglionis sub dato 14 Februar. emanatis, literaque A notatis, ac literis
praetitulati D. Abbatis, dieque sequenti praefati mensis editis, literaque B
signatis, and aliis Comminatoriis praedicti D. Commissarii, ex idiomate
Hungarico in Latinum genuine translatis 21 Febr. extractis, literaque C
signatis, nec non praefati D. Episcopi quinque Eccles. similiter in Latinum
transsumptis, quasi sui facti testimonialibus 2 Martii exaratis, literaque D
notatis, and huic supplici libello annexis, clarissime apparerent. Unde, proh
dolor! ista immanitas exiliit. Ubi ponit fundamentum haec nobis inflicta
crudelitas? Haec enim omnia Sanctae determinationi vestrae Majestatis
repugnarent, contraque benignam mentem and intentionem vestrae Majestatis
practicarentur: Quia pro lubitu in nos grassari, liberum nostrum Exercitium
interturbare, armorum strepitu, terriculamentis, aliisque exquisitis sub
coloribus opprimere nihil pensi ducerent, uti hoc iidem praefati D. Praelati,
ac praetitulatus D. Commissarius, cum associato Illustrissimo D. Gabriele
Veicsi, Commendante Szigetvariensi, qui adscitis hinc inde militibus miseros
Veresmarthienses, ex eo solum fundamento, quod antecedenter intentionem suam in
eorum excidium intendentem exsequi non permiserint, manu fere hostili
crudeliterve adoriendo, omnibus eorundem bonis primum expilatis, tandem iisdem
incolis quibusdam dispersis, aliis vero, quos ad manus habere poterant, captis,
inque diram captivitatem secum abducendo; Miserandum and horrendum nobis
omnibus dederunt exemplum. Cujus rei testis est praetitulatus D. Episcopus
quinque Eccles. in aliis literis Minatoriis in Latinum similiter transsumptis,
dieque 17 Martii datatis, literaque E signatis. Nam cum sub jugo turcico
gemebundi tot annorum decursu jacebamus, pacifico usu and liberate nostra
spirituali utebamur: Aequum esset eo magis, ut sub auspiciis alarm vestrae
Majestatis Sacratissimae tutam and imperturbatam ab omnibus vestrae Majestatis
subjectis habeamus. Quocirca ad pedes Augustissimos vestrae Majestatis
humillime provoluti per vulnera Christi oramus supplices, quatenus nobis
taliter oppressis, and fere in extremitatibus constitutis, Majestas vestra
Augustissima (in qua alioquin post Deum omnem spem and fiduciam liberationis
ponimus) pattern succurrere dignetur. Cum enim nostra libertas consistit vel
maxim in libero Religionis exercitio, quod etiam piae reminiscentiae Regum,
antequam fortuna novercante nostras provincias Turca hostis Christiani nominis
immanissimus suae ditioni adjecisset, ad hoc usque tempus permansit libero usu
intactum, juxta suum verbum regium sanctum, and irrevocabile, Articulis quoque
confirmatum, ne sinat nos taliter opprimi: Verum in sinum gratiae suae
receptos, contra quosvis illegitime and indigne impetitores defendere, ac
insuper literas protectionales benign elargiri non dedignetur, ut nos virtute
earundem liberum Religionis nostrae exercitium reassumere, reassumptum in tota
Superiori and Inferiori Barovia continuare possimus ac valeamus. Ac tum
praefatis Dominis Praelatis, quam etiam praedicto D. Commissario Caesareo (ita
and Commendanti Szigethiensi) decreto mediante clementer demandare, ut ab istis
persecutionibus verbo Regio contravenientibus supersederent. Ut tandem nos
clementem paternamque Invictissimae Imperatoriae vestrae Majestatis gratiam
experti eo alacriori animo obsequia Majestati vestrae praestanda exsequi
possimus. Quam Gratiam and Clementiam Majestatis vestrae Sacratissimae non
solum ardentibus ad Deum fundendis precibus, verum etiam perpetua fidelitatis
nostrae subjectione omni studio remereri contendemus gratiosam quantocitius
praestolaturi resolutionem,

Sacr. Caes. Regiaeque Majestatis vestrae Humillimi, perpetuoque fideles
Subditi Superioris and Inferioris Baroviae, Confiniorum, Oppidorum, and Pagorum
Cives Evangelicae Religioni addicti.
Exhib. die 16 April. 1690.
RATIONS,
PROPTER quas a Sacra vestra Caesarea Majestate per commissum mihi supremum
exercitus regimen immeritas Imperiales gratias, mihi ad agnoscendum traditas,
magno animi mei moerore, submississime deprecari coactus fuerim. Obligationi
sic tamen meae incumbat Sacra Caesarea Majestas vestra (quam semper
submississimo poplite venerari studui, and studebo) quam brevissime calculum in
Hungaria, Transylvania, Sclavonia, Servia, and Bulgaria, subsistentis militis,
omniumque necessariorum mediorum tam ad oppugnanda, quam defendenda confinia,
secundum exiguam artis ac Martis mei capacitatem, sine ullius rei notae
necessariae omissione, ut and genuinas rations, cur miles suae Sacrae
Caesareae Majestatis ita sit divisus, omnesque illorum, qui in acie cediderunt,
circumstantias, and defectum commeatuum, ac qualiter contra tam ingens inimici
agmen, ob nobis imminens periculum, distantes Provinciae ac Regiones sub suae
Sacrae Majestatis Caesareae protectione ultra proferri valiant, exponere, ac
declarare.

I. Igitur, nisi tractatus pacis aliquo temporis intervallo sepulti resumantur,
and Pax, quae mihi tamen ignota, a sua Sacra Caesarea Majestate intra breve
tempus concludatur, non concipio, qualiter Nissa and Widdinum, omnesque trans
Savum siti passus, sine speciali detrimento possunt defendi. Widdinum enim
locus distans, ac nullum nisi Nissa, and hinc adhuc difficillimum succursum
sperare potest, cum spatio unius diei penes Tinock, and illa ardua Starra
Planina arctus and plane impenetrabilis passus reperiatur, in quo inimicus
exiguo tantum milite nobis resistere potest, ita ut nominatum Widdin, quod tum
a nostro milite offensive agendo recuperatum ac munitum est, si hodie dum
intenderet offensive hostem aggredi, jam non solum illi omnis offensiva actio
foret prohibita, verum certam jacturam illius munitionis cum omnibus
praesidiariis intra breve temporis spatium experiremur, and hac quidem de
caussa: Nam etsi foret aliqua spes, aut resolutio lucrandi temporis, sciendum
tamen est, nullum effectum inde emanaturum, cum tunc Tartaris liberum foret
Valachiam irrumpere, and inde cum exercitu suo Danubium navibus sine ullo
impedimento transnavigare Ratio enim est, cum permagnum inde apud Widdin sitam
insulam Danubius ita dividatur, ut etiam cum maximis navibus sursum and deorsum
navigandi nullum obstet impedimentum, nec a praesidiariis videri possit tunc
oppugnari, ex his quoque plus metuenda jactura hujus munitionis, quamvis
effective ab host aggredi, and oppugnari non possit; tamen a concursu vulgi
ita includi, ut certo hunc fortificatum passum obtineat.

II. Nissam quoque secundum debilem capacitatem ingenii mei aliter ^efendi,
quam per ingentem exercitum posse, non invenio, cum secundum omnium opinionem
nullo alio modo defendi posse judicatum sit, nisi prius omnes passus ex
Macedonia and Bulgaria a nostro milite assecurentur, and a copioso, beneque
exercito milite occludantur, omnisque inimico in Bosniam and Serviam introitus
impediatur. In toto enim Nissensi districtu maximus defectus est graminis, quia
ille in nimia siccitate terrae fundatus est: Ita ut si hostis Procopiam
appropinquaret, ibi in omni securitate vivere posset, nec ullum ex suis
Provinciis, propter advehentes diversa ac necessaria vitae victualia defectum
sperandum haberet. Noster vero miles non solum ob similem defectum circa Nissam
subsistere non posset, verum etiam eidem timendum esset, omnia necessaria tam
per aquam, quam per terram adnavigantibus and advehentibus posse impediri, cum
tali casu ab hostili conflictu non solum navigatio Bulgariae, Moravae, and
impenetrabilis via circa Jagodinum and Nissam omnimode invaderetur, verumetiam
iis liberum esset, sive magnis, sive parvis turmis, trans viam, quae Crussa,
vel Cracolovetz ducit, sine omni impedimenti cura usque Belgradensem portam
accurrere. Multo minus etiam Bosniensibus, qui ad viginti millia exerciti
milites sunt, in nullo absoluto loco resisti possibile est, ne penes Servianum
Moravam, and illud tantum, tantoque labor recuperatum fortissimum Belgradum,
usque ad Danubium perveniant: and tandem ultimo, uti nec dubitari potest,
hostilis exercitus, sive parvus, sive magnus, se citra Danubium Fetislau
appropinquaret, uti per experientiam anno praeterito captam constat, quod etiam
vilissimis and exiguis turmis vel apud Possavaretz, vel in vicinia Ressava, per
Gulicheinae viam quidem laboriosam, curribusque periculo expositam, sine omni
etiam minimo impedimento Servianum Moravam invadere, and hunc fluvium denuo
totaliter inutilem and impracticabilem reddere possent (cui malo tamen
praecavendum) nosterque exercitus ob suas totaliter debilitatas vires tantum
tolerare non posset, ob tot'ac tam difficiles, laboriosasque vias, quas spero
sat clare me demonstrasse, quod tam debilis ac parvus exercitus Nissae
subsistens tam forti ac tam magnae hostili armadae non valeat resistere.

III. Jagodinae versabatur exiguus Caesareus miles, ibi stans, ex supradictis
rationibus in simili periculo, maxim cum augendo numerum militum Nissae a tam
paucis adhuc aliquid plus detrahere necessitas cogeret. Vereor itaque,
necogatur residuum, quod superest, usque ad inter tormenta, vel ob defectum
victualium trans Savum abducere.

IV. Quod si tamen sua Sacra Caesarea Majestas omnibus his sepositis
Clementissime annueret Nissam ad ultimam, etiam extremam necessitatem
oppugnanti hosti resistere, submississime peto veniam, vestrae Sacrae Caesareae
Majestatis informando, huic loco, etiamsi aliquis conflictus, aut exercitus
adesset, non posse succurri, cum per quandam, nempe viam Regiam, quae unica
hora Nissa, penes Montana and Bulgaricum Moravam semialterius horae arctissimus
passus formatus sit, ut nullatenus dubitari possit, quin hostis talem non
occupet, and ibi succursum nostris impediat. Locus enim iste, si per hunc
tempus lucrari quaeramus, minimum septem, vel octo millibus, cum omnibus
circumstantiis, ac omnibus necessariis, praemuniatur necesse est, and omnis
defectus fortificationis, si quis aderit, pugnando compleatur. Ita tamen hoc
stante, illa militia tanquam ad victimam ducenda sit, and quid inde emolumenti
eruendum, omnium expertorum, imo sapientissimo vestrae Sacrae Caesareae
Majestatis judicio committo, quidque per tot ponderosas informationes agendum
videbitur.

V. Quod si tamen supra relevantia motiva in tam periculoso statu pro
securioribus consiliis locum obtinuerint, ex supradictis causis (quod tamen vix
possibile amplius erit, jamjam appropinquato inimico) Nissa and Widdinum cum
toto situ a Servia penes Danubium and Savum retineri non possint, cum tamen ad
divertendum a Savo hostem, and defendendum Belgrad exiguus hic miles vix
sufficiat. Nam licet Belgradum aliquo tempore aucto populo se possit defendere,
tamen propter defectum succursus, qui ex part terrae comparere nequiret, in
Danubio per eundem suis navibus repelleretur, ab eodem facile recuperari valet:
and hinc non immerito timendum, quod per similem defensionem noster exercitus
minuatur, hostique nullo modo valeat resistere: Imo etiam, ut nullo modo
dubitandum, finita aliqua rigorosa defensione forte totam Sclavoniam deserere,
consequenter, cum nullus passus praeterea reperibilis sit, usque ad Dravum, vel
adhuc ulterius recedere cogamur.

VI. Quod si tamen Belgradum non actualiter oppugnaretur, infallibiliter tamen
Albanenses and Bosnenses uno forti Turcico agmine confortabuntur in illo
districtu, qui partim penes Savi passus subsistentem solidum exercitum occupare
valenti talis ut impediatur, pariter magnus exercitus ex nostra part
desiderabitur tali resistendi.

VII. His and similibus aliis nisi Deus immediate concurrerit, naturaliter
aliter credendum non est, quam quod inimicus aliquo conflictu sui totius
exercitus, conjunctis Tartaris, Valachis, and Moldensibus, simul per aquam and
terram Transylvaniam invadet, illamque Provinciam lucrari tentaturus penes
Danubium jacentem: Cui qualiter resistendum sit, non video, ubi miles
sufficiens, sufficienterque instructus, in his partibus inveniendus sit: Maxim
cum illi male contenti populi maximis gaudiis exultent, sise secundatos, aut
aliunde sibi alios cognationales faventes reperiant. Illudque nobis etiam non
parvum obstaculum est, quod certanti militi penes Danubium alteri parti nullum
auxilium communicationis ergo, tali tempore sum necessariae, talique periculo
difficillimae, adferendum erit. Tum nec domus annonae, nec alia necessaria in
loco sint: Ita ut ipsa natura dictet, haec confinia, nempe Transylvaniam, and
Hungariam Superiorem, omniaque ab his dependentia, in summo periculo versatura,
nisi Deus nos sua speciali gratia erexerit.

VIII. Hungarica enim militia hujus usus and naturae est, ut quamvis in aciem
ordinata sit, non compareat, maxim, si long a suis domibus in alienam
Provinciam commendetur, partim quod jam longo tempore nullam solutionem
acceperit, partim cum homines nauci and indisciplinati aestimandi sint. Nec
consultum est, istam copiosam ac barbaram gentem nostro parvo ac debili
exercitui aggregare. Si enim, quod Numen evertat, unicus infelix conflictus
nobis acciderit, nullum dubium, illam barbaram gentem contra nos arma in ipso
aggressu apprehensuram.

IX. Praesidia locorum, quae numero quam brevissimo sunt exposita, diminui vix
poterunt. Acque eodem modo timendum, ne apud tam paucum ac debilem exercitum
pro conservanda Provincia sum necessarium infelix casus contingat. Si enim
populus ab ipsismet incolis facile superari potest, ob plurimas ac gravissimas
distractiones tali non foret succurrendo: Sed summum detrimentum sentiremus:
and ita tam totam Hungariam, quam Transylvaniam, in summam, and quidem prima
pejorem rebellionem and tumultus, quos quotidie ejulat and suspirat, excidere
perciperemus.

X. Si tamen secundum adjacentes extractus sum necessarii exercitus formandi
sint, qualiter sine maximo periculo jam supra adducta absurda devenire nihil
contrarietur, and e contra effective status mihi ab Consilio bellico
transmissae listae examen observatum fuerit, deductis deducendis numerus
remanet, ut pluris alicui conflictui, quam pleno exercitui adnumerandus sit, ac
impossible tam late pa^entem lineam tam potentis hostis vincere, aut impedire,
ne illi in uno aliove loco pariter in hac part Danubii, quam altera,
infringat, aut unam, alteramve provinciam devastet.

XI. Et quamvis dicatur, quod successive decessus regiminum per noviter electum
militem suppleatur, and compleatur, considerandum tamen est, quod non solum
complendus numerus illorum inter quaedam regimina vix inceperit, partim quod
nec sibi debitam solutionem acceperint; ita tamen, quod si feliciter Belgradum
adduci deberent, sex aut septem Mensibus, ut migrent ex Provinciis
haereditariis necesse habent, and ita demum ad finem campi bellici; and cum
difficultate adhuc vix prosunt: and ita sine omni utilitate de his loquendum.
Nec loci situs his poterit demonstrari; tacendum, ut tandem defessus miles tot
tantisque curis and vigiliis, portansque contra inimicum, etiamsi non in
tantas, certe in plures nauseas devenire posset.

XII. Victualibus pro necessitate Nissae aliquot mensibus provisum esse
constat: Quae autem utilitati exercitus parum prosunt, aut in absentia illius
plane nihil utilitatis adferre possunt, sinon plane inimici cederent.
Belligradi, in quantum notum est, huc usque nullam stabilitam domum annonae;
and quamvis actualiter hic Viennae de iis mature transmittendis contractum sit,
tamen ejus certitudo multis impedimentis subjacet. Et hinc quid expectandum
est, quam ultimas and periculosissimas extremitates, ut ante annum contigerunt;
cum neque in altera part Danubii meliores conditiones observatae, qualiter
versus Orsowa and Caranzebes, cujus vicinitati etiam hoc conflictu copiosus ac
been instructus miles relinqui debet.

XII. Currus pro vectigalibus sum necessarii in tempore, and ante finem
Augusti, in quo bono esse constituti sint, nullis quidem Ciceronianis verbis
explicandum est: Maxim, cum in Hungaria hucusque numerus curruum ultra 130 se
non extendat: Reliqui vero partim Posonii nondum parati, nec pecus coemptum
est; nec mihi constat, an media illud ademendum data sint: Ubi tamen, quocunque
vertimus, sine copiosis, and quidem been praeparatis curribus subsistere
nullatenus possimus. Navigium enim Moravae ex supra allegatis rationibus, and
ob incertitudinem ventorum in Danubio incertum ac periculosissimum est: and
ideo quidem plurimum* cum hostis secundum unanimem consensum omnium captivorum
magna copia navium Danubium versus naviget, hujus opinionis vivens, quod si in
defectu nostrarum non sufficientium, aut non been armatarum navium, vel
alicujus sortis alterius, se praepotentem in Danubio viderit, velle sua vi
vectigalia nostra nostrorum victualium plane infringere, and sibi associare.

XIV. Similiter adsunt and aliae adhuc innumerae difficultates ratione pontium
navigabilium, horumque requisitorum, imo specialis pontis alicujus volantis cis
Inackee, cujus nullus ordo, nec alia praeparatoria instituta sunt: and, etiamsi
hae omnes necessitates adessent, tamen in his locis, circa finem Junii, aut
Julii, aquis diffundentibus ac diffusis, nullo anno fidendum est, and ita in
absentia nostri totius exercitus, turma aliqua hostilis, cui si non rursum
noster miles ob defectum resister^ posset, certo hosti non detrimento, sed
emolumento esset.

XV. Munitiones and instrumenta bellica, aliaque materialia, praetereaque omnia
in antiquo esse, uti reliqui ante aliquot elapsos menses, ante meum discessum,
finito campo bellico, inveni; quibus nihil nisi omnia exercitul sum
necessaria desunt.

Lettre de Monsieur Colyer, Ambassadeur d'Hollande a Constantinople.
Monsieur,
J'EUS, le 20 Decembr. de l'annee passee, l'honneur devous avertir par le
Seigneur Baron Gall de tout ce qui se passoit icy* and en voicy la duplique.
Depuis ce tems la, le 23 du meme mois, fit le Premier Vizir son entree public
dans Constantinople: Au quel je fis en person le compliment de
congratulation, le 19 Janvier; and fus receu and traitte de luy avec beaucoup
de courtoisie and civilite, sans que ni l'un ni l'autre dit un mot, ou nomma
l'Empereur and les Princes Allemans, ou le Roy de France. Cela se fit de ma
part a dessein* and avions nous, moy and l'Ambassadeur d'Angleterre, concerte
and conclu cela, afin de donner quelque soupcon au Gr. Vizir, qui avec beaucoup
de fast and d'orgueil se retiroit, and revenoit de la guerre, des desseins and
preparations a la Guerre de l'Empereur, pour la Campaign suivante:
Principalement etans tres assurez, que, combien que nous eussions eues les
ordres absolues de traiter avec luy de la Paix, il ne nous ecouteroit pas, ou
qu'il nous feroit des Propositions si exorbitantes, que cette negotiation se
romperoit incontinent de soy-meme. Nous jugeames donc, que nous ferions mieux
de n'en parler un seal mot: and que nous causerions en luy par notre silence
quelque soupcon des forces Imperiales. Ce qui nous reussit jusques la, que le
dit Vizir laissa tomber apres ces paroles: Il faut, que l'Empereur and les
Princes Allemans n'ayent plus de crainte pour la France: Autrement les
Ambassadeurs d'Angleterre and d' Hollande n'eussent pas manque de presser la
Negotiation de la Paix. Adjoustez-y, que le Teckely se soucie fort peu des
ordres de la Port, ruinant la Walachie de fons en comble.

Un vaisseau de guerre Anglois du Convoy de Smyrne a pris une Tartane Francoise
dans l'Archipel: and on a trouve la dedans deux Lettres du Roy a son
Ambassadeur icy: Des quelles ayant obtenu la Copy, je me crus oblige de vous
en fair part, avec cette esperance, qu'on ne manquera pas a Vienne de trouver
des maitres en cette art, pour les deciffrer: and qu'on en tirera des lumieres,
and particularitez de grande consequence.

Un Ingenieur, qui se nomme Signior Stefano, m'a confie, qu'il est le Comte
Nicola Guasco, natif de St. Amant, trois lieux de Valencienne, mais d'Origine
Milanois: and qu'il a des Ordres de preparer en toute diligence 6000 Bombes
pour la Campaign suivante. Il se repent de son erreur, and il m'a promis, qu'il
fera quelque chose d'importance, que je n'ose pas vous Communiquer par cettecy,
fault des ciffres. Il envoye par cette occasion un sien valet tres affide,
nomme Pietro Mollier, a Vienne, qui vous fera le recit de beaucoup des
particularitez. On attend icy de jour en jour le nouveau Ambassadeur
d'Angleterre, qu' on dit etre deja avance jusques a Esseck. J'espere, que je
recevray par son arrivement icy quelques ordres, pour remettre icy sur le tapis
la Negotiation de la Paix. Le Grand Vizir fait tout ce qu'il peut pour ramasser
des grandes sommes d'Argent, and de redresser les finances: C'est pourquoy
qu'il a retranche une partic du train du Gr. Seigneur, and fait une Inquisition
fort exact sur les gages des Officiers, and Soldats: Mais il fait encor fort
peu des Preparations pour se mettre de bonne heure en Campaign. On n'equippera
par mer que fort peu des Vaisseaux de guerre, and comme on dit, seulement dix,
avec 25 Galeres: Aussi a't on pris la resolution de ne se servir pas cette
annee des Pirates de Barbary. Je demeure, etc.

Monsieur, De V. Excellence le Tres humble Serve. COLYER.
A Pera di Constable. ce 15 Fevr. 1691.

Lettre de Monsieur Colyer, Ambassadeur d'Hollande a Constantinople.
Monsieur,
MA derniere etoit du 15 de Fevrier, de la quelle j'ay joint icy la duplique,
ayant envoyee la principalle par mer, par Venise. Depuis ce tems la le
Gouverneur de Belgrade avertit la cour icy de l'arrivee du nouveau Ambassadeur
d' Angleterre Monsieur Hussy a Esseck, and demanda pour luy permission pour
poursuivre son Voyage par Belgrade jusques icy: and combienque l'Ambassadeur de
France ayt fait tout ce qu'il a peu pour l'empecher, le Prime-Vizir neanmoins a
expedie d'icy un Aga par post a Belgrade susdit, le dernier du Fevrier, avec
des ordres, de recevoir le dit Seigneur Hussy proche d'Esseck, and de le
conduire and defrayer jusques a Constantinople: De sort qu'on l'attend icy
apres Paques. J'attens l'arrivee du dit Seigneur, avec beaucoup d'impatience,
avec esperance certain d'en entendre l'Etat des Affairs de la Chretiente.

Cet Ambassadeur de France retient apresent toutes les Lettres addresees aux
Anglois and Hollandois, qui sont icy, and a Smyrne, comme aussi celles, qui
appartiennent aux Ministres publiques de ces deux Nations, lesquelles nous
viennent par les vaisseaux Francois, ou sous le pavillon de France, Il arrete
aussi tous leurs effects: Mais le Grand Vizir etant par mes plaintes inform de
ces Insolences, s'en est montre fort mal content, and a ordonne au Douanier d'y
prendre guard tresexacte. Ce qu'etant entendu par l'Ambassadeur de France, il a
retenu quelques effects, and Argent contant, qu'on avoit recommande icy de
Venise aux Marchands Anglois and Hollandois, avec le vaisseau San Joseppe, Cap.
Luigi Juliano nouvellement icy arrive.

Mais on m'assure apresent, qu'on ne laissera pas partir ce vaisseau d'icy,
avaunt que d'avoir restitue tout ce qu'on a arrete, aux proprietaires: Ce qui
fera, que le dit Ambassadeur en recevra une petite Mortification.

Le 4 de ce mois on envoya d'icy a Jambol, par order de la Cour, quelques
Officiers, qui en ramenerent le 10 un Prince Tartare, nomme Saadet Jeray, pour
succeder au Han des Tartares, qui fut depossede le meme jour de sa dignite. Le
jour Suivant le Grand Vizir presenta le dit Prince au Grand Seigneur; and fut
il couronne, mais avec fort peu de Ceremonies, Empereur de Tartarie, and
renvoye le 18 a la Crim, pour mettre order necessaire sur les Affairs, avec un
commandment expres, de fair une Invasion en la Pologne.

On dit, que ce changement est arrive a cause, que le vieux Han a tache de
divertir le Grand Vizir contre le Sentiment du tout le conseil de guerre, de
s'en aller en person en Campaign, afin de ne hazarder pas derechef la
reputation de cet Empire, puisqu'il ne pouvoit pas assurer laPorte de la
secourir avec ses Trouppes Tartares, parce qu'on y attendoit, and craignoit,
l'arrivement de l'Armee Moscovite: and que les Albanois, ou Arnottes, auroient
assez a fair de garder leur propre pais, menace par les arms victorieuses des
Venitiens: and qu'ainsi ces Trouppes ne se pouvans joindre avec l'Armee
capitale des Turcs, on seroit contraint de se servir and contenter des seules
Trouppes ordinaires des Janissaires and des Spahis, avec celles d'Asie;
lesquelles jointes ensemble ne seroient en aucune maniere suffisantes pour
resister a l'Armee Imperialle. C'est pourquoy le Han des Tartares etoit d'avis,
qu'on feroit mieux de garder Seulement les frontieres par des Seraskiers
Particuliers, and que le Grand Vizir les pourroit soutenir de tems en tems de
Constantinople, ou d'Adrianople avec des Trouppes fraiches and nouvellement
levees: and que de cette maniere on defendroit aisement non seulement les
Frontieres, mais aussi la reputation des arms du Grand Seigneur.

Et parceque cet ^avis, ou conseil, du Han des Tartares fut rejette, and resute
par le Kiahaia Bei, ou Lieutenant General des Janissaires, and de ceux de sa
faction, avec des autres raisons, lequel Lieutenant est a present en Fort Grand
Credit a la Cour, and que le Han s'en fachoit, on a, apres qu'il fut sorty du
Conseil, arrete de le demettre de sa dignite. Ce qu'etant peu apres entendu du
Grand Han, il renonca le lendemain au Government de la Crim, pour prevenir cet
affront: and il demand apresent la permission de fair le pelerinage de Mecca.

Le Grand Vizir ne fait que se preparer a la Guerre: Mais selon ce qu'on en
peut juger, il ne sera pas aux Frontieres avaunt la sin du Juillet. C'est
pourquoy que je m'imagine, que l'Armee Imperialle feroit un grand coup, and
causeroit une grande Confusion dans les Trouppes Turques, si elle se mettroit
de bonne heure en Campaign.

Je vous puis assurer, Monsieur, que, si on n'entreprend pas quelque chose de
consideration dans cette Campaign contre les Turcs, and Francois, on n'aura pas
meme sujet de penser seulement a la Paix: Mais au contraire, si l'on aura le
moindre avantage contre cette Nation, qu'elle abandonnera le party Francois,
and recherchera la Paix incontinent. Il est donc tres-necessaire, que l'Armee
Imperialle soit la premiere en Campaign, and qu'elle previenne les desseins du
Grand Vizir: D'ou on tirera toutes les avantages imaginables.

Les mauvais succes de la Campaign pass ont extremement avance icy le credit
de l'Ambassadeur de France, and au Contraire fort diminue le respect and la
reputation des Ambassadeur d'Angleterre and d'Hollande: and principalement a
l'egard de l'esquadre des Vaisseaux de Guerre, qu'on attendoit dans la Mer
Mediterranee, du quel Messieurs les Etats Generaux m'avoient fait avertir: Mais
puisqu' on n'en a aucunes nouvelles, and qu'on meme n'en ose pas parler
d'avantage, cela fait, qu'on done l'entier credit aux vanteries des Francois:
De sort que les Turques commencent a se persuader que le Roy de France a assez
des Forces pour non seulement fair de resistance aux tous les autres Princes
Chertiens, mais encore de les attaquer par tout, and combattre.

Dans ces jours passez arriverent icy quelques Deputez de la Valachie pour
fair leurs plaintes au Grand Vizir, que le Teckely faissoit des terribiles
ravages avec ses gens dans leur Province: and le prierent d'y mettre des ordres
necessaires, and d'avoir de la Compassion pour un pais desole, and tout afait
appauvrie. On leur a done des belles paroles de la part du Teckely, and pour
le rest accord quelques demandes, qui concernoient leurs autres griefs.

Le Chef de cette Deputation est l'Oncle de l'Hospodar, qui m'a pry d'assurer
par votre entremise sa Majeste Imperialle de la fidelite and tres humbles
soumissions de son Cousin, lequel n'a de plus Grand desir, que de render
quelque Service considerable a sa Majeste ce qu'il espere de fair voir la
Campaign prochaine. Cependant le dit Seigneur me pria instamment, de prier V.
Excellence de luy fair cette grace, si cela se pouvoit fair, and d'obtenir,
par son intercession, que son friar le Seigneur Georgio Cantacuzeno qui est
apresent a Vienne, eut la permission, de se retourner dans son pais: Puisqu'il
n'y peut render aucune Service a sa Majeste and qu'au contraire etant de retour
chez soy il pourroit etre employe dans toutes les occurrences pour servir dans
les Negotiations enter le General de la Transylvanie and l'Hospodar. Vous me
ferez donc, Monsieur, un tres grand plaisir, si vous pourriez obtenir cette
permission, si cela se peut fair sans quelque prejudice aux Affairs de
l'Empire: Puisque je seray contraint d'oresenavant d'envoyer la pluspart de mes
Lettres par la Valachie, la Transylvanie, and l'Hongrie, a Vienne, and de la en
Hollande: Ce qui se pourra fair tant plus aisement, parce que, comme on m'a
averty, il y a une tresbonne correspondence enter le General Veterani, and le
dit Hospodar de Valachie.

Le Grand Vizir reussit extremement bien dans toutes ses entreprises dans cet
Empire, jusques a l'etonnement de tout le monde. Il a ces jours passez fait
Gouverneur d'Ismit le Hassan Pascia, beaufils du dernier Sultan Mohamed, etant
de retour de son Gouvernement d'Egypte: and cela pour luy oter tout le credit,
and autorite, luy donnant une charge de trespetite consideration, and qui le
mettra horse des yeux and de la souvenance du peuple.

Le meme a invente sur les Sujets Chretiens and Juifs une Tax par tete de dix,
cinq, and de deux and demi ecus, les ayant divisez en trois sorts, des riches,
de moyenne condition, and des pauvres; and ote toutes les autres Impositions:
Ce qui luy fera ramasser des tresgrandes sommes d'Argent.

J'envoye cellecy par la Valachie, and la Transylvanie: and je vous pry,
Monsieur, de me fair l'honneur par le meme chemin, d'un petit mot, de
rescription: Ce que j'attendray avec impatience, demeurant,

Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, COLYER.
A Pera di Constantinople le dernier de Mars, 1691.

In this manner Mr. Herbert came provided to Belgrade, Mr. Herbert at Belgrade.
with Instructions for prosecution of the Treaty which Sir William Hussy had
begun; but he soon found that the minds of the Turks were not as yet inclined
to a Peace, and that all his labors and endeavors would prove ineffectual,
whilst the Turks harkned to the Suggestions of the French, who had now got so
far into their good Opinion, that their Interests being made the same, their
Counsels could not be other than sincere, and their friendships of advantage;
and therefore it was apparent to Mr. Herbert, that the Turks regarding no other
Ambassador but the French, resolved to take no other Methods than such as
should be dictated by them. The case being thus manifest, struck Mr. Herbert to
the heart, who was a hot-spirited, and a passionate man, and not able to endure
to see that a Frenchman, which lately came from France, named Monsieur Marquis
de Lorain, placed in the Affections of the Grand Vizier, with design to thwart
him in all his Negotiations, he grew so impatient, that his blood boiled within
him, to such a degree, as Fevour'd him into a kind of Madness, which joined
with his old Enemy the Gout, His Death.
he died thereof on the 31st of July, 1692. Old Style.
The death of these two Ambassadors, so near the time to each other, seemed as
if there had been a kind of fatallity in the Treaty of Peace; or that the
French had by unlawful means contrived the death of these Ministers: but for my
part, Reflections on the Death of the two English Ambassadors.
I have no belief or jealousy thereof; not but that the French may be ready
enough to enter into such secret Machinations, where the Interest of their
Monarch may be advanced; but like as the Devil, when he has catched a Sinner
close within his Clutches, is not very hasty to bring him to his end, so the
French who had wholly possessed themselves of the minds and humors of the
Turks, had no need of having recourse to facinorous actions which were
detestable to God and Man. And thus did the Marquis de Loran remain with the
Vizier at Belgrade, whilst the late Ambassador Monsieur de Chauteauneuf
returned by order of the King into France.

The Campaign (as we have said) being ended, nothing of action happened during
the residence of the Vizier at Belgrade, The Grand Vizier at Belgrade.
who kept himself wholly on the defensive; and lest the Germans should think
fit to attack his Forces which lay encampt on the other side of the Rivers near
Belgrade, he made two Bridges, one over the Save, and the other over the
Danube; over which, upon news that the Christians were advancing, he caused his
Army to retreat, and to pass the Bridges into the Town, where their
Headquarters were kept during the Winter season; and thus all Military Actions
ceasing, license was given to the Militia of Anatolia to return home about the
20th of October unto their own Countries; the which was more readily granted,
in regard to the great Mutinies, and Insurrection of the People in the Lesser
Asia, and to the Venetian Successes at Sea in the Archipelago.

During the whole course of this Years Actions the Venetians were unprosperous,
their Design upon Canea failing them; which they had straightly besieged for
the space of a full Month; and had hopes of carrying the Place, had not a
Thousand French, A thousand French^ desert the Venetian Service.
leavied for Service of the Venetians, deserted, and at their first landing
gone over to the Turks; by whose assistance the Venetians were obliged most
shamefully to raise the Siege, with the loss of many Men, and of most of their
Cannon; which was the substance, and sum of all their Expedition for this Year,
1692.

About the end whereof the Grand Seignior had two Sons born to him, who were
Twins, the one named Ibrahim, and the other Selim; on which occasion great
rejoicing being shown, Fires in Constantinople.
amidst thereof a dreadful fire happened at Constantinople, which began at
Balasa, and consumed above 4000 Houses, with about 2000 Shops. This Fire
happened in three several places of the City; one of which being near the Great
Mosche of Sultan Soliman, one of the Menarees or Steeples thereof fell to the
ground, which the People interpreted for an evil Omen, and Presage for the
succeeding Year.

The Grand Vizier being returned from the War toward the end of October, gave
an account to the Grand Seignior of the state of the War, and that he had given
the Command of the Army unto Lame Husaein Pascia, and odered him with 10000 men
to watch the Motions of the Enemy, and especially to take care of Temeswaer*

Anno 1693.
THIS Year begins with the Death of the deposed Sultan Mahomet IV. who died of
a Dropsy on the 4th of January, 1693, Adrianople, Debates about a Peace.
a Council was held, in which it was debated and concluded, that the present
state of the Ottoman Empire was such as required a Peace: Howsoever another
Party prevailed, excited by the French Ambassador, who very liberally dispensed
his Presents amongst the Military Men, in whose Hands at that time remained the
Balance of War and Peace; the which was actuated by two different Principles,
the one by the Presents given by the French, and by the Arrival of several
French Officers, Engineers, Gunners, Artificial Fire-workers, and some Money
distributed amongst the Chief Turkish Officers for carrying on the War. On the
other side the Mediators, as the English, and Hollanders, whose Business it was
to procure a Peace, seemed to over-act their Parts, and by their
Solicitations, and earnest Importunities, enhansed the Price thereof, and made
the Turks believe, that either the Emperor could not subsist without a Peace,
or that some Fraud lay couched under such Specious and Importunate Pressures.

My Lord Paget (as we have said) arriving at Adrianople the 31st of January,
March.
and having received his first Audiences with the Grand Seignior, and Vizier,
he had another on the 14th of March following in Company with the two
Ambassadors of Holland, Heemskirk and Colyer, wholly relating to the Peace, at
which were present, the Chief Officers of the Empire; but nothing more was
done, besides reading their Credentials publicly, with the Propositions; and
so were dismissed for that time without a final Answer; telling them that they
should receive the same in four or five Days; but on the 18th of this Month the
Grand Vizier being displaced, (as was reported) at his own seeking, Mustapha
Pasha the Chimacam succeeded him in the Sublime Office, so that all Matters of
the Treaty were at a stand, and were to begin again; but for the better
undersanding the true state of these Affairs, nothing can be more authentic
and particular, than what was Written in a Letter from Mr. Coke the Secretary
to Sir William Trumball, which was as follows.

The Copy of a Letter from Mr. Coke, to Sir William Trumball, late Ambassador
with the Grand Seignior.
Adrianople 28. May O. S. 1693.
AS to the Negotiations of Peace, I know it will be no surprise to hear they
are in the same state as you left them. For my part I was too short-sighted to
discover those great Inclinations in the Port toward it, which Seignior Colyer
represented, which had made such Impressions in Seignior Heemskirk, that upon
Mr. Herbert's Death, he came flying with a full Sail down the Danube, not to
begin the Treaty, but conclude the Peace; and thought it was so easy, that it
was only to speak with the Vizier, and the Business was done.

He arrived at Belgrade the first of October S. V. 1692, the next Day had
Audience of the Vizier, and the third he gave in Writing to Mauro Cordato to
Translate and give the Vizier his Proposals for a Peace or Truce for 30 Years:
The substance of which for the Emperor was on the Foot of Uti possidetis; under
which Notion Transylvania to retain to him, each liberty to fortify in their
Confines; Teckely to be delivered up; the Republic of Ragusa not to be called
to Accounts for Arrears of Tribute, or for the future pay any to the Port: For
Poland, Restitution of Caminieck, and withold in Podolia, all Ucrania, the
Castelli on the Borysthenes, Moldavia, and Wallachia; and if the Tartars made
any Incursions into their Territories, the Port to pay the Damages that Crown
received: For Venice, the Province of Levadia, Athens and Thebes to be given
them as an Equivalent for the Morea, and in like manner several Territories on
the side of Lepanto, and in Dalmatia: He expected an Answer to this, and that
the Port would change their Old Style of receiving Proposals, and making none,
into an open Negotiation by Writing; but he found all this imaginary, and not
to be reduced to Practice.

Mauro Cordato told him, These Proposals were injurious to the Empire; and
asked, If he had no other to make? The Reply was, He had no more to say, till
he had an Answer to what he had already proposed, which he had earnestly
pressed for many Days in six Letters to Mauro Cordato: The Anser was, The
Vizier was returning to Adrianople, and must acquaint the Grand Seignior with
what passed, and he must go thither for his Answer. This startled him, who
thought to have concluded the Treaty at Belgrade, and immediately returned, so
he pressed for an Answer, or to be dismissed; but was told, He could not divest
himself of his Character, which remained till my Lord Paget arrived, to whom
Accidents might happen, as had to other Ambassadors, so he was forced to go by
the Danube to Rusic, and so to Adrianople, where he arrived the 24th of
November, departing from Belgrade the 23d of October.

When he arrived first at Belgrade, Marquis D'Orat, who was with Teckely and
the French, said, He was no Englishman, but a German, and came from the
Emperor. The Port had been sensible it was too great a Condescension to send
their Ambassadors at Vienna; which Point of Honor they thought regained, by
having one come to make Overtures to them, and a particular Minister for that
Business in their Hands, whom perhaps they may not easily part with.

When Seignior Heemskirk was come to Adrianople, he would have Visited the
Chimacam, who excused it, the Grand Vizier not being arrived, who came the 2d
of December, and a few Days after an Audience was desired of him, which he put
off, as not having discoursed with the Grand Seignior. A private Council was
held, Orders sent out to all parts for raising Men, and to the Treasurer to
give Money for providing Cannon, Ammunition, and all things necessary, to be
early in the Field. The Stassaki-Aga was sent to the Tartar Han, with Money to
be distributed among them to meet the Grand Vizier with a considerable Force at
Belgrade.

Seignior Heemskirk continued his Solicitations all December, and the
beginning of January, by his own Druggerman, to the Vizier's Kiah, and by
Letters to Mauro Cordato; and wrote a Complaining Letter to the Vizier of his
being come hither for an Answer, and after so long time, and being come so far
nothing was done. To which he was answered by Word of Mouth, never in Writing,
That my Lord Paget being come to Belgrade, Lord Paget arrives at Adrianople.
and in his way hither, it was thought fit in a Council to attend his Arrival,
to see if he brought no other Proposals; for if they were the same, one Answer
would serve them both.

The sixth of January Seignior Colyer came to Adrianople against the Desire of
Seignior Heemskirk, who wrote to him not to come; and at first there was great
Coldness between them, and Tyles was never employed by Seignior Heemskirk.

The last of January, his Excellency my Lord Paget arrived; he would have
entered privately, but the Vizier desired the contrary, that it might not be
thought the Port had wanted in their Respect to him, and his Lordship was
received with a great deal of Ceremony, and Numerous Attendance of Chiauses and
Janisaries.

His Audiences.
The 18th of February his Excellency had his first Audience of the Grand Vizier,
and gave him his Credentials, one for his Residence, the other for the
Mediation.

The seventh of March his Lordship had his Audience of the Grand Seignior, and
was very kindly received: He spoke his Complement, which was Interpreted by
Mauro Cordato; and the Grand Seignior answered, That His Majesty was a good
Friend to the Port, and all such should be ever kindly received by him.

The seventeenth of March, his Excellency had a private Audience of the Vizier,
where was the Mufti. His Lordship made the Offers of His Majesty's Mediation
for a Peace, or Truce between the Emperor, and his Allies, and the Port, on the
Foot of Uti possidetis, only Caminieck to be restored, or razed. The Vizier
said in a Business of so great Import, he must consult the Heads of the Law,
and the Militia, and an Answer should be given.

The 14th ditto, his Excellency Signior Heemskirk, and Colyer, were called to
the Vizier to a Public Audience, where on the Safra sat the Vizier, the Mufti
and Cadelesker on his Left Hand; on his Right the Chimacam, Ismael Passa
Janisar-Aga, the Nisangi Passa, and the Tefterdar, and the three Ambassadors,
the two Generals on Stools; below the Safra, the Kiah-Beg and all the Heads and
Ojacks of the Janisaries, the two Generals, chief of the Spahy's, and chief of
the Treasury; in all near 100 Persons: The Raise Effendi came into the middle of
the Safra, and read aloud Signior Heemskirk's Proposals, which he owned. This
was done only to exasperate the Militia: The Vizier said, They must consider of
them, and give an Answer.

The 17th the Vizier was turned out, and his Excellency finding the Vizier had
his Design in Irritating the People by such Extravagant Demands, went to the
new Vizier, Mufti, Cadelesker, and Janisar-Aga, telling them these Proposals
read were none of his, which was only one plain Proposition on a Uti
posseditis, which His Majesty thinking equal, was willing to interpose his
Offices thereon, if the Port thought fit, out of real Friendship. The Vizier
said, They would consider of it, and give an Answer. The Mufti said, The coming
of three Ambassadors had raised great Expectations in the People, and they
could do no less than make known what Proposals had been made: They were very
well satisfied of His Majesty's Friendship. The Cadelesker and Tefterdar said,
Without Restitution of the Morea, there could be no Peace. The Janisar-Aga, who
was come from Constantinople said he had seen the Proposals, That God would
humble the Pride of the Enemy, and chastize it, he hoped, this Year.

But his Excellency Lord Paget, had vindicated himself clearly to all
Ministers, as his Proposal was, but the other was sent over all the Empire to
prepossess the People; but Signior Interpreter.
Tyles had set all right in three Days.

It is observable, when Signior Heemskirk had no Intimacy with Tyles, he wrote
to my Lord Paget in January, and to the Emperor, there was no hopes of Peace;
but when he came into a Familiarity with Tyles, he was Illuminated, and in
March wrote His Majesty, the Peace was in a fair way, and he hoped to be
himself the bringer of the News of it; and yet now Tyles says to us, in eight
Months he has been here, they have never done any thing, and the Port will not
have Peace, nor were inclined to it.

Signior Heemskirk was much Embroiled, and pressed my Lord Paget much to
solicit the Vizier with Memorials; but his Excellency had seen so ill Effects
of his Writing, that he thought it much better to seem Indifferent, than
Importune, and to attend their Answer to his Proposal.


Extract of my Lord Paget's Letter to a Friend, of the same Date with the
preceding.
NOTWITHSTANDING all their seeming Reluctancies, and high Words, I am of
Opinion the Turks may be persuaded to hearken to Peace, especially if the
Imperial Army do any thing to purpose this Summer: The State here is shortly
thus.

This present 7th of June, N. S. the Janisar-Aga is not yet gone into the Camp,
nor will he go (as I think this 10 Days: About a Week after him the Grand
Vizier goes; and about a Fortnight after that, the Army will begin to March.

It is not at present strong, not of above 5 or 6000 Men, but the Asiaticks and
Tartars are to join them at Sofia: How many they may be is very uncertainly
reported; the first however will not be Numerous; they reckon upon 20000
Tartars, that will be their greatest Strength, and these altogether cannot be
at Belgrade till the latter end of July at soonest; so that if the Imperial
Army be as strong and as ready, as when I came from Vienna, I thought it would
be, they will have time enough to attempt any thing, before these Forces can
appear to hinder them.

And such was the true State of Affairs at this time in the Ottoman Court in
relation to a Peace.


The Ambassadors Heemskirk, and Colyer's Letter to the Emperor touching the
Peace.
Serenissime, Potentissime, Invictissime Caesar, Imperator semper Auguste.
SACRAE Caesareae Majestatis submississima reverentia significandum censuimus,
quod abhinc quindecim diebus inter primum Visirium, Caimacanum, Janisserorum
Agam, Romeliae Cadelisquerium and Tefterdarium in aedibus dicti Visirii circa
Pacis Negotium alterum Consilium fuerit exquisitum and ibidem nominatim
discussum. Quid de Dominis Legatis and responsione ad Pacis proposita
efflagitata and promissa denique statuant singulorum sententias enucleatim
enarrare opportunum non arbitramur, ne forsan informationis debitae penuria in
uno altreove erremus: Verum enimvero Casareae vestrae Majestati indicandum hanc
finalem fuisse conclusionem, quippe cum variarum Regionum, Ditionum and
Provinciarum desertione hic sit quaestio Regiminis and Imperii participes super
hoc deliberando tanquam maximi ponderis Negotio ullatenus negligere ipsis
integrum non esse, and nominatim Tartarorum Hannum dicentes hunc ex Crimea
quidem discessisse, verum probabiliter in finibus Visirii exercitui sese
additurum; insuper excusantes responsionem Dominis Legatis tradendam eo usque
esse protelandum: porro existimantes grato animo officia conciliatoria Magnae
Britanniae Regis and Dominorum Ordinum Foederati Belgii acceptando satis signi
datum fuisse (dum modo aequis Pax fiat conditionibus) sese non renixuros eosque
id idcirco a nobis tam ardenter ad dictum responsum pronunciandum non oportere
impelli quod parum prolationis aequae Pacificationis promotioni quam
dissolutioni forsan conducet. Quantum vero ad Dominos Legatos ab iisdem ex
aequo efflagitari non posse, ut omnes cum Visirio hinc ad limits
proficiscantur Domino Paget, idcirco Constantinopolim esse petendum nec non
Domino Colyer nisi hic mallet diutius commorari, ast Domino de Heemskirk soli
Visirium eomitaturo dictam responsionem positive and in scriptis in castris
circa fines vel itinere extradituros.

His autem totis obsistere viribus nullatenus defuimus, obnoxia incommoda plane
edocendo, verum frustra illis ubique replicantibus leviora and minoris momenti
Negotia ubique cedere majoribus, praedictas quoque locorum cessiones unice non
esse animadvertendas, sed applausus and approbationes universales ad Majorem
Imperii ejusque gubernacula tenentium cautelam non minus reputandas, quocirca
immutabilem stare sententiam non abs reopinamur credimusque fore quod dudum
praesagivimus, nimirum inchoantibus bellorum operationibus eos hostium numerum
and forsan virtutes prius experturos quam quid stabilis and fixi de Pace
decernant, interim tamen quaevis spes serius ocyus felicis exitus nostris non
cecidit animis.

Dominum de Heemskirk ante Vigesimum Mensis futuri iter facturum non suspicamur.

Vigesimo quinto alter juniorum Principum geminorum naturae vitam reddidit.

Caput Aly Pachiae abhinc parum plus anno Visirato privati and in Rhodum
proscripti nuper huc apportarunt. Principi Moldaviae initio Hebdomadis futurae
Jassum petenti Principatum occupandi animo mandatum est ut Tartarorum Hanni sub
auspicio ardentissime in id incumbat ut Polonorum Regem ad Pacem peculiarem
statuminandam persuadeat. Gallorum Legatus deseruit partem oppositam quam non
ita pridem fovebat novumque hunc Principem sibi devincire enititur. His nos
uberrimae Sacrae Caesareae vestrae Majestatis gratiae committentes sumus conatu
summo,

Serenissime, Potentissime, Invictissime Caesar, Imperator semper Auguste,
Sacrae vestrae Caesareae Majestatis Humillimi and Devotissimi Servi, H.
HEEMSKIRK. COLYER.

Adrianop. 31 May, 1693.

All thoughts of Peace, and Treaties, being thus laid aside, the Government
employed its utmost Endeavors, and Counsel were taken in Matters and
Contrivances tending to the War: It was reported, That the Grand Seignior,
Sultan Achmet, had resolved to go as far as Sophia, where he would pass the
Summer, being nearer to Belgrade, and the Frontiers in Hungary; but the
Physicians persuaded the contrary, as being prejudicial to the Health of the
Sultan, who was already affected with the Dropsy, (the fatal and common
Disease of that Ottoman Family) for Cure of which, Sultan Achmet sick of the
Dropsy.
many Consultations were held by the Physicians; who, in regard that they found
as yet a Schirrus only upon the Liver, they gave great hopes of his Recovery;
howsoever the People took occasion from hence to discourse, That in case this
Sultan Achmet were Dead, he would be succeeded by Sultan Mustapha his Nephew,
and Son to the late Sultan Mahomet, who had been Deposed: which would be a
happy Change for the whole Empire, he being Young and Brave, and as to all
appearance, of a Martial Spirit, and a Lover of Justice.

To forward the Preparations for the War with all Expedition possible,
Preparations for the War.
strict Orders were given to provide Caminieck with Provisions, and necessary
Food, for want of which, the Place labored under the greatest Extremity.

Letters also, and Commands were dispatched to all Parts in Asia, to hasten the
March of the Janisaries and Spahees, and to enroll new Janisaries, a Method not
used in former Times; by which, taking every Pitiful Fellow that offered to
come in, they composed such a Band of raw Soldiers, not only unexperienced in
War, but Poor, and Feeble, and Old, that scarce one half of them were judged
able to hold out a March to Belgrade.

The Turks also dispatched away 2000 Janisaries to reinforce the Garrison at
Negropont; likewise they reinforced Canea with Men and Provisions; as they also
did their Army in and about the Morea, and strengthened their Castles at the
Dardanelli, with Soldiers, Gunners, and Engineers, under Command of Husaein
Pasha, who had formerly been Chimacam with the Grand Seignior, but the Troops
designed for Hungary, marched slowly. These Preparations being much retarded by
the late Change of those two great Officers, namely, the Grand Vizier, who, as
we said, voluntarily resigned, and the Tefterdar, Changes at Court.
or Lord Treasurer, called Ismael Effendi Matulled, or put out, Disgraced, and
Exiled; though some reported, That he was secretly Strangled; which was a
strange, and an unseasonable Policy at such a time as this, to put all things
backward by the Death of two prime Officers of State, who perhaps were
Innocent, and Good Ministers: But under such a Government as this, it is not
sufficient to be Wise, Honest, and Industrious, but you must also be
Successful, and free of Enemies, which are things not in our power.

By these Changes, place was made for other Officers; for Osman Pasha, a
Cunning, Knavish Candiot (as most of that Nation are) was made Chimacam in
Adrianople. Mustapha Pasha, who had been Chimacam, and Seraskier on the Danube
was declared Grand Vizier; and Cantemir the Son of Dica Bey, who had for 30
Years past been Prince of Moldavia, was made Successor to his Father. This
Grand Vizier, before he could be warm in his Place, or provided with things
necessary for the War, or acquainted with his Soldiery, and the Chief
Commanders, which were to fight under him, was commanded to be gone with all
expedition to the Army; The New Vizier s^nt to the A^my.
which he prepared to do with what speed was possible. And in regard that all
intentions for Peace were laid aside, May. The Mediators dismissed.
the Mediators were dismissed from their further Attendance, and Mr. Heemskirk
was licensed to return to Vienna; though some difficulties arose thereupon at the
instance of the French, who suggested, that Heemskirk was an Instrument, and
Spy of the Emperor, and a German; and not sent as a Mediator from the King of
England, whose true Minister my Lord Paget was: And this color had like to
have cost Heemskirk dear, had not my Lord Paget owned him for a Minister of the
King, and unridled the Secret of the two Ambassadors. In like manner my lord
Paget had leave to go to his House at Pera near Constantinople, which is the
usual place of the English Ambassadar's residence.

But as to the French Ambassador he continued still at Adrianople; and when the
Vizier marched, he sent Fontaine his Dragoman, or Interpreter with him to
attend all the Motions of the Vizier, and his Camp.

Whilst these things were in Action, the news from Asia was unpleasing, and
administered Matter for serious Consideration at the Ottoman Court; where it was
reported, That the Army of Bassora, under their New Arabian Prince did daily
increase, and that the Pasha of Sivas, or Sebasse, on the Frontiers of Persia
were in Arms; and that such was the confusion in those Eastern Countries, as
obliged the most powerful of the Asiatick Spahees to remain at home on the
guard of their own Country and Estates; so that the present Ottoman Force was
inferior to that of the preceding year; and by reason of the forementioned
Changes; to which we may farther add, that of the Seimen Pasha, who was
Lieutenant General of the Janisaries, and advanced to be Aga, or General of the
Janisaries, in the place of Ismael Pasha. Likewise diverse Captains, who had
been Creatures and Favorites of the late General, were deprived of their
Commands, least they should make Desturbances, or raise Factions in the Army;
all which, as it diminished and enfeebled their Force, so it hindered the early
appearance of the Turks in the Field.

Preparations for the Seas.
But the Preparations at Sea against the Venetians proceeded more briskly than
they did at Land; for in the Month of May, 22 Sail of Galleys, and 13 Great Men
of War were provided and sitted out of the Arsenal at Constantinople, and
ordered to sail down to the Castles of the Dardanelli, there to join with the
Galleys of the Beyes of the Archipelago; to which some Ships of the Barbarouses
being added, they computed, that they might form a Fleet of 24 Sail of Men of
War, besides Galleys.

Things proceeding thus slowly by Land, for the Causes beforementioned, the
Vizier did not begin his March from Adrianople toward the Christians, until
the 26th of June Old Syle, designing at first for Belgrade; when on a sudden,
The Vizier begins his march from Adrianople.
express Orders were given to the Army to change the course of their March, and
leave the Road to Belgrade, and take that for Valachia, and through that
Country to enter into Transylvania: This alteration was the more surprising to
the Germans, who expected not the Turks on that side, because it was not known
above a Week or 10 Days before the departure of the Vizier, the which Counsel
was judged to have been given by the French Ambassador, or otherwise by the
Tartars, who propounded to the Vizier to join him on the way with such a Force,
as should make up his Army at least 80000 Men.

But whilst these Matters were consulting, news came that the Germans had a
design to lay siege to Belgrade; and on their way thither had designed against
the Palancha's of Jeno, and Julia, and threatened the Turks with devastations
over all the plain Countries; and since the taking of Great Waradin,
straightened Temeswaer with want of Provisions; which put the Turks into some
confusion both at home and abroad, and diverted entirely the design of the
Turks upon Transylvania, where the most mischief might have been done on the
Imperial Dominions; because Transylvania has ever been esteemed the most
convenient Door to let the Turks into Germany.

But what about the same time also caused some desturbances at home, was a
Terrible Conflagration which happened at Constantinople; Fire at Constantinople.
the Fire began first in the Street called Zubali, where they make the
Muskets, and all sorts of Arms for the Grand Seignior's service, destroying
all the Forges, and Instruments belonging to that Work; and the fire taking its
way, consumed all before it, until it came to the great Capan, which is the
chief, and only Magazine for Flour, and Corn, and all Provisions whatsoever,
laid up for the Use of the City; and afterward taking up the Hill, it took its
course down by the way of Balata, and consumed at least a third part of that
Division, so that the Turks report, that above 20000 Shops, and Houses were
consumed.

This great Conflagration being over, People began to enquire after the News
which the Expresses brought from the Armies, from all parts; and particularly
that from Asia was of considerable importance; giving a Relation, that the New
Arab Prince, Emir by Name, who reckned his Descent in a Direct Line from their
Prophet Mahomet, brought an Army into the Field, pretending to make himself
Sovereign of Bassora, to which he had an Hereditary Right, and Title: His Army
daily increasing, obliged the Grand Seignior to send many of his Troops out of
Europe under the Command of the Pasha of Bosnia to reinforce the Militia of
those Countries.

The European Generals being unacquainted with the Situation, July.
and qualities of those Countries, and not knowing that in the Month of July
the Rivers upon the melting of the Snows swell to a prodigious height, were
strangely surprised to find themselves without any cause, or knowing how it
came about, in the midst of a deep Water: For being encamped in the Valley of a
flat Country, the Arabs opened their Sluices, and having made some Channels like
Aquaeducts, they let so great a Flood of Waters out of the Neighboring Rivers
into the Turkish Camp, The Turks in Asia drowned in the Waters.
that before the Turks understood from whence that Inundation proceeded, 6 or
7000 of them were drowned, and the rest being put into confusion, and
endeavoring to save themselves, fell into the hands of the Arabs, and were all
cut in pieces, or made Prisoners; only the Pasha of Bosnia with 14 more escaped
of all that multitude: And soon after this defeat the Arabs attacked, and took
a Caravan, with the Spoils of which they enriched themselves.

The news of this Defeat very much discouraged the Turks in Europe, having lost
by this accident 25000 Men of their own Friends and Acquaintance, which became
the more sensible to them at that time, when the Turkish Army became so feeble
in Hungary, that had not the Tartars assisted them with great Numbers, the
Vizier would have been forced to return home with Confusion, and Dishonor.

The Tartars being made sensible of the great need that the Turks had of them,
stood the more strongly on their Terms, and made some difficulties of joining
with them, but at length suffered themselves to be worked upon, when they saw
the rich Presents which the Grand Signior had sent to the New Tartan Han, to
engage him to come early this Year into the Field; and when they saw the rich
Vests lined with Sables, and the Sword set with great Diamonds, with 40000
Zaichins in Money, they needed no other Rhetoric, or persuasive Arguments to
prevail upon them, but all unanimously prepared to make an early Campaign.

Upon the news that the Christians designed to besiege Belgrade, the Vizier
hastened his march thither; where by reason of the many losses which that
Garrison had sustained, a Recruit was sent of 1000 men out of Bosnia, and 2000
Arnouts to reinforce the Garrison. And also 15000 Turks more were detached
from the Army in Bosnia to recognize, or take a view of the Christian Forces in
those Countries; and having passed the Save over three several Bridges, came
and showed themselves before Oseck, which was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel
Baron Ogiley: This Governor finding himself unable to oppose the Turks in the
Field, kept himself within his Bulwarks and Fortifications; until the Turks
having at their leisure taken a view of the Place, and Country round about,
retired back-towards Belgrade, plundering every thing they could carry with
them, together with Men, Women and Children, which they carried into slavery,
to the number of about 3000 Souls. After which Ogiley drawing together a Body
of about 800 select and choice Men, he passed the Save, and with them surpised
a Town called Bratzein, to which having given fire, 200 Turks were burned
therein, and the like number endeavoring to save themselves from the flames;
ran out of the City, of which near 100 men were killed on the Place; and many
Christians lately taken by the Turks, were released, and sent back to their own
Habitations.

Since the taking of Great Waradin, Temeswaer, Giula, and Geno, were so
straightened for want of Provisions, that they were forced to send away all
Women, and Children, and unnecessary Persons from the Places; the better to
conserve the Victuals, and Provisions for the use of the Garrison: For General
Heusler having for some time blocked up Geno, he made a nearer approach to it;
June.
and on the 16th and 17th day of June placing his Camp within half a mile of
the place, he attacked the Suburbs, which were surrounded with a Ditch, and
fortified with Palisadoes; howsoever the Germans forced the place and took it;
the Turks retiring with much confusion into the City.

The next day being the 18th, General Heusler having received four pieces of
Cannon, he fired with them into the City, and threw some Bombs thereinto; after
which he summoned the Place, and threatened them, that in case they did not
immediately surrender, he would afterward give them no Quarter. But the Turks
not harkening hereunto, a Battery was raised, from whence the Guns fired
without ceasing; and thereby in the space of five or six days a Breach being
made, all matters were prepared for a Storm on the Place; which the Turks not
daring to withstand, and adventure, they resolved to capitulate; and on the
27th hung out a White Flag, and sent out three of their Principal Men into the
German Camp: Where entering into a Treaty, it was agreed, that the next day one
of their Gates, and Bulwarks should be delivered up into the Hands of the
Besiegers; which being performed the following day, the Garrison of the Turks
consisting of about 800 fighting Men, with 200 Horse, were convoyed within half
an hour's march from Lippa.

This City was provided with four Bulwarks, fortified with a high and strong
Wall, broad and deep Ditches, into which the River Kerez has a passage; and
within it has another retreat fortified with four Towers. In this Place the
Germans found 35 Brass, and three Iron Guns, with other Warlike Stores, as
20000 pounds of Powder, and other Ammunition proportionable. In this Siege,
within the Town, 350 Men were killed, and wounded.

Immediately after the surrender of Geno, General Heusler invested the strong
Fortress of Philagoras, situated between Geno and Lippa, which yielded unto
him; and having repaired the Breaches of Geno, and placed a small Body of Men
in those parts, under the Command of General Hoskirken, he returned to Great
Waradin with his remaining Forces.

The Grand Vizier being on his march to Belgrade, the news of what had happened
at Geno, and Philagoras was brought to him; and thereby suspecting that
Temeswaer would be the next enterprise of Heustler, dispatched immediately
Orders to the Pasha of Belgrade to send another Convoy, and more Troops thither
to reinforce the Garrison of Temeswaer with Men and Provisions. But the Pasha
with several other Commanders refusing to obey, upon certain pretenses, that
such a Detachment would be the Ruin of the Place, and that to save Temeswaer,
they should lose Belgrade; the Vizier became so enraged, that with his own Hand
he killed six of the Principal Turks, July 11.
who were Accomplices with the Pasha, and left their Dead Bodies in the Streets
to the view and terror of others.

Whilst these things passed at Belgrade, the Duke of Croy, who commanded the
Imperial Army, prepared all necessaries to besiege the Place. And in the first
place he caused a Bridge to be laid over the Danube at Veresmarton, of an hours
journey in length; over which he passed one half of his Army, and the other
half he transported in Ships and Boats, and were followed by the Hanover
Troops, and the Artillery: And though he had by these means gotten together in a
Body, yet many things were wanting to begin, and carry on the siege; to supply
which, being encamped on the 25th of this Month near Peter Waradin, he
dispatched an Express to some Brandenburgher Troops, which remained in the
Rear, to advance forwards, and hasten their march: And having assembled a
Council of War, it was resolved forthwith to pass the Save over the Bridge of
Peter Waradin, and proceed to Belgrade. And accordingly toward the end of this
Month, marching with great diligence, the Hussars having the Vanguard,
surprised the Turks near Belgrade, of whom they took many Prisoners, with some
Cattle, which they brought back into the Army; by which the Turks were so
alarmed, and by the march of the Imperial Army toward them, that they
endeavored to carry away, and save the best of their Goods, but the Imperial
Horse prevented their design.

The Christians approaching near the Turks on the first of August, August.
began to fire on all sides from the Town; whilst the Germans on the contrary,
were busily working on their Lines of Circumvallation, had not finished any
Battery until the fifth, when they likewise began to fire on the City. It was
farther at that time designed that two of the Christian Galleys, well armed,
should drive away from before the Town some light Turkish Galleys, by which
means that side lying open, they could easily encompass the City on all sides.

On the ninth the Brandenburgher Troops joined the Army, and on the same day,
some Turks belonging to the Garrison of a Palanca called Boskoua, The Palanca
of Boskoua capitulates.
situated about three hours distance from the Army, came to the Camp, and
offered to capitulate; the which being granted with such Conditions as were
proposed, the Fortress surrendered, and the Soldiers and Inhabitants were
convoyed safe to Semendria: In the Palanca they found nine Guns with some
Ammunition, with good store of Hay and Corn.

On the 12th of this Month the Turks, to celebrate their Annual Feast of the
Bairam, fired all the Guns round the City and Castle; and the Day following
made a brisk Sally with such Bravery, that at the first they brought the
Germans into some Confusion; but rallying themselves again into good Order,
they beat the Turks back into the City.

The Turks make a Sally. Are driven in with loss.
On the 14th they made another Sally more furious than the former, but with less
Success, being repulsed with the loss of 500 Men killed and taken Prisoners:
This Blow gave the Christians an advantageous Opportunity, in the space of two
Days to advance their Approaches to 150 Paces from the Counterscarp.

Another Sally.
On the 17th another Sally was made by the Turks, but were repulsed with the
loss of about 100 Men; by which the Germans advanced their Works within 80
Paces of the Counterscarp. And

Bombs thrown into the Town.
On the 19th threw several Bombs into the City, which did great execution; and
posted six Regiments on the other side of the Danube; by which all Succors
coming to the Town from Temeswaer, or other Parts on that side, were hindered
from giving any Relief; and the Turks Ships were bridled, and obliged to keep
at a distance.

On the 26th the great Battery of 36 Guns was finished, from which the
Besiegers continually fired on the City, and the Turks again on the Battery,
where the Duke of Croy standing open was shot through the Hat with a
Musket-Bullet, and his Adjutant-General killed by his side with the like.

The next Day being the 30th of August, Kathana Mustapha Pasha, with a Body of
300 Horse, Attacked the Emperor's advanced Troops near Semblin, but were so
received by them, that 40 of them remained upon the Spot, several Wounded, and
many made Prisoners. The Grand Vizier marches to relief of the Town.
The same Day Intelligence was brought to the Duke of Croy, That the Grand
Vizier had drawn together from all Parts, as many Forces as he had been able to
do, with Resolution to relieve the Town.

On the last Day of August, the Chief Ingineer Keyserfelt entering the
Trenches, was killed by a Musket Shot.

September.
In the first six Days of September nothing was performed which was
considerable, but that the Approaches were still advancing; The Christians loss.
so that on the 7th, the Besiegers Stormed the Counterscarp, which continued
until the going down of the Moon, when the Darkness of the Night put an end to
the Assault, in which the Christians lost 1000 Men, killed and wounded, on the
Place, and amongst them the Bavarian General Sybeldorf, with two
Lieutenant-Colonels, and other Officers.

The Ill Success that the Christians had sustained by the Storm made on the
Counterscarp, being the cause of Raising the Siege, it may be very proper to
insert here a Relation, which a principal Officer gave thereof, who was present
at the Attack made thereon the 7th of September 1693. in this manner.

Whilst these things were acting, News came, That the Tartars had appeared in
the Neighborhood with a Body of 2000 Men, and had droven away with them some
Cattle: And

On the 10th Instant News was brought by several Expresses, That the Grand
Vizier with an Army of 80000 Men, was arrived, together with a great Fleet of
Ships and Galleys, before W^din: Upon which News, and the sharp Blow received
some few Days before, upon the Counterscarp of the Town, it much discouraged
the Proceedings of the Germans: Upon which a Council of War being called, it
was judged dangerous to expect the Arrival of so great an Army, or to attend
and stand their Shock; and therefore it was concluded best to Decamp, and quit
the Siege, The Siege of Belgrade raised.
which accordingly was executed with good Order, and the whole Army drew off
with Bag and Baggage, Guns, and all other Materials; and so passing the River
Save, over the Bridge which they had made, they Burnt and Destroyed it: And
thus ended this Expedition with no small Charge and Expense of Blood and Men to
the Emperor.

In the Management of which, many Errors and Blunders were committed: The
Trenches were not opened until 13 Days after the Place was Invested; and that
the Batteries were not ready until 13 Days after that: It was another
Oversight, That the Fleet, which should have hindered all Provisions from the
Town, coming from Temeswaer, was not ready before the Town was Invested; which
was as ridiculous, as when the King of Denmark forgot his Mortars, going before
Hamburg; and so were the Germans Cannon, which were not brought before the Town
till five Weeks after it was Invested.

Copy de la Relation envoyee a and sur l'assaut de la Contrescarpe de
Belgrade, du 7 Septembre, 1693.
QUOYQUE je^ n'aye pas manque de rappresenter icy qu'il etoit dangereux de
donner un assaut de Contrescarpe, quand elle se trouve encore eloignee plus de
cent pas des approches, comme effectivement etoit celle de Belgrade le 7
Septembre, parceque ceux qui portent la fascine devant venir de si loin a
decouvert sont la plus part tues ou blessez avaunt qu'ils arrivent a la
Pallisade, and par consequent n'en peuvenr fournir assez, ny assez vite pour
fair le Logement requis and sa Communication aux approches avaunt l'arrivee du
jour, outre que par cette grande distance on expose plus dangereux de commencer
le dit assaut apres la nuit clause par les Raisons suivantes: Et

I. Parceque notre Artilleric, and nos Fuseliers ne pouvant ajuster leurs coups
aux Parapets, and defenses de l'Ennemy ne scavroient aussi l'empecher de
plonger a decouvert son feu sur les assailants, and sur les travailleurs.

II. Puisque nos Grenadiers par l'Obscurite ne voyant pas la contenance de
l'Ennemy, ny pouvant reconnoitre sa foiblesse dans les posts, qu' il occupe
pandant la Chaluer de l'assaut, ils n'ont pas lieu aussy de profiter du moindre
avantage, que la Confusion du d'Ennemy luy peut donner dans l'action, apres
quoy il peut se remettre, and revenir a son devoir.

III. Parceque les Turques ont accoutemez de redoubler la guard dans chacun de
leurs posts pendant la nuit seulement.

IV. Le Soldat, and bien souvent l'Officier ne se piquant pas d'une egale
bravoure, quand ils ne sont pas observes de leurs superieurs comme ils feroient
s'ils agisoient pendant la lumiere, ils profitent souvent de la Moindre
confusion pour se cacher ou se derober a leur devoir.

V. Parceque le tems du travail devenant par ce moyen plus court on ne scavroit
se mettre a couvert sur la Pallisade par un bon Logement, ny fair la
Communication en arriere avaunt l'arrivee du jour sans la quelle on seroit
ensuite force par l'Ennemy d'abandonner le post.

On ne laissa neantmoins pas le jour 7 Septembre deux heures apres le soleil
couche d'ordonner l'assaut de la Contrescarpe de cette place, qui fut dispose
comme il s'en suit. A scavoir 400 Grenadiers avec deux Capitaines sous le
commandment du Baron de Flouk major du vieux Staremberg partagez moitie a la
gauche, and moite a la droite devoient donner depuis le Ravelin du Roy jusques
a la Contregarde de la gauche de notre attacque soutenu par 200 Fusiliers, qui
etoient aussi commandez par deux Capitaines, les quels devoient etre secondes
par 400 autres Fusiliers, a scavoir par 200 sous le commandment du Lieutenant
Colonel de Thaun, qui etoit destine a la droite, and sontenu par le Colonel
Comte Marsigli avec deux Bataillons, and les autres 200 sous le commandment du
Lieutenant Colonel d'Anali qui etoit destine a la gauche soutenu par le Colonel
Danois Stockamer avec deux autres Bataillons. L'attacque sudit etant mean par
le General Seiberstorf sous la direction, and commandment du General Comte
Guido Staremberg. Ce qui fut execute immediatement apres le signal done. Quand
nos Grenadiers virent l'Ennemy qui fortit en meme temps aussi de sa Pallisade,
sur le Glacis verse l'ouvrage a Corn, chacun tenant un Flambeau allume d'une
main, and le sabre de l'autre pour les recevoir, mais poussez par la vigueur
des notres, and par le grand feu qu'ils luy firent dessus il fut oblige de
rentrer au plus vite dans son chemin couvert, and dans ses contre-approches, ou
nos gens le chargerent avec une si grande quantite de Grenades, and le Fusil
crevise a la pallisade qu'ils en firent rester un grand nombre, sur la place,
and le mirent party en confusion, lors qu'on Captain des dits Grenadiers
ayant fait dire a Monsieur le General Seiberstorf de luy envoyer du monde pour
le soutenir and pour fair le Logement sur la Pallisade; Le dit General luy fit
respondre, qu'il scauroit bien luy envoyer tout cela, quand il seroit temps il
etant pas son Affair d'entrer dans ces sorts de dispositions, de maniere que
nos Gens furent une grande heure and demi a decouvert sur la Pallisade, sans
qu'on leur envoya ny les Fusiliers destines pour les soutenir, ny les
travailleurs avec les Fascines, and Gabions pour les Loger, quoyqu'ils en
fissent toutes les instances possibles, apres quoy les dits 400 Grenadiers ne
se trouvant plus fort qu'au nombre d'environ 150 le rest ayant ete tuez ou
blesses, on fit sortir les Fusiliers pour les soutenir; and Monsieur le Comte
Guido de Staremberg voyant la perte considerable de notres sans aucun fruit,
commanda qu'on deuteronomy se retirer de l'enterprise lors qu'on luy vint faussement
rapporter, que nos Gens s'etoient logez a la gauche sur la Pallisade, ce qui
luy fit suspendre sa resolution, ordonnant de continuer le travail, and dans ce
tems la le Colonel Comte Marsigli sortit sur la droite pour le soutenir avec
ces deux Bataillons, etant rentre un moment apres avec une Legere blessure a la
jambe apres quoy Monsieur le Comte Guido ayant apris que nos Gens sur la gauche
bien loin d'etre loges a la Pallisade, comme on luy avoit fait croire, avoient
abandonne le travail, and qu' a la droite au Lieu d'avoir attaque enter l'angle
saillant du Ravelin du Roy, and la Contregarde du Cote de la Save, s'etoient
attaches enter le dit Ravelin and l'Ouvrage a Corn, contre la disposition
faite, and toute raison, a cause du grand feu de Flanc and de Front, don't
l'Ennemy les chargeoient, crut a propos avec le rest de la Generalite de fair
retirer le monde se contentant de pousser un petit Zic Zac avance d'environ 20
pas horse de notre paralele eloignee encore plus de 60, pas de la Pallisade, qui
n'etoit qu'environ deux pieds profond, lors que le jour arriva.

Quoyque la bravoure de nos Gens alla jusques a l'opiniatrete celle des
Ennemies fut assurement toute extraordinaire puisqu' il se deffendit avec une
tell constance, and fit un feu du Mousquet si continue pendant deux bonnes
heures, qu'on ne pouvoit distinguer un coup de l'autre, outre les Bombes, and
Grenades, qu'il tira sans cesse particulierement du chemin couvert enter
l'ouvrage a Corn and le Ravelin du Roy, ou nos Gens attaquerent parme prise
contre la disposition faite, and ou il y avoit trois Pallisades l'une devant
l'autre, don't de la plus avancee l'Ennemy se deffendoit avec le Mousquet, de la
second il jettoit des pierres, and de la troisieme des Grenades avec des
Cuilleres sans discontinuer un moment.

S'il est extraordinaire, qu'on aye manque de fair un logement de Contrescarpe
particulierement avec des si braves Gens, comme nous avions, il doit l'etre
encore plus qu'on n'aye pu reussir devant un Ennemy, qui ne'n a jamais desfendu
jusques a present, and on ne scauroit en attribuer la fault qu'a la mauvaise
disposition a scavoir parceque on l'a attaquee de trop loin, que l'on a voulu
attacquer la nuit contre les raisons adduites, que l'Artillerie n'a jamais tire
aux dessenses, and Pallisades des lieux que nous devions attaquer. Que les
Ingenieurs (Particulierement Mora^do) Abandonnerent d'abord le post. Que les
Grenadiers de la droit en attaquerent pas ou ilfalloit. Que ceux-cy, and ceux
de la Gauche ne furent pas soutenus, and parceque ensi^ l'Ingenieur, qui avoit
la direction du travail sur les autres ne sortit jamais se fiant aux faux
rapports qu'on luy falloit.

Cependant si l^ malheur vouloit qu'il fallut quitter cette Place, il est
constant que, Laissant a part la principale raison de n'avoir pas coupe a
l'Ennemy la communication de la Riviere, Les Ingenieurs, and l'Artillerie ont
par leur negligence, particulierement contribues a cette perto, puisqu^ les
premiers ont commences travailler a la sap etant encore a 150 pas loin,
fa^sant ainsi les paraleles, and 4 ou 5. Cloter d'ouvrage en 24 heurs, and les
seconds n'ont jamais voulu avancer leurs Batteries, on il falloit pour rompre
les deffenses de l'Ennemy, ny tirer cette quantite de Bombes, and Canons
necessaries pour ruiner cette place, particulierement le jour de l'assaut
susdit pendant le quel jour ils ne tirerent jamais ny aux Pallisades du Chemin
couvert, ny aux deffences des Contreaproches, and pieces, que nous devions
attaquer, ce qui donna lieu a l'Ennemy de soutenir si bien ses Ouvrages, qui
etoient encore touts entiers.

L'on aura perdu dans cette assaut environ 1000 hommes, tant tuez que blesses
parmy les uqels il y a 254 Grenadiers bien comptez and beaucoup d'Officiers,
and enter autres Monsieur le General Seiberstorf tue.

Nous sommes environ 80 pas de la Pallisade de la Place, de sort que Samedy 12
du mois nous serons en etat d'attaquer la Contrescarpe une second fois qui ne
reussira pas mieux que la premiere, si les dispositions n'en seront meilleures.

Ce matin 9 de Septembre, sur les 9 heures, les Tartares sont venus jusques a
notre retranchement and ont emmenez plus de 800 Beufs, and quelques chevaux de
l'Armee, and partrois ou deux faits Prisonniers on est averti, que le secour
sera icy dans cinque a six jours fort de 90000 Hommes, avec 80 pieces de Canon,
cecy cependant ne se conform point, avec les nouvellos du General Veterani; De
quelle facon que cela soit, si le secours vient je ne vois pas que nous ayons
assez d'Infanterie pour soutenir les Approches, Garner los Lignes pour mettre
au de la du Danube, and empecher le secour, and pour Garder les ponts, and
proviande, qui sera sans doubt coupee par les Tartares, qui passeront la Sauve
ou a la nage ou a Sabagg de sort que, non obstant que sur le commencement nous
ayons eu assez de temps, and moyens, pour emporter cette place, Je vois tres
necessaire d'en abandonner le Siege, and repasser au plus vite la Sauve, si
l'on veut conserver l'Armee, le Royaume d'Hongrie, and toutes ses Conquetes,
etc.

Continuation du Journal de Siege de Belgrade, depuis le 5 jusqu'au 9
Septembre, 1693.
LE 5 le feu de nos Batteries fut fort grand, and nous jettemes quantite de
Bombes and de Carcasses sur l'ouvrage a Corn. Nous commencames aussi a fair
une grande Ligne parallele a notre droite.

Le General Archinto fut dangereusement bless d'un coup de Mousquet, and
pendanr tout le travail nous n'eumes qu'un Soldat de bless and pas un de tue.

Sur le soir un transfuge de la ville, qui etoit Chretien and qui avoit
travaille aux Mines des Ennemis rapporta qu'il n'y en avoit encore pas une de
remplie. Il s'offrit a nous decouvrir toutes celles qui avoient ete faites
contre notre Attaque ce qu'il fit le lendemain, and on a trouve que cela etoit
conform aux avis que quelques uns de nos Ingenieurs, qui avoient fortify
autrefois Belgrade, avoienr done and a ceux qu'on a eu depuis.

Le 6 il arriva 2 Expres que le General Veterani renvoya de Transylvanie avec
nouvelle certain que le Grand Visir avoit pass le Danube avec les Tures, and
que parmy les Tartares il regnoit une Malady contagieuse qui en faisoit mourir
plusieurs.

Le meme jour on fit la Parallele gauche and on l'avanca beaucoup, and en
plusieurs endroits on sappa. Nous commencames aussi a fermer le Danube avec des
bateaux de Moulins a la Turque and une maniere des chaisnes Flottantes, au
dessous de la Ville, enter deux Forts que nous avons aux deux bords de la
jiviere depuis nos Lignes de Circonvallation.

Le 7, a 4 heures du Matin le General Archinto mourut de sa blessure and a 7
heures on fit assembler les Generaux de l'Infanterie and on tint conseil pour
scavoir de quelle maniere on attaqueroit la Contrescarpe and on resolut pour
mieux tromper l'Ennemy d'attaquer le poligone par plusieurs endroits a la fois,
and a chaque endroit premierement avec 100 Grenadiers ensemble, ensuite avec
300, qui devoient poursuivre ceux des Ennemis qu'ils trouveroient. Ceux ci
devoient etre suivis de 300 autres qui avoient order de prendre post sur les
Palissades.

Les Grenadiers devoient etre sontenus de 600 Fuseliers, and tous ensemble
devoient etre couverts de 1200 Mousquetaires des dernieres Lignes. On destina
1700 hommes pour toutes sorts de travaux and 6 Bataillons de reserve. Except
ce qui etoit de reserve il n'y eut que 4100 hommes pour l'Attaque, don't 2 tiers
des Imperiaux and un tiers des Brandebourgeois and Lunebourgeois devoient
donner a la droite.

Le General Guido Stahremberg eut l'Attaque droite, and le General Bavarien
Monsieur Seybelsdorf la gauche. Les Auxiliaires avoient leur post au milieu,
chacun devoit commander les siens and avoir son Corpse de reserve particulier en
cas de besoin.

L'Attaque devoit commencer une demi-heure avaunt la nuit, afin que pendant la
nuit on pust se fortifier and avoir toutes les Communications necessaires.

A midi on amena tout le monde don't on avoit besoin and a 2 heures apres Midi
S. A. le Duc de Croy and le General Heusler vinrent eux memes donner les ordres
sur la place ainsi on fit en toute diligence apporter des Fascines, des Gabions
and autres chooses necessaires; mais avaunt qu'on fust pressed non seulement le
tems destine pour l'atraque se passa, mais on traisna jusqu'a 10 heures du soir
lorsque la lune se couchoit de sort qu'on croioit de renvoyer au lendemain,
mais l'ardeur des Soldats and des Officiers etoit si grande and la contenance
de l'Ennemi qui se tenoit pres de ses feux donna si bonne esperance qu'on
voulut fair une tentative.

Les Grenadiers qui coururent d'abord, firent fort bien, and sauterent en
plusieurs endroits dans la Contrescarpe, les autres commencerent a prendre
post: Nos Canons and nos Bombes les seconderent a merveille, and c'etoit un
beau feu a voir; mais les Ennemis qui etoient assemblez dans la Contrescarpe
and dans les ouvrages de dehors en ayant eu le vent sans qu'on s'en doutast,
illuminerent tout par le moyen de leurs feux d'Artifice.

Ils firent une opiniatre resistance and attirerent a eux avec des Crochets nos
Fascines and Gabions, and en jettant continuellement des Sacs de Poudre, des
pierres and des Grenades ils empecherent que nous ne gardassions post si pres
de la Contrescarpe.

Outre que pendant l'obscurite ceux qui etoient a l'Attaque gauche s'avancerent
si fort de la droite and y pousserent tellement ceux du milieu, que chacun
n'etant pas dans sa veritable place, and ce post etant si eloigne de nos
Lignes qu'on ne pouvoit s'y maintenir de nuit, encore moins de jour, on trouva
bon de fair reculer notre Monde and de le fair avancer peu a peu jusqu'a
l'endroit on nous sommes presentement. Ce qui se fit apres un rude choc qui
dura pendant 2 heures, and nous nous sommes loges a 24 pas par le Moyen d'une
nouvelle Ligne. Nous avons eu 6 ou 700 Hommes de tuez and blessez.

Le General des Bavarois Monsieur Seybersdorf a ete tue dans cette occasion,
comme aussi le Lieutenant Colonel Horn, le jeune Comte Beck: Parmi les blessez
se trouverent le Colonel Marsigli, le Colonel Blankensee, le Comte de Thaun
Lieutenant Golonel de Guido Stahremberg, les Barons d'Alman and d'Andremont
Capitaines. Les Ennemis doivent avoir aussi beaucoup perdu de Monde.

Le 8 on a beaucoup avancee la nouvelle Ligne, and on a acheve un grand travail
sans fair aucune perte, en sort que dans 3 jours on espere d'etre pres de la
Contrescarpe. On a detache des Partys pour aller reconnoitre l'Ennemi qu'on
croit d'etre bientot icy aux environs.

Le 9 un Party de Tartares vint jusques verse notre Camp. Il a emmene quantite
de bestail, qu'on faisoit paitre malgre la deffense au de la des Sentinelles.
On les a poursuivi and on a fait 2 Prisonniers qui disent que le Grand Visir
est verse la Morava avec son Armee and qu'il doit incessamment s'avancer verse
Semendria.

The Grand Vizier having entered the Town on the 15th, September.
the Christians retired from before it, the Vizier caused all the Works which
the Germans had made, to be filled, and levelled; and what damage the Cannon
and Bombs had made, to be repaired; and sent fresh Provisions for Temeswaer
under a strong Convoy; and having caused the Tartars to make some Excursion
near Peter Waradin, and taken a view of the Imperial Camp, the Vizier attempted
nothing more of moment. Nor did the Imperial Army undertake any thing farther,
than to Retrench it self near to Peter Waradin, and act on the Defensive, which
was all that had been done of moment, during the remainder of this whole
Campaign, unless in these two Particulars following.

On the 17th of September, Count Batheim Ban of Croatia, Dalmatia, and
Sclavonia, marched from the River Unna, and Costannizza, with the Land Militia,
and arrived on the 19th at three a Clock in the Afternoon, before the Turkish
City called Brunzein Maidan; where having taken a Survey of the Ground, the
following Night the Trenches were opened: And

On the 20th, they began to fire their great Guns, Brunzien taken by Storm.
and to throw Bombs into the City: The Garrison, and the Inhabitants defended
themselves bravely; for though they were twice Summoned, they refused to
Surrender, saying, That the Place was a Magazine belonging to the Sultan, which
therefore they were obliged to maintain to the last Drop of their Blood: The
Place was also of greater importance, by reason of the Iron and Copper Mines,
which arose in the Neighborhood, our of which they forged Mortar-pieces, and
great Quantities of Iron Bullets.

The Besieged defended themselves very valiantly for the space of two Hours;
but at last the Pallisadoes being pulled up, or cut down, the Walls of the City
were forced, and taken, and above 500 Men and Women were put to the Sword,
amongst which there were two Chief Commanders, and a third, Chachilovich by
Name, was taken Prisoner, together with many principal Persons more of both
Sexes.

Within the Town the Besiegers found great quantities of Bombs, of which some
were of 200 weight, with store of Brass of rare and cunning Workmanship,
together with other very rich Booty; of all which having Plundered the
Inhabitants, and carried away all that was worth the taking, they burned the
City and Suburbs to Ashes, Plundered and Burnt.
with the Houses that were in the Neighborhood, with the loss only of about 40
Men.

The other Successful Enterprise was executed on the 19th of October by General
Hoffkirken, against Giula, of which the General himself gave this Narrative in
a Letter to the Duke of Croy, sent him by an Express in this manner.

General Hoffkirken's Letter to the Duke of Croy.
THIS Morning I-fell upon the Turks and Tartars very early, when they least
expected me, and having at the first onset forced them to retreat beyond the
first Palanca, I caused the Dragoons, with 500 Horsemen to alight from their
Horses, and with their Swords in their Hands to pass the Ditch: The Enterprise
was bold, but vigorously executed. The Turks were very strong, their Force
consisting of 40 Troops of Horse, 1200 Janisaries, with 2800 Tartars newly
arrived to Convoy Provision into that Fortress; but being on the other side of
it, they were so hotly attacked, that they were driven to the Castle, and
upwards of 1000 of them were killed, and 2500 Horses and Camels taken from
them. All the Provisions which should have been brought into Giula were yet
lying in their Mosques within the Palancha, together with some thousands of
Measures of Corn which came laden on Camels, were burned in the sight of the
Turks, and thereby all their cost and labors lost, which were designed to
supply that Place with Provisions. Had I come but eight Hours sooner, I had
also met with the Tartars marching to Debrezin; howsoever I am now preparing to
follow them, and hope to ^ome up with them to morrow, or the day following.


The Tartars returning homewards to Budziack, and passing through Walachia,
they entirely ruined and destroyed the Country. But before we end this Year,
and the Accidents which happened therein, we are to take notice of another
terrible fire at Constantinople: For as there happened one before in the Month
of May last past, so now another broke out on the 26th of August, more grievous
and terrible than any had done for many years before. The former Fire in May
began at Balata, as we have related; but that in the Month of August broke out
at Odun Schelesi, or the Wood-wharf, August*
being the common place where all the Timber for building Houses and Ships is
laid, and in which are many hundreds of Chambers of vast bigness for receiving
all sorts and sizes of squared Timber, with millions of Boards, and other
Timber fitted for building; the Damage of which amounted to an incredible sum;
and was of such a general terror and consternation, that had it happened at the
time when Belgrade was last besieged, the People for very affrightment would
have fled from Philopopolis and Adrianople; and at Constantinople it self the
People were possessed with such a Panick Fear, that thousands of Families were
ready to abandon the City, and to fly into Asia, Constantinople burned a second
time this Year.
for a quarter part of the City was burned down; and to increase this terror
amongst the People, it was given out, that the Germans were coming upon them
with a very numerous Army. And it is here very observable, that about that time
things being in a doubtful condition, and no news coming from the Army, nor
from Belgrade, the Grand Seignior in a most furious rage swore, that if that
City were lost, he would take off the Heads of the Grand Vizier, and of Osman
Pasha, the Chimacam, who affrighted with this Menace, fell sick, and died with
fear. The Eunuchs also in the Seraglio took the confidence from hence to speak
against the Government, exclaiming openly, that if such Miscarriages were
permitted in, and amongst the Principal Officers, the Sultan would be forced to
quit Europe, and take refuge in Anatolia.

But when the news came that the Siege of Belgrade was raised, the Anger of the
Sultan began to abate, and to be appeased against the Chief Officers; and then
the language of the People changed its tone, and praised the Officers, who but
a few days before they had cursed and condemned to utter Ruin, saying* that
the raising of this Siege was a Miracle of God, who had heard their Prayers;
which brought a vast Confluence of People to their Mosches, to give Thanks to
God, and to make Corban, as they call it, Corban made at Constantinople and
Adrianople.
which is a kind of Sacrifice, offered in this manner; they who are of the
richer sort, kill Sheep and Lambs, and having prepared them, they cut them in
pieces, and give them to the Poor, which is a great Charity and Relief to them;
and this in such cases of Joy, and Thanksgiving, is the most Solemn Act in all
their Religion.

The Turks before this Action were grievously dejected and cast down, but were
again revived by the news that the Siege of Belgrade was raised. To these
Misfortunes and Miseries the raging Pestilence of this Year contributed very
much, of which thousands of People died in all parts of the Ottoman Dominions;
and thus the Turks had three Judgments of God upon them this last Year, namely
Fire, Sword, and Pestilence.

And this is all that passed this Year of any moment; for the Venetiansf had
neither done, nor attempted any thing; and the Turks having lost nothing, took
courage against the next Year to be early in the field, with a far greater Army
than they had this, and likewise at Sea with a stronger, and a more numerous
Fleet, having 20 Sail of Stout Men of War in the Archipelago already fitted,
from 50 to 80 Guns, besides the increase of their Galiots, and Brigantines on
the Danube. These and such like matters encouraging the Turks, with the
Expectation of a Peace with Poland, which the French Ambassador fomented, and
forwarded so far, that an Ambassador being sent from Varsovia to Adrianople to
treat, the same backed with the French Interest; it was generally believed that
the Peace was concluded; but how true that was, the Successes of the next Year
will demonstrate unto us.

Anno 1694.
March the Grand Vizier was dispossessed of his High Office, and succeeded by
Ali, Pasha of Tripoli; the cause whereof was on a slight occasion, which was
this; the Vizier being desirous to take some recreation with hunting Hares on a
certain day, his Enemies took the opportunity to bring the Sultan that way,
where he unluckily met with the Vizier's Dogs, and a noise of hunting; of which
the Grand Seignior enquiring what it meant, some Enemies to the Vizier
answered, that it was the Grand Vizier, who might have employed his time in
management of the Affairs of the Empire, better than in Sports and Recreations,
reserved, and more becoming the pleasures of his Master, than his own; but this
(as they added) was no wonder, it being his constant trade and practice. With
which the Sultan became so enraged, that he immediately sent for him, The Grand
V ^^^r ^^po^ ^.
and taking the Seals from him, he deprived him of his Office.

Hereupon Ali Pasha was sent for, All Pasha Vizier.
being esteemed a Man of great Courage, and Experience in all State Affairs,
and being Arrived at Adrianople in the beginning of May, he immediately put
forth the Horse-Tail, which is a Signal that the Vizier designs his march for
the Camp in 40 days afterward; and to show his readiness, and zeal for the
Grand Seignior's Service, he raised and equipped 3000 Men at his own Charge,
and out of his own Estate. But here we may observe, that before the former
Vizier was deposed, Orders had been given, that henceforward no Venetian Ships
should be permitted to come into any of the Ottoman Ports under English or
French Colors, upon confiscation of Ship and Lading; howsoever two Months were
allowed for execution of the Penalty, on those Ships which were already arrived
within the Ports.

As the Grand Vizier was deposed for the reasons aforesaid, Chimacam Ahmet
Pasha banished.
so also was the Chimacam, called Calailicos Ahmet Pasha, of Greek Extraction*
in danger of being strangled, had not the Queen Mother, and the Kuzlir Aga, or
Chief Eunuch procured the favor to have his Punishment altered, and changed to
an Exile into Egypt, for the many Tyrannies and Cruelties he had committed; and
particularly for that he had taken away the Ancient Church called St. George at
Constantinople, belonging to the Patriarchate for some hundreds of Years before
that time: In his place Jeien Pasha, a prudent Person, and one very well
practiced in Affairs, was constituted Chimacam; and being the Nephew of the
famous Kupriogli, gave general satisfaction to all People, and particularly to
the Greeks and Christians, to whom he always showed much favor.

At this time, as is usual, there were two great Factions at Adrianople, one in
the Seraglio, consisting of the Queen Regent, the Kuzlir-Aga, and other
Principal Courtiers; the other Party in opposition to these, were the Mufti,
the Grand Vizier, and Principal Officers of the Janissaries, and Spahees: To
strengthen these, after the Death of Osman Pasha, the Selictar-Aga was chosen
Chimacam, being a Young Man, a Chircassian by Nation, of a very good
understanding, and for his years very well versed in Affairs: This Person being
promoted to this Office without the knowledge or consent either of the Grand
Vizier, or the Mufti, but only by the Machination or Contrivance of the
Kuzlir-Aga and Queen Mother, rendered his Condition the more unsettled, and
uncertain. And indeed not only the Court, but all the Empire was in great
Confusion by reason of the weakness of three or four Sultans successively, of
whom we have already given a Character, and particularly of this Sultan Achmet,
of whom the best we can say is, that he was a Good Natured Jolly Prince, and
feared no hurt, nor wished it to any Person whatsoever.

But how the state of Affairs were in those days, we may learn from a Letter,
which my Lord Paget wrote to a Person of Quality at Vienna, dated April 24. N.
S. 1694.

Lord Paget's Letter.
SIR,
THEY so often change their Ministers here, that an Ambassador can scarce come
to treat twice with the same Person. Since my arrival here at the Port, they
have had three Grand Viziers, three Chimacams of Adrianople, four Chimacams, of
Constantinople, three Aga's of the Janisaries, three Tefterdars or Lord
Treasurers, two New Cadileschers or Judges of Asia, and Romelia; and in short,
all the Great Officers of the Empire were changed, (the Mufti only excepted) by
which there was such a New Set of Idiots and Fools got into Places, as would
overturn the best settled Government in the World. For these Officers being
only such, as Chance offers, it is a doubtful Wager, whether he proves a Fool,
or a Wise Man; and in case he should prove a Man of Parts, yet he is suffered
so short a time to remain in his Office, that he is in no capacity to improve
them.

Ambassadors, unless it be at their first Audience, and at that of Congedie,
have no Conversation or Access to the Grand Seigniors, and then they affect
such a sort of Grandeur, as may best cover all their Thoughts by a Silence, so
that they give no place for any debate; and a Man can never lay any foundation
upon their Words: For as their Ally of France scorns to be a Slave to his word;
so they hold it to be no dishonor to be open, and esteem nothing for a Secret.
It is true, that very seldom or never, a Minister shall receive a flat denial
from a Turk, for he shall train you on to the very last point; and when you
come to the last Argument, and Upshot of all, then a Sum of Money must make the
Conclusion.


The disorders made by the Arabian Princes in the Countries about Aleppo did
still continue, which caused great fears, and apprehensions at Constantinople
it self: but those Countries being far remote, and distant made little
alterations or noise at Court.

The Negotiations of Poland at Adrianople had no success, April.
so that the Envoy was dispatched away, re infecta. Some few days afterward,
the Tartar Han quitted the Court with dissatisfaction, and all things seemed in
much disorder; however they talked high of great preparations for the following
Campaign: And to make some evidences thereof, they dispatched away 1200
Janisaries from Adrianople to Belgrade; moreover they sent away 32 Saiques for
the Danube.

About this time the Grand Vizier arrived from Tripoli de Soria, where he had
been Pasha, and was sent for by the Grand Seignior to head the Army in Hungary,
having been recommended by some Favorites to have been the wisest and most
experienced General in the Empire, but the trial showed him to be a Man rather
of the Pen and good Language, than of Arms.

But to speak more fully and pertinently concerning the Negotiations of the
Polish Envoy at Adrianople, he was lodged at Demerdesh, about an English Mile
from the City, in a poor Village, without Ceremony, or any great Equipage; he
had a Coach with six Horses, in which was a French Jesuit: His Business was
declared rather to be designed to the Tartar Han, who was at that time at
Adrianople, than to the Grand Seignior, and accordingly had Audience of him.

In the first place it was observable, Polish Envoy's Audience with the Tartar
Han at Adrianople.
that during the time of his Audience with the Tartar Han, the Polish Envoy
kept his Cap off, until he was bid to sit down and be covered; after a few
words of Complement, he arose up and delivered his Letter. The Han asked him,
whether he had any other Letters for him; to which he replied no. He asked him
from whom that Letter was, he answered, from the King his Master. The Han asked
him, whether he had any thing to say to him by word of Mouth, to which he
answered no, for that all was contained within the Letter. The Han spoke in the
Tartar Language, and the Pole in his own. The Audience ended, the Pole arose,
kissed the Han's Vest, retired backwards with his Face toward the Han, which
is a part of respect amongst Turks and Tartars, and most of the Eastern People,
all which was over in less than half an Hours time.

The which Passage seemed very Mysterious, and not well understood, from
whence, and from whom this Envoy was sent; but being gone out of the Presence
of the Han, the Negotiation appeared to concern War and Peace, and a Treaty
proposed to be held in order thereunto, between the Turk and Tartar on one
side, and of the Emperor, King of Poland, and the Venetian State on the other.
Hereof intelligence was given by my Lord Paget, Monsieur Heemskirk, and Here
Colyer, to the Emperor, Venetians, and all the Allies whom it might concern;
the which seemed very strange, that such a Negotiation should be set on foot
unknown to them, or to the Mediators of the Peace; the which was still more
surprising, when the Orders for such a Treaty given to a Polish Minister, were
disavowed, and unexpected by the Emperor and the Venetians; and what made the
Business the more doubtful, was, That this Envoy brought no Letters for the
Mediators, A sham Envoy from Poland.
from any of the Allies, or Princes concerned; nor did he admit of any Salutes
from the Foreign Christian Ministers; for though my Lord Paget had his Secretary
Mr. Coke, and the Ambassador Colyer had his Chief Interpreter upon the Place,
yet the Pole would admit of none of their Addresses, or Visits, but adhered
close to the French Ambassadors, with whom he had long and frequent Conferences.

This unusual way of management of Treaties, gave just reason of suspicion to
all Persons, that this Negotiation was nothing but an Artifice of the French,
to bring Poland into a separate Peace with the Turk, which perhaps by the
Cunning and Crafty Insinuations of the French might have succeeded, had not the
Pole too earnestly insisted on the Surrender of Caminieck into their Hands,
with all the Provisions, Arms, and Fortresses, and with the Uti Possidetis;
which was a Term at that time, and during the late Treaty, mortally hateful to
the Turks: Had not that Term, I say, been unluckily started, it is very
probable, that the Turks would have accepted of a separate Peace with the
Poles: And moreover this particular Article would go down the worse, in regard
that the Turks had lately repaired that strong Fortress, and supplied it with
all sorts of Provisions, and of all Parts had made it almost impregnable: And
another Difficulty was, That Poland was not willing to Surrender some small
Places which they had taken on the Frontiers of Moldavia; The Turks averse to a
Peace, with the Surrender of Caminiec^
by which it plainly appears, That all this Treaty was nothing but an Artifice
of the French, to amuse the Turks, and try if possible, by some Overtures of
this Nature, to bring the Poles into a separate Peace.

The Cham of Tartary being a Chief Actor, and designed to bear a principal part
in this disguised Treaty, finding that hereby he began by his Friendship with
the Polish Envoy, to lose his Credit, and Reputation, and that his good Friend
the Grand Vizier, (though newly put into Place) was tottering, and near being
Deposed, and to be himself commanded to return into his own Country, he hastened
away this supposititious Envoy all he could, and accordingly, by Order of the
Grand Seignior, he was dispatched away with some Indignity, and Disgrace;
neither the Tartar Cham, nor the Grand Vizier daring to open their Mouths in
his Behalf, or to mention any of the Conditions he had proposed for a Peace:
And such a Person must have been endued with a good Stock of Confidence, The
Polish Envoy sent away with Disgrace.
and Impudence to manage a Business of the highest Importance on such weak
Grounds as he had to pretend, especially at a time when all the Grand Officers
of the Empire were upon their Change. But such as speak most favorably of this
Business say, That this Polish Envoy, or Agent, was not sent to make a separate
Peace, but to prepare things in order thereunto, by advancing their Conditions,
on which the Port might afterward treat with the Emperor and the Venetians,
sending their Ministers into Transylvania with Powers to that purpose; but all
this came to nothing as will appear by the sequel of this History.

In the mean time all things were in great disorder in the Court between those
Officers who live within and without the Seraglio, to make up these
Differences. The Grand Vizier, with the Tartar Han, Tefterdar, Pasha, and
Janisar Aga, and some others held a Council in the Month of February, where it
was resolved, To move the Grand Seignior, to remove the Kuzlir-Aga, and the
Haznadar-Aga; and to that end the Vizier made Talkish to the Grand Seignior,
and the other Arz, for removal of those Persons, who were Mutinous, and
Intriguing in Matters of State.

Upon this Complaint the Grand Seignior grew very angry, and told the Vizier,
That the Kuzlir-Aga deserved indeed to be punished, for recommending him, the
Vizier, to that high Office; adding, That he was neither a Fool, nor a Child,
to be governed by other Men's Humors; and that the Report was false, That the
Kuzlir-Aga meddled in Affairs of State.

The Grand Seignior showing in this manner some Displeasure against the Vizier,
who had now but little Support besides the Tartar Cham; it was insinuated to
the Sultan, That it was improper for two Princes to live in the same City; and
that it had never been the Practice of former times, for the Cham to reside at
the Port, there to pry into the Secrets of the Empire.

Hereof the Cham having had some Intimation, and seeing the Disorders arising
in the Court, and fearing to be sent away, he desired to be dismissed, pretending
that his Presence was necessary in his own Country, he took leave of the Sultan
at a Solemn Audience; and being richly presented, he began his Journey
homewards, being accompanied out of Adrianople by the Grand Vizier.

After the Departure of the Cham, the Grand Vizier's Wife, who was Sister to
the Grand Seignior, was forbidden the Court, which was an evident demonstration
that her Husband was not likely to continue long in that Office.

The Here Heemskirk, who had been sent to the Assistance of Monsieur Colyer,
Ambassador for the States General at Constantinople, for management of the
Peace between the Emperor and the Turks; or rather for want of an English
Ambassador, the two former, Sir William Hussy, and Mr. Herbert being both
Dead. At that time the Turks seeming inclinable to a Peace, King William
thought it not fit to let pass this Opportunity for want of an Ambassador from
England; but rather qualified Monsieur Heemskirk then at Vienna, with the Title
of English Ambassador to the Grand Seignior (of which we have formerly made
some mention) the which had currantly passed with the Turks, had not the French
discovered the matter, and declared that this Heemskirk was no English Man, nor
no Minister of the King of Enland, but a German; and one under Notion of an
Ambassador, sent for a Spy to deceive the Turks.

Mr. Heemskirk sent back.
Upon which Insinuation, Heemskirk was not able afterward to treat with the
Turks, nor would they accept of any Propositions from him, or acknowledge him
for a public Minister, but committed him to Custody, and kept him under a
strict Guard; and so was detained for some Months, until the Lord Paget was
sent to supply the Office of a true and undoubted Ambassador; at which time
Here Heemskirk was called to Audience, and had his Dismission.

Upon Departure Heemskirk said, He was sorry that his Endeavors for putting an
end to this Bloody War, had been unsuccessful. To which the Vizier answered,
That Peace would be, when God pleased, and was not at the Pleasure and Will of
Man: And so without saying any thing more material, Heemskirk was dismissed:
and began his Journey from Adrianople toward Belgrade on the 2d of March.

During these Matters, great were the Disorders at Court; the Grand Vizier grew
weary of his Office, and would gladly have been rid of it, could he have done
it with safety, and Name his Successor; and in the mean time his Wife
endeavored to accommodate Matters between her Husband, and the Kuzlir-Aga:
Notwithstanding which Differences, and the great Animosities, yet they slackned
nothing of their Diligences to be early this Year in the Field, and accordingly
Commands were issued out to dispose all things thereunto: And an Aga was sent
to Walachia for 500 Horses to carry Flour to Belgrade.

The French Ambassador persuaded the Turks to open their Campaign this Year, by
way of Transylvania; and to induce them to follow his Advice, he assured them
that his King would have an Army this Year in Germany of 100000 Men, but the
Turks never gave much Credence to the Boastings of the French, whom they
commonly styled with the Name of Yalangi Francos: And to second this Opinion of
the French, the Nogay Tartars, The Nogay Tartar.
who were settled in a Part of Moldavia, made an Incursion through that Province
into Transylvania, and took from thence about 6000 Captives, and a considerable
Booty.

These Nogay Tartars were called into those Countries by the Tartar Han, to
succor and assist him at the time, when the Moscovites came against Crim, and
were then placed with their Families in good Numbers about Budziac, and part of
Moldavia; the Prince of which made Complaint to the Grand Seignior, that being
deprived of a great part of his Country by his new come Guests; the Provinces
were entirely ruined, and the People no longer able to support the Charge, and
pay their Tribute: But this Complaint having but little Effect, the whole Blame
of these Miscarriages were attributed to the ill Conduct of the Grand Vizier;
for which cause he was Deposed, and the Embrahor, The Grand Vizier deposed.
or Master of the Horse, was sent to demand, and receive the Seals from him,
and the Chimacam of Adrianople employed to Seal up his House.

Hereupon the Deposed Vizier obtained by the assistance of Friends, a
Hattesherisse, or Royal Command from the Grand Seignior, to return toward his
Government of Tripoli de Soria, without molestation; for which he gave the
Messenger that brought it five Purses of Money.

Notwithstanding which, a Capigi, with several Bostangees, were dispatched
after him to bring him back, and having overtaken him, he was committed
Prisoner between the Ports, from whence very few escape with their Lives; nor
did he long survive, his Estate being all seized, and confiscated to the Use of
the Sultan.

Another Capigi-Basha was likewise sent to fetch the Head of Ali Pasha, who was
Great Vizier before this last Deposed Vizier. Likewise about the same time, the
Kahya of Osman Pasha, the lately deceased Chimacam of Adrianople, was put under
Arrest, and his Master's Money, Jewels, and Goods, with his own, were demanded
to bring Money into the Seraglio.

But before we proceed any farther, it may not be from our Purpose to declare
an Action which happened in the Port of Smyrna, in the Month of March, as
follows. March.


One Capt. Hely Commander of a Merchant's Ship of 30 Guns, having brought some
Goods to Smyrna from Legorne, and finding no Goods that presented for a Voyage
back again, he resolved to seek his Fortune in some other Port: The same
Morning Captain Marine, a French Merchant-Man, and Captain Teissere another
French Man weighed also, and accompanied the English Ship half way to the
Castle, where they remained a Back-stays for several Hours; and seeing Captain
Hely turning out, watched an Opportunity to bear down upon him; which Hely
endeavoring to avoid all that was possible, could not yet hinder the French
Man from falling foul of him, by which he broke his Sprit-sail Yard, and
Jack-staff; and presented many Muskets, and Pistols at the Men to provoke them
to Fight, or commit some rash Action, to the Breach of the Peace in the Grand
Seignior's Port; but Captain Hely managed his Business with such Moderation,
and Courage, that he saved the King's Jack, and took it in, and then hoisted it
again; and the French cutting some of their own Mizen-Shrouds, Hely got clear,
and Sailed away toward the Castle, with a good part of the French Man's
Colors, being foul of a Block.

That Night Hely having procured Materials to repair his Damage, sailed away,
and the next Day got within five Miles of Marine, Rowing to come up to him,
which he did near Cape Caraborno, and there engaged him, and after four Hours
Fight, in which Hely fired above 200 of his Cannon, he took the French Ship,
which was said to be worth more than a 100000 Lion Dollars.

There being two Viziers lately Deposed, it was commanded, The New Vizier.
That the New Vizier should be actually at Adrianople on the 15th of April, so
as that he might be with the Army in the Field before the Month of June.

This New Vizier was called Ali Pasha, as was also his Predecessor, and both
had been Pasha's at Tripoli of Soria, and came from thence; but as to this, he
had no great Reputation for his Qualities: He had five Years ago been
Tefterdar, or Lord Treasurer, at the Port; he had been a great Favorite, and
an old Friend of the late Kuzlir-Aga; but others who knew him well, had no
great Opinion of him, but looked upon him, as a Man of little Experience,
without Parts, or Abilities for so great a Charge, Character of the New Vizier.
and esteemed for a Person not likely to continue long in that Sublime Station.

Whilst Matters were preparing for the Camp, against the Arrival of the New
Vizier. Ahmet Pasha who had been Chimacam of Constantinople, was declared Pasha
of Arzrum in Armenia Major, and was actually Listing Soldiers in Nicomedia; at
which every one wondered, and commonly reported, That he having been disobliged
by the Court, was there Raising and Listing Soldiers to join with the Rebels in
Asia; of which some Murmurings coming to the Ears of the Kuzlir-Aga his Friend,
he advised him to hasten away with all diligence possible, for that his
loytering in those Parts, gave just Jealousy and Ground to the contrary
Faction, to report Evil and Dangerous Matters concerning him; and for that
reason he urged him to be gone on the Business for which he was employed;
promising, That in case he dealt Faithfully and Wisely in this Business, he
would at his Return use his best Endeavors to make him Grand Vizier. The least
Whisperings of this Nature in the Time of another Sultan, had been sufficient
to have taken the Heads both of the Pasha, and of his Friend the Kuzlir-Aga,
but this present Grand Seignior feared no Evil, nor designed it unto others; so
that Ahmet Pasha lived boldly, and without control in Nicomedia, being Proud,
Obstinate, and Capricious, carrying no respect to the Commands and Orders of
the Port; but gave out his own Commands to several Places, to raise some
Thousands of Segmen, which are a sort of Foot Soldiers; which he acted so
openly, that the World could not but take notice thereof, and declare him a
Rebel: Upon which, fearing some worse Proceedings, he quitted Nicomedia, and
marched toward his Brethren in Asia, to take part with them in their
Rebellious Designs.

In the mean time News came that the Grand Vizier was speedily expected at
Adrianople, and that he was already arrived at Chalcedon, which was a Place
anciently famous for one of the four General Councils, and opposite to
Constantinople; from whence on the 18th of April he passed the Channel into
Europe, and taking the ready Road leading to Adrianople, he entered that City
on the 21st of that Month, where he was received with all imaginable Kindness
by the Faction then predominant in the Seraglio.

And the Vizier to demonstrate all Duty and Obedience to the Sultan, as also
Affection to the People, and Militia, he issued forth the Horse-Tails on the
second Day after his Arrival, which denotes the Intentions of the Grand Vizier
to begin his March in 40 Days from the time, or at farthest on the first of the
following June.

According to this Ancient Custom, the Vizier 20 Days before his Departure
pitched his Tents, and sent out the Horse-Tails into the Camp near Adrianople,
with intent as was reported, to march toward Belgrade; but Transylvania was
this Year chiefly in their Eye, as was advised by the French Ambassador; but it
appearing, that great Preparations were making by the Imperialists, to fall
upon Belgrade, the Turks altered their Design, and took their way toward that
Place, to Fortify, and Strengthen it with what Forces they were able.

Upon the Arrival of the Grand Vizier at Belgrade, many sad Complaints and
Lamentations were brought him from Temeswaer, and Giula, complaining of their
straightened Condition for want of Provisions; upon which it was resolved to
supply them with Rice and Corn of all sorts; and the Chimacam of Adrianople, in
the absence of the Vizier, sent them several Horse Ladings of Provisions, and
Money to the value of 40000 Dollars, or 80 Purses, under the Convoy of 800
Janisaries.

Whilst the Grand Vizier was acting in Hungary, Advices came from all Hands in
Asia, and was reported as well from Europeans, as from Asiaticks, that the
Sheriffs Army increased daily, and had Plundered a very rich City, in which
were great Quantities of Rich Goods of all sorts, and that this Army lived
under exact Discipline; the which Army (as was reported) was divided into two
Parts, one Division remained with the Sheriff, and lay Encamped between Mecca
and Medina; and another part of this Army was encamped in the Province, or
Kingdom of Bassora, where they made Head against those Pasha's which were
Constituted by the Sultan, endeavoring to obstruct all those Ways leading to
Aleppo. The News hereof did not a little trouble the Mind of the Grand
Seignior, and served to increase his Disease of the Dropsy, which had been
very fatal to the Ottoman Family; howsoever a certain famous Physician gave
hopes of his Recovery, pretending to Cure him, Sultan Achmet in danger of Death.
by opening four Issues in his Legs and Feet; but an acute Fever coming
thereupon, People began to despair of his Life, which caused a great Silence in
all Parts, particularly in the Army in Hungary, where it was reported, That the
Sultan was Dead, or out of all hopes of Recovery; besides which, all things
went ill for the Turks, for the three Pasha's which were dispatched from Sofia
to receive Taxes from the Venetians, not far from Narenta, returned back
without Contributions toward the War; which so grievously troubled the Grand
Vizier, that he dispatched away three other Beyes with a good Detachment of the
Albanian Militia, to force and collect his Taxes. And though the Turks put a good
Face on their Misfortunes; yet the Villainous Rebels, and Tumultuous Robbers in
Asia continued their Outrages, so that nothing came from thence, but Complaints
and Unhappy Tidings: All the force that they could make, or expect from thence,
was no more than the Yearly Succors for guard of the Castles upon the
Hellespont, together with three Pasha's, and two Beys, making in all 3600 Men
appointed for Recruits for the Grand Vizier.

To add farther to all these Misfortunes Advices were carried to all Places,
That the Venetian Fleet was arrived before Mytilene with 30 Galleys, four
Galleasses, 12 Ships of War, on which were Shipped 15000 Soldiers, the greatest
part of which consisted of Albanians, Greeks, and Sclavonians.

Moreover farther intelligence came from Salonica, or Thessalonica, That they
greatly feared the Venetian Fleet, which threatened to make a Descent within
that Gulf, and were in some apprehensions least the Enemy should make an
attempt on the Island of Scio.

About the middle of August the Turkish Forces began to arrive at several
Quarters about Belgrade, August.
where the 14th at Night, all was in Alarm by a Turkish Gally, which took Fire
by the Negligence of the Men, and having much Powder and Ammunition aboard,
blew up, to the terrible affrightment of the Turks in Belgrade, who
apprehended, that the German Army was already under the Walls of the City; though
at the same time they were no nearer than Peter Waradin, within the
Retrenchment of last Year; where finding their Troops increase but slowly from
other Quarters, they resolved there to remain Encamped, and act upon the
Defensive.

September.
On the 8th of September, the Day before the Vanguard of the Turkish Army
appeared in sight of that Retrenchment, a most Terrible Storm happened, which
carried away the Tents of the Imperial Army, sunk several of their Ships, A
Storm on the Danube.
broke their Bridge of Boats, and drove five Ships of the Fleet down to the
Islands. All which they had much ado to repair, and bring in order again
before the whole Turkish Army came to assault them; for the Grand Vizier having
received a positive Order from the Sultan, to Attack and Fight the Imperialists
wherever they could meet with them, in compliance therewith Decamped on the
seventh Instant from Salankement, and marched directly for Peter Waradin. And

On the ninth, some of the Vanguard appeared in sight of that Place; the Grand
Vizier with the Body of the Army then Encamping at Carlowitz, three Hours
distant from the Imperial Army.

On the 10th, the whole Army came within half an Hour of the Imperial
Retrenchment, the Foot taking their Quarters next to our Front, and the Horse
placing themselves to the left of their Foot, and on the left of these were
Camped the Tartars. Their Fleet consisting in 110 Ships, came likewise within
Cannon-shot of the Imperial Ships, and cast their Anchor there, being posted in
a Line of Battle.

The whole Day the Hussars were Skirmishing with the Turks and Tartars; and on
the 11th it was thought the Turks would have Stormed the Imperial Camp;
wherefore all was prepared to receive them: They appeared with 3 or 400
Ensigns, or Companies, within 800 Paces of the Retrenchment, but behind the
Earth of a Ditch which they had made, and which covered them so well, that the
Imperial Guns could but little annoy them.

A Fight by Water and Land.
On the 12th the Turks begun to fire from all sides on the Imperial Camp, with
their Great Guns: Their Fleet also advanced higher up, and fired furiously on
the Imperial Ships, and on the Bridge, September.
but were answered as hotly both from the Imperial Ships, and from the
Batteries on the Shore: Two Wagons with Ammunition were set on fire by a Shot
of the Turks, and about 30 Men were thereby Killed or Burnt. Count Solms, Major
of the Regiment of Cuirasses of Count Herbersteyn, was also Killed with a
Cannon-Bullet.

On the 13th, the firing both by Water and by Land, was again renewed: The
Attack made by the Turks, seeming to be a formal Seige both of Peter Waradin,
and of the Imperial Camp; they having either on their Ships, or Batteries,
upwards of 500 Great Guns continually firing, though with little damage to the
Germans: The Design of the Turks being to ruin the Imperial Bridge.

This great Shooting continued at the same rate the 14th, 15th, 16th and 17th,
which last Day the Turks not only threw Bombs out of three Mortar-Pieces into
the Imperial Retrenchments, but also from the Point of the Island with two
Mortars, into Peter Waradin, and carried more Guns on their Batteries.

But the Night betwixt the 17th and 18th, the Turks were pretty quiet, but
after Break of Day they again fired more hotly than ever, and showed themselves
beyond the Imperial Retrenchments; but being briskly Attacked by the Hussars,
they were droven back to their Camp. The Turks also drew a new Parallel-Line 60
Paces nearer to the Imperial Camp, and were very busy to close the said Line
with their Line of Communication.

On the 19th in the Afternoon, the German Right Wing fired with Great Guns and
Muskets from an Eminence on the first Lines of the Turks, and annoyed them
very much, so that a great Alarm arose amongst them, and the Turks came running
from all sides with Horse and Foot, to strengthen and assist their Left Wing:
The Brandenburgers r^inforce the G^rmans.
That Evening the Brandenburgh Foot, consisting of six Battallions, arrived in
the Camp, which were received with three Salvo's of the Guns from the Castle
and the Batteries on the Waterside: This Reinforcement being arrived, the
Turks seemed less brisk in their Attack; but that which most incommoded them,
was, That the Governor of Titul surprised and took 25 Turkish Ships laden with
Provisions for their Army, and sunk two or three of their Frigates. That the
Tartars having at the Request of the Grand Vizier swam over the Donau near
Cobila, (where indeed they had taken about 1000 Horse, and part of the Imperial
Baggage) were overtaken in their Retreat by General Bassompiere, who cut down
above 1500 of the Tartars, amongst which was the Han's Son; and that thereupon
the Tartar Han fell out with the Grand Vizier and Commanded his Troops,
consisting of 7000 Tartars which remained, to prepare for their return Home;
notwithstanding the Grand Vizier continued his Endeavors against the Imperial
Retrenchments, and Peter Waradin, and the Bridge, till the 13th of October; but
seeing that they lost more than they got at this sport, The Grand Vizier raises
the Siege.
and that also because the six or seven following Days of great Rains, the
Turkish Soldiers were up to their Knees in the Water in their Approaches, which
caused Numbers of 'em to Die, having also been several Days without Bread, by
the taking of the abovesaid Ships; and not knowing when any would arrive, the
Grand Vizier on the 13th at Night, caused all the Guns from the Forts and
Batteries to be carried off, and Shipped on their Galleys; and thereupon
quitted at once all his Approaches, Guards, and Retrenchments, and marched back
with the whole Army to Salankement, leaving nothing in his Camp but some few
Shovels, and three Dead Bodies; neither could the Germans follow them, their
Horse being Encamped on the other side of the River, and the Retreat of the
Turks not having been perceived till the next Day; when immediately upon the
discovery some Horse were sent after them, which returned with some straggling
Turks only, the rest of their Army having passed the Save, and broke their
Bridge down after 'em: And thus the Turks ended this Campaign; but the Germans
had the good fortune to join the City of Giula to their other Conquests.

Toward the end of this Month of September, Scio taken by the Venetians.
News came in an unexpected and astonishing manner to Adrianople, That the
Venetians had Surprised the Island of Scio, and in a few Days, without much
difficulty, had made themselves Masters of the whole Island.

At first both the Castle and the Forts Capitulated, and on the 19th all was
yielded up; and the same Day the Turkish Garrison was by agreement Transported
into Anatolia, and Disbarked at Chisme, (as the Turks call it) being the
nearest Land unto the Island.

With this News the Turks were affected with a most Terrible Consternation; and
then those two long Words might have been said of them Consternabantur
Constantinopolitani. The News was so surprising at first, that no Man would
believe it; but various and frequent Reports confirmed the Truth thereof; and
though to the great Mortification of the Turks, the News came confirmed from all
Hands, yet the Turks comforted themselves with the Thoughts, that that Island
could not remain long in the Hands of the Venetians.

The Sultan howsoever cheared himself up with better Successes by Land; and
gave order to the Grand Vizier to fight the Germans upon what Terms soever
should be offered; but the Vizier returned for Answer, That his Forces were so
weak this Year for want of the Asiatick Troops, that he was unable to fight the
Christians; which if he should attempt to do, he should undoubtedly Sacrifice
all to the Ruin of the Musselman Cause, and Destruction of the Ottoman Army.
For the truth was, the Grand Vizier had then but a very small Army, consisting
of 11000 Janisaries, and 6000 Albanians under their General Mehmet Oghla, an
Albanian, together with 20000 between Spahees and Segmen, with some Troops
belonging to Pashees, and 7000 Tartars: Besides which, Money was all this Year
very scarce.

Asia was all in Confusion, and in want of every thing; so that it was no
wonder that the Number of true Janisaries should be no greater in the Field;
for Kara Mustapha when he went against Vienna, had no more than 14000; The ill
condition of the Turkish Affairs.
and the famous Sultan Morat, when he went against Bagdat, had no more than
16000, which would not appear strange, in case it were considered, that in the
whole Empire, the entire number of Janisaries consists not of more than 40000
truly Lawful, and Legitimate Janisaries; three parts of which, in the times of
Peace, are lodged in Garrisons, as Candia, Negropont, Rhodes, Cyprus, and in
other Islands, as also in Greece, which are parts of the Morea, and on the
Confines of Persia, where the most considerable Numbers are lodged; to which
may be added Caminieck, Osi, Asack in the Black-Sea, as also in Dalmatia,
Bosnia, and other Confines. With this Answer of the Grand Vizier to the Sultan,
and representation of the present State of the War, the Grand Seignior yielded
to the Urgency of the Times, and permitted the Vizier to return to Adrianople,
and the Soldiers to their Winter Quarters; the which was done with so much
Precipitancy, that the Motion looked more like a Flight, than a Retreat.

The which News being on the 18th of October brought to Adrianople, all things
looked very melancholy, and the People began to droop with sad Countenances,
the Grand Vizier returning back with Shame and Silence; when on the 15th of the
Month all things appeared in a most Tumultuous manner at Adrianople, and
particularly in the chief Mosch there, called Sultan Solim, in which at all
times of Prayer, there is a great Concourse of People, and those of the best
sort, and of the greatest Officers of State, having their best and most
sumptuous Palaces near thar Mosch, which is the finest and stateliest part of
all the City.

It was now early about the time of Morning Prayer, or so soon as the Sabbana
Maaz was ended, People being still upon their Knees with much Silence and
Devotion, A Seditious Preacher.
as their custom is, when a bold Turk well Learned, and of a smooth Tongue,
mounted the Pulpit, having several Accomplices attending beneath to defend him,
in case any Attempt should be made upon: He began with a daring Speech, to
inveigh against the Government; crying out,

Musselmen, or Believers,
YOU are all at this time obliged to stand up for the Faith, for your Country,
and Government.

You cannot but be sensible that the Christians Attack us both by Sea and Land:
That we have a Sultan who Attends to nothing; and a Great Vizier who is not
Acquainted, or Practiced in Affairs either Civil, or Military: Wherefore let us
all run to the Gate of our Mufti, and there cry out, and exclaim for a Change
of Government.

Do you not observe what a Capricious Fool we have for a Vizier, how Obstinate,
and Ignorant, and how he daily commits a thousand Follies?

Whilst all People were attentive to hear him, two Aga's belonging to the
Chimacam, being near the Gate of the Mosch, and over-hearing the Discourse, run
away with it to the Chimacam their Master; who immediately without any delay,
or stop, in a trembling manner mounted on Horseback, and taking with him his
Servants, Officers, and Janisaries all Armed, and Commanded by the
Lieutenant General of the Janisaries, ran to the Mosch, and made this Seditious
Preacher to be seized, which caused great Confusion and Noise through the whole
City; for appeasing which, the Chimacam took a large Turn through all the High
Streets of Adrianople.

At that time it happened that a certain Pasha arrived within a few Hours of
Adrianople, October.
who had been Banished by Command of the Sultan, for many Robberies and Thefts
he had committed in the Public Treasury; his Name was Benli Husaein Pasha,
whose Head he took off; as he did in like manner, and at the same time the Head
of one Musa Aga, and threw them both into the first Courtyard of the Seraglio,
before the Gate of the Divan, declaring that these two were of the Seditious
Mutineers, who had raised the Tumult in the City, which terrified a little for
the present; which when the Chimacam perceived, he was encouraged to proceed,
and took 11 Officers, who were Ringleaders of the Sedition, whose Heads were
heaped up together before the Divan-Door, and their Bodies thrown into the
Cannels in diverse parts of the City: Amongst these, was an Officer of the Grand
Seignior's Stables, called Bekir Aga, a Talking, Mutinous Fellow; as also a
Foolish Astrologer, with 22 others, who were one Night all Strangled, and their
Bodies thrown into the River Tongi, A Sedition quelled.
(which runs near to the Grand Seignior's Palace at Adrianople) and in this
manner the Chimacam prevented a Mutiny, and quashed a Rebellion which was
rising to a dangerous height: Howsoever the People murmured, but durst not
speak so Audaciously as before.

After these Tumults were over at Adrianople, People began to discourse of
Prodigies, strange Sights, and Apparitions; and among others, a Report was at
Constantinople, That an Owl was seen at Noonday, sitting on the Old Pyramid in
the Marketplace; which as was reported, fell down of it self that Night, and
next Morning there was found within the Basis of the Pyramid, a piece of Wax,
on which was inscribed in Greek Characters, these Words.

After 300 Years, this Monarchy will suffer Great Destruction and Ruin, both
by Enemies at Home and Abroad; And this City will be Infested by Pestilence,
and by Earthquakes reduced to a Heap of Stones.

All these Stories and Reports being aggravated to the Grand Seignior, put him
into a grievous Affrightment, The Sultan sends in haste for the Grand Vizier.
so that in all haste he dispatched Posts one after the other to fetch the
Grand Vizier from Belgrade to Adrianople; but howsoever he would not move until
first he had supplied Temeswaer with all sorts of Provisions; for want of which
the Turks died of Fluxes, and all sorts of Camp Diseases; and lying on wet
Grounds, and upon Morasses, more Men died than would have done in a Day of
Battle.

By these means the whole Turkish Army was reduced to 30000 fighting Men; to
repair which, and make the Numbers to seem a little more formidable, they
forced, and Pressed about 10000 Artisans and Country Men, Raw, and
Unexperienced Fellows, to make a Show of, which had they most died, the World
would scarce have missed them, only the Albanians, a Stout and Valiant People,
were to be lamented, of which not one half returned into their own Country.

The Mufti and others growing sensible of their Low and Miserable Condition,
and overwhelmed on all sides by Enemies, by Sicknesses, by Famine, and Poverty,
wrote a Letter to the Scheriff, The Mufti's Letter to the Scheriff
exhorting him to Peace, at such a time as this is, when the Enemies to the
Mohammedan Cause overwhelmed them in all Parts; declaring, That without
betraying the Musselman Cause, they could not persist in their Wars against the
Sultan; and therefore they exhorted them to retire into their own Dominions,
and to live quietly there, Letters to Exhort the Scheriff to Peace.
rather than to expose the Holy Religion to the Insults of Infidels.

By this Letter, and other Advices, which were seconded by many Exhortations of
the Religious, and Holy Seighs, or Preachers, in their respective Monasteries,
the Scheriff seemed to be somewhat appeased, and to relent a little of his
revengeful Humor against the Turks: Besides the meaner Princes of the
Arabians, who are the most Religious, and Superstitious of all the others,
falling off from the Alliance with the Scheriff, on the score of Religion,
things became more quiet in Arabia, and gave the Turks less Fears, and
Apprehensions than before.

Moreover Calailicos Ahmet Pasha, a cunning Sophister (of whom we gave lately
an Account) having been sent from Constantinople with some Forces against the
Scheriff, changed his Method from Arms, to Epistles, Sermons, and Exhortations,
persuading him, that since he saw so many Martyrs on all sides, Dying for the
Mohammedan Cause, that he should not add to the Slaughter of the Musselmen, nor
join with Infidels to the Destruction of the True Faith.

To these were added also diverse Letters from other Pasha's, as also from
Mulla's, Seighs, and Cadi's of the most esteem in Asia; which so prevailed upon
the Mind of the Scheriff, that he for some time desisted from all Hostilities
upon the Turks.

Notwithstanding which, the Eastern Princes bordering on Arabia, were a little
cautious how they trusted the sincerity of the Scheriff; for in despite of all
his fair Words, they would not be decoyed to leave their Country open, and
exposed to the Mercy of the Ishmaelites, a People that never kept Faith; so
that the Turks received no more Forces from Asia, the following Year, than they
had done in this present, by reason of the Jealousy they conceived of the
Arabians.

Notwithstanding the pressing Desires of the Sultan, The Vizier delays his
return.
to hasten the return of his Vizier, he made his Excuses to delay his Journey;
alleging, That Prince Lewis had been reinforced by considerable Recruits, and
therefore it was necessary to observe his Motions; that the Floods by the
Land-Waters, caused by perpetual Rains, made it impossible for the Army to
march without Hardships, and unsupportable Labors: But at length the old Year
drawing toward an end, and it becoming necessary to provide for the Actions,
Wars, and Counsels of the New, the Vizier was forced to leave the Army; which
he did with great haste, and arrived before Adrianople about the 8th or 10th of
December; where he remained under his Tents, making a show as if he intended to
march into the Morea, with intention to recover Scio; but before this Design
was resolved, a Conference was held in the Vizier's Tents, where the Mufti was
present; after which the Chimacam was called, as also the Aga of the
Janisaries, and the Aga of the Spahee's, with diverse other Officers, who
returned back with the Grand Vizier; at which Assembly it was concluded, That
by reason of the urgency of the Times, and that the Imperialists were chiefly
to be attended, as being the strongest, and most considerable Party, the Grand
Vizier should remain at Adrianople, to raise new Forces, and prepare for the
Wars of the following Year. But as to the present, that all their Thoughts and
Stratagems should be employed for the recovery of the Island of Scio, the which
obstructed all Correspondencies and Commerce with Smyrna, Rhodes, and even with
Egypt it self; so that Coffee, Rice, and Sugar, were raised to an excessive
Price: Wherefore cost what it would, it was agreed, That that place was the
first to be taken; for which Expedition Misir-Oghli was appointed
Captain-Pasha, The Turks design to recover Scio.
an old experienced Sea-Captain. To provide against which Attempt, the
Venetians put all things in good order both by Sea, and Land; and in all Places
where they suspected that the Enemy might Land, and make their Descent, they
raised Forts, and planted Cannon, and supplied all necessary Provisions against
a Siege, giving a report, That they would make it as strong as Malta it self.

The Sultan being sensible that his People were become much disheartened and
weakened by the many Misfortunes and Troubles which they had sustained, gave
Orders to the Chimacam of Adrianople, named Mustapha Pasha, The good Qualities
of Mustapha Pasha.
to treat the People with Kindness and Civility: This Chimacam was a prudent
Person, and being a lover of Justice, and tender of the Welfare of the People,
was esteemed and well spoken of by all; and having known Miseries and Hardships
during the time that he had undergone a Slavery in Poland, he knew the better
how to commiserate the Afflictions of others: But above all, as Matters stood
now in these Times, the great Concern of a Chief Governor was to prevent
Tumults and Insurrections of the People; of the danger of which the late
Disturbances had given a pregnant Example, and so moved the Spirit of the
Chimacam to prosecute the Offenders, that 315 were put to Death at Adrianople,
for the aforesaid Sedition; and six of the principal Officers being forced to
fly to Constantinople, were there taken, and being put into Sacks, were
strangled, and after the Ancient Fashion thrown into the Sea; the which had
been amongst the Romans the Punishment for Parricides, Insui voluerunt in
culeum vivos and dejici in mare.

After the Conference which the Grand Vizier had held at his Tents with the
Principal Ministers of State, he made diverse Dispatches into several Parts;
namely Halil Pasha, whom he made Seraskier in the Morea, with Instructions to
keep a watchful Eye upon the Island of Negropont.

Likewise three Aga's were dispatched to Algier, Tripoli, and Tunis, to hasten
their Maritime Preparations, though with little hopes of success, by reason that
those Governments in Barbary were at Wars one with the other, and had great
Jealousies amongst them.

At this time also Orders came from Adrianople directed to the Chimacam, and
Lieutenant General of the Janisaries, to provide Quantities of Rice, and other
Provisions for the Relief of Temeswaer, which for want thereof was greatly
distressed; and so Orders were given all the way on the Road thither, to take
up all the Wagons and Carts that they could meet with, by that time that they
came to Philippopolis and Sophia, might make up a Number of 300; which might
probably prove a sufficient Convoy to secure them; And for a better
Reinforcement, Orders were given for the enrolling of 300 Janisaries, being new
raised Soldiers; and with such Preparations as these for the next Campaign,
ended this Year.

Anno 1695.
THIS Year began with a most Terrible Fire in Constantinople,

The Tartar came to Adrianople, where he spent the remainder of the Winter in
Conferences with the Grand Vizier, and other Principal Officers of State, in
order to carry on the War both by Sea and Land: And whereas all sorts of
Provisions were become very dear both in Adrianople and Constantinople, by
reason that the Seas were obstructed by the Venetians, so that no Coffee, Rice,
nor Sugar, could be transported from Egypt into those Parts; the French
Ambassador undertook to supply the same with French Ships, demanding only, That
when such Commodities arrive, the Turks should pay no more for them, than in
Times of Peace; which besides some other private Contracts were very pleasing
to the Turks, and served to confirm the Friendship, and increase the Confidence
between the two People.

As the Eyes of all the Turkish Officers were intent on the War, there being a
Design to recover Scio in the Winter Season, before the Venetians could come
forth with their Fleet, the Sultan sent for Mezzo Morto, who was Admiral of the
Fleet, together with six Captains of the Men of War, reproaching them for
Cowardice; for that in case they had done their Duty in the last Engagement
against the Venetians, Scio had not been lost; wherefore these Officers were
discharged of their Commands, and Sarhos or Drunken Chusaein Pasha, was
declared Captain Pasha, or Admiral, in the Place of Mezzo Morto; being esteemed
a Man of more Boldness, and Courage, and Conduct, than the other; and such was
the Shame, and Confusion that the Turks conceived for the loss of Scio, that
even in the Winter, a thing not practiced by the Turks, Orders were given to
the New Admiral to prepare, and equip an hundred Frigates.

Whilst all things were preparing for this Years War, and in an especial manner
for the recovery of Scio, on the 27th of January, Sultan Achmet's Death.
Old Style, the Grand Seignior Sultan Achmet dyed, which for that present put a
stop to all Business then in agitation both in regard to the War, or Peace: For
as to the latter my Lord Paget arrived at Adrianople on the 23d, and next Day
desired an Audience of the Grand Vizier, which was promised to him on the 31st,
when the Propositions he had to make, were so reasonable, and the Turks in so
good a Temper that the Ambassador persuaded himself that they would be
accepted, the Great Vizier, and Chimacam showing themselves not averse, but
rather well inclined to a reasonable Peace.

But whilst they were thinking of these things, the Court, and City, and all
People were surprised to hear the News of the Death of the Sultan; who at the
time of his last Agony, desired to see and speak with his Successor Sultan
Mustapha, who could not be persuaded to go to him, and so he died without that
Satisfaction, by a great Defluxion, or Catarrh, which fell upon his Lungs: Only
he left it in Commission to his Servants, to acquaint his Nephew, Sultan
Mustapha, who was undoubtedly to succeed him, That all he had to desire of him
was, to desire him that he would permit his Son to live; but whether this
Request was granted him or not, is not yet known; for Matters of this Nature
are seldom reported without the Walls of the Seraglio.

So soon as he was dead, Mustapha Eldest Son to Sultan Mahomet IV. was
proclaimed, and saluted Emperor, and all passed without any Disturbance,
Disorder, or Inconvenience whatsoever.

In very few Hours afterward the Body of the Deceased Achmet was hurried away
to Constantinople, and with a small Attendance buried in the Sepulcher of his
Brother, and immediately the Sultana, his Mother, was required to hasten
thither and retire, and Expresses dispatched to all Parts to carry and divulge
the News, and most especially acquaint the New Valide Sultana with the
Exaltation of her Son to the Throne of his Father. For the present Sultan
Mustapha being about 33 Years of Age, and in his Prime, appeared very Robust,
and Comely, and to show a mildness of Spirit at the beginning, he for the
present confirmed the Great Vizier in his Place, by restoring the Seals to him
which he had resigned into his Hands, and giving him a Coftan lined with
Sables. His Mother was now every Day expected at Adrianople, until whose coming
thither, nothing was to be done; for as she was a Person highly beloved, and
esteemed by her late Husband Sultan Mahomet, Father of the present Sultan
Mustapha (as we have manifested in our foregoing History) so she was a Woman of
Intrigue, and one who had so great a Power over her Son, that he entirely gave
himself up to the Government and Guidance of his Mother. The Queen Mother.
She was a Native of Canea (though some say she was a Circassian born) and taken
from thence when the Place was first possessed by the Turks; her Father was a
Protopapa, or Bishop of that place.

His first entrance into Business was to enquire after the State of the
Treasury; and to inform himself therein, Sultan Mustapha's Beginnings.
he called for the Treasurer, and demanded of him, How much Money there was in
the Treasury? To which Answer was made, Fifteen Purses: What then (said he) is
become of all the rest? To which it was answered, That his Predecessor had
disposed of it: It is well, (said he) and I shall take it from them who have
received it.

With these Beginnings it was much feared that he would prove a troublesome
Neighbor to all Christendom; and a Cruel and a Severe Master to all the
surviving Ministers of State; but things were carried so closely, that the
Government had no News of any thing until the Successor had carried his Point,
and secured every thing for his Establishment; to which many things concurred,
as that he was the Son, and lineally descended from Sultan Mahomet IV, who
after a Reign of 48 Years, was Deposed, by reason of the Ill Fortune, and
Avaritious Temper of some of his Ministers, or to please the Soldiers, who
said, That he had Lived and Reigned long enough. Moreover the People had a
great Esteem for this his Son, being Young and Handsome, and in his Robust and
Mature Age; nor was there any Person able to stand against him, nor capable of
being offered to the Soldiery for their Emperor: There was none of the Ottoman
Family known unto the World, but a Child of two Years old, the Son of the late
Sultan Achmet, and of such an one in such a Conjuncture of time, it was not so
much as to be thought of; though most of the Ministers in Power did all they
could to keep Sultan Mustapha from the Throne.

His Beginnings were very brisk, The Grand Vizier put into fear.
(for besides what he said to the Treasurer) he startled the Grand Vizier, and
all the Pasha's of the Bench, who knew not what to say, or act, or resolve, or
whom to trust, portrait of Ottoman Sultan Mustafa II Sultan Mustapha the
Second, the Present Emperor Eldest Son to Sultan Mahomet the 4th p: 522
M. Vander Gucht Scul
This sudden change humbled much of the Spirit of the Grand Vizier, so that he
did not adventure to act so freely in Business as he had formerly done in the
time of Sultan Achmet: For though he had received several Favors of his New
Master, which served to encourage him at first, yet they were so mixed with his
Frowns, and Imperious Threats, that he thought not himself safe, but lived in a
continual apprehension of Death.

When the Grand Seignior Vested him, as is commonly done by every Sultan at his
Inauguration; Sultan Mustapha his Saying.
he told him, That he should be careful what he did, that he should treat his
Soldiers well, and above all, that he be sure to tell him the truth; and if
not, he should soon know and be sensible of what would follow: But since this
Severity, The Sultan's Humor.
and sharp Saying, he remitted something of his Angry Temper, and became more
mild and easy; so that to encourage and raise his Spirit a little, he sent his
Kuzlir-Aga in Ceremony with a great Attendance, to carry to the Grand Vizier a
Prayer, which he himself had composed in the time of his Solitude, and
Seclusion from the World, which were received with profound Respect; the Bearer
himself had five Purses presented to him, and the Chief of his Attendants was
treated with several Rich Vests, and the others of meaner Degree had a good
number of Zaichins distributed amongst them. February.
The Grand Seignior also would not want his own Present, which was in Horses,
and Jewels, several Young Damsels, richly adorned, with above 100 Purses of
Money; and yet for all this the Vizier thought not himself safe, nor did the
bitter Thoughts of Death pass from him: for whilst he was trembling for
himself, he received a Hatte-sheriff, or a Royal Command from the Hand of the
Grand Seignior, requiring him to command the Chiaus Pasha to Arrest the
Chimacam of Adrianople, the Vizier's own chief Creature and Confident, and to
put him between the Gates, a Prison for great Personages: The Fault objected to
his Charge was, That in the time of the late Sultan Achmet, he had put to Death
two of this present Sultan's Favorites, for endeavoring to promote the
Interest of their Master, to the Prejudice of the Ruling Prince.
Notwithstanding all which Mortifying Commands, and Accidents, the Grand Vizier
appeared outwardly with a cheerful Countenance, for the least Sadness would
have been interpreted for Contumacy, and a Discontented Spirit against the
Commands and Pleasure of his Master; for which reason he bore up bravely
against all Misfortunes, concealing the Agitations of his Mind from all those
who had Business with him, and even from his own Domestics.

At this time my Lord Paget Ambassador from His Majesty King William, Lord
Paget at Adrianople.
was then at Adrianople, watching an Opportunity to make Proposals for a Peace
with the Emperor, of which, though about the latter time of Sultan Achmet, there
was a great and a fair appearance; yet after his Decease this young Sultan
mounting the Throne, all the hopes vanished, he himself being of a hot and
fiery Spirit, was fully resolved to try his Fortune in the War, from which
Design neither his Mother, nor his Women, nor his greatest Favorites could
divert them. And the Kiah-Bey himself, who was Lieutenant General, of the
Janisaries, a Person of great Esteem, and Power in the Army, was disgraced, and
put out of Office, for arguing in the Divan against the Grand Seignior's taking
ths Field this Year in Person.

These Changes had disconcerted all the Measures which my Lord Paget had taken
toward a Peace, of which there now remained no hopes for this Year; for the
Sultan was not to be removed from his Resolution, nor the Soldiery averse to
it, having fixed it in their Minds, that this Sultan was Lucky and Fortunate,
and was to restore all that had been lost, since the Siege of Vienna, and the
fatal Managements of the Grand Vizier Kara Mustapha. And to this purpose the
Grand Seignior discoursing with the Vizier, he told him, how sensible he was of
the evil management of Affairs in the Empire, and that they were much worse
than they had been in the time of his Father; to restore which to a better
Condition, he again declared his Resolution to try his Fortune for another
Year; the which not succeeding well, he was of an Opinion, That he could at any
time make a Truce with the Christians, which perhaps he might be inclined to
accept next Year, not out of a Necessity thereof, but in consideration to his
People, to whom, after a long War of 17 or 18 Years, he was glad to give Ease
and Quiet; for he was sensible, that the Ottoman Empire was in great Disorder,
by reason of the Ignorance, Negligence, and ill Administration of some of the
principal Ministers of State, which he would make it his Care to remedy.

With these Resolutions of the Sultan, all things were preparing to take the
Field early with a strong Army; it being divulged, and published amongst the
Soldiery, that their first March should be toward Belgrade, from whence if
they could have made any Conquest on the other side of the Save, the Turks
might yet (as low as they were) have proved a troublesome, and a dreadful Enemy
to all Germany. And indeed the Christians were more sensible hereof than
formerly; for the Turks had lately had many lucky Hits to encourage them, and
which did indeed animate the People very much, seeming to them like good Omens
of Change of Fortune in their favor: For the Venetians had in two several
Engagements at Sea been worsted by the Turks, which was the cause of the
Surrender of Scio to the Turks, of which they possessed themselves without any
great Difficulty; where though the loss the Venetians had sustained both in
Ships, and Men, was very considerable, yet the loss of their Reputation at Sea,
was much more, and of a more evil Consequence; for the Turks animated hereby,
fell boldly upon the Venetians in the Morea, and put them to the Rout, fansying
the Summer following to regain all again, despising now the Enemy which lately
they durst not see, and were afraid to approach.

To these good Fortunes of the Sultan, the News was added by way of Moldavia,
of a great Victory that the Tartars had obtained against the Poles; which with
the Successes the Ottoman Pasha's had obtained against the Rebels in Asia, put
all things at the Port into a smiling Condition, no Man doubting, but that the
influence of these prosperous Beginnings would crown all the Actions of this
New Sultan, with Success and Victory.

The Fight between the Poles and the Tartars, in the Suburbs of Leopolis,
happened on the 11th of February of this Year, being Extracted out of a Letter
of the Great General, Written to the Envoy Cavalier Proski, of the 16th of
February from Leopolis.

An Extract of the Great General's Letter, Written to the Envoy Cavalier Proski.
WE have not only in the Season of the last Spring, but during the whole
Summer, and Autumn, lived in continual Alarms, and Skirmishes with our Enemies,
but even in this very Winter been engaged with them in diverse Bloody Fights:
And particularly on the 11th of this Month of February, a Battle was made
between 3000 of our Soldiers, against 70000 Tartars, within the Suburbs, and
under the Walls of Leopolis: The Particulars of which, are these.

Sultan Zabas Gerei, A Fight between the Poles and the Tartars.
Son of the Tartar-Han, who in the Month of October last, gave up to our Hands,
all the Provisions belonging to the Turks, which he had taken into his Care and
Conduct to be Convoyed to Kaminieck; of which Disgrace, and Dishonor his
Father being very sensible, urged the Son to repair his Credit by some great
Action worthy the Fame of his Valor, and his Prowess in War: Accordingly being
assisted by all the Power of the Tartars, as well those of Budziac, Bialogrod,
and Dobrucz, as those of Crim, who the last Year had joined with the Turks
under Peter Waradin, came on the 10th of this Month of February, and Encamped
themselves in the Plains of that Town, which is called the Cracovian Leopolis,
with intention to fix his Camp there; and from thence to send out his Parties
to all Places, where they could Burn and Spoil, make Slaves, and put all to
Fire and Sword; and so they Ravaged every where for the space of eight Days,
until at length all the Countries round being alarmed hereat, I raised all the
Forces that I was able, and brought them together from their respective
Quarters, which alas, was a most inconsiderable Power against so Mighty an
Enemy; for all that we could gather, and unite, did not amount to more than
3000 fighting Men.

The Day following about Eight of the Clock in the Morning, the Sultan Tartar
drew out his Men into form of Battle; and I also having my Confidence in God,
drew out that Handful of Men which I had with me, and made a Sally out of the
City to cover the Suburbs. The Enemy staid not long to look on us, but seeing
some Polish Companies to march boldly against them, they Detached a Party of
Tartars to meet and engage them, and to force the Outworks, which were only
fortified with Hedges, and a kind of Wall made up with Mats and Rushes well
woven together. This Command was executed with such Vigor, that doubtless the
Place had been carried at the first Attack, had not the danger wherein they
were of losing their Lives, and Estates, and all they had, made them desperate,
and forced them to make all the resistance that they were able; and in effect
they fought like Lions, receiving the Enemy so bravely, that in a short time
all the Fields were covered with the Dead Bodies of the Slain. The Tartars made
Thirteen Attacks to try their Fortune, and were as often repulsed by the
Christians, without any great loss on their side.

This Fight continued four Hours, until at length the Enemy observing that all
their Assaults prevailed little, but were very Bloody, and of great loss, they
resolved, That at the same time, when they engaged us in the Front with one
Party, they should break in upon the Hedge with another, and whatever loss, or
Blood it should cost, to carry it by main force, as it immediately proved; for
the Enemy having by this means got between us and the City, The Tartars beaten.
we remained without any hopes imaginable of relief; howsoever with a Courage
full of resolution to overcome, or die like Brave Men, turning our Faces upon
them, to whom we had but newly turned our Backs, we did not only overcome them,
but cut a great Number of them in pieces; and after another Engagement, which
lasted about two Hours more, drove them out of the Suburbs of the City; though in
the time of this Fight, the Tartars having set Fire thereunto, the Wind, and
Smoke, and Dust did so incommode our People, that they were in a manner
Blinded, and knew not which course to take; howsoever their Invincible Courage
was such, as that the Enemy was put to Flight.

This Fight continued until Three a Clock in the Afternoon, by which time they
had been so beaten, that they were forced to withdraw before the Evening, about
a League and a half from the City, The Tartars withdraw.
and the next Day proceeded on their March; and the third Day passed the
Neister, on their way homewards.

The Number of the Slain on the Christian side did not exceed above 100, and
about 160 Wounded; what the Enemy lost, is not to be known.


But such Matters as these, at so far a distance, and between Tartars and
Poles, did not much affect, or trouble the Ottoman Court; but such as were
nearer hand, as Naval Fights, and the Taking and Recovering of the Island of
Scio, being near the Royal Cities, made great noise both in Europe and Asia,
and raised the hopes of the People to great and high Expectations of the future
Fortune of this New Sultan, as if he had been born to be Restorer of the
decaying Condition of the Ottoman Empire.

We have related already the ill Success which the Venetians had had in two
several Fights at Sea against the Turks, Scio regained by the Turks.
which being unusual, and of many Years not known, made it matter of Wonder to
all the World. For after the Turks had beaten the Venetian Fleet, all things
were put into great Consternation at Scio, so that the Venetian Commanders most
shamefully abandoned the Place, stealing away in the Night without giving time
for some of their Troops which were abroad to guard the Island, to Embark with
them, which gave cause to some of their Officers, who thereby became Slaves to
the Turks, to vent out Thousands of Imprecations and Curses upon them; and
indeed their Case was sad, but Necessity had no Law, for the Venetians had now
been beaten twice at Sea by the Turks, who had they followed their Blow, might
have utterly destroyed the Venetian Fleet; but the Turks being contented with
this unusual Success, a thing not known to them for more than a hundred Years
past, were contented with the Flight of the Enemy, and therewith a Cession to
them of the whole Island; and the Turks entered triumphant thereupon without
any Opposition.

The first Act of the Turkish Clemency was to Hang up four Men of the Latin
Rite, who were of the Romish Church, and of the Italian Race; namely, Signior
Pietro Giustiniani di Antonio, Signior Domenico Stella, who were Deputies,
ordained to protect that Religion; Signior Francesco Draco, and Giovanni
Castelli di Brecci. Signior Sofiati, who was Vice-Consul for the English Nation
in that Island, fled with his Family, and was well received at Tino: Domenico
Castelli Son of Vincenzo Castelli, escaped also, (with whom I was well
acquainted) together with forty of the chief Families of the Latin Rite,
leaving their Possessions, and Movables behind them: Antonio Rendi happened to
be then at Smyrna; but his Family deferring their Departure, his House was
Plundered, and all his Estate ruined like that of his Neighbors; for though they
fled to Smyrna for refuge, by this Revolution the Greeks gained a clear Victory
and Ascendant over the Latins: For whereas formerly there were great
Animosities between those two Rites; the Latins by reason of their Riches,
having the Pope on their side, were always esteemed the Superiors, and by the
great Collections made for them, and Legacies bequeathed, they gained much more
of the Hearts and Favor of the Turks, than the Poverty of the Greeks was able
to purchase; but now a fair Opportunity happening of gaining and Confiscating
all that appertained to the Latins, they seized on all that belonged to them;
treating the Greeks more favorably, The Greeks in Scio favored by the Turks.
because they believed them to be the less culpable, having the less Riches;
and in reality the Greeks having been under the Dominion of the Turks for some
Ages, were become almost their Natural Lord, from whom they expected better
Quarter than from the Venetians, or other Italians; and so always wished well
to the Turks. Thus was Scio in a short time fallen again into the Hands of the
Turks, from whence they are never again likely to recover it, unless the
Venetians amend their Politics, and prove more Vigilant and Brave in the Wars
both by Sea and Land; but that is not now to be expected, nor those of the
Latins permitted to live in that Island, unless they conform to the Rites of
the Greek Church, the greatest part of which were restored to the Enjoyment of
their Estates, with their Ancient Privileges; but the Latins were deprived of
both, by the Instigation of their old Inveterate Enemies the Greeks; though at
first they were put in hopes of obtaining the like, or equal Favors with them.

After the Death of Sultan Achmet, and that Sultan Mustapha was exalted to the
Throne; in the first place Achmet Pasha, Chimacam of Adrianople was Disgraced,
and all his Goods and Estate Confiscated to the Use of the Grand Seignior,
Changes at Court.
and he himself made a Prisoner in the Seraglio, but pardoned at the
Intercession of the Grand Vizier, and sent Governor to the Island of Mytilene,
where I had once a Pasha for a Friend Married to a Sultana, which had like to
have cost me dear; but (God be praised) I escaped him without much loss.

In the Place of this Chimacam, the Nisangi Pasha, who sets the Grand
Seignior's Firm to certain Writings, was put in his place; and the Vizier's
Kahya into the Place of the Nisangi, March.
and Gebegi Ibrahim Aga, was made Kahya.

Upon the Arrival of the Valide Sultana at Adrianople, Iastiff Aga, who had
been formerly Kahya to the Hasaki Sultana, or the Royal Queen, was Constituted
Aga, or General of the Janisaries, and at the same time Vizier of the Bench:
These were succeeded by the Spahyler Agasi, who is General of the Horse, and
his Place supplied by a Salakiar of the Seraglio.

About the beginning of March, Ymam-Sade Mahomet Effendi, then Kadilesker of
Romelia, was created Mufti by the Grand Seignior; and his Predecessor was sent
to Constantinople, from whence the Sultan sent for Mimadi Effendi to be
Kadilesker of Anatolia.

The Nakib, who is the Chief of the Green Heads, or those of the Race of
Mahomet, was deprived of this Office, and Mahomet Effendi, Kadi of
Constantinople, which was as much as Recorder of that City, was put into his
Place.

In like manner the Tefterdar-Kahyasi, or the Lord Treasurer's Steward, or
Secretary, called Galil Effendi, was also changed, who had been Treasurer in
the Time of the foregoing Vizier Ali Pasha; and thus had he formed all his
Court according to his own Humor and Fancy.

And as to the High and Sublime Offices Abroad, he began also to form and
modelize them: That of Egypt, he Conferred upon Ishmael Pasha, who had been
lately Beglerbeg of Damascus; and the Government of this latter he bestowed on
the Kadilesker of the Deceased Sultan Achmet.

Hassan Pasha, who was Kinsman to the Queen Regent, late Governor of Scio, was
called back to Court from his Banishment at Hatsack, and made the
Deputy-Chimacam, or Vikil-Chimacam, to Govern at any time during the Grand
Seignior's Absence.

A LIST of such as were put to Death for the late Conspiracy at Adrianople.
STRANGLED.
BENGLI HASSAN PASHA, late Governor of Tripoli of Soria.
BEHEADED.
Hassan Turcman Agasi. Bester Aga, Salahor of the Grand Seignior. Weli, Aga of
the Chimacam. Hassan Effendi, Kahya of the Chimacam. Mutpach Emmini, or
Customer.
HANGED.
An Astrologer.
These following were Banished.
Fisula Effendi, formerly Mufti, who had been Banished to, and afterward
Exiled into the Upper Egypt. Johaia Effendi, late Kadilescher, sent to Aleppo.
Mahomet Effendi Nakib, Banished to Aleppo. Ganziack Effendi, under Kadi of
Galata, was sent to Lemnos. As was also Nissani Oglu Hussaein Aga, Favorite to
the aforementioned Vizier, Ali Pasha. Besides these, were above a Hundred more
Strangled of Inferior Quality, whose Bodies were thrown into the River Meritz,
which runs by Adrianople.

The Valide Sultana being arrived at Adrianople, was received with open Arms by
her Son, who governed himself much by the Measures had been given him by his
Mother, who made several Changes and Alterations every Day amongst the Officers
of State; only the Grand Vizier and Mufti continued in their Offices, and the
greatest part of the others consisted of Old Servants of the Court, established
in the time of his Father Sultan Mahomet IV. of which the Queen Mother had an
Opinion that they would prove the most Faithful Servants of any in the Courr.
To make room for these Men, the Chimacam, the Great Master of the Horse to the
Sultan, the Chehaya-Bey, or Lieutenant General of the Janisaries, (who is
always more feared, and esteemed by the Soldiery than the Aga himself) were all
displaced, with the Janisar-Aga, as also the Principal Officers of the Spahees;
having an Opinion, That the Youngest are always the more Bold, and Daring,
their Courages being excited with Ambition, and Vainglory.

Things being in this manner modellized both for Domestic and Martial Affairs,
the Grand Seignior again confirmed, and published his Resolution to go this
Year to the War; and to make Provisions of Money to maintain the same, with the
usual Donative to the Soldiery, which was always given in former times,
whenever the Sultan made his first Years Campaign.

Those who were against the Grand Seignior's going in Person to the War,
pressed very hard the prevailing Argument of want of Money, to raise which, all
means possible were contrived; for the Sultan would not be put by his
Resolution, alleging, That the Negligence of his Father and Unkle's not going
to War in Person, had been the Ruin of the Ottoman Army, and the Cause of all
those Losses, and Disgraces which his Empire had sustained; but Money must be
found by one way or other; to do which, the Grand Vizier was strictly enjoined
to give an Account of Eighteen Millions in the space of Thirty Days, besides
the Arrears due to the Soldiery, in the Time of the last Sultan Achmet: And
though the Grand Vizier alleged, That it seemed reasonable, that such as had
managed the Public Offices during the two preceding Reigns, should be
answerable for the Miscarriages, and not he, who had been employed therein but
only some few Months before; yet the Sultan would not admit of this Excuse for
a Reason, but required the Account of the Eighteen Millions: His Mother also
furnished her Son with Seven Millions and a half in ready Money, and Fifteen
Millions in Jewels, which she had been collecting in the space of fifteen Years
that she had been the Wife of his Father; and from the Widow of the late
Deceased Sultan Achmet, they took another half Million; the Vizier was Taxed at
a Million and a half, and five Millions in Jewels; likewise a good round Sum
was demanded from the Chimacam, and other Pasha's and Persons in great Offices.

There was a farther Proposition made to screw Money out of all the Arabians,
and Negro's at Court: The Kuzlir-Aga was the first of that Rank from whom the
most considerable Sums were exacted; to pay which, their Estates and Faculties
sent and conveyed out of sight to Constantinople, were all called from thence.
March.
The like was also demanded from the Ulema, and all the Ecclesiastical Lands
and Estates were Taxed. All Persons Taxed.


To execute all these Contrivances and Ways for raising Money, the Grand
Seignior was solely intent, laboring Day and Night to amass Money; and spent
his whole time to heap up Riches; to do which, he acted many things without the
knowledge of the Vizier, and wrote Letters, and received Answers relating to
the raising Men, and providing Subsistence for the Troops without interesting
his Grand Vizier therein; the which struck such a Fear and Terror into the
Minds of all those who had to do with the Public Interest, that none durst to
act any thing privately, or in an obscure manner, which might be of prejudice
to the Grand Seignior, and his Government.

To keep this Sultan in the Humor of going to the War, his Mother labored to
keep up his Spirits; which being observed by the great Men, such as the Mufti,
the Grand Vizier, the Lord Treasurer, and the Generals of the Janisaries, and
of the Spahees, they all submitted thereunto, only they gave in a Petition to
be delivered to the Sultan by the Hand of the Valide Soltana, or Queen Mother;
representing, That since they had observed that it was His Majesty's Resolution
to go in Person to the War, they were concurring with him in the same,
promising to be helpful therein to the best of their Powers; beseeching only,
That His Ottoman Majesty would be pleased to Indulge them so much time, as
might serve to assemble, and gather their Militia into a Body, and to make
Provisions for their Subsistence, as also Ammunition, and Cannon, with Powder
and Bullet sufficient to attend so great an Army: Of all which they gave the
Sultan in Writing a particular Account in what forwardness all things were; and
concluded, That since it is the Custom of the Germans to be late in the Field,
they did not doubt but to be more forward than they, and to Grace and Honor
the Sultan's first Expedition with the Success of Glorious Achievements, of
which the Miscarriage would prove of evil Consequence, as the contrary would be
of mighty advantage to the whole Ottoman Empire, which languishing after a
Fortunate Sultan, would then think the Wheel turned in case they could see the
end of a Campaign concluded with Honor of a New Sultan.

The Grand Seignior being sensible hereof, raised all the Forces he was able,
both in Asia and Europe: And to Engage the Tartar Han on his side, certain
Aga's were dispatched to Tartary with Purses of Money, with Presents of a Sword
richly adorned with Diamonds, and with rich Coftans; as also with Presents to
the other Kinsmen of the Han, and to the Mirzees, who are the Noble Men, and
Chief Officers both of War and Peace, desiring them all to be early at the War;
by which great Assiduity of the Sultan, all the Great Officers were in fear of
him, knowing that as he Rewarded generously, so he Punished severely.

The Grand Vizier in the mean time considering the Troubles under which he was
to labor, as also the Invincible Difficulties of the present War, in case the
Sultan should persist in his Resolution of going in Person to Command the Army,
he endeavored what he could to obtain the Favor that he might lay down his
Office, and quietly and safely retire from all Business; for which he made
Talkish to the Grand Seignior, which is a Petition made by the Master of
Requests; (of which there is but one belonging to the Court called Talkishgee)
the substance of which was to lay before the Grand Seignior the impossibility
of making the Donative to the Soldiers, amounting unto Twelve Millions, the
which was always given by the Sultans to the Soldiers, whenever they made
their first Campaign: This was so reasonable an Exception, and Excuse, that
there was no reply to be made thereunto, but the absolute Will and Pleasure not
to pay it; for besides the want of Money in the Treasury, which had been
exhausted by a long and an unfortunate War, the Grand Seignior added, That he
did not esteem himself obliged to a Custom which was begun in the most
Flourishing Times of the Empire, when Success crowned all their Enterprises
with Victory, when the Enemies were forced to pay all Charges of the War, with
an Overplus of Riches and Increase, which filled the Royal Exchequer, and that
Wars maintained the Empire: But those Days, added the Grand Seignior, are now
past; and that it would be an Insolence in the Soldiery, to expect a Donative
from him, who was not in the least beholding to them for his being placed in
the Throne, to which he came by Succession, A Donative refused to the Soldiers.
and a Just Title, and not by the Favor and Assistance of the Soldiery; and
that whosoever had opposed him therein (who was their True and Lawful
Sovereign) would have been guilty of High Treason, and ought to Die by the Just
Laws of the Empire.

In this manner, the Wisest and most Experienced Officers observing how
difficult, and almost impossible it was to divert the Grand Seignior from his
Resolution of going in Person to the War, they all agreed to join with their
Master, and to applaud his happy Designs, which they prayed to God might be
prosperous, promising to give all Assistance with their Lives and Fortunes,
that he might return with Victory and Success: So soon were their Minds changed
to the Will and Pleasure of their Absolute and Uncontrollable Lord, that none
durst open his Mouth against his Determination, nor no Murmurings heard unless
by some few Janisaries, who Talked a little, without any Notice taken thereof.

The Grand Vizier finding himself also under Invincible Difficulties, thought
it the safest way to close with the Sultan, which he accordingly did, and with
much outward Zeal dissembled a Cheerfulness of Spirit in Compliance with his
Master.

This Matter being resolved, it was concluded, That an Army should be formed of
80000 Fighting Men, and the Tugh, or Horse-Tail, being with Prayers, after the
usual manner, exposed at the Vizier's Gate, the 30th of March was appointed to
take the Field, and enter the Tents, which are commonly pitched about two
English Miles distant from the Gates: And the Grand Seignior to lose no time,
Commanded that 2000 of his Pages, and as many others on Horseback, appointed
for his Guard, should be at the appointed time in a readiness to attend the
Sultan: But yet things went but slowly on, by reason of the great Discords
arisen in Asia, Retardments to the Motion of the War.
whereby many of the Chief Men had been killed, which gave a stop to the March
of the Militia.

To which also another stop was given by the News which the Tartar Han
received, That the Czar of Muscovy being joined with the Cossacks, was passing
down the Tanais, with design to fall upon Asac; of which he gave Advice to the
Grand Seignior, by an Express dispatched to Adrianople, acquainting him, That
the Enemies were grown so numerous, that he could not this Year send his Troops
to Hungary, having hard Work to defend his own Country, and People, from so
numerous an Army as that of the Muscovites joined with the Cossacks. But the
Grand Seignior not satisfied with this Excuse, returned an Answer, That
notwithstanding all Impediments to the contrary, he must by all means come with
a Numerous Army, and appear in his Presence; but this was impossible to be
done, the Soldiers and People not being contented to please the Grand Seignior
to see their Country laid open, and exposed to such a Powerful Enemy.

This Grand Seignior Sultan Mustapha, when he came first to the Throne, was
Feared, Esteemed, Loved, and Obeyed; but the Affection of his People was soon
estranged from him, The Mufti Deposed, the Vizier Strangled.
since he Deposed the late Mufti, and caused the Grand Vizier, with many other
Persons, Innocent and Worthy, to be Strangled, with Ignominy and Dishonor. But
the Mufti was most of all lamented, having the Reputation of a Just, Sincere,
Honest, and a Holy Man, in whose place the Sultan established his late Hogia,
or Schoolmaster, named Feizulah Effendi, a Wicked, False, Perfidious, and
Covetous Wretch, as he was generally esteemed to be.

The Grand Vizier, (as we have said) was always afraid of the Changeable
Humor of the Sultan, and could not cover his Passion, nor dissemble his
Countenance; of which the Sultan taking notice, deprived him of his Office, and
Banished him at Midnight to Chisme, which is a small Village on the Coast of
Anatolia over against Scio; but this Proscription continued not long, before he
was brought back again to Adrianople, and Strangled, and his Body flung out at
the Seraglio-Gate, where it remained until the next Day at Noon, with the Face
and Beard all besmeared with a --

At Adrianople all the Court was changed; only the Grand Seignior when he first
entered upon the Throne, confirmed the Janisar-Aga in his Place, who was an
Honest Man, and a good Soldier, but soon afterward he put him out, and
Constituted another in his Place, called Baltagee Deli, which signifies Mad
Battle-Axe Man, the Son of an Armenian Renegade, a Vile Fellow, without Sense,
or Manners: Likewise the Kahya-Bey, or Lieutenant General of the Janisaries;
and the Kuzlir-Aga, or Eunuch of the Women were displaced; and in short since
this Sultan came to the Throne, there was nothing done but placing and
displacing of the Principal Officers; all which was acted by the Counsels of
Women, and Favorites in the Seraglio, who neither had Sense, nor Experience in
the Affairs of the World. The like soon after happened to the Chimacam, who
being a Friend to the late Vizier, and one of his Creatures, was Banished first
to Mytilene, where he was likewise Strangled; from whence his Head being
brought to Adrianople, was thrown before the Ga^e of the Seraglio, with diverse
others esteemed Innocent by the People.

Thus the Sultan, as he thought, having purged his Army of Cowards, and his
Counsels of Ill-affected Ministers, began his March from Adrianople on the 10th
of June; June.
the Janisar-Aga marched away on the 3d: The Army was said to be very powerful,
and composed of Choice Men, which so encouraged the Turks, that they talked of
nothing less than the taking of Buda; and about that time News came from
Stalida de Zetuns, a small Island near Negropont, That Ibrahim, Pasha of that
Island, had entered into the Morea with 30000 Men, and was Encamped under
Corinth, expecting the Captain-Pasha, who was then designing to depart from
Constantinople in ten Days, where he had been detained longer than was usual,
to repair the Damages which the Turks had received in their late Engagement
against the Venetians: Belonging to this Fleet, seven Ships were appointed for
Alexandria to fetch Soldiers thence for the Morea; and likewise about this time
Recruits were sent to the Black-Sea to several Ports there, the Turks being in
fear of the Moscovites, who being very strong, the Tartars were afraid to
encounter them, and would have excused themselves this Year from the War, but
the Sultan would not hearken thereunto, but proceeded with Resolution on his
March.

But before the Sultan began the same, he caused the Tallol, or Common-Cryer,
to make Publication, That the Grand Seignior's Will and Pleasure was,

That no Man going to the Wars, New Orders for the Army.
should be served by Young Boys.

That good Order and Discipline should be observed in the March.

That no Man should ride out of the Common High-Road, or by Bye-Ways, into the
Cornfieldsd, or Vine-yards, or other Grounds belonging to the Husbandman.

In pursuance of these Commands, the Sultan on the very Day that he departed
from the Camp before Adrianople, being then Teptil, or in Disguise, he found a
Man cutting another's Corn to give his Horse; and only asking him, Whether he
had heard of the Grand Seignior's Command? He ordered the Selictar-Aga, who was
General of the Spahee's, for he had no other with him (excepting the
Kapugiler-Kahyase) at the same time to kill him, which he presently executed
with his Lancet, not giving the Unhappy Wretch one Moment to speak for his
Life. The Grand Seignior's Severities.
At the same time also, the Grand Seignior espied another walking through the
Corn, whom he took and carried to the Tents, where he caused his Head to be cut
off. The Topgibashee, or Master of the Ordnance, likewise the Day or two before
very hardly escaped; for having a Boy in his Company, of whom the Grand
Seignior had some Jealousy, or ill Thoughts, had certainly been put to Death
for the same, had he not had some present Witnesses at hand to prove him to be
his Son.

These and such like Acts of Severity, rendered this Sultan very formidable, so
that all People were afraid of him, not only in their Public Actions, but even
in their Private Conversation, scarce trusting their own Thoughts. Amongst
these Severities Achmet Pasha, late Chimacam to Sultan Achmet, was turned out
of his Office by this present Sultan, and Banished to Mytilene; and after
having taken from him an hundred Purses of Money, his Head was brought to
Adrianople, about two Days after the Vizier had been Strangled.

All things being now prepared for the March of the Army toward Belgrade, the
Janisar-Aga with his Janisaries, according to the usual Custom took the Van,
and marched away one Days March before the rest of the Army, so that the Grand
Seignior, attended by the Mufti, Grand Vizier, Spahilar-Aga, or General of the
Spahees, Tefterdar, or Lord-Treasurer, began their March, following the
Janisaries, on the 20th of June, June.
but after some few Hours, they made a Halt to give time to three of the
greatest Pashas, or Beglerbeys of the Empire, to come up with them; that is to
say, to the Pasha of Damascus, the Pasha of Aleppo, and Beglerbey of Anatolia,
every one of which brought with him about 1200 Men, recounting Spahees, and
Sarigiaus, and Segmen on Horseback, with all which and others attending the
Sultan in his March, they did not amount to more than 12000 Horse, with which
he marched from Adrianople in six Days to Philippopolis, and Encamped over
against that City in those Plains, where a great Council of War was held,
touching the Methods which were to be observed in the War, and the Places which
were to be Attacked.

The Numbers of this Army appeared so small and inconsiderable, that the Sultan
remained very much unsatisfied, and would not be contented, unless the Tartar
Han would follow him with all his Force unto the Camp at Belgrade; but he
positively refused it; and said, That it could not be done; unless he should
expose, and lay his People open to the Incursions of the Muscovites, who were
coming down in vast Numbers to overrun all the Regions of the Tartars:
Howsoever not to displease overmuch the Grand Seignior, the Tartar Han forced
himself to appear in the Turkish Camp with an Army of about 5000 Tartars, which
was a good addition to the Turkish Force, so that in all they composed an Army
of about 50000 Men.

The Christian Army led by the Elector of Saxony, was not much stronger, but
very desirous to meet the Turks, who had taken their March toward
Transylvania: But in regard the Turks were so far advanced before the Imperial
Army, that it was impossible for the Elector to come in opportunely, and in
season to succor the Places which the Sultan designed to Invest, unless they
could take a shorter way, which was offered unto them, being guided by some of
that Country; but the Ways proved so bad, being all Marshes and Wet Grounds,
that it was impossible to pass them with the Cannon and heavy Baggage of an
Army; so that after great Fatigues of three or four Days Marches, the Elector
was obliged to return back again to his former Camp; and in the mean time the
Turks had got such a way before them toward Transylvania, that it was
impossible for them to be overtaken by the Christian Army; and having liberty
to rove every where without any Opposition equal to them, they fell in upon the
Palanca of Lippa on the 7th of September, September.
without Breast-works, or Parapets, or any Approaches, Defense, or Shelter
before them, but only with the Scimiter in their Hands, they Attacked the
Palanca at four several Places, with such incredible Resolution, that after
four Hours Engagement, they took the Place by Storm, and put all to the Sword,
excepting only Major Toldo, who was Governor of the Place, with some others of
the Principal Officers, whom the Turks after their usual Custom, reserved to
carry in Triumph, and to show them to the People at the Port, as one Signal of
their Victory.

In the mean time the Imperial Army continued their March near to Chonad,
situate upon the River Maros; and on the 13th of that Month, pitched their Camp
before Natla, where they reposed that Day, and the 14th marched directly to
Lippa, hoping to overtake the Turks, and to come time enough to Attack the
Enemy, and relieve the Place, but they found it too late, and the Turks
reinforced with an Army of 6000 Tartars, Commanded by the Han in Person: This
News gave a stop to the March of the Imperial Army under the Command of the
Elector of Saxony; and what was most discouraging, was the News, That the Turks
lead by the Sultan himself in Person were marched into Transylvania, Veterani
defeated.
to Attack Count Veterani in his Camp, which consisted not of above 6500 Men;
who though they were very well fortified, and Resolute Men, and good Soldiers,
yet being too unequal a Match for the whole Turkish Army, which consisted of
18000 Janisaries, and 40000 Spahees, they were all cut off, with the most part
of their Officers, and as to General Veterani himself he was shot through the
Body with a Musquet-Bullet, and cut over the Head with a Scimiter;
notwithstanding which, he being still alive, Endeavors were used for his
Recovery, but he Died of his Wounds.

This ill News was followed by the unfortunate Loss of Titul, which the Turks
having Attacked by Land and Water with 15000 Men, the Place Surrendered it self
to the Turks by Treaty, in virtue of which the Garrison consisting of 1600 Men,
ought according to Articles, to have been Convoyed to Peter Waradin; but the
Turks returning after they had Burnt, and Abandoned the Place, carried all the
Garrison with them to Salankement.

This Place was taken by the Turks, before that General Herberville, who was
Encamped with 6000 Men near Kobila, as also fortified with 8 Galleys and 16
Frigates, could hinder the Enemies Approaches: After which the Turks leaving the
Place, the Imperialists entered into the same, and took Possession of all what
the Turks had ruined, for nothing was left but heaps of Rubbish.

In the mean time the great Army under the Command of the Elector of Saxony,
advanced so far as Solnak, where the Grand Seignior having received
intelligence, That the Christian Army was marching toward him, hastened with
all speed for Temeswaer, with intention to enter into Sclavonia: Upon which the
Elector of Saxony made a Halt, and on the 17th marched back, and pitched his
Camp about half an Hours distance from Chonad; and the next Day being the 18th,
continued his March as far as Mokoua. But whereas Advices came, That the Enemy
designed to enter Transylvania, the Elector resolved to send all the Infantry
to Peter Waradin, whilst he in Person, marched with the Horse to oppose the
Enemy, giving Commands to the National Militia of Sclavonia to join with the
Croats, to oppose the Entrance of the Turks into that Province: And here it
was, that certain Intelligence was given of the Defeat of that Worthy General
Veterani, and that he was dead of his Wounds; which News was received with much
grief of all Brave and Worthy Champions for the Christian Cause.

After which Count Heisler took the Van of the Army, and marched before them
for Deva, there to provide all sorts of Provisions for sustenance of those who
were to follow and to assemble the Estates of Transylvania, commanding them to
meet His Electoral Highness, and consult with him in the best manner, how
things might be put into a posture of Defense for the Safety and Security of
that Province. At which time also came the unhappy News of the loss of Titul
taken by the Turks.

It was the common Opinion at that time of all the well experienced Soldiers,
That the Martial Affairs of the Empire, were all very ill managed for that
Year: For had the Christians instead of Ingulsing themselves amongst Marasses
and Moorish Grounds unpassable for an Army, in which they lost six or seven
Days, and gave the Turks the advantage of marching so many Days before them to
Temeswaer, and thence to Lippa, they had saved the loss of Veterani and his
Forces at Lugos, as also Titul, and Karansebes, all which fell that Year for
want of good Conduct; for the Turks were esteemed not stronger at that time
than 40000 Men, and one half of them Raw and Undisciplined Soldiers; The ill
Conduct of the Imperial Army, in Anno 1695.
but the Slowness, and Negligence of the Christians in that Years Expedition,
broke all Measures, as if there had been a Fatality attending this Years
Actions: For no sooner did the Turks understand that the Imperial Army was
marching after them, but being struck with a sudden Consternation, they
Decamped with their whole Army from Lippa, more like Cowards flying before the
Enemy, than in Order and Posture of War, marching Day and Night to get into
Temeswaer before the Enemy could overtake them. But so soon as it was known to
the Turks, that the Imperial Army was marched to Segedin, they took Courage,
and gave a stop to their precipitate Flight. And here it was that Fortune
changed, and gave unexpected Success to the Turks in this Years Expedition,
which turned greatly to the Fame and Renown of this New Sultan Mustapha: For
considering that he was but a raw Soldier, and kept himself in every Action at
a distance and out of Musket Shot, yet the whole matter being carried on
against the Opinion of all his Ministers, and the Inclinations of almost all
his Soldiers, especially the Janisaries, and all the prime Officers of the Army
and the State, things looked at first with a very bad Face, and promised
nothing but Destruction.

Yet afterward succeeding quite otherwise than were expected, all was
attributed to the Courage, Wisdom, and Conduct of the Sultan; so that it became
a Wonder to the World how it was possible for a Sultan without Experience, who
had but newly come out from an Imprisonment of eight Years, and known nothing
yet of War, to be attended with such Success, that all his Army did avow, That
his Victories were due to his Valor and Conduct, which gained him a wonderful
Esteem amongst all the great Men of his Empire, both Martial and Civil; the
Effect of which was found in the following Year, Great Honor gained by the
Sultan.
when all the Soldiery being flushed with Blood and Spoil, came willingly to
the War, and struck an Awe and Fear into the Hearts of all the Ottoman
Subjects, believing this Prince to be sent them from God, to rescue them and
the Empire from Ruin and utter Desolation.

The Sultan being sensible of the great Honor and Fame which he had gained by
the unexpected Successes of this Campaign, being unwilling to lose the same, so
soon as he heard that the Imperial Army was marched toward Transylvania, he
resolved to return homewards, and not to tempt Fortune again for this Year, and
accordingly marched again with his whole Army to Temeswaer, whence he sent
Commands and Decrees one after the other, with Letters to Ziafer the Pasha of
Belgrade, to provide Temeswaer with all sorts of Victuals necessary for
maintenance of the Place; and that he should take care to send them thither,
with a Convoy sufficient to defend them from the Enemy: And farther he ordered
that Pasha to take notice, That he was returning to his Palace at Adrianople,
by the way of Walachia, of which Advice was given to the Prince, and Commands
sent him to repair the Bridges, and mend the Ways of that Country, and to
enlarge them for the more easy Passage of the Army: The Sultan Orders for his
Return to Adrianople.
The like Decrees and Commands were sent to the Prince of Moldavia; and diverse
Letters were Wrote by the Grand Seignior himself to his Mother the Valide
Soltana; as also to all the Chief Governors of the Provinces in Anatolia, and
to the Chimacams of Constantinople and Adrianople; in which, after he had
recounted unto them all his great Actions and Successes, he Commanded that Days
and Nights of Rejoycings should be celebrated for the same through all the
Dominions of his Empire, in regard that he had Taken, and laid Desolate a
greater City and Territory than that of Belgrade, and that he had slain more
than 10000 Germans, and made above 3000 Prisoners, with the Officers belonging
to them; for which Glorious Victories and Fortunes Commands were given to offer
Thanksgivings in all Places of the Empire, and to praise God, for that he had
been pleased to appease his Wrath against the Musselmen, who had long provoked
the Divine Anger.

The Sultan being in this manner resolved to make his Return to Adrianople, by
way of Walachia, notice was given thereof (as we have said) to the Prince of
the Country, who was thereby put into a most grievous Terror and Consternation
of Mind, not knowing what to do, or how to help and protect his Poor Miserable
Province already wasted and consumed by the War; and what was now to be more
done on the Passage of diverse Asiaticks, Albanians, Turks, etc. was not to be
resolved; until the Prince considering, and revolving all things in his Mind,
concluded, That the best and safest way was, immediately to depart and meet the
Sultan on his way, according to his urgent and reiterated Commands; showing no
Fears or Jealousies, but a Confidence of the Grand Seignior's Favor to him: In
pursuance of which, he proceeded, and met the Sultan over against Widin; where
being seen by him, and looked upon with a tender Eye, The Grand Seignior
marches back.
and a kind Aspect, the poor Prince began to take Courage, and ease the Throbs
of his Trembling Heart. Howsoever being acquainted with the Humor of the
Sultans, who often speak fair to their Pasha's, and yet nourish a secret Design
to take away their Lives, he could not settle his Thoughts, or believe that the
bitterness of Death was yet over; but there was nothing to be done now, nor any
starting back, but on he must go, as he did to the Place called Turno on this
side of the Danube, over against Nicopolis, where the Army Encamped on the 13th
of October, and the Sultan took some Repose for certain Days, called by the
Turks Days of Otoracke, the Officers of the Prince proceeding in the mean time
to prepare the Ways, and to make them wider.

The Grand Seignior coming very weary to Turno, reposed there about an Hours
time, and then Embarking in his own Boat, passed to the other side of the
Danube, after which the Grand Vizier followed with the whole Army, there being
Boats and Floats sufficient to Ferry them over. And here it is to be for ever
recorded to the honor of this Sultan Mustapha, That in passing this Province
of Walachia, strict Discipline was kept, and which was observed with so much
Rigor, that a Soldier durst not steal an Egg, a Pullet, or a Hen; and a Tartar
was known to be Hanged, The Turkish Discipline.
for taking away a Kid by force; and two Asiatick Turks were Hanged on a Tree
for Robbing a Bee-hive, by which Severity, to the Wonder of the whole World,
the Ottoman Army passed that Afflicted Province without the least damage or
hurt to the People.

And here at this place of Turno, it is to be noted, That before the Grand
Seignior passed the River, he called to him the Prince of Walachia, and
bestowed upon him a rich Coftan, or Vest, which is a Signal of the Favor of
the Sultan, and told him, That he was greatly pleased and satisfied with his
Service and Diligence, commanding him to return Home to his Place of Residence,
but above all he charged him to observe Justice, which if he did, he should
always enjoy his Favor; the like said the Grand Vizier to him, who giving him
a Vest as an Evidence of his Favor, gave him license to return to his own
place of Government.

When the Turks were come on the Confines over against Fetihlam, they Embarked
all their Cannon and Ammunition for Belgrade; but the lighter Fieldpieces, (of
which they found some in Karansebes) they carried with them, to render their
Entry into Adrianople, the more Stately and Magnificent.

But whilst they were contriving all things for the more Triumpant Entry of the
Grand Seignior; it was judged most requisite and proper for the present State
of the Turkish Affairs, to make the Triumph into Constantinople, which was ever
esteemed the Head of the Empire, and the Place where the Ottoman Throne was
ever seated: And as to Adrianople, it was ordered, that the Sultan should make
a short stop there of four or five Days only; and in the mean time the Valide
Soltana, with all the Female Court, was ordered to take up their Quarters in
the usual Places of the Great Seraglio, which was prepared on all sides to be
fitted for Reception of the Grand Seignior.

The Grand Seignior marches to Constantinople.
This coming of the Grand Seignior to Constantinople, was a sudden Resolution,
and unexpected, being the effect of his Thoughts on his March, only for
considering that Constantinople (ever since the Turks entered into Europe) was
always esteemed the Head and Seat of the Ottoman Empire, and the Place where
the Ottoman Emperors were ever Enthroned with the Benediction of the Mufti,
assisted by the Nakib, who is Chief of the Emirs, who wear green Tulbants; and
also the Place where the Mufti girds the Sword to the Sultan's Thigh, called
St. Juob, in Memory of that Soldier, who was the first that stormed the Walls
of Constantinople, when it was in the Possession of the Greeks; for which
reason, his Memory has ever been held in great Veneration with the Turks. The
Thoughts whereof incited the Grand Seignior with a sort of Impatience and
Ambition to imitate the Practice of his Ancestors, at a time when he esteemed
himself Great, Prosperous, and in a way to recover the lost Honor and
Reputation of the Empire.

Moreover, his Design being to be as great at Sea as at Land, or at least of
equal Match with the Venetians, or to have a better Army to enter into the
Morea, and recover the Country, his Thoughts were fixed upon Constantinople, as
the proper Place for that Design; as Adrianople was for the Wars by Land so no
time was lost in the March of the Army, to possess the Ancient Seat of the
Osmanlees.

The Grand Seignior having reposed some few Days (as we have said) at
Adrianople, proceeded forwards and arrived in Company with his Mother at
Constantinople, though at first it was appointed otherwise, and that she should
go first, and lead the way; but it afterward seemed more Great and Glorious,
and of less Charge to go together, which accordingly they did, and arrived at
the Great Seraglio about the latter end of October, or beginning of November:
But on the Road the Court and Army happening to feel some Scarcity and Want of
Provisions, the Sultan became very angry and displeased against the Treasurer
of the Army, and against those Officers whose Business it was to Oversee the
Provisions, and not to suffer any Want to be in Court or Army: Upon which
Occasion, the Grand Seignior Discharged the Tefterdar of his Office, with
Threats and Menaces of his Life: And the Commissaries for that Business being
in like manner faulty, as also the second Person under the Tefterdar, was
Discharged of his Office, and great care was taken to supply their Offices with
Men of Skill and Industry.

And now about the beginning of this Month of November, November.
The Allai, or Triumph at the Entrance into Constantinople.
the Grand Seignior with all his Court, entered into the Capital City of his
Residence, with such Applause and Triumph, and Joy of the People, that the like
was never heard or known in the Time of any former Sultan, all which served to
comfort the People, and encourage the Militia.

Amongst the Particulars of this Triumph, 300 Slaves were shown, and all
represented for Great Generals and Captains; for though there were but very few
Officers amongst them, yet they were given out for such, and for German
Princes: All the light Cannon, and Fieldpieces, with the Ammunition, Colors,
Flags, Drums, and Trumpets, were all showed, and brought into the Account of
Spoil; with a Report amongst the Soldiery, That the Turks had not lost above
500 Men, killed in the Field, though others of them which came out of the Army,
and had been Eyewitnesses of the whole Battle, and of the Turkish Army, which
consisted of 50000 Men, with the Sultan at the Head of them, and yet were hard
put to it to fight against 8000 of Veterani's Men; who having maintained a
Fight for six Hours, were at length forced to retire for want of Powder and
Ammunition, and other Warlike Provisions.

Thus much the Turks, who had been in the Battle, confessed themselves; whilst
others who came from all the Countries round to see the Show, and Triumph, Wept
for Joy, saying, That the Time was now come, that God would Avenge himself on
the Christians, for their Pride; and would for the future blind them in their
Designs, and infatuate them in all their Counsels.

Howsoever all the World cannot but confess, That the loss of so many Brave
Men, could not but prove a fatal Blow to all Christendom, especially to the
Germans, who fought almost to the last Drop of Blood: Nor were the Turks
unsensible of their Losses also, both as to Numbers and Quality; for one of the
Sultan's Brothers-in-Law, Sahin Pasha killed.
called Sahin Mehmet Pasha, a brisk daring Man, and a good Soldier, and so
Named from Sahin, which signifies a Falcon, and was the next to the Grand
Vizier, and carried three Horse-Tails gilded before him, was killed by a
Carbine-shot; for which reason he was much lamented at the Court, and most
especially by the Queen Mother, not only because he had been her Son-in-Law,
but a Person endued with many Rare and Excellent Virtues: Besides which, the
famous Mahmud Pasha, Celebrated by all to be one of the most Accomplished
Soldiers of this Age, and the most Warlike Cavalier of all the Ottoman Nation:
He was an Albanian Born, a Man of great Reputation and Fame, called Mahmud Bei
Oghli, and was slain with three Carbine-shots, and fell amongst the most
Renowned Officers of the Turks: These two were said to be the first who broke
into Veterani's Army, one to the Right, and the other to the Left-Wing, where
they found and encountered such unexpected Opposition, that the Turks confessed,
That they had never met the like, and had not prevailed against their Enemies
at that time, had it not been for the Resolution and Bravery of their Fortunate
Sultan, who standing in the Rear with his Scimiter in his Hand, hindered the
base intended Flight of his Soldiery.

This Action gave a full stop to all the following Designs of this Year; for
the Turks reasoning with themselves, That in case so small an Army as that of
Veterani, was able to do such Feats, what would become of their Forces, were
they to engage against the whole entire Army of the Kral, that is the Elector;
for they call the King of Poland Kral, and so other Inferior Princes to the
Emperor, whom they call Kaisar; but the King of England, they could never be
taught to call otherwise than Kral.

The Grand Seignior having made his Triumphant Entry into Constantinople, the
Militia of Asia which attended the Sultan from the War, had license given them
to return Home to their own Countries, and Orders were given to open a Door, as
they call it, to enroll Janisaries, according to the usual Ceremonies used on
those Occasions, and care was taken to Arm them, as well the New Janisaries as
the Old Veterane Albanian Troops; as also the Levents, or Marine Regiments, and
to recruit their Numbers, of which several had been lost in the late
Engagements at Sea; the which, though they had not for many Years been fought
with so much equality of Fortune between the Venetians and the Turks, as they
had been for this Year, yet it was not determined which side had gained the
better; though the Turks avoided the Fight, so much as was possible, and thereby
gave an evidence of their own Weakness, and doubtful Condition.

It has been long since we have heard any Discourse of Tekely, Tekely
neglected.
being not regarded so much by any as by the French Ambassador; for as to the
Turks, they had no Opinion of him, nor would they have it be thought that they
had any need of his Forces, or Interest of his Party in Hungary; but suffered
him to Lodge in one of the vilest Streets in the Town, amongst Jews, and the
meaner sort of the Armenians, called Balata; his Countenance was much changed,
pale, and fallen, and his Feet Swelled, so that his Enemies scorned him, and
his Friends could expect nothing more of good from him.

The Year drawing now toward an end, all the Endeavors of the Turks were to
begin the following Year with greater Forces than that of the preceding; and
herein they were the more concerned, in regard of the Moscovites, who were
coming down upon the Tartars with vast Numbers of Soldiers, and all things
prepared to make War upon them, and to take Asac, at least the Diversion hereby
would be great, and so employ the Tartars, that to defend their own Countries,
they would be obliged to desert the Service and Cause of the Turks: Howsoever
the Successes of the Turks had been this Year so great, as gave them courage to
consider in what manner they might be able to form two Armies for the next;
with one of which the chief Design was to enter Transylvania, and if possible,
to make Peace with the Moscovites by the Negotiations of the Tartars; but all
this came to nothing, as we shall see by the Sequel of the following Year.

Anno 1696.
Turks had gained some advantage the last Year over the Venetians both by Sea
and Land; namely, in the Recovery of Scio, and by giving a Check or Stop to the
Venetian Fleet; yet they gained little more thereby, than some little Fame and
Reputation to the present Sultan Mustapha, whom the People began to consider,
as a Deliverer sent to them from Heaven to recover their almost lost Empire,
which lay under sad Distresses as well in Asia as in Europe.

This Opinion of the People when they observed the Justice, the Courage, and
the Resolution of this Sultan to go in Person to the War, and that nothing
could divert him from it, gave them Courage and Assurance to expect a turn of
Fortune, and hopes of better Successes for the future; and though the French
promised them not to make Peace without them, but to join with them in a
perpetual League of Friendship; yet the Turks did not much trust them, but kept
a watchful Eye over them, knowing very well how little stress there is to be
laid on the Promises of the Great Monarch of France, who was also equally
Jealous of the Faith of the Turks, and both of them equally doubtful of one
another.

This Great Ottoman Empire had the last Year changed both their Master, and the
Chief Officers, without any considerable Change, or Troubles in the State
amongst themselves, for that this Sultan, in whom clearly appeared a Spirit of
greater Wisdom and Courage than in his Father Mahomet IV, or in his Uncle's
succeeding him, gave the Soldiery and the People such Hopes and Expectations
from him, that none durst open his Mouth, or lift up his Hands against him;
there appeared also something more of Justice and Virtue in him, and of
Diligence, and Care, and Sedulity in his Business, than was found in his
Father, or in any of the succeeding Uncles, as we have formerly said; which
gave hope to the great Governors of the Empire, that under him the Losses which
the Empire had sustained in these last Wars, might be repaired; for though the
Recovery of the Isle of Scio was made before he came to the Throne, and
consequently might be looked upon, as an effect of his Uncle's Counsels; for
that Mustapha did not enter upon the Government until the end of January 1695,
when that Scio had been taken about a Month before by the Turks; but that
falling so near to the time that Mustapha came to the Throne, that piece of
good Fortune was looked upon as an effect of the Wisdom of the New Emperor,
rather than of the Uncle Achmet's Counsel, by which, and by some other Exploits
of the preceding Year in 1695, Mustapha grew high in the Opinion of the People,
and the Soldiery; to which some Successes being added, as the taking of Titul
and Lippa, with the Defeat given to Veterani; for which the Turks paid very
dear, and would not have been cried up for a Victory, had not Victories become
very rare in those Days; their Hopes were very big, and that he might make
these Actions the more Triumphant and Glorious, the Grand Seignior dispatched
away several Messengers to the Kings of Persia, and the Princes of Arabia, and
to other Tributaries, to communicate unto them all his Successes and Victories
of the last Year, whereby he hoped to encourage the drooping Spirits of his own
Soldiers, and confirm those of his Friends and Allies unto him.

The Loss of Scio was certainly not very considerable to the Venetians at that
time after they had gained it from the Turks; for Conquests at such a distance
from them can never turn to any Account, or benefit.

The Morea indeed may be a more useful Conquest, than any of those on the Coast
of Asia, where the Turks are far stronger than on the Coast of Europe, and this
Year also the Venetians had been most successful in those Parts of the Morea,
having Defeated the Turks there in all their Attempts, in this as well as
several other Years; but these Successes are not likely to be continued, for
unless the Venetians increase the Number of their Ships at Sea, and augment
their Forces at Land; and make good choice of their principal Commanders; all
Matters will probably go backwards; for such Generals as Morosini and Konismarc
are not easily to be found, under whom all things thrived and prospered, so
that it were now to be wished, that the Venetian Forces were more numerous than
formerly, and composed of their own Subjects, rather than of Foreigners.

But the Turks had a more watchful Eye over their War in Hungary, and the Parts
about Belgrade, and Transylvania, than either in Asia, or other Countries of
Europe, or over the Province of Bassora, or Basorat, of which the Arabians had
made a late Conquest over the Turkish Basha of that Country, who having but
2000 Men with him, was forced to submit to the greater force of the Arabs, and
upon his Surrender made a Capitulation with them, That he might pass into
Persia, where he was well received at Ispahan by the King, being a Wise Man,
and a Soldier.

About the same time likewise Solomon Bey, a Turk, a Native of Curdistan,
having routed a Party of Persians on the Frontiers, had a Commission given him
by the Grand Seignior, to do all the Mischief he was able on the Frontiers of
Persia, not on the Persians only, but on the Georgians and Arabians, who had
joined together and made themselves Princes of those Provinces.

The Venetians at Sea give a Defeat to the Turks.
Nor did the Affairs of the Turks prosper better at that time in the Morea,
where a strong Party of the Venetian Forces made an Irruption upon the Turks,
and advanced so far as Thebes, where the Turks received an entire Defeat, all
the Country being Spoiled, Plundered, and Sacked by the Venetians, who upon
their return carried with them a great Booty, with vast Numbers of Turkish
Slaves.

Whilst these Matters were transacting, the Sultan was diligently employed at
the Port in forming a Numerous Army, and providing all things for the Support
and Maintenance of them. Nor was the like Diligence wanting in preparing and
setting forth their Fleet, and putting them into a posture capable to Fight and
Engage the Venetians; but as to the Landforces, the Campaign of this Year
began early in the Month of May, when the Heydukes in diverse places of
Sclavonia, assembled themselves in a Body to the Number of 400 Men, with which
they passed the Save, and made an Inroad so far as Nissa, about eight or nine
Days to the Eastward of Belgrade, and in that March, they drove away great
Numbers of small and great Cattle; after which they contrived in what manner to
make their Retreat; but as they thought thereupon, the Garrisons of Belgrade,
and other Neighboring Places, made a Sally out upon them with a Party of about
2000 Men, Horse and Foot, who being informed of the Enemies Design, they drew
up so advantagiously in a Wood, and received them with so great Bravery, that
after several Repulses given them, in which great Numbers were Killed and
Wounded, were at length forced to fly and quit the Field, whilst the
Sclavonians made good their Retreat, and proceeded happily in their Design,
which is all the Prologue that was made to the succeeding Actions of the
following Campaign; only every thing began then to dispose it self toward a
Bloody War, and for Action of the following Year: When the Duke of Lorain made
his first Campaign in Hungary in Quality of Major General of the Imperial-Army,
Commanding in particular the Regiments of St. Croix, de Commerci, and
Bassompierre, in which Commands this Young Prince evidenced to the World, a
clear Inclination, and Disposition to the War, agreeable to the Mind of his
Illustrious Ancestors.

Whilst things were thus preparing in Hungary, News came to the Port from
Diarbekir, giving the Relation of a Fight between the Rebels in those Parts,
and the Turks, in which the Turks had been Defeated, and their General, The
Pasha of Diarbekir put to Flight.
the Pasha of Diarbekir, put to Flight, at a Place not far from Sivas: The
Particulars of which succeeded in this manner.

When the Pasha heard where the Rebels were Encamped, he presently marched
against them with a Body of 3600 Horse, Commanding two other Pashas with a
force of 2000 Horse more to fall upon the Rebels, and getting between them
began to Kill and Destroy them without giving Quarter to any of them: The
Rebels having had timely notice of this Motion of the Pasha's, they mounted
their Horses with much Courage and Activity, toward the Evening, and taking a
Round about the Mountain, by favor of the Moon, they marched all that Night,
and in the Morning early they fell in with the Turkish Seraskier, or General,
with their Swords, And the Turks defeated.
or Scimyters, and with their Pikes and Lances, whence arose a very Bloody
Fight, which held for the space of two Hours, to the great loss and diminution
of the Army of the Turks, and danger of the Pasha's Life, who being put into
great fear quitted the Field and fled, leaving the Spoil to the Enemy; with
which they being encouraged, they marched toward Aleppo, and from thence
exacted what Money and Provisions that rich Province could afford them, upon
pain of Military Execution; at which the Sultan was so enraged, that he gave
out present Orders to raise the Nefiran, which is the Militia of the Eastern
Countries; and like one Man to rise and join themselves against the Enemy.
Besides which, many other things were to be done, both by Sea and Land, and
that with all Expedition, in regard that the force of the Rebels growing daily
greater, their Power would with much more difficulty be subdued.

And in regard there was a necessity of putting the Fleet to Sea with all
expedition, all other Affairs were laid aside, until that was dispatched, which
was performed after the Biram, and then about the beginning of May the Sultan
began his March toward Hungary at the Head of his Army, when several were of
Opinion that due care should be taken to suppress the Rebels in Asia; but the
Sultan would hear of nothing more than to raise the Nefiran of the Country upon
them, which are a sort of Soldiers like our Trained-Bands, and not better
exercised in the Wars.

The Sultan who intended to have brought this Year 80 or 100000 Men into the
Field against the Emperor, was contented to fall short at least 10000 Men of
that Number which he had the last Year: And in regard the Asiatick Soldiers
could not, or would not leave their own Country to attend the Armies in
Hungary; the whole Army of the Turks did not amount to more than 50000 Men; and
scarcely to that neither considering the Diversions made on one side by the
Persians, and by the Muscovites on the other; wherefore considering these
Difficulties and Distresses, all the Ottoracks were called to the Wars, being
in the Nature of Milites immeriti, who after their long Services in the War,
have liberty given them to withdraw to their own Homes, with two Pence or three
Pence a Day, which is called a dead Pay; and of these there may be about 40000
Men, which may be some Addition to the Number of the Turkish Army, and with
these the Turks were now obliged to help themselves.

But to understand more distinctly the Transactions and Progress of all the
Turkish Affairs both by Sea and Land for this Year following,

In the first place we are to take notice, That in the Month of March of this
Year, The Grand Seignior, with the Queen Mother leaves Constantinople.
30 Frigates were dispatched for Asac, which soon afterward were followed by
eight Galleys.

As to the Land Matters, March the 28th the Grand Seignior and Grand Vizier
made their Alloy to their Tents, which were pitched as usual at Daout Pasha;
but that being very early in the Morning, the Show was but indifferent. The
Grand Seignior was dressed in the manner, as when he made his Entrance. The
Valide followed about two Hours after, with great Attendance.

April.
Mezzo Morto the Admiral, having left the Bastarda Gally behind him, sailed out
of Port the 6th of April; and the Grand Seignior and Grand Vizier marched for
Adrianople, where they arrived the 17th of this Month.

The 23d of this April being the Day of the Great Biram, News was brought of
the Birth of a Daughter Born to the Sultan in the Seraglio, whereupon the
Chimacam, to show his Respect and Duty to the Grand Seignior, caused four Days
of Rejoicing to be proclaimed; A Fire at Constantinople.
but on the 24th Day a little after Midnight, there happening a very great
Fire, the Rejoycings were forbidden and recalled.

The Fire began without the Gate of Tophana, the Wind at N. E. which being very
fierce and strong, soon reduced all that Quarter into Ashes, where it continued
burning till Five in the Afternoon of the 25th; during which time 3000 Houses
were computed to have been Burnt, and amongst them all our Merchant's Houses,
excepting one who had the good Fortune to be saved: But God be praised not much
of our English Goods were burnt.

About the beginning of June of this Year, June.
the Marquis de Lore arrived at Constantinople, in Quality of Ambassador
Extraordinary from the French King: He was brought as far as Tenedos by a
French Man of War of 60 Guns, and from thence by a Tartan he was Transported to
Constantinople, from whence, on the 12th of this Month he was carried to
Adrianople, and thence without loss of time he followed the Camp, which had
marched thence the eighth of June.

The 23d of this Month, Tekely was Commanded by the Grand Seignior, to follow
the Camp, but his Princess remained at Constantinople, both of them being in
great Necessity to live, being only allowed five Dollars a Day, besides some
small matter arising from the Imposts of Wine, which the Grand Seignior
permitted them to bring in. The Beauty of this Lady could prevail little either
for her self or Prince; for I have heard, That she was a Lady of a very hard
Countenance, and her Air, and Carriage, in no wise engaging.

The Turkish Army being arrived at Belgrade, July.
they began to move on the 30th of July, and that Day to pass the Danube, when
public Prayers were begun at Constantinople and Adrianople for their Successes
and Blessings of their Army, which was this Year esteemed very powerful, and
designed (as the common Report was) against Transylvania: But whilst the Turks
marched full of hopes of Success, with a great Army supposed to consist of
100000 Men; their Boldness was much tempered by the News of the Surrender of
Asac to the Muscovites after 57 Days Siege, and the Advices wanting 16 Days, it
was said, That the Tartar Han arrived two Days after the Surrender, though had he
come sooner, he could have done nothing; for it was so closely Besieged, that
the Turks themselves were of Opinion, That all the Succors sent thence,
namely, from all parts of the Turkish Dominions, would not have been able to
effect any thing: Neither were the Galleys, which were with five more than the
13 sent the last Month, able to approach the Place by some Leagues: Hereupon
the Corn at Constantinople, was risen 50 per Cent. and the People were so
apprehensive of a Famine in all the Dominions of the Turks, that in case the
Muscovites should make any Progress, they should not know which way to proceed.

At that time Mezzo Morto with the Turkish Fleet was still at Scio, intending
about the middle of this Month to Sail from thence; he had with him about 40
Sail of Ships besides Galleys; the Venetians were not very strong, nor did
either side endeavor to engage.

But the most important Design of this Summers Campaign, was laid in Hungary
and Transylvania, where the Sultan fixed his greatest hopes, and both Sides
intended to do their best, and to bring things to a decisive Action; to perform
which, His Electoral Highness of Saxony having fixed the Imperial Camp at a
Place called Olasch, on the 30th of August N. S. giving out, as if the Design
was to Besiege Temeswaer, and thereby to draw the Enemy into a Necessity of
Sallying out, and coming to a Battle, that they might be better able to relieve
the Place; to which end the Turks having passed the Danube, the nearer to
approach their Enemies, made two Days March, one after the other; by which
being four Leagues distant from each other.

On the 20th of this Month they held a Council of War, at which it was resolved
to advance one Day nearer to observe the Countenance of the Enemy.

So that very early in the Morning on the 21st, they marched in good Order of
Battle, and by nine a Clock they discovered some of the Enemies Cavalry, whom
they Attacked and Repulsed several times with considerable loss to the Turks.

And on the 22d some Parties of the Christians brought several Prisoners into
the Camp, amongst which was a Chiaus, who reported, That the Janisaries were
very advantageously posted on the right side of a Morass, confined, and
reaching to the Banks of the River Temes, and another Body of them Encamped to
the Left along the Banks of the Brook Begl, their Cannon being pointed upon
that Place, where was the only Avenue, or Access where the Enemy could come
upon them; and their Camp on all sides so fortified; that the Christians could
not Attack them without much Difficulty and Danger; wherefore, to give the
Enemy room to advance, and invite them to a Battle, the Turks on the 24th
Sallied out from their Retrenchments, which was done only with Design to make
other Lines, which were finished in two Hours time, or less; and having there
planted their Cannon, they began to play one upon the other on both sides, and
as the Prisoners who had been made in several Skirmishes, assured the Christian
Army their Artillery was well served, and had killed many of their Soldiers,
and several of their best Gunners, though the loss on the Christian side had been
but very indifferent.

On the 25th nothing very considerable was acted: But

On the 26th the Christians advanced Guards acquainted the Generals, That the
Body of the Enemies Army was in motion, and marched in posture of Battle, under
Covert of Bushes, Shrubs, and some Trees, and that they had already posted
themselves between Temeswaer and the Christian Army, the Generals of which
sending to take a view of the Countenance of the Enemy; they were of Opinion,
and saw evidently, that the Body which they discovered, consisted of the whole
Turkish Army, and not a Detachment; upon which the Christian Army marched
directly upon them to Attack and Engage them; but before they could come so
near as to Engage them, they had covered and fortified themselves under the
Bushes and Ditches, that it was difficult to come at them; and having also a
Bog behind them, and a Marsh on their left Hand, with three Ranks of Wagons
fastened to each other with Chains of Iron in the Front, made the Attack almost
impossible to be made. Howsoever the Generals resolved, whatsoever Difficulties
might offer, to Attack the Enemy; The Battle of Olasch.
and accordingly about five a Clock in the Evening, six Battalions of Foot,
sustained by two Regiments of Dragoons, Charged the Enemy in the Flank under
the Command of General Heusler, and commanded them to march into the Wood,
which they performed with great Bravery, and much galled the Turks with their
Fire. The Enemies Horse hereupon advanced, and finding that the Christians had
formed their Line, charged them with great Fury, when 1200 of their best Horse
broke through the two Saxon Battalions, notwithstanding the latter made a very
brave Resistance; but Lieutenant General Zuizendorf, with some Regiments of
Horse of the same Line, beat back the Enemy, and again closed the Line with
some Saxon Battalions, and Attacked the Janisaries in their Intrenchments, and
beat them from their Post; but the Enemies Foot being reinforced, and their
Horse taking our Men in the Flank, they were obliged to retire; only two
Regiments of our Dragoons, Commanded by the Young Prince of Vaudemont, advanced
to sustain them, and repulsed the Turkish Horse; but the Janisaries returning,
and Charging them again, the Dragoons suffered very much by their Fire, and
many Soldiers and Officers were killed and wounded; but General Heusler
bringing up another Regiment to their Assistance, beat back the Enemy to their
Intrenchments, but was himself dangerously wounded.

Whilst this was doing, another Body of the Enemies Horse Charged another Body
on the second Line, where the Christian Troops received them in such a manner,
as gave a Check to their Fury, and then General Roses advancing with the Horse
of the same Line, drove them back, and pursued them about two Hungarian Miles,
when the Victory began to declare it self in favor of the Christians, and the
Turks to put themselves into Flight, when Orders came to General Roses to stop
the Pursuit, and to march back with the Troops; howsoever some other Squadrons
of Horse followed the Enemies unto their Intrenchments; from whence the Turks
made so great a Fire both with their Cannon and Small-shot, that those
Squadrons were forced to retire; and being pursued by the Enemies Horse, they
encountered another of the Christian Regiments, which they also put into
Disorder; which General Roses observing, advanced with the Regiment of Caprara,
and Charging the Enemy in the Flank, cut off above 1000 of them: Then the whole
Christian Line advanced, and pushed the Enemy into their Trenches, where they
were in such a Consternation, that the Sultan himself with much difficulty
prevailed upon them to keep their Ground, and defend their Intrenchments,
killing several with his own Hand, The Turks worsted.
that would have fled; and at length Night coming on, it put an end to the
Battle.

Thus the Christians remaining Masters of the Field, or Place of Battle,
intended to Attack again the Enemies Camp by Break of Day in the Morning; but
they labored so hard all that Night, that they fortified their Camp, and made
it almost impregnable; which hindered the Germans from making another Attempt
in the Morning.

The Christians lost a great many Men in this Fight, amongst which were diverse
Officers of Fame and Renown, as Heusler, General of the Horse, and
Major General Polland, besides others who died of their Wounds.

The Turks lost above 8000 Men, as was reported by a Pasha, who was taken
Prisoner in the Battle.

The Troops on both sides often mingled, and gave no Quarter on either side. A
great Booty was taken from the Turks, amongst which were many fine Horses, with
several Standards.

In the heat of this Action the Germans lost some Pieces of Cannon, by reason
that their Carriages were shot in pieces and the Horses which drew them were
killed.

The 27th of this Month of September, September. 27, and 28.
the whole Christian Army remained that whole Day in Posture of Battle before
their Camp; but the Enemy not appearing, His Electoral Highness resolved to
pass the Beque, and to march toward the River Theysse, to supply the Army with
Provisions, of which they began to be in want, which was done the 28th when the
Turks passed the River in like manner.

And on the 29th the Christian Army Encamped at Olasch, near the Theysse, where
General Staremberg joined the rest of the Army with six Regiments of Horse from
Titul; and Orders were sent to the Brandenburghers, and other Troops, that were
not in the Battle, having been posted in several Flying Camps, to join the
Army, which being refreshed, were ordered to march again to observe the Enemy
in their Motion.

This is the Account which the Turks themselves give of this Battle, which
being finished, as here described, both Armies thought it now to be the Time
and Season to withdraw out of the Field; and so the Elector withdrew out of the
Field, and came to Vienna; by which it was judged, that no farther Action would
happen for that Year; and in confirmation thereof, the Turkish Fleet retired
into Salankement, without having done any thing of moment for this whole Year:
It is not to be doubted, but that the Issue of this Battle turned to the
Advantage of the Imperialists, unless it be that they left 26 Pieces of Cannon
in the Bushes.

The Season of the Year declining now toward the Winter, and the Elector of
Saxony withdrawn from the Field to Vienna, the Sultan also following the like
Example, (which displeased not the Turkish Army) returned from Belgrade to
Adrianople, on the 17th of the last Month of October, where being arrived,
October.
they did not much brag or boast of their Success, though to speak truly, they
had this Year withstood a greater Force of the Christians, than they had for
several Years before, which they attribute in a great measure, to the Personal
Valor and Bravery of the Sultan himself, whose Presence ever gives Courage to
his Army: And it is said, That he kept all the time of the Battle in the Rear,
with 3000 Choice Men, to kill all Persons whom he should find or meet turning
their Backs, upon whom he did some Execution.

In all these Actions, both in this and several other Years, the French did
great Services to the Turks, The French do great Services.
both by their Counsels, and Management of their Affairs, and especially the
Marquis de Lore was very Eminent, and Signal in all his Behavior; though there
was never any good Understanding between him and the Ambassador Monsieur
Chaterneau.

This Year was not very signal on either side for any considerable Exploits at
Sea, or on the Watery Element: Only that the Turks destroyed three of the
Emperor's Vessels, or Galleys on the Danube, and took one of very good force.

After which all things remained quiet as to the Camp in Hungary and elsewhere,
except the great Preparations which were making for the re-taking of Asac from
the Moscovites; from whence five Galleys were about this time returned, having
left eight others with the Brigantines at Ozul.

On the first Day of November an Ambassador from Persia made his Entrance into
Constantinople, where a great Ship four Days after was Launched, carrying 100
Guns, four whereof would shoot a Shot of 24 Oaks, every Oak weighing two Pounds
and a half, with design to be fitted for the Service of the following Year,
with three others, which were built in the Black-Sea, much of the same bigness
and sized with that which was built at Constantinople, and now Launched for
Entertainment of the Persian Ambassador, who staid not long in that City before
he proceeded to Adrianople, where he arrived about the 20th of November with a
Retinue of about 150 Attendants, November.
besides those which were appointed to serve him by the Turks, whose Entrance
was in this manner.

The Manner of the Persian Ambassador's Entrance.
About an Hours distance from the City, at a Place called Solak Chisme, the
Ambassador was met by the Chiaus-Basha, with about 60 of his Chiauses, as also
by the Lieutenant General of the Spahees, who with a great Retinue, conducted
him to his Lodgings in the Palace of the Treasurer Achmet Pasha, who had Orders
to assign him 250 or 300 Dollars a Day for his Entertainment, for the
Subsistence of him and his Retinue: Besides which allowance was given for the
Food of an Elephant, and for Fodder for Camels and Horses; and also a 100
weight of Sugar a Day for Sweetmeats for the Persians, who are great lovers of
that kind of Diet, with Amber and Perfumes.

The Ambassador having remained about 12 Days at Adrianople, and there well
entertained, he demanded Audience of the Grand Vizier, to whom he delivered the
Credentials from the King his Master; and having been entertained in Discourse
for about the space of three Quarters of an Hour, he departed from the Grand
Vizier, having only received one single Vest, which seemed very strange, in
regard it had been the Custom for other Ambassadors from Persia to receive 60,
at least disposed between them and their Retinue.

Upon the 16th of December; Audience of the Persian Ambassador.
the Ambassador received his Audience from the Grand Seignior, on a Tuesday,
which is the usual Day of the Divan, when it was formerly the Custom to give
out the Pay to the Janisaries and Soldiers; at which time also there being an
Appearance of the Chief Officers both Civil and Military, renders all things
the more stately, and magnificent: But it seems at this time contrary to all
former Customs, the Pay was not given out to the Janisaries and Soldiers,
because perhaps that the principal Officers of the Army were at Belgrade, and
upon the Frontiers of Hungary: Howsoever as great an Appearance there was of
the Chiauses, as had been the Custom at the Audiences given to other
Ambassadors.

And then the Presents were sent unto the Grand Seignior, which consisted of

The Presents from Persia.
A Female Elephant covered with a Furniture of Cloth of Gold, which came down
to the Foot; and on the place of the Saddle, there was a Chair of State
erected, lined within with thin Silver Plates.

Besides which, were six Camels, each of which carried two Sapets, or Hampers
used in the Wars, in which were contained the Royal Presents made up in little
Bales with Coverings of Silk.

Moreover there were Ten Camels laden with Persian Hangings, six of which were
of fine Silks, and four ordinary ones, but very large, and of a more than usual
size: As also three Camels laden also with Cloth of Gold.

Upon the Ambassador's Arrival at the Grand Seignior's Seraglio, the Janisaries
were presented as running for their Porridge, and Pilao, or Rice, being about
Noon, which was their Dinner time, as was their Daily Practice, as was shown to
all Ambassadors.

The Place reserved for the Ambassador, was the same as was prepared for
others, just over against the Grand Vizier, that the manner how that Great
Minister distributes Justice to the People, might more plainly appear.

The Supreme Vizier sat at the same Table with the Ambassador; six of whose
Gentlemen were placed at the Table with the Chimacam Chassan Pasha, and six
others at the Table with the Aga, or General of the Janisaries: And in regard
the Companions of the Ambassador consisted of more than 40 Noble Men, the Turks
were obliged to place them at three other Tables; leaving out the Pasha's of
the Bench, and other Officers; so that it happened out that Day, that no Place
was left for the Kadileschers, or Lords Chief Justices, all being taken up for
the Persians.

At this time the Royal Presents contained in the 12 Chests which had been
carried upon the six Camels, were taken out, and carried by the Hands of 150
Men, as the Custom of the Turks was: The which consisted of Cloth of Gold,
Damasks, Sables, Boxes of Musk and Amber, Silks, and Sattins of various
Colors, Turbants, Hangings of Silk, ordinary Damasks, Bezoar-stones, Persian
and Indian Sattins, Bridles of Gold, a Topus or Mace of Gold, with a Sword of
the like Metal: After all which Ceremonies, according to the Ancient Custom,
the Persian Ambassador being upon his Return from the Presence of the Sultan,
he introduced 20 of his Persian Nobles, and then he delivered the Royal Letter.
The which Ceremony being over, he proceeded out from the Royal Presence
Clothed in a Rich Vest, like unto that which he had received at his Audience
with the Great Vizier, which was like to that which they had usually given in
former times to Christian Ambassadors; besides which, the Grand Seignior
presented him with the same Horse which was sent him to carry him to his
Audience with the Sultan, and Vested 90 Gentlemen of his Retinue. After which
he returned to his Lodgings which had been provided for him and with the same
Attendance as had accompanied him to his Audience.

After some Days continuance at the Ottoman Court, it was made known by some of
the Principal Ministers of State, that one part of the Substance of the Letter
was, after the Salutes and kind Wishes, and Congratulations at his Ascension to
the Sublime Throne of his Ancestors, The King of Persia made the following
Request to the Grand Seignior:

The King of Persia's Requests and Demands.
The First Article demanded.
THAT he would be pleased, if it were possible, to Remove Bebek Suliman Bei
from the Government of Caramania, and to put another Prince into his place, who
might prove of a more Quiet and Placid Disposition than this Bebek, who was of
a Turbulent Spirit, and gave much Molestation to the Persians; the which the
King of Persia, or Sofi, did not doubt but to obtain from that Friendship which
intervenes between their great Powers and Dominions. And whereas Yearly many
Persian Pilgrims travel to Mecca, where having no Place to Pray in, and make
their Devotions separately and apart from other Nations, they found themselves
much hindered, and incommoded in the Exercise of their Mohammedan Devotions;
wherefore their Desire was, That they might have a Place assigned them for the
Use of the Persians.

The Second Article demanded.
Farther it was desired, That the pre-eminence of Place and Superiority in the
Holy Land, might be given to the Armenian Patriarch, before others of the
Christian Rite, who were Subjects to the King of Persia; the which ought not to
be refused them, in regard that they profess the same Faith with other
Christians; namely, Greeks, and Franks.

But in regard that it has never been the Custom of the Turks to return a
speedy Answer to fair Promises, or Flattering Insinuations, a term of 25 Days
passed before an Answer was returned to the preceding Demands; and that was
done when the Ambassador received Audience with the Chimacam: And then he was
Invited with all his Court and Attendance, to an Entertainment with the Grand
Vizier, where they met about two a Clock in the Afternoon, the Feast held until
five a Clock, and concluded without other Presents than good Music, unless it
were of a stately Horse, with an agreeable Furniture.

Some Days afterward, he was Invited to Dinner by the Chimacam Hassan Pasha,
and in a Week afterward, he was in like manner treated by the Aga, or General
of the Janisaries, who also presented the Ambassador with a very fine Horse.

After all which Feasts, and Bankets, and Presents, the Ambassador thought it
time to send his Presents to the Grand Vizier, by his Kahya, and other
Principal Officers of his Court, in number about 40.

The Persian Presents to the Turks.
There were six Camels, two of which were laden with Presents, and the other
four with fine Tents and Furniture for the same, with rich Garments: The
Presents were all carried by the Hands of 28 Persians; that is to say, with
Cloth of Gold, Damasks, Indian Sattins, Persian Turbants, with a rich Sword.

Moreover two small Bails to the Vizier's Kahya, which contained about 25
Pieces of Sattins, Damasks, and Cloth of Gold.

In like manner the Presents to the Chimacam Chavan Pasha, contained about 40
Pieces. And that which was for the Janisar-Aga, was not much inferior to it.

After some Days stay, a Messenger was sent from the Grand Seignior, with the
Answer to the Letter of Business which the Persian Ambassador had brought:
Which was in this manner.

The Grand Seignior's Answer, to the Persian Ambassador.
THAT Solomon Bebek being an Inheritary Prince, could not be removed from his
Government; it being against the Mohammedan Law to be removed from thence; nor
was it possible for them to Allow, or Assign any separate Place to the Persians
to Pray, and Exercise their Devotions in, because that Mecca is a Holy Place,
and free, and common to all Mahometans.

The Holy Land has also been Assigned to the Standard Bearer Omer, as also to
the Franks; the which having not been much Esteemed, or set by in the Time of
Mustapha Pasha Vizier, the Pre-eminence of that Place was given as a Law to the
Franks, which was so solemnly given, that it could not be taken away,
Corrupted, or Violated.

Five or six Days afterward the Ambassador went to the Vizier to take his
Letter, which being delivered to him, The Persians depart.
about three or four Days afterward the Vizier sent him, by Order of the Grand
Seignior, 50 Bags, or Purses of Money, by the Chiaus-Basha; ten Days after
which, he departed from Adrianople, and went to Constantinople, taking 60 Days
Journey within the Dominion of the Ottomans, accounting Tocat in Mesopotamia,
and other Parts; the which was so divided, that a Persian Merchant coming to
die within that Dominion, his Goods may be challenged by his Relations, and
conveyed away to their Inheritance.

The Persian Ambassador had still another Request to make, in respect to his
Nation.

That the Persian Subjects who Inhabit at Balata in Constantinople; wanting a
Place for their Devotions, may have that Place restored to them for their
Prayers, which was formerly belonging to the Armenians.

The which Request was granted to them before the Departure of the Ambassador,
with Power to rebuild the same again in what should be wanting; the which was
taken away soon after the Departure of the Persian Ambassador from
Constantinople. And though the Armenian Commissary endeavored to proceed, and
made his Complaints at Adrianople, against the Impediments he had found; yet no
Remedy was found, but an end was put to all the Work, and the Workmen desisted
from all other Proceedings in that Building.

And here it may be enquired, How it came to pass that so many Embassies were
sent from Persia to the Turks successively, one after the other? The Cause of
which is evident from the Succession of the Three Sultans one after the other;
namely, Solomon, Achmet, and Mustapha, who now Reigns; to every one of which,
as it is the constant Custom for the Persians to send an Ambassador; so on the
other side, on the same Occasion, it is for the Turks to send unto the Persians.

September.
Toward the end of this Month, the Elector of Saxony returned to Vienna, which
was an evident Demonstration, that there would be no farther Action in Hungary
for this Year; and at the same time the Turkish Fleet retired to a Bay near
Salankement, without having done any great Damage.

The Persians, as we have said, being departed, and on their way homewards; the
Sultan considered in what manner he might most conveniently and readily pay his
Army both of Horse and Foot; for which important Service Money did not readily
offer; wherefore to supply that Want, the Grand Seignior sent for the
Tefterdar, or Treasurer, to come to his Presence, but he not being able to
appear with ready Money in Hand, the Tefterdar could scarce make a shift to
save his Head; though with great labor and difficulty he satisfied the Spahee's,
charging them to return timely at the beginning of the next Year, to follow him
to the Wars: And in the mean time Commissaries were sent from all Parts to
collect and gather all the Taxes which had been laid on the People in all
parts, whether in Europe or Asia, within the Ottoman Empire, as likewise what
Revenue was arising to the Grand Seignior from Offices, Customs, Taxes, etc.
which are usually sold every Month, especially in the Month of March over all
the Empire, which commonly brings in several Millions: So that the Tefterdar,
or Treasurer, was forced to employ Spies to advise him where the Money was, and
in whose Coffers, which yielded great Sums for supply of the Grand Seignior's
Occasions.

These things being over, great Preparations were making for the following
Campaign, both by Sea and Land; several half Galleys were already built for the
Black-Sea, Commanded by Dervish Ogli Bei of Smyrna. The Fleet under the Command
of Mezzo Morto, who was Captain-Pasha, consisted of 25 Sail of Men of War, all
of them being the Grand Seignior's own Ships, and such as being joined with
those of Barbary, would be too strong a Match for the Venetians.

This whole Winter the Grand Seignior passed at Adrianople, where after the
Example of his Father, he delighted much in Hunting. Howsoever as the Year came
on, he neglected not the thoughts of War, nor the Preparations for the ensuing
Year; but as yet the Scheme for the War was not designed nor laid.

Anno 1697.
THE Embroils in Asia with the beginning of this Year seemed to be a little
quieted, gave hopes to the Turks, Basora would shortly be restored to them.

'Twas thought at this time, that the Marquis de Lore making little or no show
at Adrianople, being then in Quality of Envoy Extraordinary, would follow the
Camp for the ensuing Campaign; but as to the Ambassador Castelneuf, he resolved
to remain at Adrianople, acting for the Affairs of their King and Nation,
between whom and the Marquis appeared no good understanding.

The Friendship still continued, and seemed to increase between the French and
the Turks, till the latter began to be something doubtful of them, upon the
Reports and Rumors which flew about, That the French were busied in making a
General Peace with all the Allies; though they at first confidently denied it to
the Turks, who notwithstanding grew Jealous of them; and from that time their
Mutual Friendship began much to abate.

The Tumults in Asia still continued; to quiet which, and to carry on the War
in Hungary, the Turks prepared to enter into Transylvania, to which end they
daily Listed and Enrolled New Spahee's and Janisaries in all the Provinces of
Asia, issuing forth very rigorous Orders, That the Militia in all those Parts
should this Year appear early in the Field; and greater Preparations were
making for this Year, than for a long time before, by reason that the Sultan
out of his Glory and Pride, resolved to make his utmost Effort this Year on
Hungary, and Transylvania, and accordingly to win all back again, and if not to
put an end to the War, to come to an Honorable Accommodation of Peace, which
the Turks were sensible could not be avoided, in case they should receive any
Blow, or sudden Foyl the next Year from the Christians.

This the Ambassadors of England and Holland so plainly foresaw, that they lay
upon the watch to observe all the Inclinations and Motions of the Turks; and
both sides now esteeming themselves upon the Crisis, labored all that was
possible to bring things to their desired Issue; when daily Spahees and
Commissaries were employed to gather and collect Sums of Money in all the
Asiatick Provinces, were observed to pass the Bosphorus, and other Seas, for
Service of the War; of which the Tartars being informed, wrote to the Sultan to
send them Money to supply their Occasions against the Moscovites, of whom they
were more afraid than of the Polanders. Howsoever the Turks being Headed by so
Brave a Sultan as this present Grand Seignior, as they thought, did not seem to
fear any thing, but to carry all before them, which so elevated them to such a
height of Pride and Insolence, that the Mediators were of an Opinion, That
until a considerable Blow were given to the Turks, Preparations for the Turkish
Fleet.
it would be impossible to reduce them to any Terms of Reason and Moderation.

In which Humor they made Preparations for the following Year both by Sea and
Land: That for the Sea designed for the Euxine, was chiefly provided at a Port
called Sinap, in the Country of Trabesonda, where they also were casting many
great and heavy Cannon: And into the Arsenal of Constantinople, were in this
Month of January 120 Cannon more brought in and lodged there.

But what other Sultans have not done, this has had the Ambition to perform;
that is, under his own Name all the Pieces of Gold and Silver should pass,
within his Empire; the like of which was never known in any other Country,
unless in England under the Reign of King William III, and the Great. I cannot
say that all the Gold and Silver within the Turkish Dominions was brought into
the Mint to be new Coined, but it is certainly reported, that a great part
thereof was; to which the five Sol Pieces made by the French, Italians,
Alteration of the Coin in Turkey.
and other Nations, greatly helped and contributed, of which there had been
many Millions Imported in 15 Years, from 65 to 80, which were very beneficial
to the Coynage of those Countries.

It was also farther commanded, That all those who had any Venetian Zechins,
should bring them to the Mint, there to be new stamped with the Letters of this
Sultan's Name, and there to be changed with the old ones of Venice, or
otherwise changed for Silver, at the rate of two Dollars and a half per Zechin:
Likewise all the Li^n Dollars, commonly imported by the Dutch with the Figure
of a Lion thereupon, were ordered to be brought into the Exchequer, where the
Figure of the Lion being beaten out with the Hammer, the Turkish Impression
with the Name of the Sultan, was to be fixed in the place thereof: To bear the
Charges of this new Coining, a quarter of a Dram of Silver was taken from every
Lion-Dollar, and then it was put into the Fire, where it was Hammered again,
and some Cbristian Letters on the side thereof were permitted to remain, that
thereby it might appear, that the same were reformed Dollars, and such as came
from the Christians; and that for the Alterations thereof, the Turkish Workmen
were not to be blamed; for which Work the Turks, Grecians, Armenians, and
Jewish Workmen, had so much allowed them by the Day, according to their
Agreement.

About this time, being the Month of February, Advices were brought frequently
to the Sultan then at Adrianople, from the Tartars, That the Moscovites were
fully resolved this Year to fall down by Sea upon Caffa; which being believed,
and so expected, very strict and severe Orders were given by the Turks, to
provide and equip 80 Frigates, with 15 Galleys, and many other Transport-Ships,
to carry the Militia into the Black-Sea, to hinder the Descent, or Landing of
the Moscovites; which Report gave great Fears and Apprehensions to the Turks,
who thereupon took different Resolutions and Measures in their Affairs.

Besides the Preparations for the Black-Sea, there were others made for the
Euxine, or White-Sea, where Mezzo Morto was appointed Captain-Pasha, or General
against the Venetians, being accounted a Man of great Courage, and Conduct, at
which time there was building a Ship of an immense bigness, Maritime
Preparations for the Year 1697.
which had been already many Months upon the Stocks, being built by French and
Greek Masters, the like of which, that is so large, had never been built in
that Arsenal; for it could carry more than 600 Soldiers, besides Seamen, and
Levents; the which being put into some tolerable condition of readiness to
Sail, the Sultan to show his Greatness at Sea, as well as at Land, to the
Persian Ambassador, (who remained behind, after the great Embassy) issued out
his Commands to three Pasha's, whom he had made Generals, to equip and fit
themselves bravely.

The first was Mezzo Morto, who was to Engage the Venetian Fleet at Sea, and to
return Victorious; and in case they did, he assured them, that they should gain
his singular Grace and Favor; and as an evidence thereof, he bestowed upon
each of them a very rich Coftan, or Vest, richly lined with Sables.

The Second was also a Pasha Vice Admiral, designed against the Moscovites.

The third was also a Pasha, in Quality of a Rear-Admiral, who was to mount the
Danube, and engage against the Imperial Fleet, wheresoever they should
encounter them, either about Belgrade, or Buda, or any other Parts of the
Danube.

After the Sultan had passed this Ceremony, he gave leave to his Generals to
depart, and speaking very kindly and graciously to them, he encouraged them to
put themselves in order for their Respective Voyages: So that now it was very
apparent, that though the Turks would be much weaker this Year by Land, than they
were the last, yet they would be far stronger by Sea, having Mezzo Morto for
their Admiral, and every thing in their feveral Fleets disposed for Maritime
and Naval Engagements; the Success of which, we may shortly hear in the course
of those Months which are proper for Actions of the Sea.

But before we proceed so far, it may be pertinent to our Business to recount
how the French Ambassador at the Turkish Court lost a Lawsuit which he had
with a certain Jew at Gran Cairo, to his great Mortification; for supposing
that he was able to avail in all Points, where his Master's Interest was
concerned; he was highly troubled to find himself disappointed in a Business at
Gran Cairo, relating to so inconsiderable a Person as a Jew. The Matter was in
this manner.

We must know, that the Jews in Egypt have commonly very great Power, by reason
that every Pasha of Gran Cairo, who is the greatest Beglerbey in all the
Empire, when he enters upon that Office, he commonly takes with him from
Constantinople, some Subtle Jew, A Story of the Consul and a Jew at Gran Cairo.
who is a Man of great Riches, to manage the vast Revenue of that Province;
which sets him up so high, that he is above the reach of all the Grandees of
the Empire, and is Honored and Reverenced as the Dominus Fac totum, or as
Joseph in the Land of Egypt.

The French Nation had at that time a Consul in Cairo, who thought himself a
Match for the Jew; who on the other side esteemed himself higher than all the
Christians, or Beyes, or Agaw's of Egypt; and consequently comported himself
with Neglect and Disesteem toward the French Consul, which he not being able
to support, made his Complaints to the French Ambassador at Adrianople, against
the Insolence of a Jew, of which the Consul gave a most Passionate Report to
Monsieur de Chateauneuf, then Ambassador for the French King at the Port; where
he so managed the Business, that a Chiaus was sent for to fetch the Jew from
Cairo, to the Divan at Adrianople; who accordingly taking this long Journey,
appeared in Judgment before the Grand Vizier.

This Jew had the Report amongst all People, of being a Person very Judicious,
Prudent, and of a patient Temper; and since it was the Office of the Ambassador
to appear against this Jew in Judgment before the Grand Vizier, the Jew behaved
himself with so much Modesty, and Prudence, that he gave unto all the Standers
by, some deep Impressions of his Understanding and Innocence, and that he had
been injured by the French Consul at Cairo, of whose Honesty and Wisdom, the
World in those Parts, had not conceived any high Opinion, nor yet of the French
Nation: But that depending too much on their great Friendship with the Turks,
they presumed to insult over a People, which had not for some Ages been
accustomed to hard Usages from Christian Nations. Notwithstanding all which,
and that the Grand Vizier had patiently understood the Pleadings on both sides,
and was as well possessed with the Cabals of the French Nation, yet he gave
Orders to the Chiaus-Bashee to take the Jew into Arrest; the which was said to
have been done out of Policy by the Vizier, to cool, and moderate the Anger of
the Ambassador, who plainly declared, That unless his Master, the King, had
satisfaction in this particular, he was commanded to retire back into France,
and to bring with him all the French Merchants, and all others of that Nation,
into their own Country.

It not being now a time for the Turks to Quarrel with the French, or to create
more Enemies than they have already, they took these Menaces with an
unaccustomed Patience, though the Great Officers being offended hereat, vented an
abundance of Reproaches against the French Nation; only the Grand Vizier using
his accustomed Patience, said, That Justice could never do Injury to any, for
that their Law, and the Alchoran, commanded it so to be done.

And in this manner this Difference passed over, with some Advantage to the
French, who had obliged so great a Person as the Jew, who is the Negotiator of
all the Affairs of Egypt, to leave his Employment to attend the Summons of the
French Ambassador at such a distance as it is from Gran Cairo to Adrianople:
Howsoever after all this, the French Nation did not seem to be fully satisfied,
because that the Vizier after all showed some Respect to the Jew, bestowing
upon him a Coftan, or Vest of Favor and Honor, declaring himself in favor of
the Jew, that he had been falsely accused, and injuriously drawn away from the
Grand Seignior's Service. To repair which Affront and Neglect to the King of
France, a Demand was made by the Ambassador, That License might be given to
Repair and Rebuild the Cathedral Church in Galata, which had for above 500
Years remained in the Christian Hands, and lastly had been Repaired and Rebuilt
at the Charges of the Most Serene Republic of Venice, soon after the last War
which they had with the Turks in Candia; but now the French depending on the
great Services they had done the Turks, seized on the Church, which had been
the Cathedral of that Diocese, and affixed the Arms of France upon the Gates
thereof; at which the Venetians being greatly offended, who were the Patrons
thereof, and had many Years past purchased the Advowson from the Turks, made
their Complaints to the Grand Vizier of the Injustice which had been done them:
Upon which, the Vizier resolving to end the Controversy between the
Christians, seized the Church of Saint Francis or Francisco, in Galata, and
Converted it into a Turkish Mosch; and in such like manner commonly end all the
Controversies which Christians have between themselves, that are referred to,
or to be termined by, the Turks.

The Ceremony which the Turks used in turning the Christian Church into a
Mosch, was by a Command from the Sultan to the Chimacam, to enter the Church
with 200 Men of his Followers, together with a good Number of their Imaums, who
began at their first Entry into the Church to sing with a loud Voice, the Tune
and Song called Sele, which is a Hymn extracted out of the Alcoran, to the
Praise and Glory of God; the which caused great Sadness in the Hearts and Eyes
of many good Christians in Galata; which had not been done, as many Turks
confess, had not the French pretended a Right to that Church; with which they
in a short time were forced to swallow two very bitter Pills, to the Dishonor
of France, and Prejudice to the Christian Cause.

Toward the end of the Month of March, March.
the Sultan equipped out seven great Men of War of 50 and 60 Pieces of Cannon
each, and all armed with 500 Levents, or so many Sea-Soldiers a piece; besides
which there were 14 light Galleys, with 25 Frigates, and all accompanied with
diverse Saiches laden with Provisions, every one of which will carry as much as
200 Carts, which are laden with Biskets, Meal, and all sorts of other
Ammunition.

Whilst these things were in Action, the French Ambassador, Monsieur de
Chateaneuf, offered this Summer to make his Campaign with the Grand Seignior in
Hungary against the Emperor, with which the Turks were well enough pleased, in
regard they esteemed this Ambassador to be a Man of great Wisdom and Experience.

Tekely likewise about this time was preparing himself to accompany the Vizier
to the War in Hungary, the which some were of an Opinion, That it would be of
good consequence to the Sultan; upon which account the Vizier conceived a great
esteem for him; and was desirous to see the good Effects of all those Promises,
which Tekely's Princess had made to him.

This Lady of Tekely went unto, and returned from Adrianople, and was observed
to be of an Humor very Assiduous, Diligent, and Malicious against the
Imperiallists, but very kind and obliging toward the French, but most
especially to Monsieur de Laurent, who the last Year was with the Sultan in the
Campaign of Hungary, and was often invited by Tekely's Lady, and by Count
Tekely himself, to take a Dinner, or a Supper, or some other Repast with them,
at which Monsieur de Laurent was often welcomed, and highly Treated.

A Friend of mine once acquainted me, That having a Curiosity to see the Wife,
or Princess of Tekely, he had the Fortune to hear Mass with her at the
Capuchin's Church at Galata, where well observing her Physiognomy, it appeared
very Ill-favored, Old, and Ugly: She professes to be a Roman Catholic, of
which she boasts to many People, and that her Husband has diverse
Correspondents almost in every Regiment belonging to the Imperial Army, from
whom he has all the Correspondencies imaginable with the Principal Commanders
both of Horse and Foot, by means of which nothing passes, but what he has a
good and perfect Account of, from all parts of the Imperial Army.

The Army which was formed and drawn up against the Moscovites, consisted for
the most part of Spahee's from Anatolia, and of a sort of a Militia of
Pascialagio, belonging to Silistra, of which they reckoned about 35000 Men,
besides Tartars.

The Reputation of this present Sultan was so great, that in all Parts both of
Asia, Africa, and Europe, he was esteemed the most Fortunate of all the
Sultans; for that in the space of two Years only appearing in the Wars, he had
showed so much Courage and good Conduct, that he had always beaten the Germans;
that is to say, when he went himself in Person to the Wars; for which cause he
was highly Esteemed, Honored, and Obeyed.

But as to the Rebels in Asia, they drew themselves up very formidably in the
Field, expecting to encounter the Army of the Port, and to give them Battle.

The great Power and Nerve of the Ottoman Force is at present in Asia, that of
the Turk-men, who are a sort of People well mounted on very strong and Warlike
Horses, Brave, and Valiant, and well Exercised in the Lance, and Bow; so that
there was great expectation when some Feats of Arms would begin: And on the
other side of Anatolia, they began to Transport over their Militia, being
designed early this Year against the Moscovites, after which the Actions in
Hungary were to begin.

But before that something may be discoursed in relation to the present State
of the Greek Church, The Greek Patriarch a Rash Man.
the Patriarch of which was very Froward and Passionate, ready to act any thing
which came into his Head, without consideration of the Prejudice which might
result thereby: And accordingly having a Quarrel with the Metropolite, or
Bishop of Salonica, he deprived him of his Title and Office, on occasion of
some Disobedience to certain Commands, to which the Patriarch would oblige him;
but the Bishop not being able to support the same, out of a Madness, and Fury,
and transport of Rage, he made a Voyage from Salonica to the Grand Vizier, to
whom he offered 15 Purses, on condition, That in Despite of the Patriarch he
might be re-established again in his Diocese of Salonica, or Thessalonica: And
to incline the Vizier the better hereunto, he demonstrated that hereby the
Grand Seignior in this time of War might gain great Advantages; For that in
case the Vizier would accept of these 15 Purses, it might be an Example to
other Metropolites, to offer some 20, some 15, and others 10, according to the
Value, and Riches of the Diocese; the which Proposition much pleased the
Sultan, having a good pretense thereby to charge all the Metropolites, or
Bishops; the which being many in the Greek Church, brought a considerable Sum
to the Grand Seignior.

The Greek Patriarch hearing hereof, made his Journey to Adrianople, there to
make his Complaints against this hard Usage offered to the Greek Church and
Nation; the which irritated very much the Anger of the Moscovites against the
Turks: And though the Moscovites did greatly at this time threaten Caffa, and
give Terror and Affrightment so far as to Constantinople it self, yet the
Sultan did not neglect the Thoughts and Contrivances of carrying forward his
War in Hungary, with as little Expense as was possible, all Charges being
retrenched; Tekely's Poor State and Condition.
amongst which one particular, was that of Tekely, to whom no more than five
Dollars were allowed a Day, that was for the Maintenance of his Lady, Servants,
Horses, and other Parts of his Epuipage; only to help them they gave a Liberty,
or License to sell Wine, which was at that time prohibited: And here it was
that he set up his Wine-Sellar within the Greek Liberties, near to the
Privileges of the Patriarchate, where he continued to exercise the Trade of
selling Wine with very good Benefit and Advantage; without which, the five
Dollars per Day could not have yielded to him and Family half his Subsistence.

And being now entered into the Month of April, April.
four of the Men of War belonging to Barbary, arrived before the Arsenal of
Galata, where other Men of War remained also at an Anchor, and frequently fired
their Cannon, with a Chi viva at every Shot, or to the Fortune of the Fortunate
Sultan.

On this occasion, the Barbarouses brought their usual Presents, as accustomary
to the Sultan, and designed to remain in the Port until the Departure of the
Fleet prepared against the Venetians, consisting of 23 Men of Mar, should be in
a readiness to Sail: And thus the Sultan being resolved to carry on the War
both by Sea and Land, did neither rest Day nor Night, but busied himself in the
proving of his Cannon, and making his Warlike Preparations with diligence, was
so pleasing to the People, that never was any Sultan so acceptable to the
Soldiery, as was this Mustapha, and the more highly was he esteemed, in regard
he was a great Lover of Justice, which is the Prime Ornament of Emperors, and
of the highest Monarchs: But notwithstanding all the Care of this Grand
Seignior, and the Preparations he made for the War of the following Year, yet
his Force neither by Sea nor Land, did amount unto the Strength of that of the
preceding Year; by reason the Rebels in Asia becoming more powerful, a
Proclamation was issued forth, That none should Transport themselves out of
Asia into Europe, on Penalty of having their Houses demolished, and their
Possessions of Timar and Ziamet to be all Ruined and Destroyed, with all the
Lands they held of the Sultan. With which Menaces the Rebels, who were
Soldiers, were so incensed, that such as they took for Prisoners, they did not
Kill, but what was worse, they cut off their Noses and Ears, and in that
Condition they sent them to the Port, that therewith they might make a report
of their Strength and Power.

Farther, there was a Report, That these Rebels (as formerly it had been done)
demanded the Life of the Valide Soltana, which is the Queen Mother, and whereof
there have been two Examples in former Times, and of one Mulchi Kadun, a great
Favorite, whom they cut in Pieces, by reason that they would not endure the
Government nor Counsel of Women; suffering howsoever the Queen Mother to live,
because she did not make Intrigues in the Affairs of State: Of which the Asian
Soldiers being put in mind, and also the Europeans of their Tumults, let us
expect to see the Issue of these Tragedies.

The Tumults in Asia gave great Disquiets to the Affairs of the Turks in
Europe, and retarded all things, or put them backward, and all in expectation
of Succors from the Levant, but none coming, the Sultan resolved howsoever to
begin his March, and to that end appointed the Days thereof, the several Camps,
and the Days of their Movements, it being determined to remain nine Days under
the City of Philippopolis, and on the 4th of July to pass Sophia, and to make
seven Days March thereof, where having fixed their Tents for some Days, then to
proceed for Nissa, and there also to halt for some Days; all which was done
with such slowness, as might give time to the Asian Troops to overtake the main
Body of the Army; the which not appearing, the Sultan received diverse Letters
from the Pasha of Bosnia, begging with great Instances that he might have
Relief and Succors sent to him, whereby to raise the Siege of Bihatz, which
the Imperialists had closely begirt on all sides: Whereupon the Sultan
dispatched away those few Pasha's which he had with him, and all the Forces
near Belgrade, and also all the Arnauts, and all for the Succors and Relief of
Bihatz.

The Turks found themselves much more Weak than they had been the Year before,
and no appearance of Recruits from Asia, nor any hopes of quieting the Troubles
in those Countries, whereupon the Grand Seignior, finding himself greatly
Distressed, he very urgently sent his Imperial Commands from his Camp before
Philippopolis, to those Pasha's who were appointed to attend and watch the
Motion of those Rebels, commanding them, that (laying aside all Excuses, they
should in the ^i^vell's Name, leave those Rebels to their own Imaginations, and
send him five of those Pasha's with 300 Horse a piece, in the lieu of those
which he formerly dispatched for those Parts; namely, the Pasha of Damascus,
called Mustapha Pasha, who had been the late Vizier; the Pasha of Aleppo,
Osman; the Pasha of Sebaste, Usuf Pasha; the Pasha of Diarbekir, Mustapha
Pasha; and the Pasha of Adana, called Fusli Pasha; but when these might be
expected from so long a Journey, was very uncertain; so that the Turks
themselves were very doubtful of the Event and Successes of this Year; for that
all the Power which the Turks could make up, could not amount unto above 40000
Men, with Horse and Foot.

Things remaining in this posture, it was the Opinion of most People, That the
Sultan would not go this Year to the War, but only in appearance, and that he
would only be upon the Defensive, avoiding all Fights and Encounters in the
Field. And as to the Moscovites, the Reports were various, and full of
uncertainty.

All this time the Sultan remained at Sophia, cheerful, and much pleased to
understand that the Polanders had declared the Prince of Conti for their King,
which could not but produce a Peace with that Kingdom, and an Union with that
Crown; which though not true, yet it gave the Turks hopes of an Addition of 30000
Coruzzi unto their Forces against the Germans; who as they did assault Tokay
the last Year with good Success, so they were full of hopes to do the like for
this also, with the Possession of several other Castles and Fortresses: But
then it was thought necessary that Tekely should be sent to them with Title of
King of Hungary; which when the Sultan understood, with the good Tidings, That
Bihatz did bravely defend it self, with Assurances of conserving the same
against all Enemies, it was esteemed News of such Importance, that the Grand
Seignior gave Commands to the Grand Vizier, to Write the News into all Parts,
and particularly unto Tekely, That the Grand Seignior had declared him King of
Hungary, for which the Sultan had sent him a Commission, with a Letter, the
Superscription of which was, Orla Maggiar Croli, which signifies in the
Hungarian Language, To the King of Hungary: To which were added also some
Purses of Money for defraying the Charges of his Journey, and adorning his
Equipage.

Tekely's Afflictions.
This Command came very unfortunately at this time for Tekely, who was then
grievously afflicted with the Gout, and preparing, for Recovery of his Health,
to pass over to the Baths, and Medicinal Waters of Prusia, or Bruscia, which
fall from that Mountain, which was anciently called, Mount Olympus: But what
was worse, the Chiauses came furiously upon him at Prusia, and without
Compassion, Complement, or good Manners, threw him into a Carr like a Log to
make him a King, without any Respect, which was most miserable for him; for he
had not only the Gout, but had a Paralytical Distemper upon him, so as that he
was seized with a Palsy in his Head, Neck and Arms: And in this manner he was
carried Day and Night in a Wagon, until he came unto the sight of the Sultan.

All this time the Sultan remained at Sophia, whilst the Army, or greatest part
thereof, marched toward Belgrade, and some into Bosnia; and having received
some Advices out of Asia, That the Rebels of that Country, were inclinable to a
Submission, and made some Evidences as if they intended to return to their Duty
and Obedience: The Sultan became very much pleased, and put himself that time
into an excellent Humor, and thereupon was induced to dispatch several Aga's
into Anatolia, with Letters written under his own Hand, in an Humble and
Caressing Style, not usual for any Sultan before that time to Write, Swearing,

In the first place, To grant Pardon to all, and a general Amnesty to such, as
should return to their Duty of Obedience.

Secondly he swore, That he would do Justice to all in their Just Demands and
Pretensions.

Thirdly, That he would give every Man satisfaction.

Fourthly, That he would damnifie no Man either in his Goods, or Estate, or
Life; but on the contrary reward every Man according to his Deserts, provided
that they became Obedient, and Deserted the Party of the Male-contented Beys,
or Pasha's, against whom are so many Examples of God's Vengeance and Justice:
Of which he advised them well to consider before they entered into a March,
which would conduct them to his Terrible and Affrighting Presence; which if
they did not accept and do, he Swore, That he would make up a Peace with the
Christians, and March in Person into Anatolia, there to take Vengeance upon
them for their Offenses, and extirpate the whole Race of those who have taken
up Arms against the Mussulman Cause; for which, by the Laws of the Alcoran,
they are to Die, and without Mercy to suffer Death.

This News being carried to the hearing of the Malcontents, about 10000 of
them Deserted the Cause, and proceeded to pass over from Anatolia into Europe,
and without any delay took the nearest way to reach and overtake the Army of
the Sultan; to hasten which, the Grand Seignior wrote Commands to the Chimacam,
and Bostangibashi, to prepare Quarters for them in the Imperial Gardens and
Houses as they passed, and that they should in all their Marches, want nothing
of Refreshments, nor those who are unprovided want Arms, or any other thing
necessary for the War; amongst which there were 3000 Bostangees fitted out for
the War, from the Grand Seignior's Seraglio's: And such Rigorous Courses were
spread over all the Countries of the Lesser Asia, August.
that those Laws and Commands of the Sultan being put into execution, it was
believed impossible for any Embroils, or Seditions, for ever after to arise in
the Lesser Asia, though they could not but be some times apprehensive of Troubles
from Persia; for since the time that this King was Crowned, he was always
esteemed a Troublesome and a Dangerous Enemy to the Turks; for though he was not
wanting in his Courtships, and Embassies to the Ottoman Court, as we have seen,
yet he was still encouraging the Georgians, and the Persians in the Parts of
Basora, to be troublesome to the Turks.

The Sultan still remained at Sophia, where having Advices from the Frontiers,
he dispatched away a Capugibashee to his Mother the Valide Soltana, giving her
to understand, That his Forces had fallen upon a Body of Germans, which he had
routed; and taken the strong Fortress of Titul, in which he had put all the
Garrison to the Sword; and did not doubt, but speedily to enter into
Transylvania; from whence he promised to send his Mother a Present of some fine
Young Ladies to attend, and wait upon her, and to be conducted by some of those
Black Eunuchs, which were attending at that time upon his Person.

After such Vapors and Boastings as these, which the Sultan expressed to his
Mother, it was not judged to be longer Honorable for the Grand Seignior to
remain at Sophia, a place so far distant from the Ottoman Camp in Hungary;
whereupon marching with the Main Body of his Army, slowly, and in good Order,
Messengers were sent unto Sarchan Pasha, then at Belgrade, who was then the
General, and esteemed an excellent Soldier, and a Courageous Man, and well
acquainted with the Countries about those Confines, to hasten his March to meet
the German Army: And so also the Sultan followed, and arrived in good time to
join the Main Body of the Front about Titul. In the Relation of which Battle,
there were two Accounts sent from Constantinople; one of the 29th of October,
and another of the 5th of November.

The Battle of the Tibiscus.
Such as were on this side of the Tibiscus, and saw the Battle, report, That the
Rout consisted only of such, as with great difficulty passed the Tibiscus by
their Swiming, and they report, That the Turks could never imagine, that it was
possible for the Imperialists so soon to Attack them, as that Day they did;
much less that it was possible for the Grand Vizier to pass his Cannon,
Ammunition, Provisions, with all the Militia of Janisaries over that Bridge,
and thence to proceed to Segedin, and so into Transylvania, and into the Upper
Hungary.

In the mean time the Imperialists kept on their March to meet the Turks, and
having prepared their Trenches, they fortified themselves therein, which caused
the Grand Vizier to assemble all his Pasha's, which were to the Number of 15,
leaving the Sultan on the other side of the Water, with a Body of Spahee's, and
Silishars, which are a sort of Spahees belonging to the Court, together with
the Solakbassees, who are a sort of Pages also belonging to the Court; but the
Taraklee Spahees, who are Timars and Zaims, followed the Pasha of their own
Province and Country; of which making an Account of their Numbers, they
calculated them to amount unto 25000, all Expert Men, who managed their Arms to
a Miracle, but were in this Battle either Killed, or Drow ed.

The Arnauts observing the German Army to be marching to Attack them, were the
first who endeavored to pass the Bridge, and to put themselves to Flight:

The Janisaries also had the like Intentions to do the same, saying, That they
had been Abandoned and Deserted by the Spahees: And as they approached near to
the Bridge, the Grand Vizier observing a Disposition in the Arnauts to pass the
Bridge, and fly, he assembled a Body of his own Aga's together, intending
therewith to hinder and prevent the Flight, which was done by killing a great
Number of them.

The Arnauts finding themselves so ill Treated, they put themselves into a
Mutiny, or rather into a Rebellion against the Grand Vizier, and killed him:
After which some Thousands of the Spahee's placing themselves on the other side
of the Bridge, with their Swords drawn in their Hands, they defended the
Bridge, and suffered none to pass over it.

By this time the Imperialists having put themselves into good Order of Battle,
furiously Attacked the Turks on all sides: At the first Charge the Turks made
some Resistance, but at the second they began to give way; and observing the
great Destruction, and Slaughter, that the Fire and Sword made, being terrified
therewith, they resolved to cast and precipitate themselves into the River,
where the greatest part of them perished; all which, as was said, happened in
the space of two or three Hours; where could never be greater Confusion, nor
greater Effusion of Blood of their own Soldiery, of which the Chief Commanders
were Slain without Mercy, or any Quarter, and such a Multitude of Turks, and
Chief Pasha's are said to have perished upon the Spot, that during the whole
War, the like Slaughter never happened as this: For according to the Report of
those, who were not far from the Presence of the Sultan, during all the time of
the Battle, they agree, That according to an Account and List of the Slain,
there never happened so Great, and so Terrible a Destruction as this to the
Ottoman Army, which more unhappily fell upon the Principal Commanders, than
upon the Common Soldiers, which they esteem to be a just Judgment of God upon
them; for that no less than 15 Pasha's were killed in this Engagement; five of
which had been Beglerbeys, or Viziers of the Bench, besides the Supreme Vizier.

And such a Slaughter, or Destruction as this, was never known to have
happened, for never in the Memory of Man, or any Age, was it ever known, that
five Viziers had ever fallen in one Battle; amongst which was the Supreme
Vizier, Giafer Pasha, another Pasha, the Aga of the Janisaries, a Pasha and
Vizier; Missir Oglu a Vizier, Fasli Pasha a Vizier, and the rest of them were
all Pasha's of Provinces and Governments.

There were 74 Captains, with their Officers and Soldiers of their several
Chambers, all slain: In every Chamber they account 100 Janisaries, of which
there may be in some Chambers, 10 or 20 Supernumeraries; so that it may be the
general Opinion, That above 8000 Janisaries were slain, and those of the
bravest and best Soldiers of all the Turkish Militia, of which the Sultan was
so sensible, that he declared, He was not so much troubled for the Number, as
for the Quality of such Brave and Experienced Soldiers, who had so often, and
in so many Engagements Worsted and Overthrown the Germans.

Besides these, were killed in this Battle, the Kahya-Bey, or Lieutenant
General of the Janisaries, with his 600 Braves, which are always attending upon
his Person, having so many in that Company, or Regiment, being the first Oda,
or Chamber of the Janisaries; for indeed the Kahya-Bey is always more Esteemed,
Obeyed, and Feared, than the Janisar-Aga himself.

Amongst the four other Generals of the Militia of the Janisaries, the
Zargagi-bashee, who was the Major General of the Janisaries, was slain; of the
other three were ordained one against the Muscovites, and the other two against
the Venetians by Sea and by Land: And besides the 74 Captains, as many
Beiracters, or Ensigns, were also slain.

And besides these 2500 Segmens of Bosnia, being divided into several Divisions
of the Great Vizier, and diverse other Pasha's, with all the Gebegees, who are
Armourers, together with their Captains, and General; as also the Gunners and
Topegibashees, or Masters of the Ordnance, which are divided into two several
Orders of Militia.

The gaining of this Battle was of that high Concernment, and the Consequences
thereof so considerable, that from thence the Peace following was derived; so
that we may believe all the World to be interested therein, and to be the
Subject of the Speculation of the greatest Monarchs of this World.

And Instance whereof we have in the following Letter, Written by the Emperor
himself, and with his own Hand, in Latin, to King William of England, in this
Style.

The Emperor of Germany's Letter, to King William of England.
PAUCAS ante horas desiderato ex Hungaria nuntio recreamur, quod exercitus
noster sub ductu Principis Eugenii de Sabaudia die decimo currentis Mensis,
Ottomanica Castra ad Tibiscum triplici aggere munita, and triginta fere hostium
Millibus propugnata, non solum fortiter aggressus sit, verum etiam Divino
juvante numine foeliciter superavit, caesis in loco december and amplius millibus
quos inter Supremus Visirius, and Janisariorum-Aga numerantur, reliquique quos
Pontis Angustia capere non potuit in Flumen praecipitati and maximam in partem
submersi, Tormentis etiam 72, una cum aliquot mill curribus, and commeatu in
potestatem redactis, nostra vero ex part tantum 500 occisis, and totidem
sauciatis.


Englished thus.
IT is within some few Hours, that the Post is arrived from Hungary, bringing
News, That our Army under the Command and Conduct of Eugenius Prince of Savoy;
did not only on the 10th of this instant Month, Valiantly Attack the Ottoman
Camp fortified upon the Banks of Tibiscus, or Theysse, with a treble Ditch, and
with a Force of Thirty Thousand Men therein, but assisted by the Gracious
Favor of Almighty God, most happily subdued them, killing Ten Thousand of them
upon the Place; amongst which, were the Supreme Vizier, and Aga of the
Janisaries, and the rest, which the narrowness of the Bridge could not contain,
threw and precipitated themselves into the River, where the greatest part of
them were Drowned; with Seventy two Pieces of their Cannon, with some Thousands
of Wagons laden with Provisions, which all fell into our Hands; and all which
was done on our sides with the loss only of 500 Men, and about as many Wounded.


After this Battle was ended, all was in great Confusion amongst the Turks, and
every one shifted as well as he could to escape.

The Grand Seignior himself posted to Temeswaer, from whence he dispatched a
Black Eunuch to his Mother, with the unhappy News of the late ill Success, and
the Particulars of it, to avoid false Reports, which upon this Occasion might
be apt to be spread abroad of the Death of himself; and other Sinister Rumors
more fatal to the Empire than ever was known before times, and might terrify
the Valide Soltana; who by the News of the Life of her Son, might take Heart,
and receive Comfort, and prevent the Mutinies amongst the Soldiery and People,
who were too ready upon such an Evil Report, to Enthrone the Brother of Sultan
Achmet, the last Brother of the three lately Deceased: But it being known that
Sultan Mustapha was certainly Alive, all was pacified; which being of so great
Importance, the Grand Seignior sent a Letter, as I said, to his Mother, by a
Black Eunuch, by way of Nicopolis, who was a Magriplee, or an Abyssine, or
Ethiopian, well beloved by the Queen, and greatly Confided in by her. The
Relation on the side of the Turks, was represented as favorably as the thing
would bear; in which he declared, That there had been a very great Battle near
a River, in which his Person was not present, and so was safe; but his Vizier
being Engaged against an Army of 100000 Men, was Slain, together with the
greatest Number of Janisaries, and Foot Soldiers, and those of the Principal
Officers; the which Relation he also dispatched by the second Master of the
Horse, with a Coftan to Hussaein Pasha, declaring him to be Grand Vizier, which
happened well for the Christians; for he was a Man always inclined to a Peace,
and no great Friend to the French; Inclinations of the Turks toward a Peace.
he was a great Lover of Wine, which mollified the Rigorous Temper of a Turk,
and made him more Jocund and Easy than commonly the Water-Drinkers amongst the
Turks profess to be; at which News the Christians immediately conceived an
abundance of Joy, not doubting but that a Peace would immediately ensue, as it
did accordingly; for all People were grown weary of so long a War, which had
now continued for about twenty Years, with very Unfortunate Successes to the
Turks both by Sea and Land.

After all which the Grand Seignior returned with what speed he could to his
Seraglio at Adrianople, where all things had put on a Countenance of Melancholy
and Sadness.

In the mean time the Christians resolving to prosecute and follow their Blow,
whilst the Turks with Fear and Disorder were flying homeward, the Prince
Eugenius of Savoy, spent the whole Day on the 12th of October in passing the
Imperial Army over the Save; October
but the River being narrow, and the Weather good and favorable, they arrived
early in the Camp on the other side:

And next Morning of the 13th, they began their March toward Bosnia, which was
difficult to pass, by reason of the Mountains, Woods, and Rocks in the way,
which was rude, and unbeaten.

Upon the 14th of this Month, the Body of the Army Encamped about Kottor, where
the March had been worse, and more difficult, and longer by an Hour than the
Day before; and though Colonel Kyba with his Squadron was marched before,
howsoever he proceeded not in his March, because he had News on the way, and
chiefly from Bagnaluca, That the Enemy had not the least Intelligence of the
Advance of the Imperial Army, so that he made a Halt until His Most Serene
Highness was come up to join the Body under his Command, that so they might
hold a Conference, and Council of War together, which they performed standing
not to lose time; and then Colonel Kyba proceeded with his Forces unto Castle
Doboy, where was a Garrison of Turks, and was situated two or three Hours from
the Christian Camp: And here it was thought fit not to go farther this Night,
because they concluded, that they were not as yet discovered by the Enemy,
because they had not heard them shoot the Alarm, as their Custom was to do
whenever they discovered any Body of Men approaching toward them; and so to
keep all things still without any discovery, they marched with much silence,
without Beat of Drum, or Sound of Trumpet: And the very same Day the Prince of
Savoy arrived in the Camp; where a Council of War being called, it was
concluded, That Colonel Kyba should be dispatched away before, to take
Possession of some Ground near to the Turkish Castle of Doboy, as was formerly
agreed, and there to form his Camp, where he was reinforced with 600 Men: Upon
appearance of which, his Orders were, That in case the Castle did not presently
Surrender, he should march immediately forward, and without loss of time march
into the Country, leaving the last 600 Men before the Castle to enclose the
Enemy, who should soon be reinforced by 200 Men more: And so should proceed to
the second Castle, called Maglay; where finding Opposition, he should leave
that likewise, October.
and so proceed forward.

By this time, or toward the Morning of the 15th of this Month, some Shooting
was heard, which was the first Signal of an Alarm: Howsoever they continued to
March without beating their Drums, or sounding their Trumpets; but this Days
March was more troublesome and difficult than the Day before, by reason that it
was through Hilly and rough Places: Howsoever coming at length to Castle Doboy,
they Summoned the Place to Surrender, the which being denied at first, by the
Turks in Garrison, the Christians labored all Night, and in that time raised a
Battery, on which they planted six Pieces of Cannon, with two Mortar-pieces.

Castle Doboy Surrenders.
The Day following the Cannon beginning to play, the Turks Capitulated, and
Surrendered themselves at Discretion and Mercy of the Enemy.

The Garrison consisted of about 80 Men, out of which they made Prisoners of
such as appeared to be the most Soldier-like Men; as for others, who were Old,
and Infirm, with Women, and Children, they gave them liberty to shift for
themselves, and go to what Places they pleased.

In the Castle little Provision was found, and few Arms, so that Colonel Kyba,
according to his Instructions from the General, proceeded in his March: And

On the 17th came to the Castle Maglay, which upon the first Summons
Surrendered, on condition only to go out with their Wives and Children, leaving
all other things behind them.

On the 18th by Break of Day in the Morning, the Garrison of Maglay marched
out, and Surrendered the Place: About which time nothing more was heard from
the Enemy, only that the Kahya, the Son of the Deceased Pasha, was Encamped
near Orossa Viza, and that the Imperial Foragers were annoyed much by the
Meroders of the Enemy.

On the 18th they appeared before the Palanca or Pass called Schebze, wherein
were 300 Turks: which upon the Summons demanded a time of Consideration until
the next Day, which the General of the Imperialists would not grant them; but
advanced with 400 Foot Soldiers, and 300 Dragoons, with the Artillery belonging
to them, and mounting 12 Pieces of Cannon against the Palanca, in the Night
they stormed it in two Places; in which Attack having lost 12 or 15 Men within
the Pallisadoes, without any stop, they still advanced forward, whilst Colonel
Kyba meeting with 200 Horse of the Enemy, whose Design was to cast themselves
into the Pass Schebze, but were prevented, being in part killed, and in part
taken Prisoners: And having Intelligence, That the Kahya was with a Body of
about two or 3000 Men, between Schelze and Branduck, he caused Batteries to be
raised to hinder their ready Passages.

On the 19th they marched on through the Orohovizar Valley, being a very
troublesome Passage at the first Entrance thereinto, not only for the
Narrowness and Streightness of the Road, but also because the Enemies on both
sides had cut and ruined the Ways; so that about three a Clock in the
Afternoon, the last Regiments, which were Horse, entered the Field, and joined
the former Troops, but the Infantry came not thither until it was Night; and as
to the Artillery and Baggage, they remained full half an Hours March behind, at
a distance from the narrow Passage, where it remained all the Night guarded by
two Regiments of Dragoons, which in the Morning marched in safe Conduct, and
guarded them in safety to the Body of the Army.

The 20th the March was through Narrow and Rocky Passages, worser than the
former, or that way which leads to the Castle Branduck, which was so difficult,
that the Imperial Army would have been in a very ill Condition, had the Turks
been capable of disputing vigorously the Passage with them: But at length
having passed the most rough and difficult Ways of Branduck, which were so
inconvenient, that the Artillery and Baggage could not be brought after them,
but were forced to be lodged under a strong Guard on the Orohovizar Valley,
where the Places were fairer and more pleasant, but the Inhabitants were fled
and gone, but had left behind them all sorts of good Fruits, with small and
large Cattle in great Numbers, with sufficient Herbage and Sustenance to
maintain them.

The 21st the Imperial Army arrived near the River Bosna, over which there was
a Bridge, but so Old and Ruinous, that the Army was not willing to adventure a
Passage over it, but rather esteemed it more secure for every Dragoon, or
Horseman to take a Man behind him, and therewith to Wade through the River;
with this Burden and Equipage they marched over a very high Hill for the space
of two Hours, which nevertheless was more easy to pass over than the former:
So they continued their March again over the Bosna, by the help and convenience
of a good strong Bridge, not ruined by the Enemy, and so advanced into the
Camp, near the Village Doboy, where Colonel Kyba joined again with Prince
Eugenius, advancing still before the same Night toward Sarai, or Seraglio, to
observe the Place, to which great Numbers of People of that Country were fled
for security: But because that City was not capable to receive such Multitudes
of People, great Numbers of them were forced to lodge before the City Gates, so
as the Prisoners declared, which together with those in the City, would make up
a Body of 30000 Men, but they wanted Arms very much: October.
So that though the Kahya was then personally present in the City; yet his Power
and Authority was weak to dispose Matters into any tolerable State and
Condition of Defense.

But the Imperialists found this Part very Fair, Fruitful, and well Built; and
therefore the Christians and Inhabitants of that Land went to the Imperial Camp
to render themselves up under their Protection.

At the beginning of this March, on the 22d, the Troops found the Ways Narrow,
Crooked, and Deep, but afterward passed into a more pleasant Place, called
Visega, and then repassed again the River Bosna, over a Bridge; at the end of
which, after an Hours time they Encamped; and by this time Colonel Kyba was
come back with his People, who had done some Execution against the Inhabitants
in their March, killing some, and making Prisoners of others, which put the
City of Seraglio into great Amazement and Confusion, whilst several Parties of
the Enemy roved round the adjacent Parts, and took several Prisoners; at which
time a Cornet, with a Trumpeter, were sent into Seraglio, to Summon the City to
submit willingly, or otherwise no Quarter should be given to any of them.

The 23d two Parties sent out the Day before, returned back again very early in
the Morning, before the breaking up of the Imperial Army, bringing no News, or
Advice from the Enemy: Only the Cornet gave a Relation, That as he was going to
Seraglio, for almost a Quarter of an Hours time he had met with no Body at all;
but afterward falling in amongst the Turks, to whom having made a Sign with
his Hand, he showed them the Writing he had with him, which were Proposals for
the Surrender of the City; but that he happened to see the Trumpeter killed
before his own Eyes, and with much difficulty, with diverse Wounds escaped
himself: And farther reported, That all the Inhabitants in great haste went out
of Seraglio.

After this the Army in a Body marched to the City, which the Turks had
quitted, and abandoned, leaving none remaining but Christians and Jews, from
whom they took all they could find, but nothing of great Value, in regard the
Turks had not only disposed of the best of their own Goods, but likewise before
their Flight had Plundered the Houses of the Christians, and committed the
Guard of the Castle to a Garrison of 150 Men; and the same Day toward Evening
a Fire broke out in the City, of which no care being taken to Extinguish it, it
was totally burnt and consumed. The Castle howsoever was not burnt, for it
being built of Stone, required leisure to demolish, which at that time could
not be allowed.

Howsoever several Parties on the 24th returned from abroad, bringing some
Prisoners with them, and many poor Christians came likewise Voluntarily in,
with Resolution to pass the Save, upon the Return of the Imperial Army; which
happened to be on the 25th and 26th, but Colonel Kyba staid, (as he usually
did) some time behind to burn and destroy every thing that remained, as yet
unconsumed.

And on the 27th they marched on, until they came to the Camp, which was before
Seniza.

And on the 28th they entered into bad Defiles, and at length into the Valley
of Orohovitz, where the Artillery and Wagons joined again with the Army.

The 29th they Encamped near Schebze; where Advices were brought to the
Generals in what manner the Enemy was gathered into a Body near Belgrade,
consisting of several Thousands of Men.

Lastly, The Imperialists returned again over the Save, carrying with them a
great quantity of Turkish Cloth, with many Turkish Women, and Goods belonging
to the saved Christians, with a great quantity of small and great Cattle.

After the Return of the Christian Army under the Command of Prince Eugenius of
Savoy, from the Fortunate Successes in Bosnia, the Troops were commanded on the
30th of October, to march from Marga, toward Caranzebes; from whence, on the
very same Evening, Lieutenant Colonel Count of Herberstein, was Commanded to
March before, with his National Militia of Rascians, joined with some Germans.

And the 31st was appointed for a Day of Repose, and Rest for the whole Army;
and on that Occasion sufficient Provisions were made both for Horse and Man.

When on the first of November the Body of the Army began to move from
Caranzebes, and in grievous Weather, with Rain and Snow, marched all the way so
far as Soczan: And then about two a Clock in the Afternoon they made a Halt
near Gialuk, in the Valley of Carassona.

And on the third they pitched near the deserted Village of Petrovizas.

From whence on the 4th Days March, a Detachment was sent before to Invest the
Fort of Vypalancha, where the Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Rabutin,
Lord of Graser, with a Body of 500 Horse, had taken his Post, or Possession,
and seated himself on the side of the Danube about 100 Paces from the River,
advancing to the Pallisadoes, and there immediately began to fire upon the
Place, and to Entrench with so much diligence, that in a short time they had
opened the Trenches 200 Paces; and having prepared the small Pieces of Cannon,
which they brought with them, and one Mortar-piece, they began therewith to
make their Batteries.

The 5th Day in the Morning, they set in order their Batteries, and began also
to throw Bombs into the Palanca, which they found to be much more strong than
it was believed at first; for that it was encompassed with a double Ditch, and
treble Rows of Pallisadoes, and a place of Retreat guarded with 400 Men, and
well provided of all things; and for the better Security, they had made some
hundreds of Faggots; and in the mean time the Turks in a great Body showed
themselves upon another Stream of the Danube above, and others at the Foot of
the Mountain, near to Rham, together with Saicks, and Frigates on the River.
Likewise on the other side of Belgrade, near Kroska, Semandria, Columbas,
Isbeck, and Gradiska, which were all places so near, that in 24 Hours time,
Succors might be brought from them, at least to hinder, if not totally prevent
the Designs of the Enemy: For which reason, the General, Count Rabutin,
resolved to lose no time, but forthwith to make an Assault upon the Place, and
if possible, to take it by force, to which end he prepared 500 Germans, and 200
Rascians to make the Attack upon the Place.

On the 6th with dawning of the Day, appeared on the other side of the River, a
great number of the Turkish Boats, battering with their Cannon, as they had
done all the Day before against the Christian Camp: And in the mean time, with
the Break of Day, the Attack began in two Places at the same time; that is,
upon the left Hand of the Danube, where the greatest difficulty was, under the
Command of Here Viart, Sergeant-Major of the Hanover Troops; and then on the
right Hand, on the River Cerasse, where the Soldiers to pass the Water, Waded
up to the Middle, under the Command of Captain Beaumont, of the Regiment of
Rabutin: And to give the greater Inconvenience to the Enemy, they fired their
Cannons continually without Intermission, as also their Bombs, besides
Small-shot from 250 Men out of the Trenches; but in regard that in the Night
before certain Recruits were sent to reinforce the Place, together with a Boat,
on Board of which were 100 Men from Columbas, and Isbeck, with new Ammunition,
so that they met with very much resistance; besides, they Stormed without
making any Breach, and that in the sight of 20 or 30 Saicks and Frigates, which
appeared above and below the Place; insomuch as things looked more doubtful and
hazardous, than with any promising Countenance of Success. Howsoever General de
Rabutin and Sergeant-General Count de Leiningen applied all possible care and
Industry to hinder and prevent the Enemies Succors from coming upon them, by
which the Soldiers at the appearance, and so near an approach of their Enemies,
again reassumed new Courage; and though they were at first well enough animated,
when they observed the Turks come upon them, with their Cries of Allah, Allah,
which they usually make upon their Charge, and that 400 of their Horse remained
for a Reserve, the Vigor and Spirit was renewed on all sides, and then with
Axes and Hatchets they cutting down the Pallisadoes, gained so much Ground,
that all things laid open before them: So that after a doubtful Conflict of
about an Hour and a half, the Place was overcome, and taken by the Valor of
the Christians; so that not only the Commander in Chief Hay Beigh, but all the
Garrison, with the Inhabitants, without any Exception, were Killed, or droven
into the Danube. All which was done and acted in a very short time, which was
well that it so happened; for had it admitted of any farther delay, the
Christians would have encountered many more Difficulties, for that the Turks
were bringing over many Succors, which would have caused very dangerous
Diversions. When on the contrary, the Turks lost 800 Persons, and the
Christians only 10, which was almost a Miracle to consider.

General Rabutin was always present on the right Hand, during the Assault, and
after it, the better to Encourage the Soldiers, he alighted from his Horse, and
having Commended and Praised every one publicly in his Place according to his
Deserts, and especially the Sergeant-General Count of Leiningen, who had the
left Wing under his Conduct, and had done and acted as much as could be
expected on such an Occasion; and indeed both he and Sergeant-Major de Viart,
showed as much Bravery, Conduct, and Military Experience as could be desired of
the greatest Captains in the World.

But now in regard this Pass of Vypalancha was too far within the Territory of
the Enemy, to be any long time maintained; for that should the Garrison be
German, or Rascian, it would be too much exposed, without any possibility of
Relief, the General Rabutin resolved to Slight and Demolish the Place, and
accordingly he gave all up to the Flames.

And on the seventh Day, so soon as the Cannon were carried away, it was put
into execution, which was soon effected by the great Numbers of Countrymen and
Peasants employed upon that Work; and the same Morning the Camp was removed
nearer to the Palancha.

The Particulars of Men Killed and Wounded in the Assault of Vypalanca.
GERMANS.
Killed, Men 10 Horses 26
Wounded, Men 87 Horses 21

Of the ARTILLERY.
Killed, 0 Wounded, 1
RASCIANS.
Killed, 4 Wounded, 18
Found in the Place.
16 Ensigns exposed round the Town. 63 Turkish Prisoners, and 32 Women. 11
Pieces of Cannon of Copper, carrying from two to eight Pound Ball. 200
Grenades for the Hand, some Powder, and some few other Warlike Arms. About 200
Bushels of Grain, with some Flour of Wheat. Besides which, all other things
were given up to the Plunder of the Soldiers. Besides which, there were above
1000 Pieces of Rock-Salt, which were brought from Valachia.

These Successes which the Christians had gained over the Turks in all Places,
through the whole Course of this Year 1697, put them into a kind of Despair of
being any more Victorious, but rather to yield to the Hand of God, and to fix a
Period to the Limits of their Empire, which they believed, by the Providence of
God, was no farther to be extended.

These Thoughts put all the Great Men, and Governors of the Ottoman Empire into
such a Melancholy, that contrary to their usual Humor of Pride, and Vain
Imaginations of Riches, and Enlargement of Empire, as if the Ottoman Arms were
never to be weakened, or brought low; all the Powerful and Warlike Men,
together with the Sultan, concluded, That after such a Series of Misfortunes;
both by Sea and Land, God frowned on their Enterprises, and would no longer
favor their Martial Proceedings: And therefore, that until such time as God's
Anger against them was appeased, there was no safety but in a Happy Peace, to
be Negotiated by the only true Allies of the Ottoman Empire; namely, the Great
King William of Great Britain, and the Most Potent Lords, the States General of
the Low Countries, or United Provinces; for whom at that time, namely, for the
first the Lord Paget was then Ambassador at the Port; and for the latter was
the Here Colyer, both of them Persons qualified by their Offices, and long
Experiences in the Turkish Affairs, to become Mediators and Ministers for their
Powerful and Puissant Masters, in Treating a Peace of the greatest Importance
of any that has happened in this, or in the preceding Age; unless it be the
General Peace, in which all Christendom was so nearly concerned.

What farther moved the Turks to desire and promote this Peace, was their Ill
Successes at Bassora, where that Pasha, whom we have formerly mentioned, had
carried for some time all before him; and though the Persians had often promised
their Assistance to the Turks, for Suppression of that Rebellion, yet nothing
was acted by them in reality, until the Grand Seignior, and the whole
Government became sensible, that nothing was to be expected of good either by
War, or Peace, but by their own Negotiations; in pursuance of which the
Mediation so often offered, was at length accepted, and put into execution at
the beginning of the Year School.

Anno School.
January.
Howsoever at the beginning thereof things looked very frowningly, without that
gentle Prospect, which is commonly the Forerunner of a Peace: For at the
beginning of this Month, three Aga's were dispatched from Adrianople, to the
Chimacam of Constantinople, with Orders to facilitate their Passage into Asia,
by the most Expedite Posts that could be formed; howsoever in their Passage
they entered into Conferences with the Chief Ministers at Constantinople,
giving them to understand, That they had Orders to Summon the Tartar Han, to
appear in Conference at Adrianople, with the Sultan, Mufti, and Grand Vizier,
whose Opinions and Resolutions were at first to continue the War; which they
declared themselves very able to do; for though it was true, that they had lost
the best part and the most flourishing of their Janisaries, and Infantry, yet
their Cavalry was almost entire, and able to Engage the Enemy with an
Advantage; and were able to form a better Army this, than the last Year.

The Tartar Han declared, That he did not fear the Muscovites so much as he did
the Cossacks, and the Poles, but of them they are in no great Apprehensions
neither; for that the French Ambassador had promised and assured them, That the
Prince of Conti should so disturb the Affairs of Poland, that no danger needed
to be feared from that People.

And now to strengthen these Proposals, the Sultan decreed, That new
Contributions should be required over all Asia, and Men of great Authority were
sent with Bands and Troops of Segmen, and other Militia, to raise the Money by
force and power.

Orders were also sent to the Chimacam of Constantinople, to put the Forges of
Constantinople at work for founding great quantities of Cannon.

And that the Maritime Affairs might not be neglected, Mezzo Morto was
continued in the Office of Captain-Pasha, or Admiral, with Orders, and
Instructions to sight the Venetians.

Thus all things looked as if nothing had been intended besides a War.
Howsoever the Great God of Hosts, in whose Hands remains the Balance of Peace
and War, having designed otherwise, and at length to give repose, and rest
after so long Wars, to the Nations of the Earth, was pleased in his Divine
Providence to direct a Conference in the Month of May, between the Great
Vizier, the Tartar Han, and the Mufti, at Adrianople, who having considered of
the many Difficulties under which the Mohammedan Religion, and the Ottoman
Empire labored, gave it as their Opinions to the Sultan, that there could be
no safety to either, but in a Peace, for which they produced many Reasons, but
none of greater force than that for this Year, no Assistance could be expected
from Asia; nor was it possible to recruit in one Years time, the lost Body of
the Janisaries, which is the Nerve of the Ottoman Militia; in which Opinion the
Chimacam of Adrianople, called Mustapha Pasha, who had formerly been Grand
Vizier, concurred with the others, and all of them joining together in the same
Opinion, made their Applications to the Sultan, giving him to understand, That
having duly considered of this important matter, nothing seemed so necessary as
a Peace, which God had now pleased in his Goodness, for the Comfort and Relief
of the Mohammedan Cause, to offer unto them: The which Declaration and Counsel
of these Great Men made to the Sultan, took so much amongst the People, that
the Report slew like Lightning, and in five Days time was divulged almost over
all the Empire.

All the Persons that were present at this private Conference, were the Mufti,
Han of Tartary, Aga of the Janisaries, Aga of the Spahees, and Grand Vizier,
and the Sultan himself.

To make some little appearance of unwillingness to make a Peace, as if they
had been able to continue the War, they sent away toward Belgrade, some
Fieldpieces of Brass, which had been lately Cast, or Founded; and on that
Occasion 15 Chambers of Janisaries, with their Ciurbagees, or Captains, of
which every Chamber consisted of 100 Men, but were computed in all to make up
2200 Janisaries, 200 Zebegees, or Armourers, 70 Gunners, which were commanded
by a certain Person, called Ali Pasha, who was Brother in Law to the late Grand
Vizier: It was reported, That all the Chambers had their full and complete
Numbers, but upon the true Computation, they were found to be much short, and
not above 70 in a Chamber; by this kind of Computation, the poor Estate of the
other Militias of the Ottoman Army being to be judged, made the Proposition of
a Peace to become much more acceptable to all Sorts and Conditions of Men: One
Evidence of which, was the readiness and haste the Grand Seignior and Vizier
showed to be upon their March toward Sophia.

In order to which, it was appointed, That the Aga of the Janisaries, should on
the 6th of June begin their March, June.
and that the Sultan should follow two Days afterward being the 8th; for that
already toward the latter end of May, all the Camels, and Horses, which were
provided to carry the Tents and Baggage, were arrived at Adrianople.

In pursuance whereof the Grand Seignior, and Grand Vizier, began their March
on the 8th of June, when it was supposed, That taking Sophia in their way, and
making that Place a Quarter of some Days Repose, there to Celebrate the Feast
of their little Biram, they might arrive at Belgrade by the 15th of July; when
all the Army of the Turks could not amount to more than 40000 Men, though they
should receive an Addition of 10000 Men from Asia, which was the greatest
Number of Soldiers that they could expect this Year from those Parts, and
hereof many Hundreds failed of making up that Number. Howsoever in regard that
the Peace in Hungary, and other Parts with the Christians, was almost secure
and certain, it raised a Cheerfulness amongst the Turks, so that they little
regarded any Apprehensions of a War against the Persians, or their Conjunction
with Bebek Sulyman, a Bold, Insolent, Daring Person, who lived on the Confines
of Persia, whom the Turks desired might be suppressed by the Persians: But the
Persian Ambassador, notwithstanding the great Treatments and Civilities he had
received from the Turks, made some Difficulties thereof, saying, That it could
not be foreseen, or measured, how far such a War as this might go; this Bebek
Sulyman being a most Pestilent Fellow, feared as well as beloved, by all the
Arabian Princes; so that a War with him might cause much Blood.

Howsoever the Turks pressed most earnestly to have this Sulyman suppressed,
alleging, Both the Honor and Safety of the Persians was concerned: And to
Encourage them herein, the Grand Vizier promised them the Sultan's Assistance;
for that having now made a Peace with the Emperor, and the other Christians,
(as might be presumed to be) his Hands were at liberty to carry the War into
what Parts of the World that he should think fit; which he should not more
readily do to any Region, than against those who might be troublesome on the
Frontiers of Persia, and bring Disturbance to the Ottoman Port.

Such Friendly Discourses as these passing between the Grand Vizier, and the
Persian Ambassador, a Promise was farther made unto him, That the Sultan would
not deny any thing to the King of Persia, which might be of satisfaction to
him; being resolved to cultivate a most sincere, and lasting Friendship with
him, according to the Capitulations lately made and agreed between those two
Great and Mighty Monarchs.

After which they did Eat, and Feasted together, with high Expressions of Love,
and a lasting Friendship; in farther Confirmation of which, a Present was made
to the Ambassador of another Horse, well Equipped with a Rich and Noble
Furniture, and then the Tefter Emini, who was designed to be Ambassador from
the Sultan to the King of Persia, and was preparing for his Journey, was
introduced into their Presence, that an Acquaintance might be begun between
them; the which was easily effected, considering that the Tefter Emini was a
Person of a good Address, and Skilful, and Practiced in the Persian Language;
he was a Refined Person, and fit, and proper for such an Embassy as this to the
Persian Court, whom the Grand Vizier had Chosen, and Elected for this
Employment; for which he was preparing himself with fine Horses of Price, well
Equipped with rich Embroidered Saddles, with Arms inlaid with Jewels, and other
Gallantries, which might serve for Presents at his Arrival at the Court of
Ispahan, to the Persian King, such as Quivers, Bows, and Arrows.

Besides all which kind Treatment, the Grand Seignior himself Treated him at
his Tents without the City of Adrianople; as also did the Chimacam of
Constantinople at his Palace on the Bosphorus, or Black-Sea.

Thus we may see how freely and frankly the Turks Treated the Persians at this
time; for now having secured the Peace with the Western Princes in Hungary, who
were much more formidable at all times than the Eastern Nations: Howsoever,
that no Advantages might be taken neither on that side, strict Commands and
wise Instructions were sent to the Beilerbey of Gran Cairo, a Person of great
Courage, Wisdom, and Experience, one of the Sultan's Bedchamber, to take the
Care and Charge of those Eastern Kingdoms, giving him also the Title of
Seraskier, or General, and Beylerbey of Bagdat, or Babylon, with Orders
forthwith to form an Army with the People of the Country, and therewith to
Attack Bassora, and drive out from thence the Rebellious Pasha, and settle in
his Place another Pasha Commissionated by the Port to succeed in his
Employment, with a Hattesheriff from the Sultan: But principally above all
things it was recommended to him, to hinder and prevent all Incursions of Rebel
Sulyman upon the Persians, who being good Friends to the Sultan, he could not
permit, or suffer, that they should receive any Affront, or Injury, from such
as go under the Denomination of Subjects to the Port.

But these Eastern Countries so far distant as Persia, were not now the care of
the Turks, whose Thoughts were wholly taken up in what manner they might finish
the War with the Christians, which were diverse; as with the Emperor, the
Venetians, the Old and Irreconcilable Enemies to the Port; also with the
Polanders, and Moscovites, the latter of which were not much known to the
World, either for Friends, or Foes, though they began now under the present Czar
by the taking of Asac, and some other Actions, to make themselves known to the
Turks, and other Nations of the World.

It being now resolved on all sides to make the Peace, the Mediators who were
to manage the Treaty, were nominated and appointed, and the most proper Persons
esteemed to be the Ambassadors from England, and Holland, both of which having
never been Engaged in the War on any of the sides, but had always been true and
ancient Friends to the Port, the Turks could have no Objections to allege
against either, nor had the Christian Princes any cause to suspect the Faith
and Friendship of two such Ambassadors, whose Offices and Persons were
acceptable to the Turks, and not displeasing to the Christians.

The Names of these Ambassadors designed to this so Necessary and Most
Honorable Employment, were the Lord Paget, Ambassador for William King of
Great Britain; and the Here Colyer, Ambassador for the Lords the States of the
United Provinces.

All Matters being now ripe for Action, and a willing mind for Execution, the
Turks moved with their Camp on the 11th of June School. commanded by the Grand
Vizier, (the Grand Seignior still remaining behind in his Tent) and with them
also moved the two Ambassadors with their Equipages: And to put every thing
into a good posture, and a way of Dispatch, the Lord Ambassador's Secretary was
dispatched away a second time, as he had been the first on the 10th of May for
Vienna, from whence he returned on the 5th of July to Sophia; where on the same
Day he there met with the Lord Ambassador Paget, to whom he Communicated the
good News of the Happy Inclinations of the Emperor and that Court toward the
Peace: But that no delay should be made therein, the same Secretary was again
dispatched away, to hasten the Emperor's Ambassadors to the Place appointed,
and agreed upon for the Treaty, and to procure, and bring with him Passes, and
safe Conducts for the Turkish Plenipotentiaries, who were the Reis Effendi,
Chief Chancellor, or Secretary; and Maurocordato, who was the principal and
first Interpreter to the Grand Seignior.

These two Persons, together with the Lord Paget, and the Dutch Ambassador, set
out from Sophia before the Camp, on the 15th of July, and on the 24th they had
passed 10 Hours beyond Nissa, and on the 31st they arrived happily at Belgrade.

The Ambassadors remained at this place for the space of two Months; that is,
of August and September, the which passed soon away, in regard that the
Expectations of Peace had so filled Men's Hearts, that nothing was heard in all
Places but the Voices of Peace and Joy in all their Quarters.

At length the Mouth of October being entered, the Proclamation of Neutrality
was first published at Peter Waradin, to the great Pleasure and Satisfaction of
all People, both Christians and Turks, and afterward at Belgrade.

On the 9/19th of October, the Lord Paget, and the Dutch Ambassador left their
Camp near the City, raised on an Eminence, where was a good Air, and a good
Prospect over the Countries round about; and upon the same Day early in the
Morning they passed the Save, a River which runs from Bosnia, and falls into
the Danube at Belgrade, where it loses its Name.

In passing this River this Order was observed.

First went an Allai-Bey, or the Marshal of the Show, with about 50 Horse.

Then 60 Chiauses on Horseback.

A Guard of Janisaries, being about 330 Men, all on Foot.

An Aga belonging to the Ambassadors, with his own Servants, and six Domestic
Janisaries.

After which followed two Flags, one with the English Coat of Arms, and the
other was a large Red Cross in a White Field.

Then followed the English Ambassador's 6 led Horses covered with very rich
Furniture, followed by the Gentleman of the Horse to my Lord Ambassador,
attended by a Giovane di Lingua, or a young Druggerman, or Interpreter.

Then came up the two Interpreters attending His Excellency the Lord
Ambassador, on each side of his Horse, and they attended with two Heydukes in
their own Country Habit; and on both sides 10 Chiohadars, or Servants, who
carry the Cloaks, or Vests of the Great Men, in White Vests, with their
Carbines on their Shoulders.

The Brother to the Lord Ambassador road afterward with six Chiohadars.

Then followed the Secretary, and Doctor, with two English Gentlemen; one from
Aleppo, and the other from Tripoli.

Also six Pages with the Lord Ambassador's Coach, with a Turkish one, which
went before the Common Servants, who marched all on Horseback, two and two.

At their Passage over the Bridge of the Save, which was lined with Janisaries,
three Guns were fired from the Castle; and the Galleys, Saicks, and the Frigates
as they passed fired ea^h a Gun.

About half the way to Semblin, the Chiaus, and others, whom the Vizier had
sent along with them, made a Halt, and having wished a good Journey to those
whom they conducted, returned back.

About an Hour after these Matters had passed, the Dutch Ambassador followed,
and was used with the same Civility as those preceding.

The Emperor's Ambassadors, because they sent Passports to the Turkish
Ambassadors Signed by the Emperor's Hand, desired to have others Signed by the
Sultan: But because it was considered that this exchange of Passports would
take up a great deal of time, the Mediators found out, and agreed upon this
Expedient, That the Proclamation being made in both the Emperors Names, no
Passports should be delivered, either from the Germans to the Turks, or from
the Turks to the Germans; but that a Pleni-power should be given to the
Midiators to grant Passports to People, who were going up and down within the
Limits of Neutrality agreed on both sides: So the German Ambassadors resolved
to go to Carlowitz within three Days time, though their Wooden Houses were not
arrived as yet.

The Mediators also agreed upon the same, and to place themselves so, that
their Doors might be over against each other at a good distance, whereby the
Turks remained wholly on the Belgrade side, and the Germans toward Peter
Waradin.

The 11/21st the Venetian Ambassador arrived at Futack, but the Muscovite
Ambassador, after their unthinking manner, came directly the same Day to Peter
Waradin, without giving the Governor Notice of his coming; by which Neglect of
the Moscovite, no Salutes were passed on him, of which he complained to the
Governor; but that was easily answered, by saying, That he knew nothing of his
coming down the River, and therefore hoped to be excused.

In fine, To Accommodate this Matter, it was agreed, That the Boats of the
Moscovites should remove from the place where they first Landed, and by a
Signal given by the Ambassador's Trumpets, the Guns should be fired, which was
done both from the Castle, the Town, and the Fleet.

On the 15/25th of this Month of October, the Turkish Ambassadors arrived at
two Hours distance from the Tents of the Mediators; but both sides having
considered, that the Days being short, and that at such a distance from the
Quarters of the Plenipotentiaries, much time would be spent and lost in going
to and fro, it was concluded, That the English and Dutch Ambassadors should go
to Carlowitz, and the Germans and Allies should take their Quarters about half
an Hour above them toward Peter Waradin, and the Turks about a Quarter of an
Hour below toward Belgrade.

Upon the Arrival of the Mediators at Carlowitz, they were received by the
German Horse and Foot, and a Captain-Lieutenant and a Standard, with 50 Horse,
and also with another Captain-Lieutenant, and an Ensign, with 70 Foot, which
were appointed to each Ambassador for the Mediators Guards. The Turkish
Soldiers were at the Right of the English Ambassador, and at the Left of the
Dutch.

On the 20/30th the Plenipotentiaries were showed to each other; and shortly
after the Conferences began; but first the Preparations were making for
building the House for Conferences: But in the mean time to supply that
Convenience, a great Tent was raised in the midst of that void place which was
between the Tents of the Mediators; where it was farther ordered, That instead
of Chambers for the several Parties, there should be Tents pitched on both
sides.

Some Points were here projected to be agreed on, as Preliminaries regulating
the Ceremonies of the Congress; about which the Poles gave some trouble at the
beginning, who seemed rather to hinder than to forward the Peace; for the
Disputes they made upon nothing, took up seven Days time; the which being at
length overcome,

October. 26. O.S.
On the 6th of November, N.S. all the Preliminary Points were adjusted, and
agreed by all the Allies, November.
which tended chiefly to prevent and avoid all Contests about Precedence, and
the disannulling all useless Ceremonies, during the Congress, as well as those
Impediments which might cause Confusion and Disturbance.

The Articles for Facilitating the Negotiation, were these.
I. TO take away Notifications, and Visits of Ceremony and Precedence. II. That
every Plenipotentiary shall advance his own Business, without being obliged to
stay for one another, which in that case is to be put into the Hands of the
Mediators, until the time that the General Subscription is made. III. That no
Plenipotentiary shall hinder or delay the Progress of the Treaty; but that
every one shall endeavor to assist each other in removing the Difficulties
which obstruct the way. IV. For confirming the District of Neutrality, and
covering the several Ambassadors, and their Retinues from Insults and Wrongs,
both during their Abode at the place of Treaty, and their Departure thence. V.
And for keeping the Train and Domestics of each Ambassador in order, and that
no Disturbance, or Quarrel might arise between them, it was Ordered, VI. That a
Prohibition should be given to every one to stir Abroad at Night; and that
whosoever should be caught Abroad after the Sun was Set, should be kept in the
Custody of the Guards until Morning, and then to be delivered into the Hands of
the Ambassador to whom he belongs, to be punished.
The Points were Signed and Sealed by the Ambassadors at Carlowitz, the 26th of
October, or the 6th of November, N.S.

On the 2/13 of November, the Ambassador from the Emperor, appeared in the Camp
of Carlovitz; as also did those from the Sultan, who placed themselves on both
sides, not far from the House appointed for the Conferences to be held, and not
far from the Places where the Mediators had their Lodgings, in which void
Places several Magnificent and Stately Tents were erected; at which, about nine
of the Clock in the Morning, the Emperor's Ambassador arrived, being attended
with four Coaches of State, and a Numerous Retinue.

And in the first place they went to the Tents of the Mediators, where at the
same time appeared the Turkish Ambassador, attended with a very stately Retinue
of Cavaliers, well mounted on Horses of the finest Shapes that could be found
in all Quarters of the Eastern World, and besides their Clothing which was
very rich, they made as beautiful an Appearance, as the Germans had done before
them: And both Parties at the same time presented themselves before the
Mediators, in the Tent appointed for the Conferences: Where after the
Salutations, and Complements on both sides, sufficiently Courteous and
Obliging, they took their Seats in the middle of the Tent, purposely set, and
laid for them, one directly against the other, in such a manner, that no Person
could take Exception against his Place, or Seat appointed for him.

This being agreed and settled, the first Conference began, which was to
determine this Great and Solemn Peace, which was the first of this kind, that
ever passed between the Christians and the Turks; not but that several Treaties
and Conclusions of Articles had passed before, but not on such equal Terms, and
with so much Honor, and Deference given to Christian Mediators, which will be
recorded in all Ages, to the Glory of William the Third, King of Great Britain,
and of the States General, His Worthy and Wise Allies.

Nor will it be less Memorable in Honor of that Noble and Ancient Family of
the Lord Paget; who with the Here Colyer, Ambassador from the Lords the
States General of the United Provinces, bore so great a share in this
Everlasting, and never to be forgotten Treaty.

The Tent appointed for this Congress had four Doors, which fronted each other,
at one of which entered the Imperial Ambassador, and at the opposite thereunto
entered the Turkish; and at the two others, which were likewise opposite,
entered the Mediators.

The Imperial Ambassador, was Named the Most Excellent Lord the Count of
Ottingen: And on the Turkish side was the Reis Effendi, which I take to be
principal Secretary of State with us.

Behind the Emperor's Ambassador the Secretary of the Embassy was placed; as
also at a small Table behind the English Mediator, was placed the English
Secretary: And behind the Ottoman Ambassador the Turkish Secretary, called
Mauro Cordato, by Extraction a Greek, and of that Rite, or Religion; he stood a
while behind the Turkish Ambassador upon his Legs, but afterward was ordered
to sit on the Ground after the Turkish Fashion; both which Secretaries took the
Minutes, or Protocollo of what was propounded, or what passed.

The Doors of the Tent was on all sides guarded equally by Germans and Turks,
and both filled up the Doors of the Tent, amongst which were many Commanding
Officers, who had room sufficient to see every thing that passed: The
Conferences began commonly about ten a Clock, or half an Hour past ten in the
Morning, and lasted until half an Hour past two in the Afternoon: And then
ended the first Day of Conference.

On the 4/14th the Imperial Ambassador dispatched a Messenger by way of Peter
Waradin toward the Places where the Regiment of Corbelli, and the two
Battalions of Anhalt, and Turcheim, were Quartered, which were settled there for
Guards near to the Congress; as also for the same reason had appointed 200
Horse of the first Rank, and 100 Foot of the second: Likewise the Turkish
Ministers remanded to Belgrade as many of their People, as they could well
spare.

The same Day that this Exchange was made, the Plenipotentiaries from the
Sultan not being used to sit upon Stools, or Chairs, but very uneasily, caused
a Safraw to be placed for them, covered with rich Carpets, and Embroidered
Cushions, upon which they sat Cross-legg'd after the Turkish Fashion.

After which the Company rising, the Imperial Ambassador went to Dinner with
the Mediators, where having remained for the space of about two Hours, they
returned to the Conference about three a Clock, which continued until half an
Hour past four in the Evening.

The next Day being the 5/15, the Imperial Ambassador appeared at the place of
the Conference in most Rich and Pompous Habit in Honor to the Day, which was
the Emperor's Birthday; and which after the Conference was ended, was honored
with a most splendid and stately Dinner, and Entertainment.

The 6/18 the Plenipotentiaries again assembled about ten a Clock in the
Morning, which continued with much diligence until eight a Clock in the Evening.

The 7/17th the Venetian Ambassador came for the first time with a most
splendid Equipage to the Conference, in which that whole Day was entirely spent.

On the 7/17th, the Turks made a Proposition to have the Principality of
Transylvania to be restored to its pristine State and Condition, but so as to
remain under the Emperor's Protection; but this Point was positively rejected
by the Imperialists, the which not taking.

On the 11/21, the Turks made another Offer about this Principality, leaving it
wholly in the Power and Possession of the Emperor, stipulating howsoever, That
an Honorary Tribute should be paid unto the Port for the same, but this was
likewise rejected by the Imperialists: For the truth is, the Emperor would
hearken to nothing which could give the Turks any Footing or Demand upon
Transylvania, which is the Entrance, and the Lock and Key into the Upper
Hungary, and into Germany it self.

So on the 14/24, after long Debates on both sides, the Point of Transylvania
was agreed in the same manner as proposed by the Germans.

The 15/25th was entirely spent upon the Argument of the Limits, in which
things were so prepared, that

On the 16/16th a good progress was made about the Regulation of the Confines;
and before they arose, or separated for that Evening, it was agreed, which of
the other Allies should have their Business come next to the Conference, and
was agreed, That it should be the Venetians, which was the more easily assented
unto, because they had agreed with the Imperialists to treat upon the Foot of
Uti Possidetis.

Accordingly on the 17/17, the Venetian Ambassadors met the Turks, and had a
long Conference with them, but the Turks making some new Demands, which the
Ambassadors not being prepared to answer, or to gratify them in, it ended for
that Day without any Determination.

The 18/28th, the Venetians renewed their former Conference, where the same
Difficulties offering and not removed, all ended again without any farther
positive Resolution.

The 19/29 the Moscovite Ambassador went to Conference, in which having held a
Discourse only in general Terms, without entering upon Particulars, nothing was
concluded, or determined for that Day.

The 20/30 was spent by the Mediators in going between the Plenipotentiaries to
dispose them toward the ultimate Agreement.

The 21st of November, or first of December, the Imperialists had a Conference
with the Turks in the Morning, at which they proceeded yet farther in adjusting
and settling the Limits of each Empire: And the same Day in the Afternoon the
Polish Ambassador went to Conference; at which his Discourse was loose and
general, so that nothing was concluded for that time.

The next Day being the 22d of November, or the 2d of December, the Moscovite
Ambassador had another Conference with the Turks, who pretended the Cession, or
Demolition of the Places Conquered by the Czar, but that Demand was rejected,
the Ambassador saying, That he would neither give unto, nor take any thing from
the Turks; but that his Master required the Fortress of Keres from the Cham of
Tartary.

The 23d of November, or the 3d of December, the Ambassador of Poland began to
abate, and remit something of his high Demands, which gave some hopes of an
Accommodation between the Poles and the Turks, in case an Equivalent could be
found for the Town and Fortress of Caminieck.

The 24/4 in the Afternoon the Venetian Ambassador had a Conference which
lasted until Night, but could come to no satisfactory Resolution; the Turks
still adhering to their Demands, that several places should be razed, which are
in the Possession of the Venetians, which the Ambassador alleged that he had
not power to grant.

The 25/5th the Polish Ambassador went again to Conference, after which, it was
observed, That the Turks dispatched an Express Courier to the Port thereupon.

The 26/6 in the Afternoon, the Imperialists went again to Conference, but
concluded nothing for that time.

The 28/8 the Imperialists had another Conference with the Turks, which held
from nine a Clock in the Morning, till five in the Afternoon; during which time
the Articles between the Emperor and the Sultan were for the most part agreed.

The 29/9th the Imperial Ambassador held another Conference with the Turks, but
that Day was for the most part spent in Debates without any conclusion.

The 30/10th my Lord Paget went to the Ottoman Ambassador in the Morning, and
to the Imperialists in the Afternoon, endeavoring to dispose both Parties to a
Peace.

December 1/11th the Imperial Ambassador had this Day the tenth Conference with
the Turks, at which the remaining Articles were debated and agreed, so that
little or nothing was wanting to perfect the Emperor's Treaty.

On the 2/12th the Moscovite Ambassador was at Conference from 10 a Clock to 12
at Noon: At which the Turks required the Demolition, and Restitution of Dogan
Calusi, and three other Forts which the Czar holds upon the Boristhenes, to
which the Moscovites would give no ear; howsoever they relinquished their
Pretensions upon Keres; so that it was not doubted but that a Medium might now
be easily found to compose Matters remaining.

The 3/13th was spent by the Mediators in trying to rectify some Mistakes and
Misunderstandings which might remove some Difficulties.

The 4/14th the Polish Ambassador was at Conference, at which four Articles
were drawn and agreed unto.

In one of which there was yielded unto the Turks the Castles which the Poles
then had, and possessed in Moldavia.

In another, it was agreed, That in Exchange for those Castles, the strong
Fortress of Caminieck, and the Provinces of Podolia, and Ukrania, should be
Surrendered into the Hands of the Poles.

The 5/15 was spent in preparing Matters for a farther Progress.

The 6/16 the Imperialists went to Conference with an Intention to reduce the
Articles which were already agreed, into order, but the Turks not having fully
finished the Translation of them, it was deferred to another Convention.

On the 7/17th, the Moscovite delivered into the Hands of my Lord Paget, the
Articles which he had promised to consign to the Mediation.

And accordingly on the 8/18th, he sent a Supplement thereunto, which did not
answer expectation, so that Business remained for some time undetermined.

The next Day 9/19 the Polish Ambassador had another Conference with the Turks,
at which the remaining Points of the Treaty were agreed upon; so that in a
manner that whole Peace was agreed, and finished.

The 10/20th of December, the Venetian Ambassador communicated a new
Commission, and Project which he had received from the State of Venice to the
Mediators.

And in the Afternoon the Moscovite Ambassador entertained a Discourse with the
Mediators, and Mauro Cordato, but at that Meeting they cleared no Business.

With these frequent Conferences on all sides, much time passed away, until
Christmas approached, and then was the Season that Labors should give place to
Devotion and Mirth, and to the Solemnities of that Festival, which continued
until the Twelve Days were over; and then all sides began again, after the
Plenipotentiary Ambassadors had passed their time very Jovially, to renew again
their Treaties: Only the Turkish Ambassadors having little to do with the
Christian Rites, wished heartily that the Feasts were over, and pressed
heartily for an end thereof; alleging, That their Presence was required at the
Port, and that the Sultan would no longer allow of their Absence.

The first that betook himself to Business, (which was strange) was the
Moscovite Ambassador, who on the 14/24th of Jan sary 1699, was the first who
Subscribed the Instrument of Amnesty, and the Treaties of the Peace of the
Emperor, and Poland, with the Port, were Signed on the 16/26th by their
Ambassadors: And the Venetian Treaty being very well adjusted and perfected,
all Parties appeared to be very well satisfied; and the Venetian Ambassador as
well as the others, though for want of sufficient Power, he could not then Sign
his Instrument, but supposed that Orders would come to him for doing the same,
before the Imperial Ratifications, which were to be exchanged on the Line of
Limits between Peter Waradin, and Belgrade, could be dispatched, in which case
the Mediators had Power to receive it. Monday the 16/26 of January was
appointed for the Solemn Day of Signature.

Monday the 16/26th of January, was the Solemn Day of Signature, the which
having been passed in the Morning, all the Ambassadors, Turks as well as
Christians, with all their Attendants, Guards, etc. with many Persons of
Quality out of the Country, making about 5000 Persons, Dined at my Lord Paget's
Quarters, at whose Table, the King of England's Health was the first that was
drank, then the Emperor's, and the lasting Continuance of the Peace, which was
Signed that very Day: And then we may believe, and fancy, that most People
there present were all heartily Merry, with as much Solemnity as that Place
could afford: And amongst other things of Mirth it was observed, That my Lord
Paget had an Ox Roasted whole for the Soldiers, a thing never known before in
those Parts.

On the 17/27th, the Mediators Dined with the Emperor's Ambassadors, where they
were entertained with the like Rejoycings, and in the Evening with Fireworks,
Fountains of Wine, Drums, Trumpets, Music, and with the Discharge of Great and
Small Guns.

The 18/28th, the Moscovite Ambassador took his leave of my Lord Paget, with
many Lofty Expressions of Civility and Acknowledgments.

The 19/29th, my Lord Paget Visited the Imperial Ambassadors, as he did the
Turks on the 20/30th, and 21/31st, which was in return of that Compliment which
the Turks had made to him some time after the first Conferences.

The 21st of January, or the first of February, the Turks were to visit the
Imperial Ambassadors, and to take their leaves of them.

On the 24/3th, the Imperialists were to take their Leaves of the Turks, and
return their Visit.

And on the 24/4th or 25/5th in the Morning, the Mediators, and Turks, designed
to take their Journey toward Belgrade, where the Mediators were to continue
until the Exchange of the Ratifications.

The 26th at Night, O.S. the Polish Ambassador departed by the Post, after
having passed many high Complements on my Lord Pagett, expressing the Transport
he was in, for the Successful Assistances he had received from His Excellency
in the Management and Conclusion of his Business.

The Muscovite Ambassador also declared, That he would leave Peter Waradin on
the 2/12th of February; and in three or four Days after which, the Mediators
declared, That the Place of Congress was likely to be quite cleared.

The House of Conference was bestowed by Count Ottingen on the Franciscan
Friars, who at the same time declared, That their Intentions were to make a
Church thereof, in memory of that Peace which had been there transacted.

For which God be praised; which being of a High Concernment to all
Christendom, and to which the knowledge of the particular Articles may be
useful to all Nations, we have thought fit to add them hereunto in Latin and
English, as here follows.


AD perpetuam rei memoriam, Notum sit omnibus and singulis, quorum interest,
posteaquam per sedecim hucusque anno saevum, exitiale, and multa humani
Sanguinis effusione cruentum adeo bellum, cum plurimarum Provinciarum
desolatione gestum esset inter Serenissimum, and Potentissimum Principem and
Dominum Leopoldum; Electum Romanorum Imperatorem semper Augustum, Germaniae,
Hungariae, Bohemiae, Dalmatiae, Croatiae, Sclavoniae Regem, Archiducem
Austriae, Ducem Burgundiae, Brabantiae, Styriae, Carinthiae, Carniolae,
Marchionem Moraviae, Ducem Luxemburgiae, Superioris and Inferioris Silesiae,
Wirtembergae, and Teckae, Principem Sueviae, Comitem Habspurgi, Tyrolis,
Kyburgi and Gotitiae, Marchionem Sacri Romani Imperii, Burgoviae, ac Superioris
and Inferioris Lusatiae, Dominum Marchiae Sclavinicae, Portus Naonis and
Salinarum, etc. ab una: Et Serenissimum, atque Potentissimum Principem and
Dominum Sultanum Mustapha Han Ottomannorum Imperatotem, ac Asiae and Graeciae
ejusque gloriosos Praedecessores ab altera part, misertique tandem afflictae
Subditorum Sortis sum dicti ambo Potentissimi Imperatores finem tantis in
perniciem Generis Humani indies augescentibus malis ponere, serio in animum
induxissent, factum Divina bonitate esse, ut annitentibus, and Conciliantibus
Serenissimo, and Potentissimo Principe, and Domino Guillielmo Tertio, Magnae
Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rege, uti and Celsis ac Praepotentibus
Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus Unitarum Belgii Provinciarum Solennes ea de causa
Tractatus Carlovizii in Sirmio prope Confinia utriusque Imperii instituti atque
ad finem perducti fuerint. Comparentes quippe dicto loco utrinque legitime
constituti Plenipotentiarii nomine quidem Sacrae Caesareae, and Romanorum
Imperatoriae Majestatis, Illustrissimi and Excellentissimi Domini, Dominus
Wolffgangus Sacri Romani Imperii Comes ab Oettingen Sacrae Caesareae Majestatis
Cubicularius, Consiliarius intimus; and Consilii Imperialis Aulici Praeses: Et
Dominus Leopoldus Schlik Sacri Romani Imperii Comes in Passaun, and
Weiskirchen, ejusdem Sacrae Caesareae Majestatis Cubicularius Generalis,
Vigiliarum Praefectus, and Legionis Desultoriorum Equitum Tribunus: ambo ad
Tractatus hosce Pacis cum Porta Ottomannica deputati legati Extraordinarii, and
Plenipotentiarii: nomine vero imperialis Ottomannicae Majestatis, Illustrissimi
and Excellentissimi Domini, Dominus Mehemet Effendi, Supremus Imperii
Ottomannici Cancellarius and Dominus Alexander Mauro Cordato ex nobili Stirpe
de Scarlati intimus jam dicti Imperii Consiliarius, and Secretarius, interventu
and opera Illustrissimorum, and Excellentissimorum Dominorum, Domini Guilielmi
Paget, Baronis de Beaudesert, Serenissimi Magnae Britanniae Regis, and Domini
Jacobi Colyer, Celsorum and Praepotentium Generalium Foederati Belgii Ordinum,
amborum apud Excelsam Portam Ottomannicam oratorum and ad restabiliendam pacem
universalem legatorum Plenipotentiariorum, qui munere Mediatoris integre,
sedulo and prudenter perfuncti sunt: post invocatam aeterni Numinis opem, and
commutatas rite mandatorum tabulas ad Divini Nominis gloriam, and utriusque
Imperii Salutem, in sequentes viginti mutuas Pacis, and concordiae leges
convenerunt.

I.
REGIO Transylvaniae, quemadmodum, de praesenti est in possessione, and
potestatate Caes. Majestatis, ita maneat in ejusdem Dominio: Et a Podoliae
confinio, usque ad extremum Vallachiae Confinium, suis Montibus, qui antiqui
fuerunt limits ante praesens bellum inter Transylvaniam ex una part, and
Moldaviam atque Vallachiam ex alia part, atque a Confinio Vallachiae usque ad
Flumen Marusum, pariter suis Montibus, qui antiqui fuerunt limits,
circumscribatur, and sic utrinque observatis antiquis Limitibus, nec ultra nec
citra ab utroque Imperio fieri possit extensio.

II.
Provincia Subjecta Arci Temeswarinensi cum omnibus fuis districtibus, and
interfluentibus Fluviis maneat in possessione, and potestate Excelsi imperii
Ottomannici, atque a part Transylvaniae fines ejus sint ab extremo confinio
Vallachiae usque ad Fluvium Marusium in Superiori Articulo constituti
Transylvaniae antiqui Limits. Tum a part Marusii usque ad Fluvium Tibiscum
citerioribus ripis ejusdem Marusii, and a part Tibisci usque ad Danubium
citerioribus ripis Fluvii Tibisci fines ejus limitentur: Quae vero intra
praedictos limits sita sunt loca, nempe Caransebes, Lugos, Lippa, Csanad,
Kiscanisia, Betsche, Betskerech, and Sablia citerius and intra praeconstitutos
ante praesens bellum praedeclaratam rationem intra ripas Fluminum Marusii and
Tibisci in Temeswarinensibus Territoriis, qualiscunque alius similis locus
reperiatur, ea condition destruantur per Caesareos, ut vi Pactorum amplius
reaedificari non possint: Et praedicta Regio Temeswarinensis omnino libera
relinquatur, and imposterum neque in dictis hisce locis, neque prope ripas
Fluviorum Marusii atque Tibisci alia vel majora vel minora loca, quae possint
Speciem Fortificationis exhibere, exstruantur.

Fluviorum Marusiii ac Tibisci inter Provinciam Temeswarinensem, and Provincias
Caesareae potestati, and possessioni subjectas usus sit communis Subditis
utriusque imperii, tum ad potum pecorum omnis generis, tum ad piscationem, and
alias commoditates Subditis perquam necessarias.

Cum vero onerariae Naves a partibus Superioribus Subjectis Caesareo Dominio,
tum per Marusium Fluvium in Tibiscum, tum per Tibiscum in Danubium, sive
ascendendo sive descendendo ultro citroque meantes nullo obice praepediri
debeant, navigatio Navium Germanicarum, aut aliorum Subditorum Caesareorum,
nullo modo possit in cursu suo ultro citroque incommodari, sed libere atque
commodissime fiat ubique in praedictis duobus Fluviis: Et si quidem reciprocae
amicitiae and mutuae benevolentiae convenientia id etiam requirat, ut Subditi
imperiali Ottomanicae potestati subjecti possint usus praedictorum Fluviorum
esse participes, sine impedimento Navibus piscatoriis etiam ac Cymbis utantur.

Molendinariae autem Naves in locis tantum, quibus Navigationi alterius, nempe
Caesarei Dominii, nullatenus impedimento esse possint, communicatione
Gubernatorum utriusque Dominii, and consensu ponantur: quinimo ne diversione
aquarum in Marusio cursus Caesarearum Navium incommodum aliquod patiatur,
nullatenus permittetur, ut sive Molendinorum, sive alia occasion ex Marusio
aquae alio deriventur seu diducantur.

Insulae quaecunque in praedictis Fluviis, cum actu sint in potestate Caesarea,
maneant, uti possidentur: and subditi utriusque Dominii omnino pacifice atque
tranquille vivant, Severissimisque Edictis ab insolentiis, and contraventione
Pactorum contineantur.

III.
Cum Regio inter Fluvios Tibiscum, and Danubium vulgo dicta Batska sit in sola
possessione and potestate Caesareae Majestatis, sic maneat deinceps etiam in
praefata potestate, and Dominio Caesareo, neque Titelium magis quam in
praesenti est, fortificetur.

IV.
Ab extrema ripa citeriore Tibisci, opposita Titelianae ripae and angulo terrae
ibidem per conjunctionem Tibisci, and Danubii terminato deducatur linea recta
usque in ripam Danubii: Item e regione citerioris ripae Tibiscanae sitam, and
ulterius protrahatur pariter recta ad Moravizii ripam citeriorem amnis Bossut,
and inde ad locum usque ubi praedictus amnis Bossut principali alveo in Savum
illabitur: and Moravizio sine ulla Fortificatione relicto, exstructisque tantum
in opposita utrinque ripa, apertis pagis, separentur per praedictam lineam
firmatam atque distinctam sive fossis, sive lapidibus, sive palis, sive alia
ratione Imperia sequenti mode: Regio Versus Belgradinum intra modo dictos
limits permaneat sub sola potestate Potentissimi Ottomannorum Imperatoris:
Regio vero extra praedictam lineam sita, maneat sub sola potestate and
possessione Potentissimi! Romanorum Imperatoris: and secundum praedictos
limits pariter possideantur Fluvii qui sunt Territoriis permanentibus in
possessione utriusque partis.

V.
Ab ostio amnis Bossut in Savum effluentis usque item in Savum elabentis Unnae
Fluvii ostium Savi altera quidem pars pertinens ad Ditionem Caesaream
possideatur ab ejus Majestate, altera vero pars possideatur ab Imperatore
Ottomannorum.

Interfluens Fluvius Savus, and Insulae in hoc communi tractu sitae, sint
communes, and usus tum ad Navigationem ultro citroque, tum ad alias
commoditates utriusque partis Subditis pariter communis sit, utriusque
religiose observantibus, pacificum, and imperturbatum ultro citroque
commercium; Usque ad Unnam Fluvium Regio pettinens ad Dominium Imperialis
Ottomannicae Majestatis, qua Bosniam spectat, citerioribus ripis Unnae Fluvii
definiatur atque terminetur evacuatis Novi, Dubizza, Jessenovizza, Doboy, and
Brod ex part Bosnensi: and qualicunque alio simili loco in hoc Tractu
existente, and deductis inde Praesidiis Caesareis, ista pars omni modo libera
relinquatur: Castanoviz autem, and insulae infra Terram Novi versus Savum cum
ulterioribus ripis ejusdem Unnae, cum sint and maneant in potestate Romanorum
Imperatoris, praedictis limitibus hinc distinguantur.

Loca demum ultra Unnam long a Savo sita, and ab utraque part Praesidiis
conservata atque possessa cum Terris ante praesens bellum ad eadem
spectantibus, maneant iterum in potestate utriusque possidentis partis, ea
Condition, ut Commissarii utrinque mox deputandi Districtus atque Territoria
singulatim deductis particularibus lineis separantes, per fossas, lapides,
palos, aut alia quacunque ratione, ad evitandam confusionem posita Signa,
segregent atque disjungant, in partibus Croatiae usque ad ultimum Confinium,
and terminum locorum in utriusque Dominii possessione permansurorum.

Et ex utraque part, si quis ausus fuerit alterare, mutare, evellere, tollere,
aut quovis modo violare aliquod ex praedictis Signis, ille per omnimodam
inquisitionem deprehensus ad exemplum aliorum severissime puniatur.

Commissariis vero ad distinctionem, and positionem limitum in isto confinio
quoad fieri poterit, quam celerrime deputandis Regiis Edictis demandetur, ut ad
Tranquillitatem, and Securitatem Subditorum utriusque Dominii sedulo animum
adhibentes sine controversia, and sine quacunque particulari complacentia
Terras optime separent, atque manifest distinguant.

Cum siti in altera Savi part, qua Dominium Imperiale Ottomannicum recipit,
munimenti Brod Fortificationes utpote recenter a Militiis Caesareis factae,
tempore educendi Praesidii Caesarei, everti debeaut, locus autem ille sit
commodissimus ad Mercaturam, poterit ibidem erigi cum honesto and commodo
recinctu civitas, ita tamen ut in Arcis aut Munimenti formam non redigatur.

VI.
Definiti tandem per hosce Tractatus, and subsecuta, ubi opus fuerit, locali
Deputatorum Commissariorum separatione stabiliti, sive deinceps idoneo tempore
per operam Commissariorum utrinque stabiliendi Confiniorum limits sancte
utrinque, and religiose observentur, ita ut sub nulla ratione aut praetextu
extendi, transferri, aut mutuari possint: neque liceat alicui paciscentium
parti in alterius partis Territorium ultra statutos semel terminos, aut lineas
quidquam Juris aut potestatis praetendere aut exercere, aut alterius partis
Subditos sive ad deditionem, sive ad pendendum tributum qualecumque, sive
praeteritum, sive futurum, sive ad quamvis aliam humano ingenio excogitabilem
exactionis aut vexationis speciem adigere aut molestare, sed omnis altercatio
just amoveatur.

VII.
Licitum and liberum esto utrique partium pro confiniorum suorum securitate
quocunque meliori visum fuerit modo, arces, munimenta, and loca per praesentes
Tractatus pacifice possessa, quaecunque de facto extant, reparare, munire, and
fortificare, exceptis illis, de quibus utrinque nominatim cautum est; ad
Incolarum vero commodas habitationes in extremis Confiniis apertos pagos
aedificare ubique sine impedimento and sine exceptione utrique parti liceat,
dummodo sub hoc praetextu Fortalitia non erigantur.

VIII.
Incursiones hostiles, and occupationes, omnesque insultus clam aut ex
improviso facti devastationes, and depopulationes Territorii utriusque Dominii
omnino, and severissimis Mandatis prohibitae sint ac illicitae: transgressores
vero articuli hujus ubicunque deprehensi statim incarcerentur, and per
Jurisdictionem loci, ubi captivati fuerint, pro merito puniantur absque ulla
remissione, and rapta quaecunque sint diligentissime perquisita, and adinventa,
cum omni aequitate Dominis suis restituantur: Capitanei quoque ipsimet,
Commendantes, and Praefecti utriusque partis ad justitiam nulla admissa injuria
integerrime administrandam sub amissione officii non solum, sed etiam vitae,
and honoris adstricti sint, atque obligati.

IX.
Maneat porro etiam illicitum futuris quoque temporibus, receptaculum vel
fomentum dare malis Hominibus, rebellibus Subditis, aut male contentis, sed
ejusmodi Homines, and omnes praedones, raptores, etiamsi alterius partis
Subditi sint, quos in ditione sua deprehenderint, merito supplicio afficere,
utraque pars adstricta sit: qui si deprehendi nequeant, Capitaneis aut
Praefectis eorum, sicubi eos latitare compertum fuerit, indicentur, iique illos
puniendi Mandatum habeant: quod si nec hi officio suo in punitione talium
sceleratorum satisfecerint, indignationem Imperatoris sui incurrant, aut
officiis exuantur, aut ipsimet poenas pro reis luant: Quoque magis nefariorum
hujusmodi petulantiis cautum sit, neutri partium liceat intertenere, and alere
Haydones, quos liberos nuncupant, Plagiarios Pribeck dictos, atque id genus
facinorosorum Hominum, qui non sunt alterutrius Principis stipendio conducti
sed rapto vivunt, tamque ii quam qui eos aluerint, pro demerito puniantur;
talesque nefarii, etiamsi consuetae vitae emendationem prae se ferant, nullam
fidem mereantur nec prope confinia tolerentur, sed ad alia remotiora loca
transferantur.

X.
Cum tempore praesentis hujus belli plures ex Hungaris and Transylvanis a
Subjectione suae Caesareae Majestatis secedentes ad Consinia Excelsi Imperii
sese receperint, atque hac in part etiam conclusae per inducias inter utrumque
imperium almae huic Paci debitis modis in futuram securitatem providendum sit,
de praedictis ita pactum est, ut in ditionibus ante nominati Excelsi Imperii ad
lubitum possint locari and accommodari: Ne tamen aliquo modo Consiniorum
tranquillitas, and Subditorum quies perturbari queat, loca ubi praedicti
collocabuntur, remota sint ab omnibus limitaneis, and confiniariis partibus,
and uxoribus illorum dabitur facultas sequendi maritos suos, iisque in
Imperatorio assignato ad hoc districtum cohabitandi. Cumque imposterum in
reliquos Subditos Potentissimi Ottomannorum Imperatoris annumerandi veniant,
non liceat illis a subjectione ejusdem amplius recedere, and si qui
recesserint, atque ad Patriam iterum reverti voluerint, in numero and
condition malevolorum recenseantur, neque illis a Caesareis fomentum aut
receptaculum praebeatur, quinimo deprehensi Ottomannis Confiniorum
Gubernatoribus extradantur, quo magis utrinque securitati Pacis prospiciatur.

XI.
Ad tollendas penitus quascunque in Confiniis super aliquo articulorum
Armistitii hujus aut quavis de re imposterum enascentes controversias,
differentias, aut discordias, ubi prompto and maturo remedio opus sit
ordinentur utrinque in Confiniis primo quoque tempore electi pari numero
Commissarii viri neutiquam avidi, sed graves, probi, prudentes, experti, atque
pacifici: Hique loco opportuno convenientes sine exercitu cum aequali
pacificarum personarum comitiva, omnes and singulas hujusmodi controversias
emergentes, audiant, cognoscant, decidant, and amicabiliter componant, talem
denique ordinem, and modum constituant, quo utraque pars suos Homines, and
Subditos citra omnem Tergiversationem vel praetextum gravissimis poenis ad
sinceram ac firmam pacis observantiam compellat. Quod si vero negotia tanti
momenti occurrerent, quae per Commissarios utriusque partis componi and
expediri non possent, tunc ad ambos Potentissimos Imperatores remittantur, ut
ipsi complanandis iisdem, sedandis, and extinguendis modum and rationem
invenire and adhibere valiant, ita, ut tales controversiae quam fieri poterit
intra brevissimum temporis spatium componantur, nec earum resolutio ulla
ratione negligatur, aut protrahatur.

Cumque praeterea in antecedentibus Sacris Capitulationibus duella, and mutuae
ad certamen provocationes fuerint vetitae, imposterum etiam sint illicitae; and
si qui ad singular certamen venire ausi fuerint, in illos ut transgressores
gravissime animadvertatur.

XII.
Captivi tempore praesentis belli ex utraque part in captivitatem abacti, and
in publicis carceribus adhuc superstites, cum occasion istius almae Pacis
eliberationem tandem aliquando merito sperent, nec possint sine laesione
Majestatis Imperatoriae, and laudatae consuetudinis in eadem Captivitatis
miseria, and calamitate relinqui: usitatis ab antiquo, vel honestioribus adhuc
rationibus, per commutationem in libertatem asserantur, and si plures, aut
melioris conditionis in una quam in altera part invenientur, pro reliquorum
etiam eliberatione, quando Solennes legati instantias afferent, gratiosa, and
huic almae Paci conveniens utriusque Imperatoris pietas nequaquam denegetur:
Caeteris vero, qui in privatorum potestate sunt, vel apud ipsos Tartaros,
licitum sit eliberationem suam honesto, and, quam fieri poterit, mediocri lytro
procutare; quod si cum Captivi Domino honesta accommodatio fieri non poterit,
Judices locorum litem omnem per compositionem dirimant: Sin autem praedictis
viis id etiam confici haud posset, Captivi pretiis eorum sive per testimonia,
sive per juramenta probatis atque solutis eliberentur. Nec possint Domini
aviditate majoris lucri sese redemptioni eorundem opponere, and quandoquidem ex
part Excelsi Imperii Ottomannici Homines non emitterentur, qui taliter
eliberandis Captivis operam adhibeant, spectabit ad probitatem Caesareorum
Praefectorum, ut ad dimittendum Ottomannos Captivos, quo empti sunt pretio
sincere liquidato, Dominos illorum adstringant, atque ita Sanctum hoc opus pari
utrinque pietate promoveatur: quousque demum Captivi utrinque praedictae
ratione eliberentur, legati Plenipotentiarii ex utraque part officia sua
adhibebunt, ut interea miseri Captivi benign tractentur.

XIII.
Pro Religiosis, ac Religionis Christianae exercitio juxta ritum Romanum
Catholicae Ecclesiae, quaecunque praecedentes gloriosissimi Ottomannorum
Imperatores in Regnis suis sive per antecedentes Sacras Capitulationes, sive
per signa Imperialia, sive per Edicta, and Mandata Specialia favorabiliter
concesserunt, ea omnia Serenissimus, and Potentissimus Ottomannorum Imperator
imposterum etiam observanda confirmabit, ita ut Ecclesias suas praefati
Religiosi reparare atque resarcire possint, functiones suas ab antiquo
consuetas exerceant, and nemini permissum sit, contra Sacras Capitulationes,
and contra leges Divinas aliquo genere molestiae, aut pecuniariae petitionis
eosdem Religiosos cujuscunque ordinis, and conditionis assicere, sed consuetae
Imperatoria pietate gaudeant, and fruantur. Praeterea Serenissimi, and
Potentissimi Romanorum Imperatoris solenni ad fulgidam Portam legato licitum
sit, commissa sibi circa Religionem, and loca Christianae Visitationis in
Sancta Civitate Jerusalem existentia exponere, atque instantias suas ad
Imperiale solium afferre.

XIV.
Commercia juxta antecedentes etiam Sacras Capitulationes libera sint (...) que
partis subditis, in omnibus Imperiorum Regnis, and Ditionibus; ut autem utrique
parti utili ratione, and sine fraud, and dolo peragantur, inter Deputatos
Commissarios rem mercatoriam been intelligentes tempore solennium utrinque
Legationum contractabitur, and sicuti cum aliis Excelsi Imperii amicis
Nationibus observatum est, ita etiam subditi cujuscunque Nationis Caesareae
Majestatis securitate, and utilitate Commerciorum in Regnis Excelsi Imperii
idoneis modis, and usitatis Privilegiis gaudebunt, and perfruentur.

XV.
Quaecunque conditiones in antiquis Sacris Capitulationibus expressae sunt, nec
praedictis Punctis hoc Tractatu stipulatis, aut liberrimo cujusque possidentium
Dominio, and usui ejusdem adversantur, aut praejudicant, posthac etiam colantur
sancte, and observentur, cassatis and annullatis iis, quae supradictis
quocunque modo repugnant.

XVI.
Ut quoque tanto magis Armistitium hoc bonaque inter ambos Potentissimos
Imperatores amicitia firmetur, ac coalescat, mittentur Solennes utrinque legati
ex quo usitatis caeremonialibus ab introitu in Confinia usque ad reditum in
locum secundae permutationis excipiendi, honorandi, tractandi atque
prosequendi, qui in signum amicitiae Spontaneum munus, conveniens tamen, and
utriusque Imperatoris dignitati consentaneum afferent; Et prima aestate in
mense Junio iter, praeviae mutua correspondentia, uno eodemque tempore
suscipientes in Sirmiensi confinio, more jam pridem inter utrumque imperium
observato, permutabuntur. Solennibus porro legatis in Imperatoriis Aulis,
quidquid libuerit, petere liceat, ac permittatur.

XVII.
Regula, and norma Curialium in recipiendis receptisque pariter honorandis, and
tractandis Ministris ultro citroque commeantibus, and commorantibus juxta
usitatam, prioribus etiam temporibus modalitatem deinceps ab utrinque cum
aequali decore, and secundum distinctam characteris missorum praerogativam
observetur. Legatis Caesareis, and Residentibus, and quibusvis eorundem
Hominibus pro suo arbitrio quibuscunque placuerit Vestibus uti licitum sit,
neve quisquam impedimento esse possit. Ministri porro Caesarei, sive oratoris,
sive legati, sive Residentis, sive Agentis munere fungantur, quibus reliquorum
Principum Fulgidae Portae amicorum legati, and Agentes immunitatibus, and
Privilegiis perfruuntur eaedem liberate, imo ad distinguendam Caesareae
dignitatis praerogativam usitatis melioribus modis fruantur, habeantque liberam
potestatem conducendi interpretes: Cursores etiam, and alii eorum Homines
Vienna ad Fulgidam Portam, atque iterum redeuntes, and ultro citroque venientes
Salvo passu tuto, and secure permeent, atque ut commode iter suum perficiant,
omni favore coadjuventur.

XVIII.
Pax ista quamvis secundum propositas conditiones conclusa, tum demum integrum
ex omni part robur obligationis, and debitae observantiae vinculum accipiet
and inducet, cum omnia, and singula, quae de Confiniis supra recensito modo
ultro citroque promissa, and acceptata sunt, tam de distinctionibus limitum,
quam de evacuationibus, and demolitionibus plenarie in effectum, and
executionem deducta fuerint, ita ut absolutae designatione limitum in unoquoque
Confinio statim subsequatur demolitio, aut evacuatio, quod ut quam celerrime
succedat, designentur ad limits, and terminos Confiniorum ponendos, and
distinguendos, ex utraque part Commissarii, qui die Aequinoctii, scilicet 22.
mensis Martii, aut 12 secundum veterem Stylum, Anni Millesimi Sexcentesimi
Nonagesimi noni in locis inter Commissarios consensu Gubernatorum utriusque
Confinii determinandis, mediocri, and pacifico Comitatu conveniant, atque intra
spatium duorum Mensium, si possibile sit, aut etiam citius, ubi fieri poterit,
Confinia limitibus, and terminis manifestis per superiores articulos
constitutis distinguant, separent, determinent, and Statuta inter legatos
Plenipotentiarios utriusque imperii accuratissime, and citissime exequantur.

XIX.
Has vero conditiones, and articulos ad formam hic mutuo placitam a
Majestatibus utriusque Imperatoris ratihabitum iri, atque ut solennia
ratificationis Diplomata intra spatium triginta dierum a die Subscriptionis vel
citius in Confiniis per Illustrissimos and Excellentissimos legatos
Plenipotentiarios Mediatores reciproce recteque commutentur, legati
Plenipotentiarii utriusque imperii sese infallibiliter obligant, atque
praestituros compromittunt.

XX.
Duret Armistitium hocce, and extendatur, (favente Deo) ad viginti quinque
Annos continue sequentes a die, qua ejusdem subscriptio facta fuerit; quo
Annorum numero clapso, vel etiam medio tempore priusquam elabatur, liberum esto
utrique partium, si ita placuerit, Pacem hanc ad plures adhuc Annos prorogare.

Itaque mutuo, and libero consensu quaecunque stabilita sunt Pacta inter
Majestatem Serenissimi, and Potentissimi Ramanorum Imperatoris, and Majestatem
Serenissimi and Potentissimi Ottommannorum Imperatoris and Haeredes eorundem
imperia quoque and Regna ipsorum: Terra item marique sitas, Regiones,
civitates, urbes, subditos, and clientes observentur sancte, religiose, ac
inviolabiliter, and demandetur serio omnibus utriusque partis Gubernatoribus,
Praefectis, Ducibus Exercituum, atque Militiis, and quibusvis in eorundem
clientela, obedientiae and subjectioni existentibus, ut illi quoque
praedeclaratis conditionibus, clausulis, pactis, and articulis sese adaequate
conformantes omnibus modis caveant; ne contra Pacem, and amicitiam hanc sub
quocunque nomine, aut praetextu, se invicem offendant, aut damnificent, sed
quolibet prorsus inimicitiae genere abstinendo bonam colant vicinitatem, certo
scientes, quod si catenus admoniti morem non gesserint, severissimis in se
poenis animadvertendum fore.

Ipse quoque Crimensis Chanus, and omnes Tartarorum Gentes quovis nomine
vocitatae ad Pacis hujus, and bonae vicinitatis, and reconciliationis Jura rite
observanda adstricti sint, nec iisdem contraveniendo, hostilitates qualescunque
exerceant erga quasvis Caesareas Provincias, earumque Subditos aut Clientes:
Porro sive ex aliis Exercituum generibus, sive ex Nationibus Tartarorum, si
quis contra Sacras Imperatorias hasce Capitulationes, and contra Pacta, and
Articulos earum quidpiam ausus fuerit, is poenis rigorosissimis coerceatur.

Incipiat vero modo dicta Pax, Quies, and Securitas subditorum utriusque
Imperii a supradata die Subscriptionis, and cessent exinde, atque sustollantur
omnes utrinque inimicitiae, and Subditi utriusque partis securitate, and
tranquillitate fruantur; Eoque fine, and quo magis per summam curam, ac
sedulitatem hostilitates inhiberi possint, transmittantur quam celerrime
Mandata, and Edicta publicandae Pacis ad omnes confiniorum Praefectos, cumque
spatium aliquod temporis requiratur, intra quod officiales in remotioribus
praesertim Confiniis istam conclusae Pacis notitiam obtinere valiant,
statuuntur viginti dies pro termino, post quem si quis hostile quidpiam
alterutra ex part admittere praesumpserit, poenis superius declaratis
irremissibiliter subjaceat.

Ut demum Pacis Conditiones Viginti hisce articulis conclusae utrinque
acceptatae, and debito summoque cum respectu inviolatae observentur: Si quidem
Domini Plenipotentiarii Ottomannici vi concessae iisdem facultatis Imperatoriae
instrumentum Turcico sermon exaratum, and subscriptum, legitimum, and validum
nobis exhibuerint: Nos quoque vi Mandati, and Plenipotentia nostra, propriis
manibus, and propriis Sigillis Subscriptas, and Signatas hasce Pactorum literas
in Latino Idiomate tanquam legitimum, and validum vicissim Instrumentum
extradidimus.

GERMAN and OTTOMAN Empires, Subscribed, January 26. 1699.
FOR the perpetual Memory of the Thing, Be it known to all whom it may Concern,
That after a cruel and pernicious War had for 17 years been carried on with the
Effusion of much Blood and Desolation of many Provinces, between the most
Serene and most Potent Prince and Lord Leopold, Elect of the Romans, and
Emperor of Germany, always August, King of Hungaria, Bohemia, Dalmatia,
Croatia, Sclavonia, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Styria,
Carinthia, Carniola, Marquis of Moravia, Duke of Luxemburgh, of the Upper and
Lower Silesia, of Wirtemberg and Tecka, Prince of Swevia, Count of Habsburgh,
of Tyrol, Kyburgh and Goritia, Marquis of the Sacred Roman Empire, of Burgovia,
of the Upper and Lower Lusatia, Lord of the Marquisate of Sclavinia, of the
Port of Naon, and the Salt Mines, on one part: And between the most Serene and
most Potent Prince and Lord, Sultan Mustapha Han, Emperor of the Ottomans, and
of Asia and Greece, and his Glorious Predecessors, on the other Part. These two
most Potent Emperors, out of a just Sense of Compassion toward their afflicted
Subjects, at length, resolving to put an End to these Mischiefs every Day
increasing with Destruction to Mankind, the Divine Goodness brought it to pass,
that by the Endeavors and Mediation of the most Serene and most Potent Prince
and Lord, William III. King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and the High
and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Belgic Provinces, that
Solemn Treaties of Peace were set on foot at Carlowitz in Sirmium upon the
Confines of both Empires, and there brought to a Conclusion; There Meeting at
the said place, on the part of his Sacred Caesarean and Imperial Majesty of the
Romans, as his Plenipotentiaries, the most Illustrious and most Excellent
Lords, Wolfang, Count d'Ottingen, of the Sacred Roman Empire, Chamberlain of
his Sacred Caesarean Majesty, and Privy-Counsellor and President of the
Imperial Aulic Council; and the Lord Leopold Schlik, Count in Passaun and
Weiskirchen, of the Sacred Roman Empire, Chamberlain of his said Caesarean
Majesty, Captain General of the Guards, and Colonel of the Regiment of
Desvetorii: Both these, at these Treaties of Peace, with the Ottoman Port,
Deputed Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries; But on the part of his
Imperial Ottomannick Majesty, the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords,
Mehemet Effendi, Supreme Chancellor of the Ottoman Empire, and the Lord
Alexander Mauro Cordato, of the Noble Family of Scarlati, Privy Counselor and
Secretary of the said Empire; By the Intervention and Care of the most
Illustrious and most Excellent Lords, the Lord William Paget, Baron Beaudesert,
and the Lord Jacob Colyer, Ambassadors from the most Serene King of Great
Britain, and the High and Mighty States General, to the Ottoman Port, and both
of 'em Ambassadors Extraordinary for the Establishment of this Peace, and both
of 'em performed the Office of Mediator with Integrity, Industry and Prudence,
after having Invoked the Name of GOD, and Exchanged the Powers, received the
Twenty following Articles of Peace, which were Agreed upon to the Glory of GOD,
and the Safety of both Empires.

I.
THE Region of Transylvania, as it is at present in the Possession, and in the
Power of his Caesarean Majesty, so it shall remain under his Dominion, Bounded
by the Confines of Podolia, and with the Mountains on the side of Walachia,
which were its Ancient Limits before the present War, between Transylvania on
one part, and Moldavia and Walachia on the other; and on the side of Walachia,
it is to extend to the River Merisch, to be Circumscribed by the Mountains,
that were its Ancient Boundaries, and so the Ancient Limits are to be observed
by both Empires, without extending or diminishing them on either side.

II.
The Province subject to the Fortress of Temeswaer, with all its Districts and
Rivers, shall remain in the Possession and under the Power of the Sublime
Ottoman Empire; and it shall remain Bounded by Transylvania on one side, and by
Walachia on the other, to the River Merisch, the Ancient Boundaries of
Transylvania, mentioned in the former Article: Then from the River Merisch to
the nearer Banks of the Tibisch; and from the Tibisch to the Danube, to be
Limited by the hither Banks of the Tibisch; and as for Caransebes, Lugos,
Lippa, Csanad, Kiscanisia, Betche, Betskerecke, and Sablia, which are
comprehended within these prescribed Limits between the Merisch and the
Tibisch, and were before the present War belonging to the Territories of
Temeswaer, both these and any other place of the like Nature, shall be slighted
by the Imperialists, so that by Virtue of this present Treaty they may not be
Rebuilt, and this foresaid Region of Temeswaer is to be left Free and Entire;
so that for the time to come, neither in these Places, nor on the Banks of
Merisch or Tibisch, shall it be lawful to Build any Places that shall carry the
Appearance of Fortifications.

The use of the Rivers Tibisch and Merisch between the Province of Temeswaer,
and those subject to the Imperialists, shall be left Free and Common to those
Subjects of both Empires, as well in relation to the Watering of their Cattle,
as to the Fishing, and any other Conveniences to both Subjects.

Ships of any Burden, coming from Parts subject to the Imperialists, whether it
be from the Merisch into the Tibisch, and from the Tibisch into the Danube, are
by no means to be hindered or stopped, whether they are going up or down the
Streams; so that the Naviation of German Ships, or other Subjects of the
Empire, are neither going nor coming to be Incommoded, but their Passage, both
going and coming, is to be Free in both the said Rivers; And because the common
Convenience of mutual Friendship and Kindness requires, that the Ottoman
Subjects should likewise partake of the Benefits of these Rivers, therefore
they may freely make use of Fishermens Ships, or other Boats.

But Mills built on Bottoms of Ships can be only planted there, where they do
not Obstruct the Navigation of the Imperialists, and that to be done by
Communicating with, and Consent of the Governors on both sides; and the Intent
of this is, That the Navigation of the Merisch be not rendered worse to the
Imperialists, whether it be by lessening the Stream for the sake of Mills, or
any other pretense whatsoever.

The Islands in both the said Rivers, that are in the possession of the
Imperialists, are to remain so; and that the Subjects on both sides may live
Quietly and Peaceably, is to be provided by severe Edicts, forbidding all sort
of Insolences and Contraventions to the present Articles.

III.
Considering the Region commonly called Batska, betwixt the Tibisch and the
Danube, is in the sole Possession, and under the Power of his Imperial Majesty,
it is agreed, it shall for the future continue so, and Titul is not to be more
Fortified than it is at present.

IV.
A right Line to be drawn from the Extreme Bank of the Tibisch opposite to that
of Titul, and to that Angle of Land made by the Conjunction of the Tibisch and
Danube to the Bank on the other side the Danube, and thence to be stretched
straight to Moravitz on the hither Bank of the River Bossut, and from thence to
the place where the Grand Stream of the River Bossut falls into the Save, and
Moravitz is to remain without any Fortification, and only open Villages to be
built on both sides the River, and the Empires shall remain separated by the
foresaid Line, to be marked out either by Ditches, Stones, or Pales, or any
other way, after the following manner, viz. That part of the Country within the
foresaid Limits toward Belgrade, shall remain Subject to the Ottoman Emperor;
but the Country on the other side the said Line shall continue under the
Dominion and in the Possession of the most Potent Roman Emperor, and accoridng
to the foresaid Boundaries, the adjacent Rivers are to remain in the Possession
of each Party.

V.
Reckoning from the River Bossut flowing into the Save, and likewise the
Entrance of the River Unna into the same River, that part of the Save adjoining
to the Imperial Country, is to remain to his Imperial Majesty, and the other
part to the Turkish Emperor.

The River Save, flowing betwixt both Dominions, and the Islands situated in
it, shall be common to the Subjects of both Empires, as well for the Use of
Navigation up and down the River, as any other sort of Conveniences, who are
to enjoy a peaceable and undisturbed Commerce: That Country on the side the
River Unna toward Bosnia, belonging to the Turkish Empire, shall be terminated
by the Banks of that River Novi, Dubizza, Jessenovitza, Doboy, and Brod, on the
side of Bosnia, are to be Evacuated, and every other such like place in this
Tract of Land, and the Imperial Garrisons to be all withdrawn, and the Country
to be left Free: But Castanovitz, and the Islands on this side Novi, toward
the Save, and the further Banks, shall be left distinct from these Limits,
considering it is Agreed, they should remain in the Possession of the Roman
Emperor.

As to the Places beyond the Unna, of great distance from the Save, which are
Garrisoned and Possessed some of 'em by one Party to this Treaty, and some by
the other, with the Lands that were Appendages, and belonging to the said
Places before the present War, it is Agreed, They should remain to the
Possessor, with this Condition, That Commissaries on both sides suddenly to be
appointed shall separate each District or Territory by particular Lines to be
distinguished by Ditches, Stones, Posts, or any other evident Marks to avoid
Confusion; particularly the Confines of Croatia are thus to be distinguished,
and the Bounds of all other Places now in the Possession and under the Power of
each Party to this Treaty.

And on both sides, it is Agreed, That if any one dare presume to alter,
change, remove, pull up, destroy, or violate any thing that is thus set for
distinguishing Landmarks, he if found out, or convicted by any manner of
Enquiry, shall for an Example to others, be most severely punished.

It shall likewise be an Instruction to the Commissaries to be as soon as
possible Deputed on each side by the Sovereign Authority, that as the end of
their Deputation is the fixing the Limits and Boundaries of each Empire, so
their principal Intention shall be the Security and Quiet of the Subjects of
both Empires, and this to be so managed, that without Personal Heats on either
side, or without any particular Regards, they plainly distinguish the Limits of
each Empire.

The Fortifications of Brod on the other side the Save, (lately made by the
Imperialists) at the time the Place is Evacuated by the Garrison, it is Agreed,
should be Slighted, yet considering that Place is very convenient for a Staple
for Merchants, it shall be lawful to Enclose that Place with convenient Walls,
but still not such as shall arise to the Nature of a Fortification.

VI.
The Limits thus fixed by this Treaty, and afterward, as Occasions require, to
be more distinctly settled by the personal view of Commissaries on both sides,
shall for times to come be with so much Exactness and Religion observed, that
they shall not be extended, altered, transferred, or changed upon what pretense
soever.

Nor shall any of these Parties, the Limits thus set forth and established,
pretend to Exercise any sort of Jurisdiction beyond the Lines and Bounds thus
described, whether it be upon pretense of Collecting of Tribute or
Contributions for times past, or for the present, or for times to come, or upon
pretense that these Subjects delivered themselves over to the other side, or
upon any other Color or Account whatsoever, be permitted, allowed, or connived
at to make Collections out of each others Districts, or in the least to molest
each other, that all Occasion of Quarrel and Dispute may be for ever removed.

VII.
It shall be lawful for each Party, for the Security of their Confines on the
Lands thus peaceably set out and possessed by this present Treaty, in the best
manner they can, to repair and strengthen all Castles, Fortifications, and
other Places now in being, except it be those against which there are
particular Provisions made: But in the Extreme Confines of both Empires, it is
Agreed, That open Villages may be without any Let or Hindrance, raised, yet so
that there be not any Fortifications erected.

VIII.
All sudden or private Insults, all hostile Incursions or Devastations, or
Executions from the Subjects of one Empire upon the other, are forbid upon the
severest Penalties; The Contraveners or Transgressors of this Article,
wheresoever they are found, shall immediately be Imprisoned, and by the Justice
of the Place where they are taken, shall be punished without Pardon or
Reprieve; Diligent Search shall be made after what they have thus Robbed or
Unjustly Acquired; and when it is found, it shall be wholly restored to its
proper Owner. The Captains, Commanders, and Governors, in both the Empires,
shall Administer equal Justice, under the Penalty not only of their Office, but
of their Life and Honor.

IX.
It shall not be Lawful for either of the Emperors to Receive or Comfort in his
Dominions, the Rebels or Malcontents of the Others; But such Fugitives as
these, as likewise all Robbers, Thieves, although they are the Subjects of the
Other Empire, yet shall they be punished in the Country they are found in: If
they lie Concealed, then all Endeavors may be used to discover 'em to the
Governors of those Places, and they upon such Discovery are obliged to punish
'em; If these Governors be Remiss in Punishing of these wicked Men, then shall
they incur the utmost Displeasure of their Emperor, and shall be put out of
their Employment, or lose their own Lives. And that a Securer Restraint may be
made to the Extravagancies of these Wretches, it is provided, That neither of
the Parties shall Entertain or Nourish the Haydones, whom they call
Freebooters, and those Partymen named from Pribecke, or any other sort of Men,
who not being in the Pay of either Empire, live upon Robbery and Rapine, and
both these and those that nourish and assist 'em, shall be punished according
to their Demerits; And so intolerable are such Wretches, that though they promise
Amendment of their Customary Life, yet is not Credit in this case to be
Indulged to 'em, but they are to be removed from the Confines to some more
remote Parts of the Empires.

X.
In the time of the War, several of the Hungarians and Transilvanians withdrew
themselves from the Subjection of his Caesarean Majesty into the Confines of
the Sublime Port, and by the present Truce it is Agreed, these shall be
Indemnify'd in the manner following, viz. They shall have convenient
Habitations allotted them in the Ottoman Empire; But least the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Bordering Subjects should be endangered to be disturbed,
the Places appointed for their Abode shall be remote from the Boundaries of the
Empires: The Wives likewise of these shall be permitted to follow 'em, and to
Cohabit with 'em in the Places thus assigned. But considering these Men are
always hereafter to be taken as Subjects of the Ottoman Empire, it shall never
hereafter be Lawful for 'em to Forsake or Renounce to that Subjection; And in
case they pretend to Recede from it, and to return into their Native Country,
they shall be deemed Rebels or Malcontents, nor shall they receive
Entertainment or Succor from the Imperialists, but being taken they shall be
delivered to the Ottoman Governors on the Borders, that by this means the
present Peace may on both sides be better secured.

XI.
In Order to remove all Differences, Controversies, or Discords, which might
arise concerning the Interpretation of any of these Articles or any other
matter during this Truce, it is Agreed, That where there shall be occasion for
a ready and effectual Remedy, an equal number of Commissaries shall on both
sides be immediately chose on the Confines: These shall be Sober, Prudent,
Experienced, and Peaceable Men, who without Troops meeting with an unarmed
Retinue of equal number on both sides, shall hear, consider, decide, and
amicably Agree all such Controversies as can arise, and shall propound and
appoint such Order and Methods, by which either Party shall without delay or
fraud, reduce or compel their Servants and Subjects to a sincere Observance of
this Peace; But if Matters of such great Moment should arise, that such
Commissaries are not able to Agree or Determine 'em, then shall Affairs be
referred to the two most Potent Emperors themselves, that they themselves may
find out and apply so proper Means or Expedients for the settling such
Differences, that they may in as short a time as possible be finally
determined, nor shall such Resolutions be neglected or long Protracted.

Whereas in the Sacred Articles of former Treaties between the two Empires,
Duels, and all sort of Challenges in order to 'em, have been forbid; it is now
likewise Agreed, that in like manner for the time to come they shall remain
unlawful, and if any dare presume to enter into single Combats, they shall be
proceeded against with the utmost rigor.

XII.
The Captives, that during this present War have on each side been carried
away, and are at present remaining in the public Prisons, considering from
this happy Peace, they may reasonably expect Release, nor can they be retained
in this Misery without Indignity to the Imperial Majesty, and Offense of
laudable Custom, shall be restored by way of Exchange upon the usual or more
easy Conditions; and in case there are more on one side than on the other, or
some of greater Quality on one side than on the other; yet the Solemn Demands
of the Ambassador on each side shall so far prevail upon the Clemency of each
Emperor, that these Supernumeraries shall with the rest find a Release: But as
for the Prisoners that are in private Hands, or amongst the Tartars, they shall
be Redeemed upon Equitable and as moderate Terms as possible: But if such fair
Agreement cannot be made with the Patrons of these Slaves, the particular
Judges of the Places where they live shall settle this Matter of what is to be
paid for their Redemption; but if those ways should fail, then the Captives
themselves making it appear by Testimonies or Oaths, what their Masters paid
for 'em, upon the Repayment of that Money shall be Released; Nor shall it be
permitted to their Masters to oppose themselves to this Release upon the
pretense of a greater Price; and considering that on the part of the Ottoman
Empire there may be no particular Society of Men employed to look after this
Redemption of Captives; yet it is Agreed, That the Caesarean Magistrates stand
in Honor obliged to see the Turkish Slaves Released upon the Payment of what
they cost their Masters, so that this work may be carried on with equal
Sincerity on both sides: And that such Captives may at length gain their
Liberty, the Ambassadors of each Empire shall in the mean time use all good
Offices, that they may in the mean time be treated with Mildness and Humanity.

XIII.
As concerning the Religious Orders, or Exercise of the Christian Religion,
according to the Rites of the Roman Catholic Church, it is Agreed, by the most
Serene and most Potent Ottoman Emperor, That whatsoever Indulgences have been
made by the precedent most Glorious Ottoman Emperors in their Dominions,
whether it were by Antecedent Sacred Capitulations, by Imperial Signets, by
Edicts or Special Mandates, that all these shall stand good and confirmed; so
that the foresaid Religious may repair and rebuild their Churches, may Exercise
their usual and accustomed Functions; so that it shall not be lawful from any
one, contrary to these Sacred Capitulations and Divine Laws, to impose upon 'em
any sort of trouble or pecuniary Exaction, let these Religious be of what Order
or Condition soever, they shall enjoy the usual Protection and Goodness of the
Imperial Ottoman Empire.

Besides, it shall be allowed to the Ambassador of the most Serene and most
Potent Roman Emperor to the Fulgid Port, to enter into Treaty there according
to his Instructions about the Religion and Places of Christian Pilgrimage or
Visitation in the Holy City of Jerusalem, and he shall there lay before the
Imperial Throne his Demands about these Matters.

XIV.
The Commerce according to the former Sacred Capitulations, shall be free to
the Subjects on both sides, through all the Kingdoms and Dominions of both
Empires, but this intercourse of mutual. Trade may be performed without Fraud,
and with just Profit, at the times of the Solemn Embassies on both sides, there
shall be appointed Commissioners well versed in Mercantile Affairs, who shall
Debate this Matter; and the same Privileges the High Empire allows to other
Nations in Friendship with it, shall with the same Security and Advantages to
the Subjects of his Caesarean Majesty of what Nation soever they may be.

XV.
Whatsoever Conditions are expressed in the Ancient Sacred Capitulations, shall
stand good and be religiously Observed, provided they do not contradict the
Articles of this present Treaty, or are no ways prejudicial or obstructive to
that free Exercise of Power, which each Empire is intended to have in its own
Dominions; and in case any former Articles come under this Description, then
they are declared by these Presents null and void.

XVI.
And that this present Truce may the better grow and be confirmed into a mutual
Friendship and Confidence betwixt the two most potent Emperors, Extraordinary
Ambassadors shall be sent on both sides, who are to be Received, Treated, and
Attended from their Entrance into the Confines, and during their stay, and to
the time of their Return till they are again Exchanged with the usual
Ceremonies, and for a more manifest Declaration of the Friendship between the
two Emperors, these Ambassadors shall bring and make voluntary Presents, yet
such as shall correspond to, and be agreeable to the High Dignity of each
Emperor. And the said Ambassadors, by Concert in June in the ensuing Summer, at
the same time beginning their Journey, shall be Exchanged in the Confines of
Sirmium, after the manner that has been used upon such Occasions.

And it shall be permitted to each of the Ambassadors at the Imperial Courts,
to make what Requests they shall think convenient.

XVII.
The Rule for Receiving, Entertaining, or Treating the Ministers by the
Courtiers of each Empire, shall be taken from the practice of former times, to
be executed with all imaginable Candor and Decency, according to that distinct
Prerogative which the Characters of those that are sent shall Demand. The
Caesarean Ambassadors, Envoys, or Residents, and their Attendants, shall
without the hindrance of any one, enjoy a full liberty of using what sort of
Garments they please. Besides, the Caesarean Minister, whether he be Vested
with the Character of Ambassador, Envoy, Resident, or Agent, shall at the
Fulgid Port enjoy the same Privileges and Immunities, which the Ambassadors or
Agents of any other Princes there enjoy, and to make a Distinction of the
Prerogative of the Caesarean Dignity, with the usual Marks of Preference: They
shall have liberty of Hiring their own Interpreters, and their Messengers that
come to the Fulgid Port, or return from it to Vienna, shall have free Passage
going and coming, with all convenient Favor and Assistance in their Journey.

XVIII.
This Peace though it now stands concluded upon the present Conditions, yet it
shall then only be esteemed to have and to receive its full force of Obligation
and Effect, when all and singular Conditions, stipulated and accepted on both
sides, as well concerning the Distinctions of the Borders, as the Evacuations
and Demolishments shall be fully executed in this manner, after the Limits are
settled, then shall the Evacuations and Demolishments of Places follow, and
that all this may as soon as possible be put in practice, Commissaries to
settle these Distinctions, shall on both sides be appointed, who at the
Equinoctial, S.N. 22. S.V. 12 of March, A.D. 1699. shall with a moderate and
peaceable Attendance, meet at Places to be determined by the Governors of the
Confines, and these Commissaries shall within two months or less, if possible,
by manifest marks described in the former Articles separate and set apart these
Confines, and shall with all exactness and expedition, execute all other things
that shall be Agreed by the Plenipotentiaries of both Empires.

XIX.
The Plenipotentiaries of both Empires do mutually Oblige themselves, and
Promise, that these Conditions and Articles thus reduced into Form, shall be
mutually Ratified by the Majesty of each of the Emperors, and that within 30
days or sooner from the time of Subscription, the Ratifications shall in Solemn
manner be mutually Exchanged in the Confines by the most Illustrious and most
Excellent Lords the Plenipotentiary Mediators.

XX.
This Truce shall continue, and God willing, extend to full 25 years, to be
reckoned from the day of the Subscription, after the Expiration of which Term;
or in the middle of it, it shall be in the Power of either of the Parties; that
so shall think fit, to prolong it to a greater number of Years.

Therefore what things soever are here established by the mutual and free
Consent of the Majesty of the most Serene and most Potent Emperor of the Romans
on the one part, and the Majesty of the most Serene and most Potent Ottoman
Emperor on the other, and their Heirs, shall be Religiously and Inviolably
observed through all their Empires and Kingdoms, by Land and Sea, through all
their Cities and Towns, and by all their Subjects and Dependants; and it is
likewise Agreed, that it shall on both sides be strictly enjoined to all
Governors, Commanders, Captains, Generals, to all the Soldiery, to all under
their Protection, to all in Subjection and Obedience under them, that they take
diligent Care to Conform themselves to all the abovementioned Conditions,
Clauses, Compacts and Articles, that under what pretense or color soever,
contrary to the Peace and Friendship thus established, the Subjects on either
side do not offend or injure one another; but abstaining from all sort of
Enmity, they are commanded to become good Neighbors to each other, under the
severest Penalties, if after they are thus admonished, they do not yield a
ready Obedience.

The Tartar Cham likewise, and all the Nations of the Tartars, by whatsoever
Names they are called, stand engaged to the Observance of this Peace, Good
Neighborhood, and Reconciliation; nor shall it be permitted 'em in prejudice
of these Agreements to commit any Hostilities in the Provinces; or upon any of
the Subjects, or upon any under the Protection of his Caesarean Majesty.
Moreover, if any one shall presume to Act contrary to these Sacred Imperial
Capitulations, Agreements or Articles, whether he belongs to the Tartar
Nations, or to any other Forces by whatsoever Name called, he shall be most
rigorously punished.

This Peace, Cessation, and Security of the Subjects on both sides, shall
commence from the Date of this Subscription, and thence all Enmities on both
sides shall cease and be extinguished, and the Subjects on both sides shall
enjoy full Security and Tranquillity, and for that end, and in order all
Hostilities may be carefully prevented, Mandates and Edicts for publishing the
Peace shall as soon as possible be sent to all Governors of the Confines; but
considering some time will be requisite, that the Officers in the remoter
Confines may have notice of this Peace, 20 days are for this purpose appointed,
after which, if any one on either side presume to commit any sort of Hostility,
he shall without Mercy, suffer the Punishments before declared.

In the last place, that these Conditions of Peace, contained in 20 Articles,
and accepted of on both sides, may with great and due respect be inviolably
observed; The Lords the Ottoman Plenipotentiaries, by Virtue of an Imperial
Faculty granted to 'em for that purpose, have delivered to us an Authentic and
(...) Instrument, writ and subscribed in the Turkish Language, are likewise by
Virtue of a Special Order, and by our Plenipotentiary Power have on our part
delivered these Writings of the Articles Signed and Subscribed by our proper
Hands and Seals in the Latin Tongue, as a True and Authentic Instrument.

This Treaty between the Emperor, being thus finished and agreed, the next
thing was to appoint Commissaries to regulate the Limits between Croatia, and
Bosnia, as was concluded by the Treaty of Peace at Carlovitz, to appear upon
the said Limits on the 14/24th of March following, in order to which Affair his
Imperial Majesty appointed Count Marsilii for his Commissary, giving him Orders
to depart from Vienna in a Weeks time. But the Ratifications relating to the
Articles of Peace concluded on both sides were sooner dispatched, for the Grand
Seignior's Ratification of the Treaty arrived at Belgrade, the 9th of March
N.S. 1699. of which Advice was given the same day to the Secretary of the
Imperial Embassy, who waited at Peter-Waradin with that of the Emperors, that
the Exchange might be made on the same Day, the which was accordingly done.

COPIA INSTRUMENTI TURCICI CUM MOSCOVITA. Hic est Deus, maxim aperiens omnia,
Potentissimus, Firmissimus. In Nomine Dei misericordis, semper miserentis.
CAusa exarationis hujus veritate praecellentis Scripti, and necessitas
descriptionis hujus realitate insigniti Instrumenti haec est: Incorruptibilis
Domini Creatoris, and immortalis Opificis liberrimi arbitru, Domini Dei, cujus
Gloria extollatur extra omnem similitudinem, and paritatem, aeternarum
confirmationum ubertatis concessione, and gratia honoratissimae Meccae, and
lucidissimae Medinae Servi, and Sanctae Jerusalem, and aliorum Locorum
benedictorum Defensoris, and Rectoris, binarum Terratum Sultani, and Regis
binorum Marium, Dominatoris potentis Aegypti, and Abyssinarum Provinciarum, ac
Felicis Arabiae, and Adenensis Terrae, and Caesareae Africanae, and Tripolis,
and Tuneti, and Insulae Cypri, and Rhodi, and Cretae, and aliarum Albi Maris
Insularum, atque Imperatoris Babylonis, and Bositrae, and Laxae, and Revani,
and Carsiae, and Erzirum, and Schresul, and Mussul, and Diarbekir, and Ricae,
and Damasci, and Aleppi, and Sultani Persicae and Arabicae Irachiensis
Regionis, and Regis Ghiurdistaniae, and Turchistaniae, and Giurzistaniae, and
Daghistaniae, and Trapezuntis, and Imperatoris Provinciarum Rum, and
Zul-chadriae, and Maras, Imperatoris Regionum Tartariae, Circassiae, and
Abasiorum, atque Crimeae, ac Desti-Capzac, Imperatoris Orientis, and
Occidentis, and Anatoliae, and Rumeliae, Possessoris Sedis Regiae
Constantinopolis, and protectae Prussae, ac defensae Adrianopolis, and
praeterea Imperatoris latissimarum tot Provinciarum, totque Climatum and Urbium
ac celeberrimi Dominatoris, Sultani Sultanorum, Regis Regum, Serenissimi,
Potentissimi, Augustissimi Domini nostri Imperatoris, Refugii Musulmannici;
Sultani Filii Sultanorum, Sultani Mustafa Regis, Filii Sultani Mehmet Regis,
cujus Imperium Deus perenne faciat, ac Principatum stabiliat usque in diem
judicii, Majestatis, Excelsum Imperium inter, and Gloriosissimum inter eximies
Principes Christianos, and Praelectissimum inter magnos Dominatores
Christianos, Directorem magnorum negotiorum Christianarum Rerumpublicarum,
Chlamyde Amplitudinis and Majestatis exornatissimum, Argumentis magnitudinis
and gloriae condecoratissimum Czarum Moscoviticarum Regionum, and omnium
Ruthenicarum Provinciarum Dominatorem, and Possessorem subjectarum illis
Terrarum, and Urbium, sublimem Czarum Moscoviae Petrum Alexovicium (cujus fines
Deus salute and rectitudine coronet) cum intercedens aliquibus annis dissidium
fuerit in causa calamitatis Subditorum, and Subjectorum utriusque partis, ea
intention, ut iterum in amicitiam, and benevolentiam commutetur, ad bonam
constitutionem rerum Civitatensium, and ad reducendum in meliorem conditionem
Statum Servorum Dei, in Sirmio in Confiniis Carlovicii facto Congressu, cum
Illustrissimo, and Excellentissimo inter Christianos Magnates, Domino Procopio
Begdanouiz Vosnizin, alte memorati Czari Plenipotentiario Commissario, and
Extraordinario Legato, and intimo Consiliario, and Locumtenente Bolchiae, ab
eodem Czaro ad Tractatus, and Conclusionem Pacis negotii perfecta authoritate
destinato, and deputato: atque explentibus, Mediationis manus bonis officiis,
ac diligenti opera, deputatis a Gloriosissimis inter eximios Christianos
Principes, and Re^^giis Magnorum Dominato^um ejusdem Gentis, Angliae, Scotiae,
and Hiberniae Rege, Wilhelmo Tertio, and Generalibus Statibus Nederlandensibus
(quorum fines Deus salute and rectitudine coronet) ad exequendam Mediationis
suae functionem ad Tractatus Pacis, Illustrissimis and Excellentissimis inter
Magnates Christianos, Wilhelmo Lord Pagett, Barone de Beaudesert, etc. and
Domino Jacobo Colyer, etiamsi ab utraque part adhibita sit ad Pacem, and
Conciliationem propensio, and inclinatio, cum tamen non esset facile, brevi
tempore, ut ablatis difficultatibus omnes res, convenientes Amicitiae, and
Vicinitati, perfect, and debite ad bonum ordinem redigerentur, ne
interrumperetur continuatio istorum almorum Tractatuum, sed ut pertractentur,
and ad finem perducantur, hac utrinque intention per mutuum consensum a Die
vigesimo quinto Decembris, Anni millesimi, centesimi, decimi, nempe Natalitio
Domini Jesu Christi, usque ad integros duos annos terminus constitutus est,
intra quem scilicet almus iste Tractatus ad bonum ordinem reducatur, and inter
Excelsum Imperium, and Moscoviticum Czareatum, favente Deo Altissimo, Pax, sive
per inducias, sive perpetua coalescat, and vetus amicitia renovetur. Itaque
intra statutum unanimi consensu terminum cesset omne praelium, and bellum, and
pugna, atque conflictus, and utrinque amoveantur, and tollantur hostilitates,
Moscorum Czaro subjectis a Moscovitis and Cosaccis, and aliis in subjecta
Excelso Imperio Musulmannica Confinia, sive alia, sive Crimensia and Loca, and
Subditos, nulla fiat excursio, and hostilitas nullumque damnum inferatur, neque
clam, neque palam. Pariterque a part Excelsi Imperii nullius conditionis
Exercitus, praesertim Crim^nsis Chanus, and omnia genera Tartarorum and Hordae,
nullam penitus excursionem faciant, nullumque damnum inferant, neque clam,
neque palam, in Civitates, and Oppida, and Subditos and Subjectos Nostro Czaro.
Atque si qui sive clam, sive palam, motum aliquem, sive dispositionem, and
hostilitatem, and incursionem fecerint contra hoc Pactum, and hanc conditionem,
quae inter nos confecta est, and sese contumaces, and minus obedientes
reddiderint, ex quacunque part sint, deprehendantur, incarcerentur, and sine
remissione puniantur. Proinde praefata ratione colendi, and observandi hujus
Armistitii tempore, conflictatio and hostilitas penitus amoveantur atque
tollantur, and ab utraque part perfecta propensio, and plena inclinatio
adhibeatur ad conclusionem Pacis; and Crimensis Chanus propter suam
obedientiam, and subjectionem ad Excelsum Imperium, adjungatur huic Paci. Utque
ab utraque part acceptatum, and observatum sit, and alte memorati Czari
Plenipotentiarius Legatus and Commissarius vigore suae Facultatis, and
Auctoritatis Moscovitico Sermon descriptum, legitimum, and validum
Instrumentum tradiderit: Nos quoque Facultatis and Vicariae nostrae
Deputationis vigore, nostris Manibus subscriptum, and nostris Sigillis firmatum
hoc Scriptum, tamquam validum and legitimum Instrumentum tradidimus.

Deus favens est aequitati.


IN Nomine Domini Dei Omnipotentis in Trinitate Sancta unius; Ejusdem Gratia
Sereniss^mum, and Potentissimum Magnum Dominum Czarum, and Magnum Ducem Petrum
Alexovicium, totius magnae, and parvae, and albae Russiae Autocratorem,
Moscoviae, Kioviae, Wolodimiriae, Novogardiae, Czarum Caraniae, Czarum
Astrachani, Czarum Siberiae, Dominum Plescoviae, and magnum Ducem Smolensci,
Treriae, Ingoriae, Permiae, Viatkae, Bolgariae, and aliorum Dominum, and magnum
Ducem Novogardiae, inferioris Terrae, Csernihoviae, Resaniae, Rostoviae,
Jarosclaviae, Belovroriae, Valoriae, Obdoriae, Condiniae, and totius Plagae
Septentrionalis Imperatorem, and Dominum Iveriensis Terrae, Cartalinensium and
Gruzinensium Czarum, and Kabardiensis Terrae, Csercassorum, and Montanorum
Ducem, ac aliorum multorum Dominiorum, and Terrarum Orientalium, Occidentalium,
Septentrionaliumque Paternum Avitumque Haeredem, Successorem, and Dominum, ac
Dominatorem, suam inter Majestatem, atque inter Serenissimum, and Potentissimum
Magnum Dominum Sultanum Mustafam, Chanum, Filium Sultani Mehmet Chani, Dominum
Constantinopoleos, Albi Maris, Nigri Maris, Anatoliae, Vrumiae, Romaniae,
honoratissimae Meccae, and Medinae Sanctae, Jerusalem, Aegypti, and
Abyssinarum, Babylonis, and Ricae, and Damasci Dominatorem, Tartaricarum and
Crimensium Hordarum, nec non aliorum multorum Dominiorum, Regnorum, and Urbium,
Insularum, and Provinciarum Imperatorem, ab aliquot annis intercedens dissidium
causa fuit calamitatis Subditorum, and Subjectorum utrique parti, ex
intention, ut rursus in Amicitiam, and Benevolentiam, ad bonam rerum Civilium
constitutionem, reducendumque in meliorem conditionem statum transmutetur, in
Sirmio ad Confinia Carlovizii facto Congressu cum Illustrissimis and
Excellentissimis, Selectissimo Domino Magno Cancellario Reis Mehmet Effendi,
and cum Selectissimo Domino ab Intimis Secretis Alexandro ex Prosapia Scarlati
Mauro Cordato, alte memoratae suae Sultanicae Majestatis Plenipotentiariis
Commissariis, and Extraordinariis Legatis ad Tractatum, and Constitutionem
Negotii Pacis perfecta Authoritate destinatis ac deputatis, Mediationem inter
Serenissimi and Potentissimi suae Regiae Majestatis Magnae Britanniae, and
Praepotentum Generalium Statuum Nederlandensium Hollandiorum, Illustrissimorum,
and Excellentissimorum Plenipotentiariorum Eorundem Extraordinariorum
Legatorum, Domini Wilhelmi Lord Pagett, Baronis de Beaudesert, etc. and Domini
Jacobi Colyer, etc. ab utraque autem part ad Pacem, and Inducias propensio,
and inclinatio adhibita fuit; attamen non facile fuit, intra breve tempus,
sublatis difficultatibus res universas, convenientes amicitiae, and vicinitati,
perfect, and debite in bonum ordinem redigere; sed ne interrumperetur
continuatio horum almorum Tractatuum, quinimo deinceps perficiatur, and ad
finem deducatur, hac intention utrinque per mutuum consensum, id est, a Die 25
Decembris anno School. a Nativitate Domini Dei Jesu Christi, in futuros duos
integros annos, inter alte fatos ambos Magnos Dominos fiant Induciae, in quibus
almus hicce Tractatus in bonum ordinem reducatur, atque inter suam Czaream
Majestatem Moscoviticam, and Sultanicam Majestatem Turcicam, Deo Altissimo
secundante, Pax perpetua, aut in sufficientes annos Induciae concludantur, and
vetus Amicitia restauretur. Proinde in hoc constituto determinato unanimi
consensu desinat omne praelium, bellum, pugna, and conflictus, and utrobique
amoveantur, and tollantur hostilitates, and a Subditis suae Czareae Majestatis,
Moscovitis, and Cosaccis, ac aliis, Confiniis Musulmannicis, and Crimensibus,
atque reliquis suae Sultanicae Majestati subjectis Terris, and Subditis, nulla
incursio and hostilitas fiat, neque clam, neque palam ullum damnum inferatur.
Pariter ex part suae Majestatis Sultanicae adversus partem suae Czareae
Majestatis nullius ordinis Exercitus, potissimum vero Crimensis Chanus, and
omne genus Tartarorum, and Hordarum penitus ullas incursiones faciant, nec
ullum damnum palam aut clam in Civitatibus, and Oppidis, and subditis
Territoriis suae Czareae Majestati perpetrent. Et si qui clam vel aperte motum
aliquem, and dispositionem, hostilitatem, ac incursionem contra hanc
constitutionem, and conditionem, quae nos inter confecta est, fecerint, and ex
quacunque demum part tales contumaces reperiantur, apprehendantur,
incarcerentur, and sine remissione indefense puniantur. Hac itaque praefata
ratione, tempore colendi, and observandi hujus Armistitii, conflictatio, and
hostilitas absolute amoveatur, and tollatur, ac ab utraque part ad
concludendam Pacem perfecta propensio, and plena inclinatio adhibeatur, and
Crimensis Chanus ex munere suae erga Imperialem suam Majestatem Turcicam
obedientiae, and subjectionis, huic Paci adjungatur; Quae omnia ut ab utraque
part acceptentur, and observentur, quoniam alte memoratae suae Sultanicae
Majestatis Plenipotentiarii Legati, and Commissarii, vigore suae facultatis,
and Authoritatis Turcico Sermon scriptum legitimum, and firmum Instrumentum,
ex eoque Latino Sermon propriis manibus, and Sigillis firmatam Copiam
dederunt, pariter and ego facultatis, and Plenipotentiae mihi datae vigore,
manu propria subscriptum, and Sigillo firmatum hoc Scriptum Ruthenico and
Latino Sermon copiatum, tanquam firmum, and legitimum Instrumentum tradidi.
Scriptum in Carlowiz, Ann. School. Mense December. Die 25.

It is God the most Powerful, the most Just, who brings all Things to pass. In
the Name of God the Merciful, always Compassionate.
THE Reason of the making this Writing Refulgent in Truth, and the necessity of
the Description of this Instrument stamped with Reality, is this; The War
betwixt the Sublime Empire of Mustapha, by the Concessions of the Plenitude of
the Eternal Confirmations of the Incorruptible Lord Creator, and the Immortal
Maker of most Freewill, the Lord God, whose Glory be extolled beyond Similitude
or Equality, and by the Grace of the most Honored Mecca, and the Servant of
the most Illustrious Medina, Defender and Rector of the Holy Jerusalem, and
other Blessed Places, Sultan of the two Earths, and King of the two Seas, Lord
of Potent Egypt, and the Abyssine Provinces, and Arabia the Happy, and the Land
of Adenum and Caesarean Africa, and Tripoly and Tunis, and the Island of Cyprus
and Rhodes, and Crete, and other Islands of the White Sea, and Emperor of
Babylon, and Bosnia, and Laxa, and Revanum, and Carsia, and Erzirum, and
Sehresul, and Mussul, and Diarbekir, and Rica, and Damascus, and Aleppo, and
Sultan of the Persic and Arabic Irachian Region, and King of Ghiurdistania and
Turchistania, and Daghistania, and Trapezuntum, and Emperor of the Provinces of
Rum, and Zulchadria, and Maras, Emperor of the Regions of Tartary, of
Circassia, and the Abastans, and the Crimea and Desti-Capzac, Emperor of the
East and West, and Anatolia and Rumelia, Possessor of the Royal-Seat of
Constantinople, and Protected Prussia, and Defended Adrianople, and besides of
so many the most large Provinces, and of so many Climates and Cities, and most
Celebrated Governor, Sultan of Sultans, King of Kings, most Serene, most
Potent, most August Lord our Emperor, the Refuge of Musulmen, Sultan Son of
Sultans, Son of Sultan King Mehmet, (whose Empire God perpetuate, and establish
his Government to the Day of Judgment;) And the most glorious amongst the
principal Christians, Director of the great Affairs of the Christian
Commonwealths, Adorned with the Robes of Greatness and Majesty, Conspicuous
with the Power of Greatness and Glory, the Czar of the Muscovite Regions, and
Lord of all the Ruthenic Provinces and Possessor of the Lands and Cities
Subject to them, the Sublime Czar of Mus^ovy, Peter Alexovic, (whose End let
God crown with Salvation and Righteousness,) considering this War for some
Years has been the Occasion of Calamity to the Subjects on both sides, with an
Intent, that it might be changed into Friendship and Kindness, that Affairs
might be put into better Order, and the State of the Servants of God might be
reduced into a better Condition, in the Congress of Sirmium in the Confines of
Carlovitz, upon Treaty with the most Illustrious and most Excellent amongst the
Christian Grandees, Lord Procopius Begdanoviz Vosniziri, Plenipotentiary
Commissionated by the Czar, and Ambassador Extraordinary, and Privy-Counsellor,
and Lieutenant of Bolchia, Designed and Deputed by the said Czar with full
Powers to Treat and Conclude a Peace, and the most Illustrious and most
Excellent amongst the Christian Grandees, William Lord Pagett, Baron of
Beaudesert, etc. and Lord Jacob Colyer, performing the part of Mediators, with
great good Offices and Diligence, Deputed so to do by the most Glorious amongst
the most Illustrious Christian Princes, and the Resort of the Rulers of the
Nations, William III. of England, Scotland, and Ireland, King, and the States
General, (whose Ends God crown with Salvation and Righteousness,) although both
Parties showed a Propensity and Inclination to Peace and Reconciliation; but
considering in so short a time it was not easy to remove all Difficulties, and
to settle all things Agreeable to Friendship and good Neighborhood; Therefore,
least the Continuance of these good Treaties should be interrupted, but that
they should proceed and be brought to an End, with this Intent on both sides,
by mutual Consent, the Term of Two Years is Agreed on to begin from the 25th of
December, Christmas Day, A. Heg. 1110. within which time this good Treaty may
be reduced into Order, and by the Grace of the most High God, a Peace or Truce
may be concluded betwixt the Sublime Empire, and the Muscovitish Czareate, by
which perpetual and ancient Friendship may be Renewed. Therefore within the
Term thus prefixed, by unanimous Consent, all War, Battles, and Skirmishes
shall cease, and all Hostilities shall be removed and forbid to the Subjects of
the Czar of Muscovy, both Muscovites and Cossacks, and all others, there shall
be no Excursion, Hostility, Damage, whether privately or publicly done or
committed, upon the Musulman Confines, subject to the Sublime Empire, whether
in the Crimea, or any other Places, or upon the Subjects of this Empire: In
like manner on the part of the High Empire, no Army of what Condition soever,
especially belonging to the Crimean Cham, and all sorts of Tartars, or Hords,
shall make any sort of Excursion, nor commit Damage privately or publicly,
upon the Cities and Towns, and Subjects or Dependants upon the Czar: And if
contrary to this Compact and Agreement, which is made betwixt us, any, either
privately or publicly, shall raise any Commotion, or make Preparation for it,
or shall commit Hostility, or make Incursion, or shall be Obstinate, or not
Obedient, let 'em be of what side they will, they shall be Apprehended,
Imprisoned, and Punished without Mercy; Therefore after this method shall this
Truce be cultivated and observed during the time of it, all Conflicts and
Hostilities shall be removed and extinguished, and both Parties with full
Inclination shall apply themselves to the Conclusion of a Peace, and the
Crimean Cham shall be included in this Place, by reason of the Obedience and
Subjection he owes to the Sublime Empire: That it may be received and observed
on both sides, the Plenipotentiary Ambassador and Commissary of the highly
forementioned Czar, by Virtue of his Powers and Authority, has delivered an
Authentic Instrument in due Form, written in the Muscovite Language: We
likewise by Virtue of our Powers and Deputation, have delivered this Authentic
Instrument in due Form, Subscribed with our Hands and Sealed with our Seals.

God is favorable to Justice.


IN the Name of the Omnipotent Lord God, One in Holy Trinity: By whose Grace
the most Serene and Potent Lord Czar, and Great Duke, Peter Alexovic, Emperor
of the Whole Great and Little Russia, of Muscovy, Kiovia, Wolodimiria,
Novogardia, Czar of Carania, Czar of Astrachan, Czar of Siberia, Lord of
Plescovia, Great Duke of Smolenscum, Lord of Treria, Ingoria, Permia, Viatka,
Bolgaria, and of other Dominions; Great Duke of Novogardia, of the Lower
Country, of Csernihovia, Resania, Rostovia, Jarosclavia, Belovroria, Valoria,
Obdoria, Condinia, and Emperor of all the Northern Country, and Lord of the
Land af Iveria, Czar of the Cartalinensians and Grunizensians, and Duke of
Karbardia, of the Csercassians and Mountaneers, and many other Dominions and
Lands to the East, West and North, from Father and Ancestors, Heir, Successor,
Lord and Commander, between his Majesty and the most Mighty Great Lord Sultan
Mustapha Han, Son of Sultan Mehmet Han, Lord of Constantinople, of the White
Sea, the Black Sea, of Anatolia, Rumia, Romania, of the most Honored Mecca and
Medina, and Holy Jerusalem, of Egypt, of the Abyssines, of Babylon and Rica,
and Commander of Damascus, Emperor of the Tartarian and Crimean Hords, as also
of many other Dominions, Kingdoms and Cities, Islands and Provinces.

Whereas the War for many years has been the Cause of the Misery of the
Subjects, and Dependants on both Parties, that Friendship and Kindness might be
restored, and by that means the Civil Affairs might become better settled, and
all things changed into a more flourishing Condition; with this intent a
Congress was had in Sirmium on the Confines of Carlovitz, with the most
Illustrious and most Excellent the most Select Lord Great Chancellor Reis
Mehmet Effendi, and the most Select Lord of the Privy Council, Mauro Cordato,
of the Family of Scarlati, Plenipotentiary Commissioners, and Ambassadors
Extraordinary of the highly mentioned Sultan Majesty, Deputed with full Powers
to Treat of and Settle the Business of a Peace, through the Mediation of his
most Serene and most Royal Majesty of Great Britain, and of the States General
of the Netherlands, by their most Excellent Plenipotentiaries, Ambassadors
Extraordinary, the Lord William Lord Pagett, Baron de Beaudesert, etc. and Lord
Jacob Colyer, etc. both sides showed an Inclination to a Peace and Truce, but
in so short a time it was not easy to remove all Difficulties, and put all
things into an Order agreeable to Friendship and Good Neighborhood; yet least
the Continuance of these Treaties should be Interrupted, and that they might be
perfected and brought to an end, with this Intent, by mutual Consent on both
sides, a Truce, betwixt the two great highly mentioned Lords, is Agreed on for
Two Years, to Commence from Christmas Day, the 25th day of December, Anno
Domini School. within which Term, this Treaty may be reduced into good Order, and
by the Blessing of God, a perpetual Peace or a Truce for a sufficient Number of
years may be Concluded, and Ancient Friendship restored betwixt his Czarish
Muscovite Majesty, and Turkish Sultan Majesty; Therefore within this prefixed
time, all War, Battles, Fights, and Skirmishes, shall Cease, and on both sides
all Hostilities shall be removed and extinguished; nor shall any Incursion or
Hostility be done, or any Damage committed, either privately or publicly by
the Subjects of his Czarish Majesty, whether Muscovites or Cossacks, or others,
within the Mussulman or Crimean Confines, or within any other of his Sultan
Majesty's Dominions, or on any of his Subjects. In like manner on the part of
his Sultan Majesty no sort of Troops of what Condition soever shall be brought
against his Czarish Majesty, especially the Crimean Cham, and the Tartars of
what Nation or Hord soever shall be obliged not to make any Incursions, or do
any Damage publicly or privately, either in the Cities, Towns, or Territories,
Subject to his Czarish Majesty: And if contrary to this Constitution and
Agreement made betwixt us, any privately or publicly should raise any
Commotion, or make Preparation for it, or make Incursion, or Commit Hostility,
such obstinate and disobedient Persons of what side soever they are, shall be
Apprehended, Imprisoned, and Inevitably punished without Mercy: By this Method
for the time appointed for this Cessation of Arms, all Conflicts and
Hostilities shall be absolutely taken away and abolished, and both Parties
shall apply to conclude a Peace, with sincere Endeavors and full Inclination,
and the Crimean Cham, according to his Duty and Dependence upon his Imperial
Turkish Majesty shall be concluded by this Peace. That all these Things may be
accepted of, and observed by both Parties, because the highly mentioned
Plenipotentiary Ambassadors and Commissaries of his Sultan Majesty, by Virtue
of their Powers and Authorities, have delivered in due Form an Authentic
Instrument written in the Turkish Language, and from that a Copy in Latin,
Signed with their Hands and Seals; in like manner, I by Virtue of the Authority
and full Power granted me, have delivered in due Form, an Authentic Instrument
Subscribed with my own Hand, and Confirmed with my Seal, Written in the
Ruthenic and Copied in the Latin.

In Nomine Sanctissimae and Individuae Trinitatis.
AD perpetuam Rei memoriam. Omnibus and singulis, quorum interest notum sit,
Quandoquidem inter Regnum Polonicum, and Excelsum Imperium intercedens
diuturnum dissidium, Serenissimo and Potentissimo Magnae Britanniae, Franciae
and Hyberniae Rege, Guilielmo III. and Praepotentibus Generalibus Foederati
Belgii Statibus, sistendi humani Sanguinis, and reducendae reciprocae Quietis
desiderio, ad procurandos hujus almae Pacis Tractatus, Mediationem suam
interponentibus, atque officia omnia, and omnes conditiones Mediationis,
diligenti opera and studio explentibus, Excellentissimis Dominis ad Fulgidam
Portam Legatis Plenipotentiariis, Guilielmo Domino Pagett, Barone de
Beaudesert, in Comitatu Staffordiensi, ejusdem Comitatus Regis Locumtenente, ex
part Majestatis Britannicae: and Domino Jacobo Colyer, ex part Praepotentium
Generalium Foederati Belgii Ordinum, favente Deo, reciproca utrinque
inclinatione atque propensione sopiri, and penitus extingui placuerit, atque
Carlovizii ad Confinia Sirmii, ubi Congressus Legatorum Plenipotentiariorum ex
Inclytae Mediationis dispositione institutus fuerat, initis Tractatibus de
Pacis Articulis cum Illustrissimo and Excellentissimo Domino Mehmet Effendi,
Magno Cancellario Excelsi Imperii, and Illustrissimo atque Excellentissimo
Domino Alexandro Mauro Cordato, de Nobili Stirpe Scarlati, ab Intimis Secretis
ejusdem Excelsi Imperii, ad tractandam Pacem Legatis Plenipotentiariis, post
aliquas Sessiones, tandem annuente Divina Clementia, Negotium hoc almae
desiderataeque Pacis feliciter in mutuas Leges coaluerit, and integerrima
iterum Amicitia, and Pax inter Serenissimum, and Potentissimum Musulmannorum
Imperatorem Sultanum, Filium Sultani Mehmeti, Sultanum Mustapha: and
Serenissimum ac Potentissimum Regem, Augustum Secundum, Dominum meum
Clementissimum and Rempublicam Poloniarum, super undecim, mutuo consensu
compositis hisce Articulis, perpetuo religiose inter utrumque Dominium
observanda, perfecta and conclusa, restituta and renovata est, qui articuli
subinde singulatim describuntur.

I.
CUM Excelso perpetuitati subnixo Imperio, multo abhinc tempore intercedente
open, and favore Dei Altissimi sublata hostilitate, conciliationi and bonae
vicinitati congrua cum Sinceritate, antiqua amicitia iterum coalescente, ut
hostilitates utrinque amoveantur, and Subditi pristina securitate, quiet, ac
tranquillitate fruantur, ante ultima duo bella constituti veteres Limits
restituantur ac stabiliantur, and Confinia Provinciarum subditarum Poloniae, a
Confiniis Imperialibus tum Moldaviae, tum aliorum Districtuum, subjectorum
Excelso Imperio, antiquis Limitibus separentur ac distinguantur, neve utrinque
aut praetensio, aut extensio deinceps fiat, sed Limits antiqui sine mutatione
aut perturbatione, tanquam sacri, religiose observentur atque colantur.

II.
Quaecunque sive Munimenta, sive Loca vel majora, vel minora intra veteres
Moldaviae Limits, ante penultimum bellum existentes, sita, atque hucusque
detenta sunt a Dominis Polonis, eductis atque extractis inde Polonicis
Militiis, evacuentur, and Moldaviae Provincia maneat ex integro libera, ante
postremum bellum, in quo erat pacifico Statu.

III.
Intra veteres quoque ante prostrema duo bella, versus Poloniam, Limits situm
Camenici Fortalitium, eductis inde Musulmannicis Militiis, evacuetur, and
integrum relinquatur, and Podoliae atque Ukrainae Provinciarum nulla deinceps
ab Excelso Imperio fiat praetensio, and Ukrainae Kosacorum Hatmani nomine
Substitutus, qui modo in Moldavia residet, Hatmanus amoveatur. Cumque Limits
antiqui Poloniae and Moldaviae manifesti sint, si commodum fuerit tempus, ab
initio futuri Martii inchoetur evacuatio, and quam citius fieri poterit,
quamprimum Polonica Militia e Moldavia educatur, and Munimenta and Loca illius
evacuentur, and Moldavia maneat libera. Simulque ab initio Martii Caminecensis
Fortalitii evacuatio inchoetur, atque evacuationis negotium, ubi prius persici
poterit, sine haesitatione, and sine tarditate ac negligentia in executionem
deducatur, and Caminecensis Fortalitii evacuatio ad summum usque in decimum
quintum mensis Maii ad finem perducatur; and quo cum facilitate and celeritate
dicti Fortalitii fiat evacuatio, ad onera imponenda, and transvehenda, quoad
fieri potest, curribus and Jumentis transportationem coadjuvent Poloni, and
ubique evacuationis negotium cum securitate and salva re peragatur: in quibus
evacuationibns Fortalitiorum, and aliorum Locorum, quoquo Pacto munitorum e
Subditis, quicunque voluntary exire velint, cum propriis rebus and
Suppellectile exeant tuto and secure, and quicunque remanere velint, item tuto
remaneant, and utrinque nullatenus impediantur. Et cum evacuatio Fortalitiorum
and Locorum a principio Martii Mensis utrinque inchoari debeat, instantiam de
Tormentorum Camenieci relictione, scilicet ex propriis atque ibi repertis,
Ablegatus Polonus quamprimum ad Fulgidam Portam expediendus, afferat ad Solium
Imperatoris.

IV.
Nemo Subditorum Excelsi Imperii cujuscunque conditionis, praesertim vero
Tartari, cujuscunque Gentis, sub cujusvis praetensionis, and controversiae
praetextu, in Subditos Regis and Reipub. Poloniarum, and in Limits eorum
hostilitates exercere, excursiones agere, Captivos rapere, Pecora abigere, aut
quidquid damni infer, neve eos offendere possit, expressis Regiis Edictis
committatur, and demandetur Vesiriis, Beglerbegis, and felicissimo Crimensi
Hano, Carelgaio, and Nuradino, and reliquis Soltanis, ac Woiewodae Moldaviae,
ut adhibita maxima sedulitate observent and conservent Confiniorum pacificam
tranquillitatem, and conciliationem atque quietem, neve aut in captivationibus,
aut Pecorum abactionibus, aut quacunque alia ratione damnis and molestiis
afficiant Poloniae Subditos, and severissime inquirant in perturbatores and
transgressores conditionum Pacis, atque habita notitia ad exemplum aliorum in
illos animadvertant, and rapta adinventa propriis Dominis restituantur, and si
qui hac de re negligenter ac oscitanter agant, sive amissione officiorum, sive
privatione vitae, prout ex divinis Legibus convenerit, just puniantur. Pariter
Poloni has conditiones Pacis omnino, and sedulo observent atque colant, and
nemo in oppositum quidquid audeat.

V.
Cum Regnum Poloniae ab antiquo sit liberrimum, ab Excelso Imperio aut
subjectis eidem Gentibus, qualiscunque praetensionis, aut expostulationis
praetextu, nulla penitus hostilitate perturbetur, and conclusae istius almae
Pacis Pactorum vi, ad tales praetensiones nequaquam adstringantur.

VI.
Tempore hujusce belli Budziacenses, and alii Tartari e propriis Locis
exeuntes, atque in Terras Moldavorum ingressi, hostilitates ac offensiones hac
occasion in Moldavos and Moldaviam exercent: quod cum sit contrarium sacris
Capitulationibus ante hac concessis Regibus Poloniae, ac proinde cessare ac
sustolli debeat, a quibusque Locis and possessionibus, and praediis, and
hyemalibus in Moldavia aut occupatis, aut de novo extructis Tartari amoveantur,
and nativis propriis Locis habitent, atque pacifice vivant, and imposterum
nullas offensiones faciant.

VII.
Religiosi Christiani Romano-Catholici juxta concessa ab Excelso Imperio
edicta, ubicunque Ecclesias suas habent, consuetas suas functiones sine
impedimento exerceant, and pacifice vivant: and ulterius sibi commissas
Instantias de Regione extraordinarias ad Fulgidam Portam Magnus Legatus ad
Imperatorium Solium exponat.

VIII.
Cum Res Mercatoria e fructibus Pacis existat, atque Provincias in meliorem
conditionem reducat, utriusque Dominii Mercatores imposterum non per occulta
loca meantes, sed per loca transitui opportuna ultro citroque euntes and
redeuntes, postquam solverint juxta consuetum ab antiquo Telonium rerum
portatarum and exportatarum, novis exactionibus, and expostulationibus
nequaquam molestentur, neve ex numerata pecunia Telonium exigatur: and
quicunque nativi Subditi Poloniarum, and Lithuaniae, and aliarum subjectarum
iisdem Nationum ad Mercimoniam agendam venientes, and nullum damnum inferentes,
praedicta ratione mercaturam and coemptionem, and venditionem, sicuti in
antecedentibus sacris Capitulationibus etiam declaratur, exactione tributi
dicti Haracz, and aliis inordinatis exactionibus ne molestentur. Verum
enimvero, si qui relictis suis Regionibus in Imperii regnis sedem figant, and
si qui alii Exteriores sese Polonis immisceant, tales ne possint esse
detrimento Reipublicae, Mercatores Polonorum redeuntes ex armis, and equis, and
jumentis, and captivis, qui liberationis suae instrumentum legitimum habentes
in Patriam redire voluerint, nihil exigatur, and ne quisquam impedimento sit
taliter abeuntibus captivis. Verum sub isto praetextu sine facultate nemini
liceat vetita abducere. Praeterea opibus and rebus Mercatorum utriusque
Dominii, quibus in aliis Regionibus mori contingat, publici Confiscatores and
Partitores ne ab utralibet part sese immisceant, sed inter Mercatores, cui
sides adhibetur, tradantur, ut juxta catalogum depositionis haeredibus tradat;
si quis autem casus acciderit inter Mercatores, inter ipsos Praepositi
decisione definiatur, ipse vero, quibus debet, rationem reddat. Ad debitum sive
Scripto, sive Instrumento Judiciario non affirmatum solvendum contra Divinas
Leges nemo compellatur, neve Testimoniis solis conductitiis lites debitorum and
sponsionum dicantur, aut audiantur, Instrumentis scilicet legitimis and
Scriptis ante extraditis, sacris Mandatis perlectis atque consideratis, just
ac debite causae decidantur, atque in similibus causis contexta and statuta in
sacris Capitulationibus, ut aliis confoederatis Nationibus concessa, in Polonos
etiam Mercatores extendantur, and ulterius speciatim Polonis antehac
concessorum, and in manibus eorundem servatorum sacrorum Edictorum sensus
quoque colatur and observetur.

IX.
Captivi tempore belli abacti, pretiis illorum juxta Leges comprobatis aut
datis Juramentis in manifestum productis atque solutis juxta antecedentium
Capitulationum hac de re declarationem eliberentur. Si vero tales Captivi multo
tempore servierint, ex discretione pretia emptionum cum imminui debeant, si
honesto and mediocri pretio cum Domino Captivi conveniri non poterit, Judices
Locorum legitime procedentes, tales differentias componant. Si aliqua occasion
post conclusionem Pacis ex Regionibus Polonicis Captivi rapiantur; sine pretio
dimittantur: and in Regnis Excelsi Imperii, and inter Tartaros etiam ad
eliberandos Polonos captivos circumeuntes Homines, quandocunque res suas
pacifice agerent, praetextu operae eliberationi Captivorum navatae, aut alia
ratione neutiquam offendantur, quinimo offendentes and detrimentum inferentes
puniantur, Captivi in publicis Carceribus detenti permutatione utrinque in
libertatem asserantur. Magnus vero Poloniarum Legatus de Captivis suas
Instantias ad Solium Imperiale ass re poterit.

X.
Quandocunque Serenissimus Rex Poloniae in stabilita cum Excelso Imperio Pace
firmiter permanebit, sicuti in antecedentibus Capitulationibus declaratur,
Moldaviae Woiewodam ea ratione, qua ab antiquo cum Regibus Poloniarum sincere
sese praestitit, rursus consueta ratione sincere tractet: caeterum instar
aliorum Subditorum Excelsi Imperii, uti prius, pacati sint, and e Moldaviae
atque Wallachiae Provinciis, si qui transfugerint, ne recipiantur; si qui alia
methodo in Poloniae Dominium irrepserint, ac postea Provinciam suam perturbare,
and corrumpere deprehensi fuerint, similes Homines, quando perquirentur,
reddantur, and conditio ista, cum in antecedentibus Capitulationibus clare, and
manifest posita sit, observetur. Pariter and Subditis Polonis, sive Poloni
illi sint, sive Kosaci, cujuscunque Nationis extiterint, quando perturbationem
afferent, hinc etiam neque recipiantur, neque protegantur, sed retro reddantur.
Et universi, quicunque turbare voluerint Pacem atque Amicitiam, haccine ratione
conclusam, ex merito puniantur.

XI.
Quaecunque conditiones, and Clausulae in antecedentibus Capitulationibus
descriptae atque contentae, nullatenus adversantur de recenti conclusis Pactis,
neque oppositae sunt liberis, and perpetuis Juribus utriusque Dominii, deinceps
etiam colantur, and observentur, quae vero contrariae sunt, cassentur, and
annihilentur, favente and annuente Deo Altissimo. Quae utrinque declaratis, and
exaratis Articulis perfectiori, and exactiori ratione conclusa Pax, and
Conciliatio inter Majestates Serenissimi and Potentissimi alte memorati
Poloniarum Regis, Domini mei Clementissimi, and Successorum ejus, and
Rempublicam Polonam, and ex altra part Serenissimi, and Potentissimi
Musulmannorum Imperatoris, ejusdemque Haeredum, ex voluntate and Clementia Dei
perpetua, stabilis, firma, and inconcussa permaneat, and conservata, atque
custodita sit ab omni turbatione, and mutatione, and confusione, and
violatione, and uno eodemque tenore firmissime perseveret, and constantissime
continuet; and ut omnes omnino hostilitates amoveantur atque sustollantur, quam
citissime notitia praebeatur in Confiniis, Praefectis and Gubernatoribus, ut
sibi caveant, ne imposterum transgressiones fiant, neve altera pars alteri
damna inferat. Verum enimvero omnes utrinque sincere and amice sese praestent
juxta istam almam Pacem. Ut autem omnibus cognita, and comperta sit istius
almae Pacis Conclusio, triginta dies pro termino ponantur: post quem nullus
praetextus, nullaque excusatio acceptabitur, sed in eos, qui adversabuntur,
editis Edictis exactam obedientiam merentibus severissime animadvertatur. Post
Subscriptionem autem Instrumentorum utriusque Partis Ablegatus prius a Polonia
missus, and ad Fulgidam Portam veniens, juxta antiquam consuetudinem afferat
Regias publicas Literas, Ratificationem Pactorum Instrumentis declaratorum
continentes, atque Literas Imperatorias ratificatorias item accipiat and
deducat; Postea vero ad solennem confirmationem Pactorum Pacis, and
perfectionem reciprocae sinceritatis, and absolutam terminationem mutuae
Amicitiae, and dispositionem, ac digestionem reliquarum rerum, juxta laudatum
veterem morem, adventurus Magnus Legatus, quamprimum commode fieri poterit,
moveat, ac proinde undecim numero Pactis conclusa juxta istas conclusiones alma
Pax ab utraque Part acceptetur atque colatur. Cum vero alte memorati
Illustrissimi, and Excellentissimi Domini Excelsi Imperii Plenipotentiarii and
Commissarii existentes Legati, vi suae Facultatis, and auctoritatis Turcico
Sermon exaratum legitimum and validum instrumentum tradiderint, ego quoque vi
Facultatis, and Deputationis meae propria manu subscriptas, and Sigillo
sigillatas a me praesentes Pactorum Literas tanquam legitimum, and validum
Instrumentum tradidi.

POLAND, AND The Sublime OTTOMAN Empire, Made at Carlovitz in Sirmium, in a
General Congress of the Confederate Plenipotentiaries. In the Name of the most
Holy and Individual Trinity.
TO the perpetual Memory of the Thing; Be it known to all and every one, whom
it may Concern: Whereas there has been a long War between the Kingdom of
Poland, and the Sublime Empire; to stop the Effusion of humane Blood, and with
Desires of Restoring a mutual Quiet, the most Serene and most Potent William
III. King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and the States General of the
United Provinces, in order to set on foot this Treaty of a happy Peace, have
interposed their Mediation, all the Duties and Conditions of which Mediation
have with great Study and Industry been performed by their Excellencies the
Plenipotentiary Ambassadors to the Fulgid Port, on the behalf of his Britannick
Majesty, by William Lord Pagett, Baron de Beaudesert in the County of Stafford,
Lord Lieutenant of the said County, and on the part of the States General, by
Lord Jacob Colyer; which War, through GOD's Blessing, by Reciprocal
Inclinations on both sides, has been Composed and wholly Extinguished, at
Carlovitz on the Confines of Sirmium, where, according to the Designment of the
Illustrious Mediation, a Congress of the Plenipotentiary Ambassadors was
appointed, and Treaties of Articles of Peace begun with the most Illustrious
and most Excellent Lord, Mehmet Effendi, Creat Chancellor of the Sublime
Empire, and the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lord, Alexander Mauro
Cordato, of the Noble Family of Scarlati, and Privy-Counsellor of the Sublime
Empire, Ambassadors Extraordinary for the Treaty of Peace; and after some
Sessions, at length, by the Divine Goodness, this Business of a happy and
desired Peace was Digested into Terms agreed on both sides, and a most entire
Friendship and Peace was Perfected and Concluded, Restored and Renewed, between
the most Serene and most Potent Emperor Sultan of the Musulmen, Sultan
Mustapha, Son of Sultan Mehmet, and the most Serene and most Potent King
Augustus II. my most Noble Lord, and the Republic of Poland, which Peace is to
be Religiously observed betwixt both Dominions, and is Digested into Eleven
Articles, which follow one by one.

I.
BY the Help and Blessing of God, Hostility with the High Empire founded on
Eternity, having for some time ceased, and now the Ancient Friendship Agreeable
to the Nature of Reconciliation and good Neighborhood reviving, that all Acts
of Hostility may be prevented, and the Subjects enjoy their Ancient Security,
Quiet and Tranquillity, the Ancient Limits shall be established and restored to
what they were before the two last Wars, and the Confines of the Provinces
subject to Poland, shall by these Ancient Boundaries be separated and
distinguished, as well from the Imperial Confines of Moldavia, as of those of
all other Countries subject to the Sublime Empire, nor shall there on either
side be any Pretension or Extension made but the Ancient Limits, without Change
or Disturbance, shall as Things Sacred, be Religiously observed and maintained.

II.
Whatsoever Fortifications or Places; great or less, which before the War,
before this lay within the Limits of Moldavia, and have hitherto been in the
Possession of Polish Masters, the Polish Garrisons shall be withdrawn, and they
shall be Evacuated, and the Province of Moldavia shall remain as free as ever,
and in the same peaceable State it was before the last War.

III.
The Fortress likewise of Caminiec being before the two last Wars situated
within the Ancient Limits toward Poland, shall be Evacuated, and the Musulman
Garrison withdrawn, and shall be entirely left; Nor shall the Sublime Empire
hereafter make any Pretensions upon the Provinces of Podolia and the Ukrain;
and the Deputy of the Ukrain Cossacks, who goes by the Title of Hatmannus, now
residing in Moldavia, shall be removed. And considering the Ancient Limits of
Poland and Moldavia are very plain, if the Season permits, the Evacuations on
this side shall be begun by the beginning of the ensuing March, and the Polish
Troops shall be withdrawn out of Moldavia as soon as possible, and the
Fortifications and Places shall be Evacuated, and Moldavia left free; And at
the same time from the beginning of March, the Evacuation of Caminiec shall
Commence, and the Business of the Evacution shall without Hesitation, Neglect,
or Delay, be put in Execution, as soon as it can be performed; and the said
Evacuation of this Fortress of Caminiec, shall at farthest be completed by the
25th of May, and that the Evacuation of the said Fortress may be performed with
Speed and Ease; The Poles, shall, as much as possible, in order to the Lading
and Carrying away of Goods; assist the Transportation with Carriages and
Cattle; and on all hands the Evacuation shall be carried on with Security and
Safety: In all which Evacuations of Fortresses, and other Places, in whatsoever
manner they are fortified, whosoever of the Subjects shall voluntarily desire
to depart, may do it securely, and safely, with all their Effects and Goods;
and whosoever of 'em have a mind to continue where they are, may in like manner
safely do it; and there shall by no means be any Let or Impediment on either
side; and considering the Evacuation of all Fortresses and Places is to be
commenced in the beginning of March: As to the Affair of leaving behind the
Artillery at Caminiec, viz. those that were belonging to it, and were found
there; the Polish Envoy that is to be sent to the Fulgid Port, shall lay that
Demand before the Throne of the Emperor.

IV.
None of the Subjects of the Sublime Empire, of whatsoever Condition,
especially the Tartars, let 'em be of what Nation soever, shall under the
color of any Pretension or Controversy presume to commit any Hostilities upon
the Subjects of the King and Republic of Poland, or upon their Borders; and
shall not presume to make Excursions, to take Captives, to drive away Cattle,
or to do any sort of Damage, or give any sort of Disturbance, which shall be
particularly expressed in Royal Edicts, and commanded to be put in Execution by
Visiers, Beglerbegs, and the most Happy Crimean Cham, Carelgaius and Nuradinus,
and the other Sultans, and the Weywode of Moldavia, that they, with utmost
Diligence, secure the Peace, Quiet, and Tranquillity of the Borders; that
neither by the Captures of Men, or driving away of Cattle, or by any other
Means, the Polish Subject suffer any Losses or Disturbance, and that they make
strict and severe Enquiries after the Disturbers and Transgressors of these
Conditions of Peace, and when they come to the knowledge of 'em, they Inflict
Punishments upon 'em for Example to Others; and if in these matters any one
acts carelessly or negligently, he shall be duly punished as is Agreeable to
the Divine Laws. In like manner, the Poles on their part shall carefully
observe and prosecute these Conditions of Peace, and let no Man dare to act any
thing contrary to 'em.

V.
Considering the Kingdom of Poland was from Ancient Times entirely Independent,
it shall not, by the Sublime Empire, and by any Nations subject to it, under
the color of any Pretension or Demand whatsoever, be disturbed with any
Hostility, nor upon the force of any Compacts of that happy Peace, shall they
stand obliged to any such Pretensions.

VI.
In this War, the Budziac and other Tartars, leaving their proper Seats, and
entering upon the Lands of the Moldavians, do upon that pretense Exercise
Hostilities upon, and Create Disturbances to Moldavia, and its Inhabitants,
which being contrary to the Sacred Capitulations formerly granted to the Kings
of Poland, for that Reason ought to Cease and be prevented; therefore shall the
Tartars be removed from all Places and Possessions, and Lands and
Winter Quarters, whether these were taken from others, or newly raised by them,
and shall inhabit their Native Places, and live peaceably, and for the time to
come Create no Disturbances.

VII.
The Regulars of the Church of Rome, according to the Edicts granted by the
Sublime Empire, wheresoever they have Churches, may without hindrance Exercise
their usual Functions, and live peaceably; and besides, the Extraordinary Envoy
to the Fulgid Port may lay before the Imperial Throne any new Demands upon this
Head.

VIII.
Considering Merchandise is one of the Fruits of Peace, and brings the
Provinces into a more thriving Condition; therefore the Merchants of each
Party, not practicing by any obscure Ways, but going and coming through
convenient and open Roads, after they have paid the usual and ancient Duty for
things Exported and Imported, shall by no means be burdened with new Exactions
and Demands; nor shall a Duty in ready Money be Exacted; and whatsoever Native
Subjects of the Two Polands and Lithuania, and of other Nations subject to
them, after this manner coming to exercise their Merchandise, their Buying and
Selling, as is declared in former Sacred Capitulations, shall not be troubled
with the Exaction of the Tribute called Haracz, or any other unusual Exactions:
But still with this Proviso, that any resolving to leave their Native Country,
and set up their Rest in the Dominions of the Empire, or any Foreigners mixing
themselves with Polanders, such shall not to the Detriment of the Government enjoy
this Exemption. Polish Merchants leaving the War, and returning Home with their
Horses and Carriages, and Captives, having an Authentic Certificate of their
Dismission, and being desirous to return to their own Country, shall not be
subject to any Exaction, nor shall any Let or Obstruction be made to Captives
thus going away. But still under this pretense, none without leave obtained,
shall presume to carry away things prohibited. Besides, the public Officers of
Justice shall not pretend to intermeddle in the Confiscation or Distribution of
the Goods or Effects of Merchants Subjects to the one, dying in the others
Dominions, but they shall be delivered into the hands of Merchants of Credit,
that according to the Inventory they may be disposed of to the Right Heirs: But
if any Difference happens betwixt the Merchants themselves, this shall be
Decided by the Consul or Chief, and let him be Accountable to those whom he is
subject to: None, contrary to the Divine Laws, shall be Compelled to pay any
Debt, not verified in Writing, or by some Judiciary Instrument; nor shall the
Causes of Debts or Contracts be Tried or Decided by hireling Evidences, because
upon the reading and considering the Divine Precepts, such sort of Suits are to
be Decided only by Authentic Instruments and Writings of an Antecedent Date;
And so in all Controversies of the like Nature, whatsoever Privileges are
intermixed and established in the Sacred Capitulations, shall, as in the Grants
to the other Confederate Nations, be Interpreted and Extended to the Polish
Merchants; and besides the true meaning of all Grants by Sacred Edicts, (which
are still preserved in their hands) particularly indulged to the Poles, shall
be maintained and observed.

IX.
Captives carried away in time of War, shall be Released pursuant to the
Declaration about this matter in former Capitulations, upon Proofs made
according to the Laws, of their Value, or by Oaths that make that manifest, the
due Prizes being paid. But if the Captives have served a long time, the Prizes
of their Redemption ought to be proportionably Abated; but if the Master of the
Captive cannot be brought to a fair and moderate Price, the Judges of the
Places proceeding in a legal Course, shall compose such Differences: If after
the Conclusion of the Peace, Captives shall be taken out of the Polish
Territories, they shall be Dismissed without Ransom; Besides, Men going about
for the Redeeming Polish Captives; whether in the Kingdoms of the Sublime
Empire, or amongst the Tartars, as long as these Men shall behave themselves
peaceably, they are by no means to be disturbed, either upon this very
pretense, that they make it their Business to deliver Captives, or upon any
other Account whatsoever; nay, those that do Disturb 'em, or do 'em any Injury,
shall be punished: Captives detained in public Prisons, shall on both sides be
Released by Exchange: Farther, the Great Embassy of Poland may present his
Demands concerning Captives to the Imperial Throne.

X.
As long as the most Serene King of Poland shall continue in this established
Peace with the Sublime Empire, as is expressed in former Capitulations, the
Waywode of Moldavia shall continue to behave himself toward the Kings of
Poland in the manner as was anciently used: Let the Moldavians remain in Peace
like the rest of the Subjects of the Sublime Empire; and if any fly out of the
Provinces of Moldavia, or Walachia, and take Refuge in Poland, they shall not be
received; If any by more Subtle means slide themselves into the Polish
Dominions, and shall be afterward found out to Disturb or Corrupt their own
Country, such sort of Men, when demanded, shall be surrendered up, and this
Agreement as it remains, clearly and manifestly expressed in former
Capitulations, shall be observed. The like Measures shall be used toward
Polish Subjects, whether they be Poles or Cossacks, or of whatsoever Nation,
when they shall create any Disturbance, they shall not be received nor
protected on this part, but shall be surrendered up. And in general, whosoever
go about to Disturb this Peace and Friendship thus concluded, shall be punished
according to their Demerits.

XI.
All Conditions and Clauses described and contained in former Capitulations, so
far as they are not opposite to the present Compacts, nor contrary to the
Independent and perpetual Rights of either Sovereignty, shall hereafter be
observed and maintained; but those that are contrary, shall by the Blessing of
the most High God be utterly Abolished and Annihilated. Which Peace and
Agreement betwixt the Majesty's of the most Serene and most Potent highly
abovementioned King of Poland, (my most Gracious Lord) and his Successors, and
the Republic of Poland; and on the other part, of the most Serene and most
Potent Emperor of the Mussulmen, and of his Heirs, as it stands concluded in
these described Articles, in a more perfect and exact manner; so by the Will
and Goodness of God let it remain perpetual, stable, firm; and unshaken, and
may it be preserved and kept from all Disturbance, Change, Confusion and
Violation, and so without any Interruption, may it most firmly Persevere, and
most constantly Continue, and that all Hostilities may be removed and taken
away, notice shall as soon as possible be given in the Confines, to all
Commanders and Governors, that they take care to themselves, that no
Transgressions be committed, and that neither side does Injury to the other;
but that in great Sincerity and Friendship, all on each side Comport themselves
as this happy Peace directs: That the Conclusion of this happy Peace may become
known and certain to all, a term of Thirty days are appointed, after which no
Pretense nor Excuse shall be received, but Edicts being issued, requiring an
exact Obedience, whosoever shall do any thing contrary shall be most severely
punished. After the Subscription of the Instruments of Peace on both sides, an
Envoy sent from Poland, and coming to the Fulgid Port, according to Ancient
Custom, shall bring the Royal Public Letters, containing a Ratification of the
Pacts declared in these Instruments, and likewise shall receive and carry back
with him the Imperial Letters of Ratification: But after this, in Order to a
more solemn Confirmation of these Agreements, and an absolute Completion of a
mutual Friendship, and for a more perfect Disposition and Digestion of all
other Matters, the great Embassy, that according to Ancient Custom is to be
sent, shall, as soon as possible, set forward; and therefore this happy Peace,
comprised in Eleven Articles, shall on each side be received and maintained.
Now in Consideration that the highly mentioned most Illustrious and most
Excellent Lords, Plenipotentiaries and Ambassadors Commissionated of the
Sublime Empire, have by Virtue of their full Powers and Authority, delivered in
due Form an Authentic Instrument of this Peace, written in the Turkish
Language, I likewise by Virtue of full Powers, and my Deputation, have
delivered the present Writing of the said Peace, Subscribed with my proper
Hand, and Sealed with my Seal, as a Valid and Authentic Instrument.


TRattato di Pace tra' l'Eccelso Imperio Ottomanno, e la Serenissima Republica
di Venezia, conchiuso nel Congresso di Carlouiz nel Sirmio sotto le Tend alli
26 di Genaro 1699; essendovi Ambasciatori Plenipotenziarii del l'Eccelso
Imperio gl'Illustrissimi and Eccellentissimi Signori Mehemet Effendi Gran
Cancelliere, and Alessandro Mauro Cordato; e per la Serenissima Republica
l'Illustrissimo and Eccellentissimo Sig. Carlo Ruzini Cavalliere; Mediatori
gl'Illustrissimi and Eccellentissimi Signori Gulielmo Paghet Ambasciatore di
Sua Maesta Brittannica, e Giacomo Colyer Ambasciatore degli Alti e Potenti
Stati Generali delle Provincie Unite: oltre gl'Illustrissimi, and
Eccellentissimi Signori Ambasciatori Plenipotenziarii di Sua Maesta Cesarea, e
di Polonia, etc.

I.
LA Morea colle sue Citta, Fortezze, Castelli, Terre, Ville, Monti, Fiumi,
Laghi, Boschi, Porti, and ogni altra cosa, che si ritrova dentro la
Circonferenza della medesima, ora possessa dalla Republica di Venezia, resti
pacificamente nel possesso, e Dominio dell'istessa Republica, tra'i suoi limiti
del Mare, e dell'Essamiglio, ove sono li Vestiggi dell'antica muraglia, cosi
che ne dal canto di Morea si faccia veruna estensione nella Terra Ferma, ne dal
canto della Terra Ferma si faccia alcuna estensione oltre i Limiti della Morea.

II.
La Terra ferma essendro nel possesso dell'Eccelso Imperio, resta totalmente
nel possesso, e Dominio dell'istesso Imperio, per appunto nello Stato, che si
trovava nel principio di questa ultima Guerra. La Fortezza di Lepanto restara
evacuata dalla Republica di Venezia. Il Castello detto di Rumelia nella part
di Lepanto si demolira, e si demolira parimente la Fortezza di Prevesa, e si
lasciara in quella part la Terra ferma nel suo primiero, and intiero Stato.

III.
L'Isola di Santa Maura colla sua Fortezza, e Capo di Ponte, detto Peracia,
senza veruna estensione maggiore in Terra ferma, e l'Isola di Leucade attaccata
a Santa Maura, restaranno nel possesso, e Dominio della Republica di Venezia.

IV.
LEvacuazione di Lepanto, e la Demolizione del Castello di Rumelia, e di
Prevesa, si esseguiranno subito doppo la distinzione de'i Limiti in Dalmazia;
and in questo mentre per levare tutte le ostilita, and anco le occasioni di
queste, li Presidii de'i detti tr^ Luoghi si conteneranno dentro, ne faranno
alcuna escursione nella Terra ferma, ne veruna pretensione per qualsivoglio
pretesto, e gli Abitanti delli sudetti Luoghi possano restare, e partire,
secondo che vorranno, senza usarsi alcuna violenza.

V.
Li Golfi, che si trovano fra la Terra ferma, e la Morea restano all'uso
commune, obligandosi l'una, e l'altra part di conservarli immuni, e franchi da
qualsivoglia cattiva Gente.

VI.
Le Isole dell'Arcipelago, e di quei Mari restaranno in quello Stato, che erano
avant'il principio di questa ultima Guerra, nel possesso dell'Eccelso Imperio,
ne si pretenderanno dalla Republica caraggi, o siano contribuzioni, od altra
introdotto nel tempo della present Guerra.

VII.
Per l'avenire l'Eccelso Imperio non pretendera dalla Republica di Venezia per
l'Isola di Zante, ne dalli suoi Abitanti alcuna Pensione passata, o futura.
L'Isola di Egina colla sua Fortezza come adgiacente alla Morea, e posseduta
dalla Republica di Venezia, rimanera col suo present Stato nel possesso, e
Dominio del l'istessa Republica.

VIII.
Nella Dalmazia le Fortezze di Cnin, Sing, e Ciclut, e Gabella, essendo al
present nel possesso, e Dominio della Republica di Venezia, restaranno nel
pacifico possesso, e Dominio della medesima; ma poiche si devono porre li
Limiti in tale forma, che li possessi restino chiari, e li Sudditi di ambe le
parti in quiet, e tranquillita, ne si possa venir a qualsivoglia imaginable
differenza, che possa in alcuna maniera disturbare la tranquillita delli
Confini: si e accordato, che dalla Fortezza di Cnin alla Fortezza di Verlika, e
da quella alla Fortezza de Sing, e da questa alla Fortezza di Duare detta
Zadvaria, e da questa alla Fortezza di Vergoratz, e parimente da questa alla
Fortezza di Ciclut, e Gabella, si tirino Linee rette, e si separino li Confini,
siche dentro le debt Linee verso il Dominio Veneto, and il Mare tutte le
Terre, e li Distritti colli Castelli, Forti, Torri, e Luoghi chiusi, restino
nel solo possesso, e Dominio della prememorata Republica: e le Terre, e
Distritti, che saranno fuori della detta Linea, restino nel possesso, e Dominio
dell'Eccelso Imperio, colli Castelli, Forti, Torri, e Luoghi chiusi, essistenti
in quelli, e non si permettera per l'avenire alcuna estensione, e dilatazione,
o restrizzione ne dall'una, ne dall'altra part. E le debt Linee secondo
l'abilita de'i Luoghi si faranno chiare, e manifest colli termini o di Colli,
e Boschi, o di Fiumi, and acque correnti, and ove il luogo non dara l'evidenza,
si poneranno segni di Fosse, o Pali, o Colonne, come fra li Commissarii d'ambe
le parti destinati a questa designazione di commune concerto si trovara a
proposito; e perch debt Fortezze nel possesso della Republica habbiano anche
in front spazio convenienti di Territorio, all Fortezze di Cnin, Verlika, e
Sing, Duare, e Vergoratz, e Ciclut, si assignara dalli Commissarii lo spazio di
un'ora di Paese, con rettitudine o linea semicircolare, conform lo permettera,
o lo richiedera la convenienza del Terreno; la Fortezza di Cnin havera il suo
fianco verso le parti della Croazia, sin'al Confine del Cesareo Dominio, senza
verun pregiudizio delli tree Dominii, che haveranno in quella part li termini
delli loro Confini, ma si havera sempre da osservarsi il Jus accordato a cadaun
di questi tree Dominii per questa universale Pace.

La sudetta linea si osservara dall'una, e dall'altra part; ma se vicino, o
dentro in quella, venisse a restare qualche Fortezza dell'Eccelso Imperio,
restando nelle spalle di quella il suo Territorio intiero, nella front
semi-circolarmente havera da goder il Terreno posto dentro la circonferenza
parimente dello spazio d'una ora, e per la Fortezza di Ciclut parimente nella
front si dara il territorio nello spazio di un'ora, e nel fianco fuori della
linea lo spazio di due ore di Terra, tirandosi una linea retta sin'al Mare.

Et in questa forma, e regola essendo distinto il Confini, e posti li termini,
e separate le Terre da possedersi, si osservaranno inviolabilmente, e senza
veruna mutazione; e se alcuno may havera l'ardire di violare qualche segno, o
di trasgredire qualche termine, e gli Uffiziali ancora, che mancaranno, nella
dovuta cura col meritato castigo delli delinquenti, tanto dall'una, quanto
dall'altra part, saranno severamente puniti.

E se a caso li Commissarii havessero l'incontro di qualche difficolta, che non
potessero accordarsi: informaranno li loro Padroni sinceramente, e realmente,
affinche cogli Usfizii delli Rappresentanti delle Maesta Cesarea, e
Brittannica, e degli alti Potenti Stati Generali delle Provincie Unite presenti
alla fulgida Porta si definisca amichevolmente: E per simile od altra
qualsivoglia differenza di Confine non si venira ad alcuna ostilita, ne
s'intorbidara la quiet delli Sudditi, ne s'intendera alterare la Pace
conchiusa coll'Eccelso Imperio.

IX.
Il Territorio, e li Distritti della Signoria di Ragusa saranno continuati
colli Territorii, e Distritti dell'Eccelso Imperio, levandosi ogni ostacolo,
che impedisce la continuazione, e la communicazione delle Terre della detta
Signoria colle Terre del medesimo Imperio.

X.
Nella vicinanza di Cattaro, Castelnuovo, e Risano, essendo attualmente nel
possesso, e Dominio della Republica di Venezia, restino nel pacifico possesso,
e Dominio della medesima Republica, colle lora Terre; e l'istesso s'intenda per
qualunque altra Fortezza in quella part essistente attualmente nel possesso
della medesima. E li Commissarii, che saranno destinati dall'una, e l'altra
part, siino d'esperimentata probita, affinche senza alcuna propria passione,
giudicando realmente questo importante affare, anco in quella part separino li
Territorii, e li distinguano con evidenti segni, siche si levi l'occasione
d'ogni torbidezza, ma da quella part ancora si avertisca, che non s'interrompa
la continuazione intiera delle Terre di Ragusa, con quelle dell'Imperio.

XI.
Dovendost cominciare la designazione del Confine di ambe le parti in Dalmazia;
e nella part di Cattaro al primo tempo che sara commodo, li Commissarii
Deputati a questa opera corrispondendo con previi avisi faranno la loro
congiunzione in luogo conveniente, con comitiva di Gente militare bensi, ma
pacifica, e quieta, d'ugual numero, e coll'ajuto d'Idio cominciaranno la loro
funzione dal giorno dell'Equinotio de'i 22/12 Marzo dell'anno corrente, and
adopraranno ogni diligenza nella distinzione dell'uno, e dell'altro Confine
delle sudette parti, affinche con prestezza finiscano nel termine di due Mesi,
e piu presto, se si puo fare.

XII.
Quanto piu e desiderata la fermezza dell'amicizia, e la quiet delli Sudditi
di ambe le parti, tanto piu devono essere ugualmente abominati quelli, che
portati dal reprobo loro o genio, o costume, anco nel tempo di Pace con
ladronecci, and altri ostili essercizii intorbidano la tranquillita del
Confine, percio ne dall'una part ne dall'altra si dara ricetto, o fomento a
tali forusciti di qualsivoglia sort, ma saranno perseguitati, presi, e
consegnati, accio che ad essempio di altri siino col meritato castigo puniti, e
sara per l'avenire proibito l'appoggio, and il mantenimento di questi mali
Huomini.

XIII.
A cadauna delle parti sia lecito di risarcire, riparare, e fortificare le
posseduto Fortezze, ma non gia di fabricarne di nuovo altre Fortezze, appresso
il Confine, o le Fortezze demolite dalla Republica di Venezia nelle Sponde
della Terra ferma; Per la commodita pero de'i Sudditi sia lecito di porre
Borghi, e Villaggi per tutto, osservandosi tra di loro pacificamente ogni buona
corrispondenza, e vicinanza, e contenendosi nelli proprii termini; e se a caso
succedesse fra lora alcuna differenza, subito convenendo li Prefetti del
Confine d'ambe le parti amichevolmente, e con ogni giustizia levino l'occasione
di qualsivoglia contrasto.

XIV.
Tanto per la Religgione, e par la liberta, e permuta degli Schiavi, quanto per
il Traffico, si osservara lo Style, e tenore delle antecedenti Capitolazioni, e
sara lecito all'Ambasciatore della Republica di portarne le sue ulteriori
istanze al Soglio Imperiale: Intanto circa il Traffico siano confermati anco
per questa Pace li sacri commandamenti concessi peravanti alla Republica, and
il Traffico havera da godere la sua forma, che haveva avanti questa ultima
Guerra, e li Mercanti della Nazione Veneta tutti li Privileggi, che le sono
stati concessi.

XV.
Sin' al giorno delle immediate Sottoscrizzioni fra li Plenipotenziarii
dell'Eccelso Imperio, e della Republica di Venezia, dal giorno della
Sottoscrizzione delli Plenipotenziarii di Sua Maesta Cesarea, e di Polonia
dell'accordato per la Republica, deve cessar ogni ostilita d'ambe le parti
tanto per Terra, quanto per Mare; and osservarsi ogni buona corrispondenza, and
affinche li Rettori di ogni Confine habbiano la notizia di questo Armistizio,
si pone per le parti di Bosnia, Albania, e Dalmazia il termine di trenta
giorni, e per le parti dell'Isola di Candia, e di Morea, e gli altri Confini di
quelle parti, si pone il termine di giorni quaranta, doppo e dentro quali
termini al possibile dal canto dell'Eccelso Imperio, e dal canto della
Republica di Venezia non si contravenira ad alcuno di questi Articoli, che si
potranno osservare.

Si concede inoltre alli Sudditi una vera, and universale amnestia, e
qualsivoglia loro fatto, o delitto commesso in tempo di Guerra, passando in
totale oblivione, nissuno di essi, come delinquente, sara per l'avenire
castigato, e molestato.

OTTOMAN Empire, AND Most Serene Republic of VENICE.
THE Treaty of Peace between the Sublime Ottoman Empire, and the most Serene
Republic of Venice, concluded in the Congress of Carlovitz in Sirmium, under
Tents, the 26th Jan. 1699. The Ambassadors there present on the part of the
Sublime Empire, were the most Illustrious and most Excellent Signiore's, Mehmet
Effendi, Great Chancellor, and Alexander Mauro Cordato, and on the part of the
most Serene Republic the most Illustrious and most Excellent Signior Charles
Ruzini, Knight. The Mediators, the most Illustrious and most Excellent Signiore's
William Pagett, Ambassador of his Britannick Majesty, and James Colyer
Ambassador of the High and Mighty States General of the United Provinces;
besides, the most Illustrious and most Excellent Signiore's, Ambassadors
Plenipotentiaries of his Coesarean Majesty, and of Poland, etc.

I.
THE Morea, with all its Cities, Fortresses, Castles, Lands, Villages,
Mountains, Rivers, Lakes, Woods, Ports, and every thing else, that is found
within the Circumference of it, now in the Possession of the Republic of
Venice, shall remain peaceably in the Possession and the Dominion of the said
Republic, as it stands Bounded by Sea and by Land, by that Line where remain
the footsteps of the Ancient Wall, so that from within the Morea, that Land
shall not be Extended any farther toward the Terra Firma, nor on the side of
the Terra Firma shall they exceed these Limits of the Morea.

II.
The Terra Firma that is in the Possession of the Sublime Empire, shall remain
entirely in the Possession and Dominion of the said Empire, exactly in the
State it was in, in the beginning of the last War. The Fortress of Lepanto
shall be Evacuated by the Republic of Venice, the Castle of Rumelia on the
side of Lepanto, shall be Demolished, and likewise the Fortress of Preveza
shall be Demolished, and the Terra Firma on that side shall be left in its
first entire State.

III.
The Isle of St. Maura, with its Fortress, and that Entrance upon the Bridge
called Peracia, without any farther Extension of it toward the Terra Firma,
and the Island of Leucade adjoining to St. Maure, shall remain in the
Possession and Dominion of the Republic of Venice.

IV.
The Evacuation of Lepanto, and the Demolishment of the Castle of Rumelia, and
of Prevesa, shall be performed immediately after the Separation made of the
Limits of Dalmatia; and in the mean time to prevent all Hostilities and all
Occasions of Complaint, the Garrisons of the Three said Places shall keep
themselves at Home, and shall not make any Excursion into the Terra Firma, nor
any Demand upon what pretense soever, and the Inhabitants of the said Places
may either stay behind, or go away, without any Violence to be used toward 'em.

V.
The Gulphs that are betwixt the Terra Firma and the Morea, shall remain in
Common, and each Party does oblige it self to Clear and Preserve 'em free from
Robbers.

VI.
The Islands of the Archipelago, and of those Seas shall remain in the State
they were before the beginning of this last War, in the possession of the
Sublime Empire, and the Republic shall not pretend from 'em any Duties or
Contributions, or any thing else introduced in the time of the present War.

VII.
For the time to come, the Sublime Empire shall not pretend from the Republic
of Venice, or from the Inhabitants, any Pension passed or future upon account
of the Island of Zante. The Island of Egina, with its Fortress being adjacent
to the Morea, and in possession of the Republic of Venice, shall in its
present State remain in the Possession and Dominion of that Republic.

VIII.
In Dalmatia, the Fortresses of Cnin, Sing, Ciclut, and Gabella, being at
present in the Possession and Dominion of the Republic of Venice, shall remain
in the quiet Possession and Dominion of the same; but because the Limits ought
to be put into such a Form, that Possessions may be distinguished, and the
Subjects of both Parties rest in Quiet and Tranquillity; and that they may not
come to any sort of imaginable Difference, which might Disturb the Peace of the
Confines, it is agreed, that a straight Line be drawn from the Fortress of Cnin
to the Fortress of Verlika, and from that to the Fortress of Sing, and from
that to the Fortress of Duare called Zadveria, and from that to the Fortress of
Vergoratz, and likewise from that to the Fortress of Ciclut and Gabella a
straight Line shall be drawn, and thus the Confines shall be separated, so that
within the Lines toward the Venetian Dominion and the Sea, all the Lands and
Districts, with the Castles, Forts, Towers, and enclosed Places, shall remain
in the sole Possession and Dominion of the foresaid Republic, and the Lands
and Districts, which shall be without the said Line, shall remain in the
Possession and Dominion of the Sublime Empire, with all the Castles, Forts,
Towers, and enclosed Places that are there, and for the time to come no sort of
Encroachment, Extension, or Restriction on one side or other shall be
permitted: And the said Lines, according to the nature of the Place, shall be
made plain and manifest by the Boundaries either of Hills or Woods, or Rivers
or Currents, and where the place will not afford the evidence of such Marks, there
shall these Distinctions be made by Ditches, or Pales, or Pillars, as shall be
agreed by the Commissaries of both Parties by common consent designed for this
purpose, and that these Fortresses might have in the Front of 'em, a convenient
space of Territory; The Commissaries shall assign a quantity of Land of about
one Hour (about three miles) to the Fortresses of Cnin, Verlika, and Sing,
Duare, and Vergoratz, and Ciclut, to be measured either in a right or
semicircular Line, according as the Convenience and Circumstances of the Land
will permit; the Fortress of Cnin shall have its Flank toward the Parts of
Croatia, even to the Confines of the Caesarean Dominion, without any prejudice
to those Three Potentates, the Boundaries of whose Dominions terminate
thereabouts; but the Rights accorded to each of these Three Governments by this
Universal Peace shall always be observed.

The foresaid Line shall be observed by each Party, but if in the Neighborhood
of it, or within it, there happens to be any Fortress belonging to the Sublime
Empire, which just behind it has an entire Territory belonging to it, then
shall it enjoy from the Front the quantity of Land of an Hour, Circumscribed
within Semicircular Circumference; and as to the Fortress of Ciclut, that shall
likewise have from the Front a Territory of one Hour, and in the Flank, besides
that Line, the space of two Hours of Land, to be measured by a right Line to
the Sea.

And in this Form, and by this Regulation, the Confines distinguished, and the
Limits settled, and the Lands of each Possession separated, shall be inviolably
observed, and without any alteration; and if any one shall have the Boldness to
violate these Marks for Boundaries, or commit Trespasses on these Limits; and
even Officers that shall be wanting of a due Care in punishing Delinquents,
shall be severely punished, as well on one side as on the 'tother.

And in Case the Commissaries shall meet with any Difficulty which they cannot
Agree, they shall truly and sincerely inform their Patrons, to the end that by
the good Offices of the Representatives to the Fulgid Port of their Caesarean
and Britannick Majesty's, and of the High and Mighty States General of the
United Provinces, the matter may be amicably determined, and from any such like
Difference about the Confines, no Hostilities shall ensue, nor shall the peace
of the Subjects be disturbed, nor shall it be interpreted to break the Peace
concluded with the Sublime Empire.

IX.
The Territory and Districts of the Signory of Ragusa, shall continue joined to
the Territories and Districts of the Sublime Empire, and all Obstacles shall be
removed that may hinder the Continuation and Communication of the Lands of the
said Signory with the Lands of the foresaid Empire.

X.
All in the Neighborhood of Cattaro, Castelnuovo and Risano, that is actually
in the possession and Dominion of the Republic of Venice, shall remain in the
peaceable Possession and Dominion of the said Republic, with all the Lands
appertaining; and this same is to be understood of any other Fortress on that
side being now actually in the possession of the said Republic; And the
Commissaries that shall be appointed on one side, and the other, shall be Men
of an Experienced Probity, that they may without partiality and prejudice,
equally decide this important Affair; And here two Separations shall be made by
evident Signs, that all occasions of Disturbance may be removed, but good
notice is to be taken, that the said entire Continuation of the Lands of Ragusa
be not interrupted.

XI.
The Distinction of the Limits on both sides in Dalmatia and about Cattaro,
being to be set on foot as soon as ever the Season will permit, the
Commissaries designed for this work giving previous Advices, they shall indeed
have a Military Attendance, but a peaceable and quiet one, of equal number on
each side, and by the help of God they shall enter upon this Office on the day
of the Equinox of this instant Year, viz. 12/22 March, and shall in the
foresaid Places use all their Diligence in distinguishing and separating one
Confine from the other, that they may with Expedition finish the matter in two
Months and sooner if it be possible.

XII.
As the Continuance of the Friendship and Quiet of the Subjects on both sides
is earnestly desired, so ought those to be equally abominated, who, carried on
by their own ill Disposition or Custom do in the time of Peace, with Robberies,
and other hostile Acts, disturb the Tranquillity of the Confines; therefore no
Reception nor Encouragement shall be given to these Banditti of what sort
soever by either Party, but they shall be pursued, taken, and delivered up,
that for an Example to others, they may undergo their deserved Punishment, and
for the time to come all Assistance and Maintenance shall be forbid to be given
to such evil Men.

XIII.
It shall be lawful for each Party to amend, repair, or fortify the Fortresses
in their Possession, but not to build Fortresses anew near the Confines, or to
rebuild the demolished Fortresses of the Republic of Venice, on the sides of
the Terra Firma; But for the Convenience of the Subjects, it shall be lawful
for them any where to erect open Towns or Villages, maintaining peaceably
amongst themselves good Correspondence and Neighborhood, and containing
themselves in their proper Bounds; and if by chance any Difference happens
amongst them, the Governors of the Confines for both Parties meeting peaceably
amongst themselves, shall with all Justice take away the occasion of any manner
of Dispute.

XIV.
The Ancient Method and the Tenor of the Antecedent Capitulations shall be
observed as well in the matter of Religion, and Liberty, and Exchange of
Slaves, as in Traffic; and it shall be lawful for the Venetian Ambassador to
lay his farther Demands on these Subjects, before the Imperial Throne: In the
mean time the Sacred Edicts granted heretofore to the Republic, stand also
confirmed by this present Peace and Traffic, shall enjoy the same Form it had
before the last War, and the Merchants of the Venetian Nation all the
Privileges that have been granted to 'em.

XV.
All Hostilities shall cease, as well by Land as by Sea, and a good
Correspondence be maintained, as well from the day of the immediate
Subscriptions of the Plenipotentiaries of the Sublime Empire, and of the
Republic of Venice, as from the day of the Subscription of the
Plenipotentiaries of his Cesarean Majesty and of Poland to this Agreement by
the Republic; and that the Governors of the Confines may have notice of this
Truce, for the Countries of Bosnia, Albania, and Dalmatia, Thirty days are
appointed, and Forty days for the Parts about the Island of Candia and the
Morea, and all the other Confines on that side; and after and within those
Terms, as far as possible, neither on the part of the Sublime Empire, nor on
the part of the Republic of Venice, shall any Contravention be made to these
Articles, which can any ways be observed.

Moreover, by these Presents, a true and universal Amnesty is granted to all
Subjects upon the account of any Fact or Crime committed during the War, all
those things shall be passed over in Oblivion, nor shall any one for the time
to come upon that account be punished or molested as a Delinquent.

Constantinople, of the 12/22th of February, 1700.
ON the 29th of January, O.S. Count Otting the Emperor's Ambassador, made his
public Entry here: First, marched the Basha of Nicopoli, with his Retinue, who
conducted the Ambassador from Rutsick hither; after him an Oda of Janisaries,
with their Aga and Officers; then came the Dutch Ambassadors Gentleman of the
Horse, his led Horses, my Lord Pagett's Secretary, with three Gentlemen, and 12
Men in Liveries, all the English Nation; and then followed the Chiousses,
Vizier Agas, the German Ambassadors Officers, five Led Horses, the Gentlemen
Hautboys, Trumpeters, Noblemen, and he himself on Horseback, having 20 Trabants
on both sides, his Drugoman, and the rest of his Retinue: He came in by
Adrianople Gate, through part of the City, and out again by Fenar-Gate on the
Waterside, so to Ujup, Kehathana; and finally to Pera, where he is lodged in
Hattum Hussein Aga's House, not far from my Lord Pagett's.

The ^3/13th Instant he had his Audience of the Vizier, where he was Clothed
with a Sable Vest, and his Gentlemen to the number of 100 with Caftans.

The 6/16th his Excellency went in Pomp to the Sultan: The reason why he had
his Audiences so soon, is, because the Turks Ramazan or Lent begins on Friday
the 9/19th, and therefore they could not then receive him with the usual
Ceremonies.

There being here at present more Ambassadors than has been seen these 18
years, there passes a great many Visits between them; my Lord Pagett has been
the 19th of January to Visit the French Ambassador, and he my Lord the 1st
instant; on the 5th my Lord went to the Venetian Ambassador, and the 7th to the
Emperors: The 8th, The French Ambassador sent a Gentleman to Count Otting, to
Compliment him upon his Audience of the Sultan, adding, that he hoped to have
the Honor to Salute him, and doubted not but that his Excellency (according to
the Custom of this place) would see him before any other Ambassador; upon which
Count Otting sent a Gentleman to the French Ambassador to assure him of his
Intention to keep Friendship and good Correspondence with him; but as for the
Visits, he could not but observe the Custom practiced in all the Courts of
Christendom, to pay the Visits in the order as they were given him; and as the
English Ambassador had first sent to him to felicite his Arrival, and had
visited him in Person, he could not but repay him the first Visit; whereupon
the French Ambassador told the Gentlemen, Je suis fache que de la maniere que
les chooses sont, je ne puis pas me donner l'honeur de salver son Excellence;
time will show if he persists in this Resolution. The Venetians are also much
Incensed against the Hollander, for having Visited the Imperial Ambassador the
first, and thereby Usurped, as they say, their Right of Precedence.

I will trouble you further with the Description of my Lord's Cavalcade when he
delivered the King's Letters.

His Excellency with his Retinue went on Horseback from his Palace to the
Waterside, where 40 Boats, each with 7 Oars on a side, were prepared for the
Transportation of himself and his Retinue: He Embarked, and in his passage was
Saluted by the K. William and Dalaware, two English Ships then in Port, which
had placed themselves in the middle of the River for that purpose: Being landed
on the other side, we found our Horses in a readiness, and every thing disposed
to begin a regular March: First went six Janisaries, then the Gentlemen of the
Nation all mighty well mounted, and their Horses richly accoutred; then 50 of
his Excellencies Liveries, two and two, his 16 Interpreters, his Gentlemen of
the Horses at the Head of 7 led Horses; after that, the Honorable Thomas
Pagett, encompassed with Footmen, two of which held the Reins of his Bridle, he
himself carrying the King's Letters at Arms length: After him went his
Excellency, preceded by 6 Pages, and surrounded with Heydukes and
Selict-Cohadars, his Excellencies Gentlemen and Officers to the number of 30,
all well mounted. In this manner we rode through the Principal Streets of
Constantinople to the Grand Visier's Palace, where his Excellency wa^ received
with all the Demonstrations of Civility and Respect, he himself being first
Vessel by the Vizier Azem, then such of his Retinue as were thought by his
Excellency deserving that Honor. The Ceremony being over, his Excellency
returned in the same manner to his Palace, where was prepared a sumptuous
Entertainment for all that accompanied him.

On the 16th of February, N. S. the Turkish Ambassador had Audience of the
Emperor, and was conducted to the Palace. The Emperor received him in the
Council Chamger, seated on his Throne under a rich Canopy, and attended by his
Principal Ministers of State, and other Persons of the first Quality: The
Ambassador when he entered the Room, made a low Reverence, another in the middle
of the Chamber, and the third near the Throne. He went up the Steps of the
Throne, presented his Credentials, and laid them on the Table that was before
the Emperor, and then returned to the Place, where he made his Speech in his
own Language, containing an Assurance of the Sultan his Master's Friendship,
and sincere Intentions, strictly to observe the Treaty between the two Empires
lately concluded, which being interpreted by the Sieur Della Torre, the Emperor
commanded Count Caunitz, Vice Chancellor of the Empire, to return an Answer,
which he accordingly did in High Dutch, and the same was Interpreted to the
Ambassador by the Sieur Della Torre. Then the Ambassador ordered hi Steward to
bring in the Grand Signior's Presents; a List of which he laid upon the Table,
with a Letter from the Grand Vizier, and going once more up the Steps to the
Throne, kissed the Border of the Emperor's Robe, his Attendants at the same
time making a very low Reverence. After which the Ambassador withdrew, walking
backwards while he was in the Emperor's Presence, and making three Reverences
in like manner as when he came into the Room, and was reconducted to his House,
and nobly entertained.


A LIST of the Presents presented to the Emperor by the Turkish Ambassador.
A Large Tent or Pavillon, very richly adorned with Testons of Gold Embroidery,
the Staves finely gilt and painted. A Plume of Red and White Feathers, set with
52 Diamonds great and small. A Bridle covered with Gold, and enamelled with Red
and White, set with 531 Diamonds, and 338 Rubies; the Bit, Curb, and other
things belonging thereto, all of fine Gold. A pair of Stirrups of Gold, set
with 128 Diamonds, and 204 Rubies. A Housse wrought with Flowers in Gold,
richly set with Rubies, Pearls, and Emeralds. A great Silver Mace inlaid with
Gold, and set with 16 Rubies and 25 Emeralds, with Straps to hang it up by,
made of Red Brocado Silk embroidered with Pearl, Emeralds. A red Velvet Saddle
embroidered with Pearl, Emeralds and Gold. A Velvet Saddle-Cloth, embroidered
with 3 Gold Roses. A Sumpture-Case of Scarlet Cloth, embroidered with Gold. A
Bridle covered with Gold, enamelled with dark Blue, the Bit and other
Appurtenances of Gold; the whole set with 112 Emeralds, 381 Rubies, and 49
Diamonds. A pair of Silver-gilt Stirrups. A Housse, embroidered with 26 Roses
of Pearl and Coral. A Velvet-Saddle, wrought with Gold and Silver. A Velvet
Saddle-Cloth, embroidered with three golden Roses. A Sumpter-Case of Scarlet
Cloth, embroidered with Flowers of Gold. A Piece of Amber, weighing 89 Ounces.
Fifteen Bezoar Stones. Ten Lumps of Musk. Two Pieces of Cloth of Gold. Two
Pieces of Red Satin, wrought with Gold. Six Pieces of very rich Gold Brocado.
Four Pieces of Silk Brocado, wrought with Gold. Ten Pieces of fine Callico,
called Duezarhi. Thirty five Pieces of fine Callico, commonly called Imperial.
Twenty Pieces of fine Callico, wrought With Gold. Four Persia Carpets, wrought
with Gold. Four other Carpets of Turky-work. A Dun-coloured Horse of
Turcomania. A Bay Horse of Turcomania. A Light-dun Horse of the Country called
Beideleugh. A Bay Horse of Arabia. Two Silver Chains to fasten Horses to the
Stall. A Silver Trough for the Horses to drink in. Two Leopards covered with
Clothes of Persia Brocado, and tied with Silver Chains.

Particulars of the Presents which the Emperor by his Ambassador gave to the
Grand Seignior.
THirty-six Seiket Cups with Covers and Sotto Coppe. Twelve Ewers and Basins,
six of which were gilt. Ten hanging Clocks, in Silver embossed Frames. Eight
great Clocks, in form, like the Pedestal of a Pillar, and the Clock-work in the
middle. A curious inlaid Cabinet. Abundance of very rich Brocades. A great oval
Looking-Glass, in a square inlaid Frame. A great Silver Fire-Pan (alla Turca) 1
foot high from the ground, curiously wrought and very substantial. A Silver
Screen six foot high, very solid, and the top made like a Schollop Shell. A
Fire Hearth (alla Franca) the Bars of which were of polished Steel, the sore
part of it of Silver, at each end it had a pyramid of Silver, and in the middle
a great Ball. A pair of Tongs, Fire-Shovel and Proger of polished Steel, with
Silver Heads Twenty-four Silver Sconces, with Looking-Glasses in the middle of
them. Two great Silver Tables (alla Turca) at least an Ell in Diameter. Twelve
gilded Tumblers. Two great Silver embossed Dishes, at least 7 foot in Diameter.
Two great gilded Ewers and Dishes of the same bigness. Six great Silver
Flower-Pots. Six standing Lamps, emitting Branches like those in our Churches.
A Silver Fountain, 8 foot high, in Foliage-work. Two Frank Tables, and two pair
of Stands very prettily inlaid. Two standing Clocks, the Cases of which were of
the same Work. A great Looking-Glass set about with Stones of diverse colors,
having a Dial-Plate in the middle of it, and the Figure^ ingeniously cut.

The Last Account of Count TEKELY.
TEKELY was a Count of the Kingdom of Hungary, and one of the most Ancient
Families thereof, and one of the most Zealous Professors, and Assertors of the
Protestant Religion, which caused him to join with the Turks, through the whole
Course of the last Wars, of which we have given an ample Account in the due
places of this History, whereby appear the great Services which this Noble
Person did them, and how ill and barbarously they sometimes used him.

I have particularly instanced how this present Sultan being at Belgrade, where
having occasion for this Tekely's Services, he sent a Capugi-bashee or two, to
fetch him thither from Constantinople, where he had Lodged himself for Recovery
of his Health, being informed by the Physicians at Constantinople, that the Air
of that City was much better than that of Adrianople. The Officers who are sent
from the Grand Seignior to execute any of his Commands, do commonly perform
them without any Consideration, or Ceremony, or Respect to the Person to whom
they are sent, and so they did to Tekely, whom finding in his Bed, laboring
under a grievous Fit of the Gout, they rudely forced him to arise, and without
any Remorse, threw him into a Wagon, and hurried him away to Belgrade, to
receive such Commands as the Grand Seignior had to employ him in; and on all
Occasions as the hopes of a Peace appeared, the Neglects put upon him did daily
increase.

It is commonly the Humor of the Turks, after they have done with the Service
of any Person, never more to treat them kindly, nor if they can to suffer them
to Live: Of which we have a fresh Instance by Letters of the 15th of July last
from Constantinople, which tell us, That the Chimacam of that place had
received an Express Command, or Decree, from the Sultan, to Exile or Banish
Tekely, into some Island of the Archipelago.

At the first coming of this News Tekely was strangely Surprised, and was half
Dead with the Apprehensions thereof; the Remembrance of his Journey to
Belgrade, and Terrors thereof, were scarce out of his Mind, before another
Scene of Banishment was presented to him, into an Island where was no
Sustenance fit for his Weak Indisposed Body, nor no Consolation, or Comfort to
be expected from Society, or Conversation of Mankind; nor yet from his Wife
neither, who, poor Lady, by this hard Usage, was struck with an Astonishment,
and both joined together in their loud Exclamations against the Ingratitude,
and Tyranny of Princes, who have no Tenderness of Compassion for any but
themselves; for if they had had, they would never have exposed two such Noble
Families unto Ruin and Destruction.

After all which Hardship, it is believed, that the Turks will scarce suffer
them to arrive unto the Place of their Banishment, but by the way take their
Lives, as has been the Practice commonly amongst the Turks on the like
Occasions. And this sad Account shall suffice to put an end to the many
Tragedies of this History.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS Contained in this BOOK.
A.
AChmet Proclaimed Emperor, p. 398. His Character, ibid. and 399. Falls ill,
but recovers, 430. His Qualifications, 431. Sick of a Dropsy, 50x. Dies, p.
522. Achmet Aga defeated, p. 192. Sent to Belgrade to discover the state of
Alba Regalis, 276. Is taken, and his Confession, ib. Adrianople, Consultations
there, p. 424. Polish Envoy has Audience of the Tartar Han there, p. 512.
Affairs of the Turks in a doubtful Condition with the Muscovites, 13. Albanians
fall on the Turks, 270. Alba Regalis; the Grand Vizier there, 100. Pasha
thereof endeavors to secure it, 231. Its state, ib. In distress, 276.
Mutinies. 280. Ali Pasha made Grand Vizier, p. 511. Amanzega, (Bar. of) defeats
the Pasha of Gradisca, 287. Ancient Seat of Ladislaus Cziacchy plundered and
burnt, 352. Apasi, the Emperor, afraid of him, 3x. Assists the Malcontents,
ib. Seeks a Quarrel with the Emperor, 37. Plot against him, 40. His
Declaration, 92. Desires a Neutrality, 189. Is in distress, 193. Treaty between
him and the Emperor, 198. Orders sent to the Grand Vizier to relieve him, 199.
Sends Deputies to the Duke of Lorrain, 261. Apti, Pasha, Governor of Buda, 201.
He is Summoned to Surrender; and his Answer, 207. Killed, 217. Arad taken, and
in it a rich Booty, 186. Argos Castle described, 226. Turks retreat, and quit
it, 227. Surrendered, 228. Army: The Order of that of the Christians, 118. 126.
167. Mutiny in that of the Turks, 124. That of the Turks petition against
Solomon, 251. Disposition of that before Gran, 137. Number of that of the
Turks, 139. That of the Christians repasses the Danube, 142 That of the Turks
near Buda, 167. Ill Condition of that of the Turks, 171. That of the Christians
reinforced, 242. That of the Turks appears, 244. That of the Christians passes
the Drove, 250. News from that of the Turks, 253. They march to Constantinople,
ib. Inflexible, 255. Miserable, ib. Seditious, 302. That of the Christians
passes the Save, 307. Great Misery in that of the Turks, 424. Armies in sight
of each other, 168. March, 200. Arnauts List themselves under the Germans, 353.
Athens Besieged, 271. Taken, 272. Described, ib. Austria: States thereof
convened, 27. Auxiliaries of the Emperor, 157.
B.
BAden (Pr. Lewis of) at Ratisbonne, p. 280. His Character, 298. Marches toward
Gradisca, 307. Passes the Save; [313.] Is recalled to Vienna, [319.] Resolves
to attack the Seraskier, 341. Writes to the Vizier, 344. Marches to Nissa, ib.
Engages the Turks near Nissa, 345. Marches to Widin, 348. Is at Jagodina, 378.
Prepares to fight the Turks, 387. Views the Troops, 400. Baragotski and Smith,
Generals, defeated, 39; Barcan taken, 127. Barsfelt taken, 155. Basignani
(Engineer) fails in his Design, and is killed, 322. Bavaria (Elector of)
Marries the Emperor's Daughter, 156. Comes to the Camp before Newhausel, 166.
His Proceedings before Buda, 201. Secures the Works he had taken, 210. Comes to
the Camp at Salankemen, 238. Vizier's Tent allotted to him, 245. His Character,
298. Made General of the Emperor's Forces, the Duke of Lorrain being sick, 301.
Hastens to the Camp, 305. Prepares to march for Belgrade, 307. Returns to
Vienna, 314. Beck (Gen.) made Governor of Buda, 219. Beck, the Garrison
thereof, make a Sally, 395. Belgrade; the Grand Seignior there, 99. The Suburbs
thereof consumed by Fire, 308. Particulars of the Siege thereof, from 308 to
312. Taken again by the Turks, 383. Besieged by the Emperor, 504. The Siege
raised, 505. Bestrissa surrenders to the Duke of Lorrain, 263. Blockake of
Canisca and Great Waradin continued, 344. Bohemia: An Insurrection there, 52.
Appeased, ibid. Boldness of the Christian Soldiers, 203. Bosnia (Basha of)
endeavors to relieve the Turks and is repulsed, 273. Strangled, 288. Brave
offer made by an Engineer, 320. Brunzien taken by Storm, 509. Plundered and
burnt, 510. Buda: a new Vizier arrives there, 38. Tekeli received there, 92.
The Vizier thereof writes to the Grand Seignior, 124. Its Siege intended, 140.
Formed, 143. The Vizier thereof slain, 146. The Siege raised, 153. Ill
Accidents happen after it, 154. Proceedings at the Siege thereof, 148.
Arguments against the Siege thereof, but the Siege resolved on, 194. Its Pasha
changed, 195. City taken, 217. Budiani changes his side, 125.
C.
CAbals at the Port, 229. Calamata taken and demolished, 183. Camp of the
Christians increases, 110. That of the Turks opened, 118. Manner of that of the
Turks, 241. Ill Condition of that of the Christians, 152. That of the
Christians alarmed, 212. Marches against the Vizier, 319. At Alexin, 377.
Campaign of the Year 1692 ends, 443. Candia: the Pasha thereof put to Death,
156. Canina invested, capitulates, 390. surrenders, 291. Canisia refuses to
surrender, 329. Inclinable to capitulate, 368. Treats, 369. Surrenders 370. Its
Situation described, ib. Caprara (Count) recalled, 94. Licensed to return to
Vienna, 96. Commands in Hungary, 281. Commands at Belgrade, 317. Seizes on
Semendria, ibid. Caraccioli (Gen.) killed, 364. Caraffa (Gen.) goes to
Hermanstadt, 279. His Character, 298. Casseneck surrenders to the Turks, 367.
Cassovia yields to the Emperor, 29. The Inhabitants and Soldiers thereof fight,
32. Taken by Tekeli, 93. Described, 173. taken by Caprara, 174. Castle Nuovo
attacked, 272. Surrendered, 275. Caunitz (Count) treats with the Grand Seignior,
74. Ceremony of Crowning the King of Hungary, 264. Changes great in the Turkish
Court, 436, 437, 438, 501, 526. Chielifa surrenders, 183. Invested by the
Turks, 223. Relieved by the Venetians, ibid. Chiaus sent by the Army to the
Sultan, 251. Children of Frangipani, Nadasti and Serini change their Names, and
why, 30. Chimacham of Constantinople an Enemy to the French, 431. Chonad
defends it self against the Turks, 234. Christians forced from the Bridges,
105. Several of them killed, 107. Pass the Danube, 142. Defeated, and receive a
great Loss, 152. Five hundred put to the Sword, 154. Prepare to give Battle to
the Turks, 213. Gain an entire Victory over the Turks, 346. Cities Revolt to
the Emperor, 125. Claudiopolis described, 262. Its Conditions with the Duke of
Lorrain, ibid. Clergy endeavor to disturb the Diets, 75. Clin surrenders at
discretion, 327. Coin altered in Turkey, 445. Conditions demanded of the
Hungarians by the Turks, 23. Conduct ill of the Imperial Army, 552. Coningsmarc
advances against the Seraskier, 224. Engages the Turks and overthrows them, ib.
Falls ill, 320. Dies, 321. Considerations offered by the Turks, 353. Conspiracy
against the Vizier discovered, 302, 441. Constantinople: a Fire there, 5. A
Council held there, 6. The Inhabitants thereof possessed with a panick fear, 222.
Fires there 497, 502, 538. Copper-Money breeds Sedition in the Turkish Empire,
431. Copy of a Letter from Mr. Coke to Sir W. Trumbal, late Ambassador to the
Grand Seignior, 498. Corbelli destroys the Palanca of Bellingesh, 367.
Reinforces the Troops in Servia, 377. Corinth described, 270. Cornaro, (Gen.)
in Dalmatia, 314. Marches against Clin, 326. Designs against Narenta, 327.
Returns to Spalatro, ibid. Joins the Venetian Fleet, 363. Attempts to burn some
Turkish Vessels, ibid. Coron described, 177. Taken by Storm, 181. Council
General of the Turks called at Sophia, 347. Councils held about the Siege of
Buda, 200. Counties and Towns, several submit, 128. Croats take Behatz from the
Turks, 441. Cross set up instead of the Half Moon at Vienna, 122. Crown of
Hungary described, 140. Croy (Duke of) wounded, 119. Cruelties acted both by
the Imperialists and Hungarians, 35.
D.
DAmbi sent by the Venetians to confer with Liberachi, 358. Debates about a
Peace, 497. Debrezin taken by Count Strazoldo, 38. Redeems its self from Free
Quarters, 189. Deputies afraid to meet at the Diet at Presburg, 32. Designs to
surprise Tekeli, 348. Despot of Valachia submits, 280. Diarbekir, Pasha, put to
flight, 537. Diet at Cassovia, 24. The Emperor declares against it, 25.
Dissentions amongst the Turkish Militia, 246. Appeased with Money, ibid. Dobay
Castle surrenders, 554. Doge of Venice sick, 322. Continues so, 356. Recovers,
357. Sails for Culuri, 360. Relapses, 364. Returns home, 365. Donative refused
to the Soldiers, 529. Doria (Marquis of) sold for 60 Rix-Dollars, 377. Draco,
Bey, tortured, 3. Duare besieged and relieved, 176. Dunewalt (Gen.) with a
Party observes the Enemies Motions, 246. Marches to Kobas, 250. His Character,
299. Dutch troubled by the Turks, 11. Dutch Ambassador's Letter to the Emperor,
498.
E.
EArthquake at Smyrna, 301. At Sophia, 336. Edendorf, a Meeting there, 114. A
Council of War held there, ib. Embassy from the Poles and Moscovites to the
Emperor, 49. Emeric, a Jesuit, hinders the Agreement between the Emperor and
the Hungarians, 22. Emperor; his Grant to the Hungarians, 17. Prepares for War,
26. Denies the Maintenance of the Hungarians Privileges, and why, 30. Sends
Presents to the Grand Seignior, 31. His Declaration, 32. Enforced, 33. Alters
the Government of Hungary, ibid. Makes Applications to the Port, 38. Publishes
a Manifesto, 45. Satisfies the Malcontents, 78. His Camp, 97. Takes a view of
his Army, 98. Goes with the Court to Lintz, 101. Enters Vienna after the Siege,
121. Interview between him and the King of Poland, ib. Wants Money, 156.
Prepares for the next Campaign, 276. Encourages the Bulgarians and Rascians,
333. Makes Preparations against the Turks, ib. Ratifies the Treaty of Canisia,
370. Empress Crowned Queen of Hungary, 92. English Merchants troubled by the
Port, 8. Ambassador, a Trick put upon him, ibid. Trade in a bad Condition, 393.
Ambassador hastens to Constantinople, and makes his Entry there, 397. Erschet
holds out against the Emperor's Forces, 29. Surrenders, ibid. Esperies yields
to Tekeli, and is demolished, 93. Described, 160. Esseck, described, 171.
Taken, ibid. Burnt, 172. The Bridge ruined, 221. Abandoned by the Turks, 249.
Summoned by them, 385. They raise the Siege, 386. Esterhasi and Forgatz make
offers of Peace, 75. Made Palatine, 76.
F.
FAcket taken by the Rascians and burnt, 394. Faction against Kara Mustapha,
Grand Vizier, 6. Famine and Pestilence, a great one, 159. Fechedebator
surrendered, 339. Felsiat surrenders, 280. Ferislau taken by Tekeli, 338. Burnt,
348. Fight; a bloody one, 115. Another by Land and Water, 517. Another between
the Poles and Tartars, 524. Filiporich taken by the Venetians, 391. Finch (Sir
John) the English Ambassador, a Trick put upon him by the Port, 8. Flies kill
abundance of Cattle, 372. Forces; number of the Emperor's, 98. Number of the
Turks, 99. A List of those designed against Buda, 199, 200. Number of those of
the Circles, 162. Those of the Emperor join, 401. Forts, Schella and Scheinau
give Offense to the Turks, 38. France; the King thereof makes a Truce with the
Emperor, 139. Frangipani (Count) made Prisoner, 26. Tried and Executed, 30. His
Estate forfeited to the Emperor, 32. French Ambassador imprisoned, 7. A juggle
between them and the Turks, 8. Ambassador has an Audience of the Grand Vizier,
196. Persuades the Turks to fight, 399. They assist the Turks, 251. Desire to
engage the Turks to them, 261. King obstructs the War against the Turks, [314.]
Writes to the Pope, [515.] Their Cruelty in Germany, [316.] Encourage the Turks
to continue the War, 332. Endeavor to draw the King of Poland from the
Emperor, ibid. Banished the German Empire, 337. Obstruct the Peace between the
two Empires, 355.
G.
GAspar (Col.) killed, 319. General of Malta receives Audience of the Doge,
317. General Tax, 528. Generals of the Great Duke and Malta desire to return
home, 321. Germans blamed for not making a Peace with the Turk, 332. Contemn
their Enemies, 340. Defeated, 366. Quit the Blockade of Great Waradin, 384.
Germany alarmed by the Turks, 95^ Girolamo Garzani slain, 320. Gomenizze taken
by the Venetians, 183. Gondola, his Character, 299. Gran; the Siege thereof
resolved upon, 125, 128. Proposals concerning the State thereof, 128. A
Description of it, 129. Surrendered on Conditions, 130. Greek Patriarch a rash
Man, 548. Greeks in Scio favored by the Turks, 526. Grievances of Cassovia and
Epperies; together with all the other Protestant Cities and Towns in Hungary;
from 65, to 73. Guadagne (Duke of) joins the Venetian Fleet, 360. Gutta taken
by the Turks, 160.
H.
HAdgi Ali mutinies, 285. Kills the Aga of the Janisaries. ibid. Halmet
yielded, 280. Hanover (Prince of) killed, 393. Harscham; a Battle began there,
244. Hatwan surrendered, 219. Heemskirk (Mr.) sent home, 514. Herbert (Mr.) sent
Ambassador to the Turks, 444. His Letter to the Author, ibid. Herbeville (Col.)
ordered to recover Orsoua, 340. Defeats of a Party of Turks, and retires from
it, ibid. Heusler (Col.) his Successes, 160. Attacks a Convoy of the Turks, but
pays dear for it, 190. Wounded, 250. His Character, 299. Defeated, 377.
Hoffkirchen (Count) makes an Excursion as far as Esseck, 249. Attacked by Topal
Pasha, 306. Defeats him, ibid. His Letter to the Duke of Croy, 510. Holstein,
(Prince of) Commands the German Army, 353. Hungarians complain to the Emperor,
21, 22. Their Deputies return dissatisfied, 22. Treat with the Turks, 23. Their
Agents dismissed from Candia by the Grand Vizier, ibid. The Loyal part of them
Petition the Emperor, 27. They meet at Leusch, and require the maintenance of
their Privileges, 30. Their Grievances, 35. Zealous for their Religion, 37.
Hungary; the Original of the Troubles there, 15, and seq. The Clergy disturb
its quiet, 34. A War breaks out, ibid. Hussy (Sir Will.) chosen Ambassador
from England to Turkey, 397. His Death, 412.
I.
JAnisaries demand the Head of the Grand Vizier, 133. Choose a new Aga, 258.
Assault their Officers, 259. Jazlowitz taken, 155. Ibrahim Pasha put to Death
at Rhodes, 255. Illock abandoned by the Turks, 304. Imperialists revenge
themselves on the Hungarians, 34. Fight with the Poles, Tartars and Hungarians,
41. Overthrown, 42. Fifteen hundred revolt, ibid. Fall in the Pasha of
Newhausel, 44. Successful, 53. Possess themselves of Bridges and a Fort built
by the Turks, 239. Defeated near Dragoman, 352. Ill Conduct of their Army, 532.
Inclinations of the Turks toward a Peace, 553. Instances of Peace promote the
War between the two Empires, 436. Job (St.) invested by Caprara, is obliged to
surrender, 191. Joshua (Col.) revenges himself upon Strazoldo, 49. Falls off to
the Emperor, ibid. His Death, ib. Irrick surprised by the Christians, and much
Booty taken, 395. Ismael made Vizier, 286. Excuses himself from going to the
War, 288.
K.
KAlo besieged by Tekeli, 92. Kanisia straightened, 305. Kaposwar taken, 220. Kara
Kaia made Vizier, 134. Proposes Peace, which is disliked by the Grand Seignior,
135. Lingers under a Distemper, 186. Banished to Constantinople, 188. His
Estate seized, ib. Kara, Kiaja, his Character, 5. Karakowar taken 395. Kara
Mustapha, Vizier, his Character, 1. Marries his Daughter to the Grand
Seignior's Hazna Kajasee, 6. Treats the Christian Ministers contemptuously, 7.
Cuts off his Kaja, and why, 13, 14. Meditates a War with the Emperor, 15.
Resolves upon it, 39. His Death, 134. Kops, his Cruelty blamed, 42. Kremnitz
taken by Tekeli, 48. Kuperlee Pasha sent for and kindly received at
Constantinople, 253. Laid aside, 284. Sent to Canea, 287. Kupriglioli the Grand
Vizier dies, 39. Kuzlir Aga's Counsel against Regeb, 252.
L.
LAgos yields to the Germans, 301. League concluded between the Emperor and
King of Poland, 96. Leslie (Count) Sen. sent to Krembs, 105. Attends the Motion
of the Seraskier, 165. Expedition to the Bridge of Esseck, 171. Leslie (Count)
Jun. slain, 108. Leventz taken, 131. Liberachi encamped, 357. Purposes to join
with Bossina, ibid. Alarms the Venetians, 358, A Plot against him, ib. Excuses
his coming over to the Venetians, ib. His Compliment and Advice sent to the
Doge, 359. Threatens the Villages near Salona, 362. Fights, and is defeated,
ib. Lippa taken, 301. Surrendered to Genesis Veterani, 426. List of such as were
put to Death for a Conspiracy at Adrianople, 527. Lists of the Imperial and
Turkish Armies in the Plains of Salankemen, 237. Lithuania: the Forces thereof
come to the Duke of Lorain, 131. Loradin, (Marq. of) arrives at Constantinople
from France, 442. Permitted to go to Belgrade, ib. Lorain, (Duke of) Feasts the
Emperor and his Courtiers, 98. He puts all his Foot into Vienna; 103. Secures
Presburg, 106. Receives Letters from Vienna, 110. Meets with the King of
Poland, 114. Marches after the Seraskier, 150. False Letters delivered to him,
163. Sick, 211. Passes the Danube, 247. Possesses himself of Alba Julia, 262.
His Character, 299. Sick, 300. Lubkovitz suspected, and his Estate seized, 36.
Lugos taken, 394.
M.
MAhomet, Sultan, goes to Constantinople, 195. Is frighted at the tumultuous
Meetings of the Turks, and sends to them, 221. Endeavors to appease his Army,
255. Seeks to cut off his Brothers and Sons, 256. Is prevented and loses his
Authority, ib. Is deposed, 257. Mahomet, Pasha, put to flight, 268. Betakes
himself to Salona, 269. Maina described, 223. Malcontents of Hungary assemble
at Kivar, 22. Chief of them cited to Newsol, 25. Offer their Grievances to the
Emperor, ib. They fly into Moldavia, 29. Repent too late, 33. Their Obstinacy,
35. Hold a Conference, 37. Refuse to treat, 39. Successful, ib. and grow proud
therewith, ib. New Overtures made them, 40. Obstinate, ib. Joined by the Poles,
42. Take a Convoy of Money and Provisions, ib. Increase in their Forces, ib.
The Emperor sends to treat with them, ib. Propose to elect a King of their own,
43. New Offers made them, 49. They and the Turks intercept a great Convoy
belonging to the Emperor, 92. Put to flight, 106. Some of them fall off to the
Emperor, 137. Maltese Galleys join the Venetian Fleet, 361. Separate from them
again, 365. Malvasia blocked up, 357. Particulars of the State thereof, 360.
Surrenders, 389. Mamut, Pasha, flies upon a Report that the Christians were
marching against him, 352. Mantua (Duke of) comes to the Camp at Salankemen,
243. March of the Christian Troops to the Rendezvous, 400. Marsigli (Count)
Secretary to Sir Will. Hussy, 400. Himself and a Chiaus at Great Waradin, 427.
Marzamama takes the Command of the Turkish Fleet, 184. Megara burnt, 272.
Memoirs of Sir Will. Hussey's Reception and Negotiation at Belgrade, from 409,
to 423: Mines sprung, fired, etc. 111, 112, 115, etc. Mitra surrenders to the
Venetians, 271. Modon attacked, surrenders, 225. Mongatz blocked up, 189.
Besieged, and the Siege raised, 192. Monticuculi his Counsel to the Emperor,
53. Attacked by the Tartars, he makes his Escape with some Loss, 367. Morlaques
and Mainotes described, 175. The latter worst the Turks, 176. Morosini (Gen.)
draws into Winter Quarters, 183. Elected Doge of Venice, 313. His notable
Exploits, 388. Moscovites send an Ambassador into Poland, and to
Constantinople, 49. Make Peace with the Poles, 50. Fall from it and agree with
the Turk, ib. Send other Ambassadors to the Port, 51. Inclinable to a League
with the Venetians, 136. Treat with the Turks, 195. Moscovy (Czar of) sends
Ambassadors to Poland, 230. Mufti's Letter to the Scheriff, 520. Muran yielded
to the Imperialists, 29. Mustapha (Sultan) His Beginning, Character, and
Humor, 522, 523. His Severities, 529, 530. Gains great Honor, 532, Gives
Orders for his return to Adrianople, 533. Marches to Constantinople, 534. He,
with the Queen Mother leave Constantinople, 538. Mustapha Aga arrives at the
Imperial Court to renew the Treaty of Peace, 353. Mustapha Pasha his good
Qualities, 521. Mutability of the Turkish Court, 134. Mutinies at
Constantinople, 284. Mutiny against the Grand Vizier, 128. One prevented in the
Turkish Camp, 340.
N.
NAdasti (Count) contrives how to poison the Emperor, 22. Betrays Serini, 28.
Discovered to be in the Plot, 29. His Pardon denied, 30. Tried and Executed,
ib. His Estate forfeited to the Emperor, 32. Nagiferents; a Confident of
Wesselini seized, 29. Napoli di Romania described, 225. Navarin (New) attacked,
224. Capitulates and Surrenders, 225. Navarin (Old) Invested by the Venetians,
223. The Inhabitants treat and surrender, ib. Negropont; the City described,
315. When taken by the Turks, ib. Preparations by the Venetians to besiege it,
ib. Strength of the Turks in it, 316. The Country and Inhabitants described,
318. Neutra demolished, 100. Newburg (Prince of) his Character, 299. Newhausel;
a Plague there 49. Besieged, 98. Blockade, 159. Straightened, 162. Siege
resolved on, 164. and described, ib. Its Situation, 165. Town on Fire, ib.
Taken, and its dismal Condition, 170. Newstadt: the Treasure of the Bishop
thereof, 103. Nissa in want of Provisions, 368. Provided, 371. Invested, 377.
Straightly besieged, 378, Surrendered to the Turks, 382. Nogay Tartars described,
514. Novi delivered to the Turks, 394. Novigrad (Pasha of) strangled, 160. Its
description, 163. Noviporto; a design upon it discovered, 373.
O.
OEdemburg; the Emperor holds a Diet there, 75. Dissolved, 79. Officers changed
in the Turkish Court, 168. Oak, a Turkish Measure, what, 12. Olasch (Battle of)
539. Orlick (Baron of) defeats a Party of Turks, 234. Orovitza quitted by the
Turks, 249. Orsoua taken by Tekeli, 338. Burnt, 348. Surrendered to the Turks,
387. Ottoman Port in great disorder, 234. Overtures of Peace made by the
Emperor, from 55, to 73.
P.
PAget (Lord) arrives at Adrianople with the Character of Ambassador from
England to the Port, 498. Has an Audience, 499. His Letter to a Friend, 500.
His Letter to a Person of Quality at Vienna, 512. Continues at Adrianople, 523.
Palanca of Boscoua capitulates, 504. Palfi (Count) his Character, 299.
Particulars of the great Battle of Salankemen, from 401, to 408. Pasha of
Hungary ordered to assist the Malcontents, 40. Passage; a remarkable one, 320.
Patras taken, 268. Peace: Offers of it from the Turks, 347. The Instrument of
that between the Emperor and the Turk, in Latin, from 567, to 573. The same in
English, from 574, to 580. The Instrument of that between the Turk and
Moscovite, in Latin, from 581, to 582. That between the Moscovite and Turk, in
Latin, from 583, to 584. The first in English, 585, 586. The second, 587, 588.
The Instrument of that between the Republic of Poland and the Turk, from 589,
to 592. in Latin. The same in English, from 593, to 596. The Instrument of that
between the Republic of Venice and the Turk in the Venetian Tongue, from 597.
to 599. The same in English, from 600, to 602. Pedipol procures a Commission to
be Prince of Transylvania, but is opposed by Apafi and overcome, 43. Pentlow
(Sam.) an English Merchant at Smyrna, his ill Treatment by Kara Mustapha, Grand
Vizier, 2. His last Will, ib. Percilia routs a Body of Tartars, 395. Pernick
stormed and taken by the Christians, 374. Persian Ambassador at Adrianople 433.
Has Audience, ibid. Continues there against the Inclinations of the Turks, 434.
Takes his Congee, 442. Another arrives at Constantinople, 541. Has an Audience,
ibid. Departs, 543. Pest set on Fire by the Turks, 142. Abandoned again by
them, 201. Peterhasi relieves Cassovia, 174. Peter Waradin fortified, 401.
Piccolomini (Gen.) his Character, 299. Dispatched to Vienna, [319.] Reinforced,
he marches toward Pristina and Clin, 351. Retires to Nazianech, 352. Sick, yet
marches toward Prisseren, ibid. After to Panni, ib. Dies, 353. Plague; a
miserable one, 159. Plot discovered in Hungary against the Emperor, 24. Plots
contrived by Tekeli discovered, 233. of the French Discovered, 337. Poland; a
League perpetual between it and Moscovy, 196. A sham Envoy from thence, 513.
sent away with disgrace, ib. Poland (King of) gives leave to some of his Troops
to serve the Malcontents, 41. Marches into Transylvania, ib. Enters the
Turkish Camp, 120. His Elogium, 121. Declines the Siege of Gran, 129. Returns
home with his Army, 132. Recals his Forces, 138. His Actions in the Year 1684,
155. Poles press to have the Treaty signed, 52. Charge the Turks, 119. Put to
flight, 126. Deliberate again about fighting, ib. Fight again, 127. Two Polish
Gentlemen revolt, 41. Their Treachery discovered, ibid. Pope assists the
Emperor, 157. Possega quitted by the Turks, 250. Seasonably relieved, 281.
Prattick given to the Doge, 366. Preparations for a Battle, 401. For the
Turkish Fleet, 545. Presburg; a Diet held there, 32. Another, 36, 37. Debates
about relieving the Town. Secured by the Duke of Lorrain, 106. Presents sent by
the Grand Seignior to the Emperor, 604. Presents sent by the Emperor to the
Turk, 605. Preveza surrendered, 146. Principal Men in Asia put to Death, 399.
Proposals sent to the Turkish Army, are by them refused, 254. Propositions for
a lasting Peace offered at Constantinople by Mr. Herbert the English
Ambassador, from 445, to 496. Protestants guilty of a bloody Outrage, 35.
Present their Grievances and Address to the Emperor, from 79, to 92. Pyroth:
Commander thereof defeats a Party of 1500 Turks, 352. Taken 377.
Q.
Queen Mother dead, 133. Quinque Ecclesiae taken, 220.
R.
RAbata (Gen.) his Character, 298. Radimir abandoned by the Turks, 373.
Ragotski endeavors to reconcile himself to the Emperor, 27. Is pardoned, 28.
Conditions made with him, 32. Ragusean Ambassador imprisoned, 3. Rascians in
Arms against the Turks, [314.] Submit to the Emperor, [317.] Take two Places
and defeat the Turks, ib. Faithful to the Emperor, 368. Take more Booties, 443.
Ratza taken from the Turks, 281. Rebellion in Asia, 333. Reflections on the
Death of the English Ambassador, 496. Regeb gives Counsel, but not taken, 252.
Seized, but escapes, ibid. Taken, 254. Strangled, 258. Rejoicings at Venice for
their Victories over the Turks, 268. Relation of a Mutiny at Alba Regalis, 283.
Riccardi (Col.) examines the State of Alba-Regalis, 282. Desires a Parley with
the Pasha, ib. Leaves the Place, 284. Retardments to the Motion of War, 529.
Roman Clergy seize on the Protestant Churches in Hungary, 35, 36. Rome
obstructs the Peace between the two Empires, 355.
S.
SAlm (Prince of) his Character, 298. Salona surrendered to the Venetians, 270.
Santa Maura described, 144. Besieged and surrenders, ib. Saponara sent to
Belgrade, 94. Treats privately with Tekeli, 95. Save: Consultations to pass it,
305. The Heydukes pass it, ib. Savoy (Prince of) his Character, 299. Carries
the News of Victory to Vienna, 244. His Bravery, ib. Saxony (Elector of)
returns home, 122. Schaffenburg (Count) his Character, 299. Killed, 311.
Schlict defeats a Party from Great Waradin, 426. Schonot; it is Cruelty, 193.
Relieved by the Turks, 194. Schultz (Isle of) the Christian Infantry there,
100. Schultz (Gen.) forced to leave Ungwar, 162. Sits down before Esperies,
172. Takes it on Conditions, ib. Watches the Motions of the Seraskier, 208.
Scio taken by the Venetians, 518. Regained by the Turks, 525. Sea Fight, 392.
Secretary of Holland drubb'd, 4. Sedition in the Turkish Camp, 248. Seditious
Preacher, 519. Segedin besieged, 220. Taken, ib. The Garrison thereof surprise
Chonad, 395. Semendria taken by Storm, 382. Seraglio; the Pleasures thereof, 5.
Seraskier; his Original, 135. Comes to Belgrade, 139. Assaults the Christians,
142. Is repulsed and flies, 143. Endeavors to raise the Siege of Buda, 151.
Attacks the Christians in their Trenches, but is put to flight, 228. Flies to
Corinth, 226. Keeps a Guard on Negropont, 364. Serien (Count) his Character,
299. Serini (Count) his Lady disgusted, 22. He seems not resolved, whether to
join with the Rebels, or to continue in his Obedience, 25. Submits to the
Emperor, ib. Offers made him by Prince Lubkovitz, 26. Escapes from Chiaketorno,
ib. Is made Prisoner, ib. Justifies himself, 28. Tried and Executed, 30. His
Estate forfeited to the Emperor, 32. Serini (Young) restored to his Estate, 48.
Suspected and imprisoned, 53. Set at liberty, ibid. Setzin taken by the Poles,
132. Shitan Ibrahim made Vizier of Buda, 146. His Character, ib. His Cruelty,
149. Put to Death, 186. Sciaus (Capt. Pasha) Marches to relieve Coron, 179. Is
defeated with loss of a great Booty, 180. Retires to Napoli di Romania, 182. Is
driven into Rhodes, 183. His Character, ib. made General, 248. Declared Grand
Vizier, 251. Makes his Entry and salutes the Emperor, 257. Sighet streighnn'd,
305. Surrenders to the Emperor, 328. Described, 329. Simon-Torn taken, 220.
Skirmish between the Turks and Venetians, 317. Smith (Gen.) his Letter to the
Poles, 41. Soldiers take an Oath to reform the Government, 252. The Soffraw
granted to the Christian Ministers, 135. Solomon Aga pitched upon for Grand
Vizier, refuses it, 134. Solomon Pasha, his Reception by the Grand Seignior,
187. The Grand Vizier jealous of him, ib. He is made Vizier, ib. Troubles the
Christians, 314. Solomon, Kiaja, a threatening Expression of his to Kara
Mustapha Grand Vizier, 3. Solomon Sultan installed, 259. His Person, Character
and Qualities, ib. Visits his Brother Achmet, 260. takes upon him to govern,
287. Marches to Sophia, 336. Consents to a Peace, 347. His Death, 398. Solomon
Vizier taken, 252. Strangled, 254. Souches (Count) his Character, 299. Soyer
(Col.) defeated, 34. Spahies Mutiny and are punished, 185. They and the
Janisaries unite, 258. Return Home, 260. Sporke (Gen.) His Answer to the Turks,
27. Standard of Mahomet exposed, 286. Staremberg (Count) imprisoned, 25.
Wounded, 211. His Character, 298. Stephanopolis refuses to receive a German
Garrison, 300. Is obliged to surrender, ibid. Stiria promises Money to the
Emperor, 276. Storm upon the Danube, 517. Story of the Consul and a Jew, 546.
Strahina attacked by the Turks, 374. Strazoldo; fight between him and Col.
Joshua, 48. Strigonium besieged, 167. Succors sent by the Venetians to the
Cutzi, 314. Swedes come to the Siege of Newhausel, 164. To the Siege of Buda,
204.
T.
TAbor, (Isle of) its Description, 103. Taff, (Count) his Character, 299.
Tartars, a ody of them defeated, 107. Another Body defeated, 155. Barbarous
usage of the poor People, 367. Complaints against them, 424. Beaten, 525.
Withdraw, ib. Taxes great on the Christians, 398. Teftish Pasha created, 335.
The Nature of it, ib. One sent into Asia, 432. Tekeli (the Elder) chief of the
Rebels, 30. He dies, 31. His Castle surrendered, ib. Tekeli (the Younger)
appears in the Wars, 42. Succeeds Wesselini, 44. In love with Princess
Ragotski, ib. Defeats her Troops, ib. Offers new Grievances, 45. Proceedings
against him, ib. Master of the Field, ib. Writes Letters, 46. Revolts to the
Emperor, and is slighted, 48. Returns again to the Rebels, ib. Offers
Conditions, 74. A Plot to sieze him during (...) ^ruce, 75. Makes new
Propositions, 76. Called to the Diet, ib. His Answer, 77. Joins with the Turks,
ib. Emperor assents to his Marriage with Princess Ragotski, 93. His Successes
at Zatmar, ib. His Protestations, 97. Refuses to come to the Turkish Camp, 112.
Sends a Letter to the K. of Poland, 125. Sends Deputies to the D. of Lorrain,
128. Puts forth an Act of Pardon, 138. Writes to the Pope, 139. His Successes,
160. In disgrace with the Port, 185. Received again into Favor, ib. Receives
Aid from the Turks, 188. Marches to Mongatz, 191. With Money makes Levies, 232.
Enters into the Country near Segedin, where he is defeated and wounded, 233.
Writes to his Princess, 279. Defeated, ib. Is declared Prince of Transylvania,
374. His Declaration upon it, ib. Sends a Letter to his Princess, 377. Her
Answer, 378. Flies from place to place, 384. At Adrianople, 435. His Audience
with the Grand Vizier, ib. French Ambassador visits him, ib. He and the Tartars
sent away, ib. He is neglected, 535. His poor State and Condition, 548. His
great Afflictions, 550. His ill Treatment by the Turks, and Banishment, 606.
Tesfagee refuses to obey the Grand Seignior's Command, 285. He is slain, ib.
Teutonick Order: The Character of the Grand Master thereof, 33. Made Vice-King
of Hungary, ib. His Character, 34. Titul surrendered to the Turks, 401. Tornese
surrendered to the Venetians, 270. Tour (La) killed, 178. Transilvanians join
the Imperialists, 199. Treasure found, 112. Treaties between the Turks, Poles,
and Moscovites, 50. Of Peace laid aside, 423. With the Princes of the Empire,
157. Treaty between the Emperor and Malcontents, how broke off, 74. Between
the Poles and the Tartars, 161. Concluded with the Deputies of Transylvania,
229. Begun between the Emperor and the Turks, 331. Troubles at Constantinople,
251. Turkish Affairs in an ill Condition 518. Turkish Ambassador desires
Audience, 329. Order of the Solemnity thereof, 330. Another proceeds to Vienna,
348. Turkish Court in great Confusion, 347. Turkish Discipline, the manner of
it, 533. Turkish Fleet very weak, 313. Turks listen to the request of the
Hungarians, 23. Alarmed at the Germans appearing on their Frontiers, 27. Refuse
Assistance to the Malcontents, 31. The Reason why, ib. Assist them underhand,
36. Join with them, ib. Grow Proud, 38. Much enraged at the taking of Debrezin,
ib. Make Incursions, 40. Join with the Malcontents, 48 Fall off from the
Moscovites, 51. Jealous of Tekeli, 76. Appear before Vienna, 103. Summon the
City, 104. Batter it, 105. Discontents between them and Tekeli, 107. They are
repulsed before Vienna, and cover their Trenches, 108. Parties of them
defeated, 109, 112. In want of Forage, 111. Two thousand killed, 116. An
Account of their Forces, ib. How many killed in the Siege of Vienna, ib. Give
Ground, 119. Routed, 127. Pursued, ib. Prepare again for War, 157. Propose a
Treaty, 158. Slight the Poles, 161. Fall on the Baggage before Gran, 141. Are
put to Flight, and Defeated, ib. Two Parties of them Defeated, 148. Forces at
Sea, 158. Landforces defeated, 169. Propose a Treaty, ib. Defeated near
Esseck, 171. March to relieve Coron, 177. Take a Fort from the Venetians, 178.
Receive a great Defeat, 180. The ill State of their Affairs, 184. Corn scarce
among them, 195. Demand Hostages of Transylvania, Moldavia, and Valachia, 200.
A Body of them Routed, 220. Another put to Flight, ib. Meet Seditiously, 221.
Seek for Peace, 235. Resolve to Fight, 243. Routed, 244. Fly out of the Morea,
269. Burn and abandon Corinth, ib. Endeavor to take Singh, but are repulsed,
275. Attack the Malteses, 319. Receive a great overthrow, ib. Seek for Peace,
304. Fly from before Belgrade, 308. Sue again for Peace, 309. Assault the
Germans, but are repulsed with Loss. [314] Desire Peace, which the Emperor
unhappily refuses, [319.] Design against the Christians, 341. Defeated, 342.
Attack the Christians, ib. Are beaten and Retreat, ib. Fly to Potoschin, 343.
Abandon their Camp, and the Germans possess it, ib. Put to Flight, 346.
Defeated, 348. Forces Land at Negropont, 357. Return with Loss to Temeswaer,
387. Despise a Peace, 393. In hopes of Victory under their new Grand Vizier,
397. Falsify their Faith, 401. Pursued by the Rascians, 425. Resolve to
continue the War, 432. Repulsed from Titul and Fitz by the Rascians, 441.
Repulsed from Portsea, 443. Vigorously Attack Poroka, ib. Are repulsed, 444.
Design to recover Scio, 520. Many of them Drowned in the Waters in Asia, 503.
Averse to a Peace, with the surrender of Caminiec, 513. Regain Scio, 525.
Defeated, 537. Again worsted, 540. Inclinable to a Peace, 553.
V.
VAlior set upon by ten Turkish Vessels, after a bloody Fight is killed, 392.
Valona in fear by the Venetians, 390. Abandoned by the Turks, 391. Venier
killed, 364. Venetian Armada sails to Patrass, 266. Venetian Camp wasted with
Sickness, 318. Venetian Fleet Winters at Napoli di Romania, 356. Resolve to
Besiege Napoli di Malvasia, 389. Venetians troubled by the Port, 9. Their
Ambassador imprisoned, 10. Declare War against the Turks, 136. Their Reasons
for it, 137. Relieve Chielifa, 223. Anchor before Corinth, 269. Take Possession
of it, 270. Their Successes against the Turks, from 313, to 327. At Sea give
the Turks a great Defeat, 537. Veterani Routs the Tartars, 220. His Character,
299. Defeated, 531. Vicegrad described, 140. Stormed and taken, ib. Victory, a
wonderful one, 346. Vienna, a Plague there, 49. Fortified, 94. A great
Consternation there, 101. Garrisoned, 102. The number of the Garrison, ib.
Council appointed for Government of it, 103. A Fire there, 104. Staremberg,
Governor thereof, Wounded, 105. The Besieged make a Sally, ib. Spring a Mine,
107. A Letter shot into the Town, ib. The Turks spring a Mine, 108.
Counterscarp taken by the Turks, ib. Are in hopes of Relief, 113. Signs of
Approaching Succors, 116. Turks play their Cannon against it, 119. Joy within
the Town, 121. Virovitz surrendered, 148. Vizier of Buda, his great Power, 218.
Viziers, Four new ones of the Bench made, 303. Vizier (Grand) makes a Peace
with the Poles, 39, and why, ib. Accepts of the Conditions offered by the
Moscovites, 51. Publishes a Manifesto at Alba-Regalis, 100. In the Camp before
Vienna, 103. His Tents fall to the Lot of the King of Poland, 120. Complains
against the Pasha of Buda, 123. Strangles the Vizier of Buda, and other Pashas,
124. Excuses himself before the Grand Seignior, 132. Is acquitted, 133. Ordered
to stay at Belgrade, 230. Prepares for War, and sends to the Tartars, ib.
Endeavors to relieve Sighet, ib. Gives up the Seals, 286. Is killed, ib. The
new G. Vizier goes not to the War, 340. Marches to Nicopolis, 373. Invests
Belgrade, 382. Not inclined to a Peace, 397. Character of one, 434. Artifices
of his Son, ib. Seeks the Life of the Chimacam, which puts his own in danger,
436. Removed, and another instituted, 437. At Belgrade, 497. Sent to the Army,
502. Begins his March to Adrianople, ib. Deposed, 514. A new one, 515. His
Character, ib. Raises the Siege of Belgrade, 518. Sent for in have, 519. Delays
to return, 520. Put in fear, 522. Strangled, 529. Ungwar taken, 162. Vypalanca
burnt by Rabutin, 557.
W.
WAllestein (Count) sent into Poland, 95. His Business, ib. Walpo invested,
249. Surrenders, ib. Waradin (Great) Besieged, and Blockaded, 428, 429, 430. In
great distress, 438. Surrendered, 439. Wazia, attacked and taken, 154.
Wesselini dies, 44. Widen taken by the Germans, 349. A Place of much advantage,
350. Tartars retire from it, 376. Invested by the Turks, 378. Surrenders to
them, ib. Witzen, a Fight near it, 141. Wormb (Count) blamed, 45. Wuchin taken
by Dunewalt, 248.
Y.
YEdic breeds Disorders in Asia, 334. A Party of his Soldiers Defeated, 335.
Marches to Prusa, and defeats the Pasha, ib. Declared King of Anatolia, ib.
Besieges Angona, which ransoms it self, ib. Is defeated by the Teftish, and
killed, 336. Yeghen Commits some Outrages, 288. Entrusted with the Army, ib.
Demands the Seals of the Grand Seignior, ib. Mutinies, 304. Seizes on Hassan
Pasha, ib. Commits great Spoils, [318] His Fate, 333. Kills the Tartar Prince,
ib. The Father Meditates Revenge, but he is favored by the Grand Vizier, ib.
Commits all sorts of Outrages, 334. Commands issued from the Port to take him
dead or alive, ib. Flies, into Albania, ib. Is beheaded by Mamoot Bei, ib.
Z.
ZArnata taken by the Turks, 182. Zatmar invested by Apafi, 92. Siege raised,
ibid. Zelen surrenders to the D. of Lorrain, 263. Zemplin refuses to receive a
German Garrison, 29. Zerneck quitted by the Turks, 250. Zyclos taken, 221.
The End of the CONTENTS.

