Licensed,

Sept. 17. 1672. Roger L' Estrange.

JUDGMENT ON Alexander AND Caesar; And also on Seneca, Plutarch, and Petronius.

Translated out of the French.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for Jonathan Edwin at the sign of the three
Roses in Ludgate Street. 1672.

JUDGMENT UPON Alexander and Caesar.
IT IS a consent almost universal, That Alexander and Caesar have been the
greatest men of the world; and all those who have concerned themselves to judge
of them, have believed, they obliged Conquerors that have come after them, by
finding some resemblance between their Reputation, and their Glory. Plutarch
after having examined their Nature, their Actions, their Fortune, leaves to us
a liberty of deciding, which he durst not take. Montaigne more bold, has
declared himself for the first; and since the versions of Vaugelas and of D'
Ablancour have made these Hero's the Object of all our Converse. Every one has
taken part with the one or the other, according to his inclination or his
fancy. For my part, who have possibly examined their lives, with as much
curiosity as any one, I will not give my self the authoty to judge absolutely.
But if you will dispense with me, to tell you what I think; you shall have some
Observations I have made of the agreement and difference I find:

They both had the advantage of great birth: Alexander the Son of a
considerable King: Caesar of one of the chief Families of that Republic, whose
Citizens esteemed themselves more than Kings. It seems, the Gods were willing
to declare the future greatness of Alexander, by Olympia's dream, and several
other presages: his own haughty inclinations from his infancy, his jealous
tears for the glory of his Father, and the judgment of Philip, who believed him
worthy of a greater Kingdom than his own, seconded the advertisement of the
Gods. Many things of this Nature have been no less remarkable in Caesar: Sylla
saw in him (young as he then was) many Marius's. He dreamed that he lay with
his Mother, which the Augurs interpreted, that the Earth, the Common Mother of
all men, should be submitted to his power. He was known to weep, looking on the
Statue of Alexander, that he had yet done nothing, in an age, wherein that
Conqueror had made himself Master of the Universe.

The Love of Learning was a passion common to both: But Alexander every way
ambitious, was touched with a jealously of superiority in his studies; and his
chief design for knowledge, was to be more knowing than others; witness his
complaint, that Aristotle had published certain secrets, which should have been
known to him alone; he declared, that he aspired to raise himself above other
men, no less by Letters than Arms. Having a curious and passionate spirit, he
pleased himself closely with hidden mysteries, and was particularly affected
with Poesy.

There Is none but have heard of the passions he had for Homer; and who is
ignorant, that in favor of Pindar, the houses of his Descendants were saved in
the ruin of Thebes, and general desolation of his Country.

The spirit of Caesar, somewhat less vast, reduced Sciences to his use; and he
seemed, not to have loved learning but for its benefits. In the Philosophy of
Epicurus, which he preferred before all others, he principally applied himself
to what regarded man: but it appears, that Eloquence had his first endeavors,
as knowing it necessary in the Commonwealth to arrive at the greatest things;
he pleaded in the Rostra, at the death of his Aunt Julia, with great applause;
he accused Dolobella; and in the end made that excellent and delicate Oration
for saving the lives of those Prisoners taken in Catalines Conspiracy.

There is left to us nothing that we can assuredly say was Alexanders, unless
some divine sayings, of an excellent and admirable composure, which leave with
us an impression equal to the greatness of his Soul, and the vivacity of his
Spirit.

But the greatest difference I find in their Sentiments, is, in the matter of
Religion. For Alexander was devout, even to Superstition, fering himself to be
led away by Augurs and Oracles; which, besides his natural inclination, may be
attributed to his ordinary reading the Poets, who begot in men a fear of the
Gods, and did indeed compose all the Theology of those times.

As for Caesar, whether it were his temperament, or his having followed the
Opinions of Epicucurus, he passed to the other extremity. He expected nothing
of the Gods in this life, and took little care what might happen in the other.
Lucan represents him at the siege of Marseillia in a sacred Wood, with an Axe
in his hand, where giving the first blow, he muted the Soldiers, (seized with a
secret horror of Religion), by words sufficiently impious. Salust makes him
say, That death is the end of all Evils, and that beyond it, there is neither
care nor thought of Joy.

But men, how great soever they be, compared one with another are always
feeble, defective, contrary to themselves, subject to error or ignorance.
Caesar was troubled at a dream which presaged him the Empire, and laughed at
that of his Wife, which advertised him of his death. His life did very well
correspond with his faith, it is true, 'twas moderated indifferently as to
voluptuousness, but yet he denied himself no pleasure that he affected, which
gave occasion to Catullus to make so many Epigrams of him; and was in fine the
cause of that saying, That Caesar was the wife of all husbands, and the husband
of all wives.

In this case Alexander had great moderation, yet he was not insensible.
Barsinoe and Roxana won his affection, nor had he so much continence, but that
he made use of Bagoas, whom Darius had used before.

The pleasure of feasting, so dear to Alexander, and wherein he sometimes
suffered himself to be carried to excess, was indifferent to Caesar. Not but
that in the time of labor and action, Alexander was sober, and free from
delicacy; but in time of repose, ease was irksome to him, unless he gave life
to it by something spritely.

They were, both the one and the other, liberal in giving, even to profuseness;
but Caesar with more design and interest; his largesses to the people, his
excessive expenses in his Aedilship, his presents to Curio, were rather
corruptions than true liberalities. Alexander gave to do good, out of the pure
greatness of his Soul. When he went into Asia, he distributed all his desmeans,
disfurnished himself of all things, rereserving nothing but the hopes of
conquest, or resolution to perish. When he beheld himself Master of the East,
and had no more need of any person, he paid the debts of his whole Army.
Painters, Engravers, Musicians, Poets, Philosophers, all indigent brave fellows
had share in his Magnificence, and part in his Glory. Not that Caesar was not
likewise naturally very liberal, but in the design he had to raise himself, he
was obliged to gain persons necessary; and scarce did he behold himself Master
of the Empire, but it was unfortunately snatched from him with his life.

I find not in Caesar such friendships as Alexander had for Ephestion, nor such
confidence as he had in Craterus. His intercourses were either strengthnings of
his affairs, or a procedure sufficiently obliging, but much less passionate for
his friends. It Is true, his familiarity had nothing dangerous in it, and those
who communicated it, need not fear, either his anger or caprichio's. Whereas
Alexander was extreme, either he was most obliging, or most terrible; nor was
any one secure with a secret wherein himself was engaged. Notwithstanding, his
friendship was his greatest passion next his glory; of which we need no other
testimony than his own, when he cried out to Achilles Statue. O Achilles! How
happy were thou to have so faithful a friend in thy life, and a Poet like Homer
after thy death.

Hitherto we have sought these two great men in their Natural qualifications,
it is time to examine the Genius of Conquerors, and to consider them in all the
extents of action. It is a kind of folly to reason of things only imaginary,
nevertheless according to all appearance, If Alexander had been in the place of
Caesar, he had only employed his great and admirable qualities to his ruin. It
may be believed, that his haughty humor (enemy to precaution) would have
difficulty secured him in the persecutions of Sylla; hardly could he have
sought his safety by a voluntary withdrawing; as what he gave was out of a pure
motion of liberality, his largesses would have been pernicious to him, instead
of attaining the Aedilship, wherein magnificencies and profuseness were
permitted; his gifts and presents out of season, would have made him suspected
by the Senate; and it is very possible, he could not have subjected himself to
Laws, which would have pinnioned a Soul so imperious as his; and so attempting
something unseasonably, he had found the fate of the Gracchi, Spurius, Manlius,
or Cataline, but if Alexander would have lost himself in the Republic, Caesar
whose Courage and Caution usually went hand in hand, had never conceived in his
mind, that vast design of the Conquest of Asia.

It is to be believed, that Caesar, whose conduct was so fine and close, that
he was concerned in all the conspiracies, without being ever but once accused,
and never convicted. Who in the divisions he stirred up amongst the Gauls,
assisted one party to oppress the other, till he brought all under his Yoke.
It Is to be believed, I say, that that very Caesar following his own Genius,
would have settled his own Estate, brought under his Neighbors, and divided all
the Republic of Greece, till he had fully subjugated them. For certainly, to
leave Macedon without hopes of return; to leave Neighbors about him ill
affected, Greece indeed as it were submitting, but scarce settled in a
subjection, and with Five and thirty thousand men, Seventy Talents, few
Provisions, to go to seek out the King of Persia, whom the Graecians called the
great King, and whose single Lieutenants on the Frontiers made the whole world
tremble; is that which passes all imagination; and seems somewhat more, than if
in these days, the Republic of Genoua, that of Lucca, or Rogusa, should
undertake the Conquest of France. If Caesar had declared war against the great
King; it had been on the Frontiers, by little and little, nor would he have
thought himself unhappy to have bounded his Estates with the Granick, or if his
Ambition had pressed him farther, can you think he would have refused the offers
of Darius; he who daily offered peace to Pompey, or that he would not have
contented himself with his Daughter and five or six Provinces, which Alexander,
it is possible, insolently refused? In short, if my conjectures be reasonable,
he would never have gone into the plain Country, to have sought the King of
Persia, accompanied with a Million of men; how brave, how constant soever he
were, I question, whether he would have slept so profoundly, that night which
preceded the battle of Arbella. I believe indeed, he would have been of
Parmenio's mind, nor should we have had from him any of the answers of
Alexander; yet it was necessary to undertake this unequal fight to become
Master of Asia; otherwise Darius had drawn on the War from Province to Province
during life. 'Twas of force that he perish as soon as he arrived, or that a
thousand different people should see him overcome with all his forces.

It Is true, that this immoderate desire of glory, and too vast Ambition, which
permitted him no repose, rendered him sometimes so insupportable to the
Macedonians, that they were all ready to forsake him. But 'twas in that
Juncture he particularly made appear the greatness of that Courage which
nothing could astonish. Go ungrateful wretches, (said he to 'um), go, and tell
in your Country, that you have left Alexander with his Friends, laboring for
the glory of Greece, among people who will obey him better than you. There is
nothing in all his life, which the Prince of -- did more admire than this his
fierce answer to the Macedonians, and this confidence in himself Alexander
(said he), forsaken by his own, amongst Barbarians scarcely conquered,
conceives himself so worthy to command, that he does not believe they can
refuse to obey him. To be in Europe or in Asia, amongst Greeks or Persians, is
indifferent to him; he doubts not to find Subjects, where he can find Men.

But what is said for Caesar's advantage, is, That the Macedonians had to deal
with Nations soft and effeminate; and that the Conquest of the Gauls, whose
people were fierce and warlike, was much more difficult to the Romans. I will
not trouble my self to examine the Courages of the one, or the other; but it is
certain, that Caesar found not among the Gauls any true Armies, there were
whole entire Bodies of people, even to the women, children, and old men, who
tumultuously armed themselves for the defense of their liberty; multitudes who
fought without order or discipline; and to speak truth, if you except twice or
thrice, Caesar might say, Veni, Vidi, Vici, in all those occasions; which makes
me believe, that if Labienus had commanded those Legions, he had no less
subjected those Provinces to the Republic; whereas Parmenio, according to the
best appearance, would not at all have fought that great Battle, which decided
the affairs of Asia. You will likewise find this particular remarkable:
Parmenio stood in need of Alexanders assistance in this fight; whereas Caesar
had one day been lost without Labienus, who, having routed all on his side,
sent the tenth Legion to disengage him.

But be it for the greater peril of their Enterprises, for the exposing their
Persons in them, or for being the less fortunate in doing so. Alexander was a
hundred times in manifest danger of his life, and received often very great
wounds. Caesar truly had his hazards, but more rare, nor do I find him
dangerously wounded in all his wars. Nor can I perceive, that the people of
Asia were so soft and effeminate, they who were always formidable to Europe. In
the greatest power of the Commonwealth were not the Romans unfortunate against
the Parthians, which composed but a part of Darius his Empire? Crassus perished
with his Legions in the time of Caesar; and soon after, Anthony made a shameful
and unhappy voyage. As for Conquests, none can be truly attributed to C^^sar,
but that of the Gauls; for in the civil war he reduced the Commonwealth with
the best part of its own forces; and the single Battle of Pharsalia made him
Master of an hundred different people, which others had vanquished. Vespasian
cannot be said to have conquered the Empire, because he was declared Emperor
upon the defeat of Vitellius; so Caesar profited himself by the Labors of all
the Romans, the Scipio's, Aemillus's, Marcellus's, Marius's, Sylla, and Pompey,
his own enemies fought for him, and all all that was done in six hundred years,
was the fruit of one hours fight.

But that which seems to me more incomprehensible of Alexander, is, that in
twelve or thirteen years, he conquered more Countries, than the greatest Estates
have done in the whole extent of their continuance: a Traveller is at this day
famous, who has crossed but a part of those Nations he subdued; and that
nothing might want to his happiness, he peacebly enjoyed his Empire, even to
the point of being adored by those he had overcome. In which I lament the
misfortune of Caesar, who could not give a form to the Estate of Rome,
according to his designs; being assassinated by those he was about to subject.

There yet remains one consideration to make, concerning Alexander, That all
the Captains of the Macedonians were great Kings after his death, who were but
mean men compared to him during his life. And certainly, I pardon him in some
sort, if in a Country where it was a received belief, that the most part of the
Gods had their Families on Earth, where Hercules was believed the Son of
Jupiter, for having killed a Lion, or knocked some thief o'th head, I pardon
him, I say, if seconding the opinion of Philip, who believed his wife to have
commerce with a God, if deceived by the Oracles, if finding himself so much
above all other men, he has sometimes despised his true birth, and sought for
his Original in the Heavens; possibly, he caused this belief to be spread among
the Barbarians, to draw from them the greater veneration. Though whilst he gave
himself out to the world for a kind of a God; sleep, pleasures with women, and
the blood that distilled from his wounds, made him know, that he was but a man.

After having spoken so much in favor of Alexander, I will say in one word
with Cicero, that for the beauty of an universal Genius, Caesar was in all
things the chief of all Romans, Orator, Historian, in affairs of the
Commonwealth, and in Employs of War. In truth the enterprises of Alexander have
something more astonishing, but his Conduct and Capacity appear not to have the
same Equality. His War in Spain against Petreius and Afranius, is a thing which
people of the utmost experience yet admire. The most memorable Sieges of the
later times have been formed after the manner of that of Alexia, and we owe to
Caesar, our Forts, our Lines, and our Countervallations, and generally, all
that which secures Armies before places. For the vigor of it, the Battle of
Munda was more sharply contested than any of those of Asia; and Caesar ran as
great hazard in Egypt, as Alexander did in the Town of the Mallians.

They were no less different in their procedure than in action. When Caesar had
not Justice on his side, he sought for appearances, and never wanted pretexts.
Alexander would give the world no reason but his Will, he followed in all
things his Ambition and his Humor, but Caesar was guided by his interest or
his reason.

There was scarce ever known a person of such evenness in his life, such
moderation in his fortune and such clemency in injuries: those impetuosities
which cost Clitus his life, those ill cleared suspicions which caused the loss
of Philotas, and which, to Alexanders shame, drew in train with it, as a
necessary evil, the death of Parmenio, all these Eruptions were unknown to
Caesar: Who could not be reproached with any death but his own, for that he
took not care enough of his proper preservation.

It must therefore be acknowledged, that, far from being subject to the
disorders of passion, he was the most active man of the World, and the least
moved: great and little things found him still in the same posture, without
appearing to be heightened by one, nor lor'd by the other.

Alexander was not properly in his own nature, unless in extremes. If he were
to run, it must be with Kings; if he were to hunt, it must be Lions; 'twas an
affliction to him, to make a Present that was not worthy of him. Never was he
more resolute, never more gay, then when his troops seemed discouraged; never
so full of confidence as in their despair. In a word, he began to enjoy himself
at that point, where other men, whether for fear or some other weakness, use to
give themselves over; but his Soul, too exalted, did difficultly comply with
the common course of life; and little careful of its self, it was to be feared,
might take its flight in the midst of pleasure and repose.

Here I cannot forbear to make reflection upon those Hero's whose Empire and
Rule has so much sweetness in it, that it is no difficulty to obey; we cannot
have for them those secret repugnances, nor those inward promptings to liberty
which perplex us under a forced obedience; all that is within us is made supple
and easy; yet what comes from them is sometimes insupportable. When they are
our Masters by right of power, and so far above us by Merit, they think to
have, as it were, a double Empire, which exacts a double subjection; and it is
a troublesome condition, to depend on men so great, that they may lawfully
despise us. However, since there is no reigning in deserts and solitudes, and
that there is a necessity of their conversing with us; it should methinks be
their interest, to accommodate themselves to our weakness; and we should
reverence them like gods, if they they would be content to live with us like
men.

But let us finish this discourse, which becomes toilsome to my self, and say,
that by all practicable ways, Caesar has done the greatest things, and made
himself chief of all the Romans.

Alexander was naturally above all men; and you may say, that he was born
Master of the Universe, and that in all his Expeditions, he went less to fight
with his enemies than to make himself known to his Subjects.

JUDGMENT ON Seneca, Plutarch, and Petronius.
I Will begin with Seneca, and tell you, with an extremity of impudence, That I
have a greater esteem for his Person than his Works. I honor the Master of
Nero, the Lover of Agrippina, and that Ambition which pretended to the Empire;
but for the Philosopher and the Writer, I have a very slender value; and am
neither affected with his style, nor his conceptions. His Latin has nothing in
it, like that of Augustus his time, nothing that is easy, nothing that is
natural; full of points, full of imaginations that breathe forth more of the
heat of Africa or Spain, than the flame of Greece or Italy. You will find
there things cut in two, which have the air and method of sentences, but have
neither the solidity, nor good sense, which thrust and press upon the mind,
without gaining the judgment. The continued violence of his discourse does as
it were affright me; and the Soul, instead of finding satisfaction and content,
meets with nothing but melancholy and perplexity.

Nero, who though one of the wickedst Princes living, was a person of a great
deal of wit; had ever about him, a sort of fine spruce delicate little Masters,
who treated Seneca like a Pedant, and endeavored to make a Fop of him. But I
am not of the opinion of Bervillus, who thinks the false Eumolphus in Petronius
was the true Seneca. If Petronius would have given him an injurious Character,
he would rather have personated him under a Pedant Philosopher, than an
impertinent Poet; besides it is almost impossible to find any resemblance of
humor in it. Seneca was the richest man of the Empire, yet always praised
poverty: Eumolphus was a Poet very low, and almost in despair with his
condition, continually complaining of the Ingratitude of the Age, and for his
sole comfort applying, that bonae mentis soror est paupertas. If Seneca had
vices, he was precise to cover them under the cloak of Wisdom. Eumolphus
boasted of his, and lived in the world like a Libertine.

I cannot therefore perceive on what Bervillus grounded his conjecture. But I
am deceived, if all that Petronius speaks of his time, of the corruption of
Eloquence and of Poesy; if Controversiae sententiales vibrantibus Pictae, which
troubled him so much; if vanus sententiarum strepitus, at which he was
astonished, hinted not at Seneca. If the per ambages and deorum Ministeria,
etc. was not meant of Lucans Pharsalia. If the praises he gives to Cicero,
Virgil, and Horace, were not designed to lessen both the Uncle and the Nephew.
However it be, to return to my opinion of this Philosopher, I never could
peruse his writings without finding an aversion to those principles wherewith
he would inspire his readers. If he endeavor to persuade Poverty, I dye with a
desire of Riches; his Virtue makes me afraid; and the least vicious, would
abandon themselves to pleasures, on the description he makes of it. In short,
he talks so much of death, and wearies me with such dismal Idea's, that I do
all I can, not to profit by reading him. That which I find most praiseworthy
in his works, are the Examples and Quotations wherewith he adorms them. For he
living in a very delicate Court, and knowing a thousand fine stories of all
times, has brought in very pleasant ones, sometimes of the Greeks, sometimes of
Caesar, of Augustus, of Mecaenas. For after all this, he had abundance of wit,
and an infinite knowledge, but his style has nothing in it agreeable to me, and
his opinions are too crabbed; and it is ridiculous, that a man who enjoyed an
excess of riches, and preserved himself with such mighty care, should preach
nothing but poverty and death.

Montaigne has found out a great agreement between Plutarch and Seneca; both
great Philosophers, both Preachers of Wisdom and Virtue, both Masters of Roman
Emperors; the one richer and greater in the world, the other more happy in the
education of his Pupil. The opinions of Plutarch (as says the same Montaigne)
are sweeter and better accommodated to society. Those of Seneca, according to
his opinion, more strong and firm, but according to mine, more rugged and
austere. Plutarch does sweetly insinuate Wisdom, and would make his Virtue
familiar even in pleasures themselves, Seneca reduces all pleasure under
Wisdom, and makes only the Philosopher happy. Plutarch, of his own Nature
virtuous, and first persuaded, easily persuades others. The Spirit of Seneca
aims and animates it self toward Virtue, and as if it were a thing strange to
him, it is necessary he first surmount it.

As for Plutarchs style, not having any knowledge of the Greek; I cannot give
you any assured Judgment, or pass my Sentence concerning it; but I must needs
say, that amongst his Morals, there is a great deal I cannot at all comprehend,
whether it be by reason of the difference of things and manners in his time and
ours, or that they are truly above my little capacity: the familiar Demon of
Socrates, the Creation of the Soul, and the course of the Moon, may be
admirable to those that understand them. I must confess, I cannot find out
their excellencies; and if they be wonderful, it is a wonder beyond my reach. We
may judge by the good words of the ancients which he has left us, by those
sayings left by him, and those gathered together with so much diligence, by the
long discourses at table, how sensible he was of conversation, and yet there
was either little delicacy in those days, or his palate was none of the most
exquisite; he sustains grave and serious matters with a vast proportion of
sense and reason, but on things depending purely on wit, there is nothing
either ingenious or delicate.

To say truth, the lives of the Illustrious men, are Plutarchs Masterpiece, and
in my judgment one of the finest Works of the world; you may there see those
great persons exposed to view, and yet retired within themselves; you may see
them in the purity of Nature, and in all the extents of Action; One may behold
the constancy of Brutus, and his fierce answer to the evil Genius that spoke to
him; one may perceive, that maugre himself, there yet remained some impression
of that Fantasm which all the reasoning of Cassius could hardly efface; a few
days after you may see him ordering his Troops, and giving Battle, so happy on
his side, and so unfortunate by the error of Cassius; you may behold him
re-attempting his fortune, losing the fight, reproaching virtue, and finding
more succor in his despair, than from that ungrateful Mistress he had so long
faithfully served.

There is a natural force in all his discourse, which equals the greatest
action, and of him only it may properly be said, Facta dictis exaequata sunt;
yet he forgets not the mean nor common things, but with diligence examines the
ordinary course of the life.

For his Comparisons, which Montaigne has found so admirable, they appear
indeed to me very polite; but I think, he might have exceeded them, and pierced
farther into the depths of their Nature. There are windings and turnings in our
Souls, which have escaped him; he has given judgment of man too much in the
gross, and has not believed him so different as he is from himsef, wicked,
virtuous, just, unjust, merciful, cruel; and where man seems to be-ly himself,
he attributes it to stranger causes. In short, had he been to define Cataline,
he had given him us, either Covetous or Prodigal; that alieni appetens, sui
profusens, was above his knowledge, and he could never have unravelled those
contraries which Salust has so well separated, and which Montaigne himself much
better understood.

To judge of the merit of Petronius, I would have perused what Tacitus says, and
without lying, he must be one of the most honest men of the world, since he
could oblige so severe an Historian, to renounce his Nature, and enlarge
himself in the praises of a voluptuous person; not but that so exquisite a
voluptuousness contributed as much to the delicacy of the spirit, as to that of
the taste. That Erudito Luxu, that arbiter Elegantiarum, is the character of an
ingenious politeness, much different from the grosser conceptions of the
vicious: Nor was he so given over to his pleasure, as to become incapable of
affairs; neither had the sweetness of his life made him an enemy to business.
He retained the merit of a Governor in his Government of Bythinia, and the
virtue of a Consul in his Consulate; but instead of subjecting himself to his
dignity, as do most part of men, fetching thence all their perplexity, or all
their joys; Petronius, with a spirit superior to his charges, reduced them to
himself: and to explain my self better, according to Montaigne, he renounced
not the Man in favor of the Magistrate.

For his death, after having well examined it, either I am deceived, or it was
the most exemplary of all antiquity. In that of Cato, I find melancholy, and
some anger; his despair of the affairs of the Commonwealth, the loss of his
Liberty, the hate of Caesar, were great assisters of his resolution; and I know
not whether his natural fierceness, did not almost reach to fury, when he tore
out his own bowels. Socrates indeed died like a wise man, and with indifference
enough; however, he sought to assure himself of his condition in the other
world; was continually reasoning with his friends in the prison; and to say all
in aword, Death was to him a very considerable Object. Petronius only found a
sweetness and unconcernment in his Audiebat referentes nihil de immortalitate
animae, and Philosophorum placitis. Sed levia carmina and faciles versus. He
not only continued his ordinary functions, to give liberty to his slaves, to
cause others to be punished, but suffered himself to be transported to any
thing that might delight him; and his Soul, at the point of so troublesome a
separation, was more affected with the sweetness and facility of Verse, than
all the sayings of Philosophers. Petronius at his death only left an image of
life; no action, no word, no circumstance betrayed any trouble of a dying man;
of him may properly be said, that dying is to cease to live, and to him the
Vixit of the Romans justly appertains.

ON PETRONIUS.
I Am not of their opinion, who believe, that Petronius intended to reprove the
vices of the times; or to compose a Satyr with the same design wherewith Horace
writ his. I am deceived, or good manners were not so much obliged to him. It Is
rather a delicate Courtier, who finds it ridiculous, that a Pedant should
become the public Censurer, and undertake to blame the corruption of the
times. And to speak truth, if Petronius would have left us an ingenious moral
of the description of Sensualists, he had endeavored to give us some disgust,
but it is in this, that vice appears with all the graces of the Author; it is in
this, that he sets forth with more excellency the acuteness and politeness of
his spirit.

Moreover, if he had a design to instruct us by a way more fine and intricate
than that of Precept, we should at least see an example of divine or human
justice upon some one of his Debauches: but so it happens, that the only good
man, which he introduces, the poor Lycas, an honest faithful Merchant, fearing
the gods, perishes miserably in the tempest, in the midst of those Varlets
which are preserved. Encolpius and Giton bind themselves to one another, that
they may dye in the straiter embraces, and death dares not disturb their
pleasure. The voluptuous Triphena saves her self in a skiff with all her
baggage. Eumolphus was so little moved with the danger, that he had the leisure
to make some Epigrams. Lycas, the pious Lycas, in vain invokes the gods for
their assistance, and, to the shame of their providence, is the only innocent
swallowed up among so many guilty. If we see sometimes Encolpion melancholy and
grieved, his grief is not the effect of his repentance; he has murdered his
Host, is a fugitive, there is no sort or manner of crime that he has not
committed, yet thanks to a good Conscience, he lives without remorse; his
tears, his sorrows proceed from a very different cause; he laments the
unfaithfulness of Giton, who has forsaken him, and despairs to imagine he may
be in the embraces of another, who laughs at the solitude to which he is
reduced.

Jacent nunc amatores Obligati noctibus totis; and forsitan, mutuis libidinibus
attriti derident solitudinem meam. All crimes ever succeeded happily to him,
only one, which in truth brought upon him a very severe punishment; yet this
was a sin to which neither divine nor human Laws had allotted any chastisement;
he had too faintly answered the caresses of Carce; and the plain truth is, this
fumbling is the only fault that ever afflicted him; he acknowledges he has many
times erred, but never deserved death but in this occasion. In fine, not to tie
my self to the order of the History, he relapses again into the same crime, and
receives the deserved punishment with a perfect resignation; it is now that he
begins to consider with himself, and feels the Anger of the gods.

Hellespontiaci sequitur gravis Ira Priapi. He laments the sad and miserable
estate into which he is fallen: Funerata est pars illa corporis, qua quondam
Achilles eram. And to recover his former vigor, he puts himself into the hands
of a Priestess of that Gods, with most excellent reflections on Religion, but
in effect, the only ones that ever proceeded from him in all his adventures.

I could tell you likewise, that the good man Eumolphus is -- by little boys,
when he recites his Verses; but when he corrupts his Scholar, the Mother treats
him as a Philosopher, and though they lie in the same Chamber, the Father
sleeps dogs-sleep. So much is the buffoon severely punished in Petronius, and
vice happily protected. Judge by this, if virtue had not need of another Orator
to persuade it. I believe, he was of the opinion of --

That an honest man and good manners agree not together. Si ergo Petronium
adimus, adimus virum ingenio vero aulico, Elegantiae arbitrum, non Sapientiae.
CHAP. II.
It Is not to be doubted, that Petronius designs, to describe the debauches of
Nero; and that that Prince was the principal object of his Satyricon. But to
know, if the persons which he introduces are true or feigned, if he give us
Characters according to his own fancy, or else describes the proper Nature of
certain people; is a thing very hard, and which in reason we cannot assure our
selves of. I believe for my part, that there is no one person in Petronius,
that can generally agree with Nero. Under Trimalchio, he apparently derides his
ridiculous Magnificence, and the extravagancy of his Pleasures. Eumolphus
represents to us the foolish passion he had for the Theater.

Sub nominibus exoletorum, faeminarumque and novitate cujusque stupri; Flagitia
Principis perscripsit. And by an agreeable disposition of different imagined
persons he touches diverse impertinencies of the Emperors, and the ordinary
disorder of his life.

It may be said, that Petronius is very contrary to himself, to blame the
sumptuousness of a Feast, and the delicacy and softness of other pleasures; he
that was so diligent and ingenious an Inquisitor after voluptuousness!

Dum nihil amoenum and molle affluentia puta: nisi quod ei Petronius
approvavisset. For to speak truth, though that Prince was in his own nature
sufficiently corrupt, yet according to Plutarchs judgment, the complaisance of
this Courtier contributed very much to throw him into all manner of Luxury and
Profuseness. In this, as well as in most things of History, we must regard the
difference of times.

Before that Nero gave himself over to this strange kind of looseness, there
was no person in the world, so agreeable to him as Petronius; insomuch, that
every thing passed for gross and dull that had not his approbation. This Court
was like a School of pleasure, or Inquisition of voluptuousness; where every
thing was fitted to the delicacy of so exquisite a palate. I believe likewise,
that the politeness of our Author, became pernicious to the public, and that
he was one of the principal causes of the ruin of several considerable persons,
who made a particular profession of Wisdom and Virtue. He was continually
preaching Liberality to that Emperor who was already a Prodigal; softness, to
one given over to sensuality; what ever had but an appearance of Austerity,
seemed to him fond and ridiculous. If my conjectures be right, Traseas had his
turn, Helvidius his, and whoever had merit without the art to please, was
troublesome at his own cost.

In this sort of life, Nero grew every day more and more corrupt; and as the
delicacy of the pleasure began to yield to the disorder of the debauch, he fell
into extravagancies beyond all bounds, and into an utter disorder of mind.
'Twas then that Tigellinus, jealous of the parts and favor of Petronius, and
those advantages he had over him in the skill of contriving pleasures,
endeavored to ruin him, Quasi adversus aemulam and Scientiae voluptatem
potiorem. Nor was it any difficult matter for him to do; for the Emperor,
absolutely given over as he was, could not suffer so curious a witness of his
infamies; he was less tormented with remorse for his Crimes, than with a secret
shame, which his gross debauches threw upon him, when he remembered the
sweetness and delicacy of his former delights. Petronius on his side, was not
without his disgusts; and I am of the mind, that in the time of those concealed
discontents, he composed that ingenious Satyricon, which we unhappily have but
imperfect.

We may see in Tacitus, the occasion of his disgrace, and how soon after Piso's
Conspiracy, the Friendship of Scevinus, was the pretense of his fall.

CHAP. III.
PEtronius is through his whole writings to be admired for the purity of his
style, and the excellency of his conception; but that which most of all
surprises me, is the great facility wherewith he does ingeniously give us all
sorts of Characters. Terence is possibly the Author of Antiquity, which dives
best into the nature of persons. Yet I can find this to say against him, that
he is too much confined, and all his talent is bounded, in putting fit words
into the mouths of servants, and old men, a covetous father, a debauched son, a
slave, or a kind of Pick-pocket, behold at once the utmost extent of Terence
his capacity: expect not from him, either the gallantry, or passion, or
conceptions, or discourse of an honest man.

Petronius, with an universal spirit, finds the genius of all sorts of
professions, and forms, as he pleases, a thousand different natures; if he
introduces a Declamer, he manages so well his air and his style, that you would
say he had Declamed all his life. Nothing in the world can better express the
disorders of a debauched life, than the quarrels of Encolpius and Acyltor,
about the matter of Giton.

Does not Quartilla represent admirably those prostituted women?

Quarum sic acceusa libido, ut saepius peterent viros* quam peterentur? Does
not the marriage of little Giton and the innocent Pannichris give us the
perfect image of an accomplished unchastity.

All that a Fop could do ridiculously, at a magnificent Banquet, a counterfeit
gallant, and an impertinent; you have represented to the life, at the feast of
Trimalchio.

Eumolphus shows us Nero's folly on the Theater, and his vanity, to recite his
own works; and you may observe, in passing over so many curious verses, of
which he makes a debaucht use, that an excellent Poet is ordinarily no very
honest man. And by the by, as Encolpion representing Eumolphus, for a Poet
dogril, and maker of fantastic verses; yet forbears not to find in his
Physiognomy, something of Great; you may perceive, he observes judiciously not
to ruin those Idea's he had given us.

That distemper he has, to compose out of due season, even in vicinia mortis,
his volubility to tell his compositions in all places, answer to his ridiculous
aim: Et ego, inquit, Poeta sum, and ut spero non humillimi spiritus, si modo
aliquid Coronis credendum est, quas etiam ad imperitos graves defer solet.

His knowledge general enough, his extraordinary actions, his expedients in
misfortunes, his constancy to help his companions in Lycas his ship; that
pleasant Court of searchers for successions, which he brings together in
Crotona, have still and accord with those things which Encolpius had promised:
Senex Canus Exercitati vultus, and qui videbatur magnum aliquid promittere.

There is nothing so natural, as the personating of Crisis; all our Confidants
come not near it; and without speaking of her first conversation with Polienos,
that which she says of her Mistress, upon the affront which she had received,
with an inimitable quickness and propriety: Verum enim fatendum est, ex qua
hora accipit injuriam, apud se non est.

Whoever has read Juvenal, knows very well, impotentiam Matronarum, and their
wicked humor, Si quando vir aut familiaris infelicius cum ipsis rem habuerat,
but there is no body but Petronius could describe Circe so fair, so sensual,
and so gallant.

Enothea, the Priestess of Priapus, ravishes me with the Miracles which she
promises, with her Enchantments, her Sacrifices, her mourning for the death of
the sacred Goose, and the manner how she was comforted; when Polienos made her
a present, with which she might buy a Goose, and gods too, if she thought fit.

Philumena, that honest Lady, is no less pleasant, who when she had devoured
many Estates in the flower of her youth and beauty, being become old and
consequently useless for pleasure, endeavored to continue her excellent art by
the means of her Children, which with a thousand fine discourses she introduces
to old folks which had none. In short, there is neither nature nor profession,
the genius of which Petronius does not admirably follow; he is a Poet, an
Orator, a Philosopher when he pleases.

For his verses, I find in them a pleasing force, and a natural beauty.
Naturali pulchritudine carmen exsurgit. So that Douza could no longer endure
the fire and tempest of Lucan, when he read the taking of Troy, or that little
Essay of the War of Pharsalia, which he declares to love much better, Quam
trecenta Cordubensis illius Pharsalicorum versuum Volumina.

I know not whether I am deceived, but in my mind, Lucretius has not so aptly
discoursed the matrer of dreams, as Petronius.

Somina, quae mentis ludunt volitantibus umbris,
Non delubra Deum, nec ab aethere numina mittunt,
Sed sibi quisque facit; nam cum prostrata sopore,
Vrget membra quies, and men's sine pondere ludit;
Quicquid Luce fuit, Tenebris agit oppida bello
Qui Quatit and flammis miserandas saevit in urbes;
Tela videt: etc.
And what can one compare to that voluptuous night, the representation of which
so fills the Soul, that there is need of more than a little virtue, to contain
within those simple expressions it makes upon the spirit.

Qualis nox fuit illa! Dii, Deaeque,
Quam mollis Thorus! Haesimus Calentes,
Et transfudimus hinc and hinc labellis,
Errantes animas. Valete curae!
Mortalis ego sic perire coepi.
What a night, O good gods! What warmth! What kisses! What breathings! What
mixture of Souls in those hot and amorous respirations!

Though the style of a Declamer seems ridiculous to Petronius, yet he forbears
not to show a great deal of Eloquence in his Declamations; and to make it
appear, that the most debauched are not incapable of meditation and return;
Morality has nothing more serious, nor better applied than the reflections of
Encolpius on the inconstancy of human things, and the uncertainty of death.

What ever subject presents it self, it is impossible either to think more
delicately concerning it, or to express it more lively. Oftentimes in his
Narrations, he proceeds no farther than the simple nature, and contents himself
with the naked graces, sometimes he puts his last hand to the work, and when he
pleases, there is nothing dishonest, nothing hard. Catullus and Martial treated
on the same things grossly, but if any one could find out the secret to clothe
smutty things in language like his, I will answer for the Ladies, that they
would praise his discretion.

But that which Petronius is more particular in, is, that besides Horace in
some Odes, he is possibly the only person of antiquity, that has known how to
speak of Gallantry. Virgil is touching in the passions; the loves of Dido, the
loves of Orpheus, and Euridice, have charm and tenderness, but there is nothing
gallant; and the poor Dido, such a charitable good Soul she was, became amorous
of Aeneas upon the recital of his misfortunes. Ovid is witty and easy.
Tibullus delicate. Yet it behoved all their Mistresses to be more learned than
my Lady -- whilst they bring in the gods, fables, examples drawn from the
farthest antiquity. They are still promising Sacrifices, and I believe Mr. --
took from them the manner of burning hearts in Holocaust. Lucian, as ingenious
as he was, becomes dull when he talks of love, and makes his Gallants discourse
rather in the language of the Country than Court.

For my part, though I am a great admirer of the Ancients, I cannot forbear to
render justice to our own Nation, and do certainly believe, that we have over
them a great advantage in this point; and without lying, after having well
examined the matter, I know none of those great Genius's, that could make
Massinissa, Sophonisha, Caesar, and Cleopatra, speak so gallantly of love as we
have heard them speak in our language; but as much as others yield to us,
Petronius exceeds us. There is no Roman can furnish us with so agreeable a
story as the Matron of Ephesus. Nothing so gallant as the love-Epistles of
Circe and Polienos; and all their adventure, whether in the entertainments, or
in the description, has a Character much above all the politeness of our age.
Judge then, how delicately he would have treated a just passion, when this was
only the business of two persons, who at first sight were to come to the last
enjoyments.

The Matron of Ephesus, according to Petronius.
THere was a certain Lady at Ephesus, in so great reputation for Chastity, that
even the women of neighboring Nations came to see her as a wonder; this
excellent woman, when her husband was to be carried to sepulture, was not
content, according to custom, to attend his corpse, with dishevelled hair, and
to beat her naked breast in the sight of the people, but would follow his
beloved body to its monument, and when it was after the Greek manner placed in
the Sepulcher, would become a Guard to it; and began whole nights and days to
weep over it: from thus afflicting her self, and seeking her own death, neither
her friends nor neighbors could withdraw her; the Magistrates at last, finding
both their power and prayers repulsed, left her; and every one deplored this
woman of so singular an Example, who had now past the fifth day without
sustenance. There accompanied her a faithful Handmaid, who with her tears
assisted her mourning, and as often as the light placed in the Monument began
to fail renewed it. She now was grown the talk of the whole Town; and all sorts
of people confessed her to be the only rare exemplar of true Love and Chastity.
When it happened, that the Governor of the Country having caused certain Thieves
to be crucified near the place where this Lady thus consumed her self over the
body of her dead Husband; the next night after, a Soldier who had the guard of
the Crosses, lest any should give the bodies burial, took notice of a light
within the Monument, and heard certain mournful voices; and Curiosity, that
vice of Mankind, made him desirous to know who or what it was; going therefore
into the Monument, he espied a wonderful fair Lady, and stood astonished, and
took it at first for an Apparition; but when he beheld the dead body, and
considered the tears, and saw the lacerated countenance, he soon conceived what
it might be, and that the dead object had made the other careless of living; he
then brought his Supper into the Monument, and began to exhort the dying Lady,
not to afflict her self with so vain a mourning, and with a grief that could
bring no benefit, that we must all dye, and all go to the same home, and many
such like things wherewith we use to reduce minds overcharged with sorrow; but
she obstinate to all consolation, rent more violently her breasts, and tearing
off her hair, strowed it on the bosom of her dead Husband. Yet would not the
Soldier be so repulsed, but with fresh exhortations, began to persuade her to
eat; till the Maid corrupted with the sent of the Wine, first reached out her
vanquished hand to the humanity of the Inviter; and being enlivened with meat
and drink, began to combat her Ladies obstinacy; and what will it profit you,
said she, thus to consume your self? why will you bury your self alive? or why
will you render you spirit to the Fates before they ask it?

Think you the gods do for our ashes care? Will all your mournings give light
to what the Fates have extinguished? why will you not rather renounce this
womanly error, and enjoy life while you may? that very dead body lying there,
should admonish you, to live. There Is none do unwillingly give ear, when they
are compelled either to eat or live. The Lady wearied with several days
abstinence, permits her resolution to be broken, and with the same desire which
before had vanquished her Maid, falls to, and eats; you might guess the rest,
who know the effects of human satiety. With the same allurements wherewith the
Soldier had persuaded the Matron to live, with the same he assaults her
Chastity. The young man appeared to her neither deformed, nor of unpleasant
discourse; and the Maid was assistant with her counsel: Will you (said she) a
pleasing love disdain?
Think how you are restored to life again.


Why should I prolong my story? Neither in this case could the woman preserve
her vowed abstinence; the Soldier becomes Victor both ways: they therefore lay
together, not only that night in which they made their close and sudden
Nuptials, but likewise the following, and the third day; shutting up the
entrance of the Tomb, that both known, or unknown, which passed that way,
believed this Mirror of Chastity to be expired on the body of her dead Husband.
The Soldier in the mean time, delighted as well with the woman's excellent
beauty, as the secret of the adventure, bought all necessaries, as far as his
slender means would go, and every night brought them to the Monument. But
whilst he thus enjoyed his love, some of the friends of one of the crucified
persons, perceiving the guard neglected, took down the body and paid it the
last Rites; which when the Soldier the next day found himself thus robbed off,
and beheld one of the Crosses without a body, he runs to his woman, bitterly
complaining, and tells her, the like punishment was to be inflicted upon him;
nor would he stay the Judges sentence, but with his own Sword do justice upon
himself for his neglect. So that now she was like to behold in the same fatal
Sepulcher, the dead bodies of her Husband and her Gallant; but the woman was as
merciful as she was chaste. The gods forbid, said she, that I should at once
behold the Funerals of two men whom I held so dear; I had rather hang up the
dead than kill the living; and accordingly she bids him take the body of her
dead Husband out of the Coffin, and hang it on the Cross that wanted one, the
Soldier steads himself of the ingenuity of this prudent woman; and the next
day, all the Town admired, how a dead body could creep to the Cross.

FINIS.

