LICENSED Roger L' Estrange.

December. 13. 1671.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Eloquence OF THESE TIMES; Particularly of the BAR AND
PULPIT.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Preston in Turn-stile Alley in Holborn, 1672.

THE EPISTLE TO HIS Ingenious Friend T.B.
SIR,
ELoquence is so natural to persons of your House, that it is difficult to form
any Ideas, but what you have already conceived; or to write any thing upon this
glorious Subject, that you have not perfectly considered. All the world knows,
that it was this Eloquence, joined with a great Capacity, with a Probity yet
more great, and with all those Virtues which Quintilian gives for its
companions, which has advanced your Father to the first preferments in the
Church, and who yet attracts the admiration of of this renowned Kingdom. The
chiefest glory that you have acquired in pursuing such noble paths, you have
obtained from Eloquence: It is to her that you owe those great praises, that
you have merited in your first sally into the World. For this cause, Sir, the
Reflections that I present you belong most justly to your self; do you protect
them, Sir, and it will render them more acceptable to those who read them: For
who can refuse to read, or give their approbation to what appears authorized by
a name so auspitious to Eloquence as yours is?

How often, Sir, have I admired that solid Spirit, that excellent Judgment, that
vast and illuminated understanding, which you have in all things, and in which
you are so very much distinguished from all those that are considerable, upon
the account of their virtue and great qualities? But as you aspire not to any
other reputation, but what flows, mixed with pleasure, from an honorable
discharge of your sacred Function, I forbear to make a further discovery of
what all the world observes in you, and which all your modesty cannot conceal:
Yet how would the Public accuse me, if out of fear of wounding your modesty, I
should neglect to speak of that unexampled moderation which you have witnessed
in the flower of your Age, in renouncing all things, to apply your self only to
copy, even to the least Tracts, from that admirable Model which you have
perpetually before your eyes.

It is there Sir, that you find an inexhaustible fountain of bounty, of
Knowledge, and of Piety, which are not to be met elsewhere. How infinitely
above others are you rendered capable of all these excellences by a Study such
as that is, and by an imitation of such a Father? O what a happiness is it, to
have a domestic example, which alone includes all others!

It is not Fortune alone that distributes these advantages; there is required
virtue, which must be as naturalized in a Family to merit these favors of
Heaven. I have said perhaps too much for a man that desires not to be known:
For it is not enough to conceal my name, but I should also have concealed my
Zeal, and contented my self that you know who I am, and with what passion I am,
Sir,

Your very humble and obedient Servant. N. N.

THE Epistle TO THE READER.
THat Eloquence which rendered the possessors of it so illustrious in the happy
age of Augustus, and in that of his Immortal Predecessors Has now lost all its
wonted Charms, and natural Beauties. The nobleness of its end, and dignity of
its use, is so little preserved in this vain and voluptuous Age, that it is no
wonder to see it degenerated into a thing merely superficial. We labor in the
composition of Perfumes, and our cares are only scrupulous in the disposition
of Words, and an arrangment of Sentences, with a beautiful variety of Periods;
we commonly hunt after glistring Metaphors, and making choice of expressions,
which go to the pomp and ostentation of our Language, even sometimes to the
contempt and ruin of Piety, whilst we neglect, out of a sloathful impatience,
what goes to the essence of it. True Eloquence consists not in the number of
Syllables, nor in a musical ordering of Dactyles or Sponds to make up harmony.
Of which kind was that Oration of Ovid, which Seneca calls solutum Carmen.
Alas, how miserably do they mistake; who make it consist in a few fugitive
words. True Eloquence is a thing that survives in the most ungrateful Memories,
and makes its passage into the most secret parts of Man, descends to the bottom
of his heart, and pierces even to the Center of the soul: It is above the
scrupulous Precepts of Grammarians. Priscian has no longer any Jurisdiction
over us; nor are his Precepts of more force to us than the Edicts of the Great
Mogul. The Compilators of common places, the Copiers of others Rhetoricks, or
the Translators of some Chapters of Quintilian, are not of the number of those
who do successfully attach or captivate the Soul; they may have their Faction,
and be satisfied with their applauses, but yet all their victories are only in
Picture, their triumphs in Masquerade, and all their false miracles but a
shadow. The world is so far become reasonable, as that pedantry has lost its
credit, even in the Universities. Their travel is to be pitied, who are busied
in the gathering and tying together of Flowers, and decking their declamations
in affected Ornaments, which only surprise the Ignorant and the Vulgar. True
Eloquence has the mean of an Amazon, rather than of a Wanton; She is not so
curious of her Ornaments, as of her Arms, and had rather gain the soul by an
entire victory, than debauch it for a few hours by a light satisfaction; all
her charms are the charms of a Majestic Beauty, which only triumphs over great
Souls, and dazzle not the Imprudent by a borrowed and affected luster. It must
well consided, that, besides the knowledge of all Sciences, an Orator must be
acquainted with all the different avenues to the seat of Reason; he must
perfectly know the strength and weakness of humane spirit, and those parts of
the soul that are most pregnable. I have often blushed with indignation at the
reading of some of our Late Writers; so much are also their styles vitiated and
depraved: and to see so few Imitators of that vigorous and majestic style of
our illustrious Bacon, which was the legitimate offspring of his fine pregnant
and powerful Imagination. As on the Stage, Farce has supplanted Comoedy, so in
the Press the lascivious and burlesque has usurped upon the grave and modest.
And what is most deplorable, we have seen the holy Scripture it self debased by
an impudent and ambitious Jargon; and even those Authors which pass for the
most polished, the most elaborate Discourses, are but nugas canoras, Six words
are oftentimes cramed with twelve figures, and all their Sentences pompous and
magnificent; but that Magnificence is so far removed from sobriety, and the
Majesty of an Oratory style, that the most rash and prodigal Poesy has nothing
more licentious. The most of our young Orators, as well as Poets, are
distempered by this wild and extravagant fury. In others we find an inequality,
which renders their discourses monstrous; sometimes they are elevated with a
precipitation approaching to fury; and other sometimes depressed so low, that
their styles become flat and distasteful, whereas it ought to be continued in a
constant equality and sweetness. Non est formosa cujus crus laudatur, aut
brachium, sed illa cujus universa facies admirationem singulis partibus
abstulit. The Clergy, Sir, Seneca.
are not wholly exempt from failings; their Eloquence is properly Pagan, which
proceeds from the reading of certain Authors, which has so imbued their minds
with their Ideas, that they cannot forbear them in matters the most Religious;
how many thinking it better to say the Christian Persuasion than the Christian
Faith, etc. Know Reader, that notwithstanding what I have said, that I am so
far from despising or undervaluing Elocution, that I praise, and admire it in
whomsoever I find it; and I am as much in love with elegant words and noble
expressions, which may adorn our Language, as any are: But yet, with
Quintilian, I would have them serve to unfold a sense yet more considerable.
Curam ego verborum, rerum volo esse solicitudinem; A too great care of words,
and their disposition is equally blameable, with a too great neglect. I am very
sensible, that he who appears in Print, let the cause, as to himself, be never
so good, profitable, or commendable, exposes himself to censure; yet I cannot
forbear to urge the general importance of the Subject in excuse of my pains. I
know it cannot be unseasonable in a time when our own Clergy are still
wrestling with the reproaches that have been lately cast upon them upon this
account. Yet I must needs say, that had the style of that Author been more
modest and respectful, he might have escaped the confusion of being seen in the
Press the second time less to his advantage. Instructions are entertained with
effect, when they are not too personally addressed: We may with civility glance
at, but cannot, without rudeness and ill manners, stare upon the faults or
imperfections of any man: And I think every man ought to be offended with
himself, who violates that religious respect which they owe to the Church and
Churchmen.

ERRATA.
PPage 6. Line 12. for fine active Spirits, read fine and active Spirits: and
l. 15. f. this r. it is. P. 13. l. 15. f. as a skilful Painter knows, r. as a
skilful Painter who knows. P. 14. l. 20. f. that the extremity and heat, r.
that in these extremities the beat. P. 15. l. the last. f. Escheres r.
Eschenes. P. 24. l. 16. f. his Spirit r. our Spirit. P. 63. l. 23. f.
dicerenter r. dicerentur. P. 80. l. 17. f. amongst us r. among them. P. 88. l.
4. f. some tincture r. some tinqueure of Antiquity. P. 116. l. 19. f. pains r.
pain. P. 131. f. minds r. means. l. 14.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Eloquence OF THESE TIMES.
THough true Eloquence has a power more absolute than Authority, or Violence,
to which we do not usually submit our selves more than in Ceremony and with
constraint; yet its powers are subject to revolutions and declinations, as all
other things are: For we have much pain in these times to find any remainder of
that Empire which it exercised upon the Spirits of men, and whereof there
appeared so many glorious marks in those Ages and States where she has ruled.
We must not now expect such miracles of Elocution, nor such excellent works of
Discourse, as have received birth in Athens and Rome, when Eloquence was there
the Mistress universally adored.

Let us not boast our selves upon the pretended Glory of our Age, which we
prefer to all others, without a due deliberation; for at this day, who is the
Orator that can be Master of the resolution of those to whom he speaks, and
force them to divest their pre-occupations, and renounce their Sentiments? We
have heretofore seen Eloquence in a short moment restore a Calm in the most
violent agitations of a people moved and mutinous: We have seen it in the
confused deliberations of a tumultuous Assembly, to make impressions unhoped
for upon their Spirits, and to appease their Seditions by inspiring the most
fearful with Courage, and disarming the insolent and revolted, and constraining
both to follow blindly her Counsels: We have seen her also in Arms, in the
shape of Pallas, fly from Rank to Rank, and restore heart to fainting and
flying Soldiers; and in fine, to triumph amidst the Armies of those whom she
has vanquished by her Reasons.

But to speak truly, at the present, we have only remaining a vain Phantome of
that victorious Eloquence, which we now possess not but in Idaea. Ingenii
ipsius lumen eloquentia. Cic. O^o^.
Let us examine then from whence comes this Disorder in a time wherein we have
so much Spirit.

. 1.
ARistotle, Cicero, Quintilian, and Longinus, which have left us Treatises of
Rhetoric, the most accomplished of Antiquity, remark that that Eloquence which
they had seen sometimes in Athens and in Rome, before that these Republics had
lost their liberty, could not rule then amongst a People free and Independent:
She is a fierce and haughty Mistress, who cannot be made subject to Vassalage
or Flattery: She seems to bear in her Character that of a Monarchy, which
cannot submit without destroying it self: And Aristotle observes that she had
not any success in Cicily, during that the Tyrants were their Masters, when all
other Arts continued there and flourished. This was the opinion of these great
men, who were very able to judge of the truth, though they licensed themselves
to speak something in favor of the Government wherein they had been advanced.

. 2.
As the Honors that Greece rendered to Eloquence, made it considerable amongst
other Nations, and the success it had at Rome was by the great rewards which
were proposed; so her Credit ceased there, when her Recompenses were taken
away. We must not then be astonished, (the Fruit which we gain from this Art,
being now so disproportionate to the travel and application that it demands) if
we find so few Orators so courageous as to sustain the Fatigue, Sibi
persuaserunt neminem sine eloquentiae, aut assequi posse in Civitate, aut tueri
conspicuum and eminentem locum: De cause. corrup. Eloq.
especially when it is not attended by any hopes which smile either on their
Interest or Ambition. Eloquence was the means to attain to the greatest Honors
in those Estates in which she had Dominion; but in these times there is little
or nothing to be obtained by the same way: This alone is capable to extinguish
that generous ardeur and study which is necessary to Eloquence, and to rebate
the most fine active Spirits.

. 3.
That greatness of Genius which Eloquence requires, and which we search after,
is now no more to be found: This is a gift of Heaven, and a work of many Ages;
for besides a happy birth for the pronunciation, the sole Assembly of Natural
Qualities required to succeed in this Art of Speech, is extremely rare; there
is required an extraordinary elevation of Spirit, a great judgment formed by a
natural solidity, to which the usage of the world, and a profound knowledge of
Letters, must give perfection: There is also required a vast Memory, and an
extended Imagination, an easy Comprehension, a Voice clear and distinct, a
Visage that has nothing of forbidding, a Pronunciation fine and animated,
joined with an Air of Authority; and many other Qualities, which being usually
incompatible of themselves, are very difficultly found all together assembled:
Cernimus vix singulis aetatibus binos Oratores laudabiles extitisse. De Orat.
It Is this that gave cause to Cicero to complain, in his time, when Eloquence
was so flourishing, that he could not without great trouble find in that Age,
two Orators that merited esteem; yet this is no reason but that they may be
found no was well as at other times; for Nature is as liberal of her gifts in
these last times, as she was in the first; but ordinarily we have not so much
light, to know in our selves those qualities, when they are there; or
sufficient care or application to cultivate them; so that they are there, as if
they were not at all.

. 4.
Besides this natural disposition, there is required to be eloquent, a great
capacity, and a great application. These were the three things which rendered
the Eloquence of Brutus, Erat in Bruto natura admirabilis exquisita doctrina,
and industria singularis. De clar. Orat.
which Cicero praised so much, so very accomplished: There must be a great
Attachment to study, and an extraordinary diligence at the Cabinet to replenish
the Spirit with knowledges necessary to Eloquence. It is good to draw from the
Sources, to study to the bottom the Ancients, principally those which are
original; and in fine, to make a Subject of our perpetual Meditation the
Rhetoric of Aristotle, who has taken the care to expose so exactly all the
particular motions of man's heart. The Orator ought to make the chief end of his
Study to move the Souls of his Auditors by the movement of his Affections,
which are the true resorts of this Machine, which is so difficult to inflame,
when we bestow no time in the study of them.

Without this knowledge an Orator is in a condition to determine nothing, nor
to obtain the attention of an Oracle, which he must ordinarily be esteemed; nor
can his spirit be capable of any reasonable production, according to the
opinion of the judicious Critic, Neque concipere, neque edere partum men's
potest, nisi ingenti flumine literarum undata. By what means can he enlighten
others, if he himself be not enlightened? or how can he persuade, if himself be
not persuaded? And who is there now who can sustain the travel of a study so
opiniastre, and of a perseverance so great, as must be that of the Orator, who
must be ignorant of nothing?

. 5.
The true Eloquence being so difficult to acquire, we think at least to
recompense it by the appearances of a false Eloquence, which had its first
course amongst the Greeks and Latins, in the declinings of their Republics,
which never had any subsistence or entertainment than in the servitude of these
Nations. The Sophists, whose Lives Philostratus and Eunapius have described,
established in their public places, this false eloquence, which gives all to
the exterior part by aerie and wandering Discourse, and has no other tendency,
than to amuse the people: but as this Eloquence has nothing of natural, the
Figures themselves and the Ornaments serve only to render it more weak.

All its Movements are false; it touches not at all the heart, nor enters in
any manner into the Spirit; all that it gives, is a pleasure superficial, and
is no more than a simple pastime for the foolish and idle. But as it is easy
to mistake universally the false for the true; for the former quickly offers it
self to the Spirit; but the latter is not found than with study and with care:
the first is immense by the multiplicity of its appearances, which serve to
disguise it; whereas the other has none, and consists in some kind in a point
indivisible: We ought not to be astonished if we take Appearance for Truth in
Eloquence, as in other things; but when we arrive to true discernment, we find
that there is little of true Eloquence or perfect Oratory; and that the most
part of those which speak in public, are no other than pure Declamators.

. 6.
We exercise not our selves to obtain this Eloquence in the way that is most
ordinary, and sure to succeed in the pursuit, that is, frequent exercise in
composition, Nulla res ad dicendum proficit quantum scriptio. Cic. fu Brut.
to which we must apply our selves with no little assiduity to acquire a
habitude; for nothing is equal to the advantage we receive by it: It was by
this way that Demosthenes and Cicero are come to that degree of perfection
which every one knows; and without speaking of the first who spent so many
years in that acquest; Caput est quod minime facimus; est enim magni laboris
quod fugimus quam plurimum scribere, De Orat.
no person is ignorant that the latter employed all his leisure which his
Affairs allowed him, to exercise himself to speak well, by this frequent use of
Composition.

. 7.
We study not to speak things correctly, nor to make our Images and Portraicts
equal; we speak usually too much or too little; the Mean that we must hold, is
known to very few persons, for that it is almost imperceptible; to attain which
Knowledge, we have but very few Rules. And as a skilful Painter knows how to
distinguish Passions in different Subjects wherein he is to express them; he
does not make the joy of a Prince like that of a Valet, nor the fiercness of a
common Soldier equal to that of his General. There are also in the motions of
the Soul different degrees, which the Orator ought to distinguish, to avoid the
confusion of Images; Which are not well comprehended or understood but by those
who are perfect Masters of the Art. The Ignorance of this Principle, so little
practiced, occasions the making so many false pictures of Eloquence. In omnibus
rebus videndum quatenus; etsi enim suus cuique modus est, tamen majus offen dit
nimium quam parum. De clar. Or at.
It is important in the multitude of Idea's which present themselves to the
Fancy, to make a just choice, and to avoid taking the false for the true; this
demands an exact discernment, a great experience, and an exquisite
understanding; we ought above all, to make a reflection, that the extremity,
and heat of our Fancy may not transport us, and the too much shocks more than
the too little. This is that which the Roman Orator reproves so many times in
his books of Rhetoric: For the too much is always a mark that we are
transported beyond our selves, which is a great fault; but the too little may
seem a mark of Moderation and Reserve, which is always a Virtue.

. 8.
We think it not enough to bestow our Cares in the study of our natural
disposition, to follow its inclination, without committing some constraint in
affecting Manners, which becomes us not, and in forcing through violent
studies, wherewith we become overburdened; or in fine, in imposing an air of
Greatness, or of more Art than we are able to sustain; this began (as Cicero
notes) first to make Eloquence degenerate from that Grandeur which it had in
Athens, under Pericles, Lysias, Eschenes, and Demosthenes; for that Demetrius
Phalerius affected more of Art than his Genius could bear. Phalereus non tam
armis, quam Palaestra inslitutus, Cicero in Brut.


. 9.
The Pronunciation, which is one of the most important parts of Eloquence, is
yet one of the most neglected: It renders Eloquence sensible to the people by
the composition of the exterior part, and which has the Art to impose by the
appearances, when it wants the power to touch by its effects. If its virtue be
so great, as to make impression in Subjects feigned and supposed, as it does
upon a Theater in a Comedy, what can she not do, when things true are her
object? But this admirable Art becomes unprofitable to those which speak in
public, because of the little care they have to use and apply it; it is true,
he must have much of the natural in him, who succeeds well in this Art; but
where he wants that, application may supply. The Eloquence of Demosthenes
became admirable by his pronunciation, though he had not any natural
disposition; and he was obliged for his success, to the pains that he took to
obtain it: But because we are soon weary of these constraints, we cannot
resolve to give our selves the pain that is required to form our selves to this
exeroise whereby we lose that great advantage that the pronunciation gives to
an Orator, by giving a certain agreement to his person, and by the passionate
expressions which it inspires even into his Eyes and Visage: Also we may truly
say, that nothing frustrates more the ordinary effects of Eloquence than the
little care we have of the exterior part, whose faults become so much more
sensible, as they are above, in delicacy, the other pleasures we receive from
Eloquence; which being an Art to please by the profession which it makes, has
nothing more opposed to it, than that which is violent and disagreeable in the
action.

. 10.
Those which make profession to speak in public, are not so careful to put in
use their Logic, either by a pure negligence to instruct themselves in it, or
by a natural debility to practice it; or in fine, by a very blameable regret
they have to put themselves in pain of a little Meditation, in which the
Discourses of Ceremony, or of Interests of State, with those of Religion, have
not any part; and those which are purely for pomp and preparation, are
ordinarily those wherein Logic finds its self most defective; for that they
are too wandering, or too abstract for the general matters whereof they treat.
Logic is the first Rule of Discourse, and the universal Organ of Speech; to
discourse without this Instrument, it is but to beat the Air, and make a noise;
we cannot say any thing that is judicious, or supportable, without it. How often do
we abandon it? and when we put it into use, how many extravagances do we
commit, either by the confusion of the expressions wherewith we perplex it; or
in fine, by the Idea we form of false Reasonings, to supply the want of the
true Reason, which cannot inhabit but in a Spirit fine and penetrating: The
rareness of such a Character is the reason that we find Eloquence so defective
in the most part of those which make profession of it; for that the Reasonings
on which they establish it, are either too mysterious, or too common, or
altogether false and Chimaerical; and if we examine things well, we shall find
that commonly in the usage of Eloquence in this age, there is no defect so
essential as that of Reasoning, to which we have no great care to form our
selves. This is not so much obtained by the study of Logic, which we learn at
the College; as by the reading Aristotle's Rhetoric, and by the frequent
commerce we must have with good Books, the reading whereof imprints upon the
spirit a justness of apprehension, which cannot be acquired without it. A right
judgment is sometimes a Gift which comes purely from Nature; but when we have
it not, we must labor to find it in Books, whereof we must be careful to make
a good choice; for we may meet with some Books, which, instead of rectifying,
may quite destroy our judgments: We must therefore take counsel of the most
knowing persons, upon what we are not able to understand our selves. The
neglect of this, is the reason why so few persons are capable, and young men
yet more than others; for that their experience and the usage of things have
not yet formed their Spirit: But though the want of Logic be the most ordinary
defect of those that speak in public, yet it is a thing whereof there always
appears the least want; for none but men of the finest spirits, whereof there
is always the fewest, are capable of that knowledge; not but that the people
perceive very well the natural order of Discourse, and all that there is of
Logic in it, without knowing it; but their Light reaches not so far to see
what is false in his Reasonings, or defectuous in the order and pursuit of his
Design: Upon which we may make three Orders of Spirits, the first, of those
which attend only to the Words, to judge of their Beauty; the second, of those
which go further, and who judge of the Thoughts: the third, of those which go
even to judge even of the whole Design, Order and Proportion of the Parts;
which last is not known but by the most intelligent. There are some Orators who
leave not their Auditors liberty to examine the bottom of their Discourse, by a
certain Charm of Words and of Thoughts, wherewith they surprise them: There are
some others which quite blind us by the agreeable manner of expressing things.
I have known a person of this sort, who always pleased, though his Discourse
was very little correct, either in the Order or Reasoning: but after all, he
pleased none but Women and the Ignorant; the more understanding esteemed him
not.

. 11.
When we apply our selves to the study of Eloquence, we are accustomed to
mistake, by the false measures we take of it, or of its Subject, or of those to
whom we address our selves. For an Orator who has a great elevation of Spirit,
many times takes too great a pleasure in pursuing his own Fancy, without giving
any care to proportion his Discourse to the Subject, or to measure the capacity
of those to whom he speaks; it is much more easy to abandon our selves to the
impetuosity of our Genius, than to regulate our selves according to the
Circumstances of the things we speak of; for one is the effect of Imagination,
the other the effect of Judgment, which is a Gift more rare. Also it is no
marvel if those that speak in public, are so subject to this Disorder, out of
which spring so many Indecencies, and choquant Disproportions which are jumbled
together in our ordinary discourses which are made public; as the assuming of
an air of greatness in the most trivial affairs, and affecting grand
expressions in the most petty Subjects; making ostentation of the beauty of his
Spirit to the people, and before a gross and stupid Auditory, and being ardent
and pathetick in Subjects which deserve it not. Eloquence ceases to be true,
Refert cognoscere qui sunt audientium mores, quae publica recepta persuasio.
Fab. l. 3. c. 7.
when it has no proportion with the capacity of those to whom it is addressed.
The diversity of Ages, Ut gubernator ad incursus tempestatum, sie agenti ad
varieta tem causarum ratio mutanda. Quintil. l. 10, cap. 7.
Sexes and Conditions, and of Lights acquired or natural, ought to oblige the
Orator in different manners to proportion it to the Spirits of these different
estates.

. 12.
It must be known in general to distinguish the diverse Characters of Eloquence,
for to serve himself according to the necessity of the Subject whereof we
treat, lest we fall into confusion. And we must be especially careful of this
confusion, because nothing is capable to succeed in this Art out of its place.
The grand Air of Eloquence ought to be in great places, and i^ great
Assemblies, where we find a general concourse: For we must speak to persons of
great quality in that kind of Discourse which has most of esteem, extention
and grandeur of expression. This Character ought to be used in the most
elevated Subjects, and in the most important matters; as it ought to be simple,
Tenues causae tenue dicendifilum requirunt. Orat. Oration poscitur austera, si
accuses; fusa, si lauds. Quintil. l. 9. c. 4. Loquendi accurata, and sine
molestia diligens Elegantia. Cic. in Brut.
natural, and without affectation of expression in lesser Subjects. Praises
demand a Style elevated and diffused; Accusations serious and austere; in fine,
Eloquence has arrived to its utmost perfection, when it knows to adapt words
proportionate to things, and to conserve the care to unfold her self without
difficulty or scruple. There remains two things especially to be avoided, the
cold Style, and the Boyish; for the first renders the Discourse dry and
insipid, by the faint languor and lowness of its expression; the second renders
it distastful and tedious by its affected amplifications, wherewith they weary
the patience of the Auditor.

. 13.
Thought that Longin. confounds in some fashion the cold Style, and Boyish,
whereof I have spoken we may always distinguish them in this manner; in the
affectation of a cold Style, we use great expressions in Subjects which demand
little; and in the Boyish, we use little and low expressions in things that
demand great: But our Language is become so modest, reserved and scrupulous,
that it rejects all expressions too strong and glistering, Metaphors too hardy,
and the too frequent points in a cold style, as it does in the Boyish, the
little exultations in serious matters, and the too languishing amplifications
in those places of discourse, which ought to be serious and concise.

. 14.
It is impossible to be happy in an elevated Style, when we are not entirely
persuaded that it is formed of the things themselves which we have to speak, of
the great images which we have conceived, and of the elevation of our Genius
more than that of Expression, the vain splendour of words, or that train of
studied Periphrases. This is that which in Discourse, in some manner, is like
that load of Flesh in the Body of man, which serves only to charge and
imbarrass it with an unprofitable weight; for when this elevated Style is
unnatural, it degenerates into a Character low and reptile; for it cannot
sustain it self. Pindar and Sophocles elevated themselves so high by the
grandeur of their expression, that they could not, without much pain, pursue
it. And when they could not bear up that elevation, which is not natural; for
that it is not always in the things they speak of; they sometimes abase
themselves even to a contempt, and become not knowabl even to themselves. This
is a fault not to be pardoned; for there is a presumption of appearing great
without being so, and a desire to elevate themselves without being able to
sustain themselves in that height. The Secret is to study how to think of
things worthily, Oration sententiis debet esse ornatior^^ quam verbis. Fab.
and serve our selves of no other words than of those which are capable to
answer to the dignity of the Subject whereof we speak.

. 15.
As the great defect of the wiser sort of men is the negligence they have to
measure themselves upon the capacity of the Subject, or their Auditory. That of
the lesser Genius's is a too scrupulous care, and a too affected Diligence to
attach themselves more than is required, to finish in particular certain parts
of the Discourse they have enterprized, and to which they have some peculiar
affection. This is a pure effect of their little judgment, to tie themselves to
one part of a Design; for they are not able, nor so happy as to form a Design
all entire. These narrow Spirits suffer themselves to be surpised into a false
Principle, which they would authorize by the Authority of Tyrius Maximus, who
pretends that Art has always something more perfect than Nature; and that we
cannot find any natural Beauty that can be so perfect as some of their
artificial Statues. I pretend not to enter into a Discussion of that Principle
with this Philosopher: But Eloquence being the true Art to please, which she
cannot do without an imitation of Nature, that Maxim of those little Spirits
which give so much to Art, is not a very sure mean to persuade. I pretend not
only that Rule is false, but that their too Boyish Attachment to Precepts which
they have learned in their youth, has formed in them a very vicious Idaea of
Eloquence: We need not then consult the Agamemnon of Petronus, to comprehend
the ridiculousness of that Eloquence which has nothing of natural in it; for
that it fastens it self too much upon the exterior Ornaments, which they would
have to pass for that which is most essential. The true foundation of Eloquence
is a good Judgment, which as it is the quality most necessary to speak in
public, so it is the most rare; we need not be astonished that we find so few
perfect Orators, since a perfect Orator cannot be formed but in an Age happy,
and in a people of good Gust.

. 16.
The Sovereign Art of Eloquence consists in a scrupulous attention to Nature,
as to its true Model, and first Original, whereof we have so little knowledge,
by reason of the little care we take to pursue the Tracts, and to observe the
conduct; we must study then to know well this great Model, and to examine all
its Resorts by a profound study of Philosophy, and a long observation of
natural things; for so often as we depart from Nature we fall into error and
mistake; the heat of our most passionate motions, is but a false heat; the most
dazzling splendor of her Figures are but a false and deceitful blaze; and the
greatest of her Reasons has nothing real, and is no other than a sophistical
Declamation and pure Illusion.

. 17.
We find very little of construction in the Discourses of the most of our
public Orators, because they apply not themselves to study the Rules of
Speech. Those which have a genius for Eloquence find it a trouble to abase
themselves to those little scrupulous cares which are necessary to succeed
well; the natural elevation of their spirit cannot be subjected to those
circumspections; and those that have not that genius, are subject to fall into
the fault of affectation, to supply by words that which they want of light to
understand things well.

. 18.
The most ordinary source of those defects which we meet with in the
expression, which is so essential to Eloquence, comes from the natural defects
of the imagination. The expression falls into a Lux and into superfluity, when
the Imagination is too quick and ardent; she falls into galimatia's and into
obscurity, when the Imagination is too abundant and too profuse: In fine, it
falls into a faint languishing and insipidness, when the Imagination is too
cold, too heavy and enveloped.

. 19.
We scarce ever study that just temperament which is of so much use in the
mixing in our Discourse, Reason with Authority, Comparison and Similitude with
Example and Induction. In the usage it self which we make of this great
Instrument of persuasion, we apply not our selves with any care to arrange our
reasons in such a manner, as that the one may sustain the other by the order
which we give them; for the stronger Reasons ought to succeed the weak, and the
most solid to those that are the less solid, to the end that the Discourse may
sustain and elevate it self the nearer it approaches to the period of its
perfection. This is a thing of such Importance, that the only neglect of this
observation renders sometimes the reasonings which are very strong and solid,
little effective, for that they weaken themselves when the proportion of the
reasons is not observed. This proportion consists in the not urging of any
thing that may appear weak, when we have said any thing more persuasive: For
the latter Reasons make the most lasting impression in the spirit, and ought
therefore, as I have said before, to be the most strong. Besides the
mannagement of the Reasons, which ought to be placed in their natural order,
and ought not to be confounded, they must also be orderly managed in the use
which we make of Induction, least we be exposed to an inconsiderate
multiplication. Also our Orator must have that admirable Art, which knows
generously to retrench superfluities in things as well as words, and to
suppress too frequent Ornaments, without harkening to the transport of the
Imagination, which by a natural inclination suffers it self to be carried away
to a vain splendor of Discourse, which usually has nothing of solid
Eloquence, he cannot move with success those great Machines of het Art, without
these precautions, which are of the highest consequence, for that they reduce
things to their natural estate. But these Observations are but seldom
practiced, because they are but little known.

. 20.
That Eloquence which touches not the spirit, and makes not its way to the
heart, is not true Eloquence, it is no more than a pure instruction, which
ought not to be used but in the School. And all those Beauties which smite the
spirit without affecting the heart, are not true Beauties. That great Air it
self which Longinus teaches, affects but little, when it does not dazzle nor
astonish, as he avows himself, for that it enters not into the thoughts of
those to whom we speak. All those great expressions, without as great thoughts,
are like those great Ships that are not balanced, they float, and never sail
in safety.

. 21.
That Eloquence in general which bestows too much care in the arrangment of
words, Cum verborum derogat affectibus fidem, et ubicunq: ais o lentatur
veritas abesse videtur. Quint. l. 10. c. 4. Non ad judiciorum certamen, sed ad
voluptatem aurium scripserat Isocrates. Cic Orat.
and of that outward splendor which glisters in the expression, almost never
succeeds. We are usually displeased with all things which appear studied and
artificial. That great Orator Isocrates, which wrote, as it seems, only for
pleasure, was not fit for affairs, and had never succeeded at the Bar, for
that he was too polished. This was the manner also of the Sophists, upon whom
Socrates rallyes so pleasantly in Plato's Phaedra, and Longinus notes in the
great artifice of Hiperides, who used to fill his Discourse with too many
Ornaments, and too many beauties. It is a great Art to know how to manage
these Ornaments, and to dispose them in their due place, when necessity obliges
to make use of them. The Artifice of Eloquence cannot have any effect, but
against it self, when it is too dazzling, for thereby it becomes suspected, and
we regard it only as a Page which is gawdily dressed, Quae par^nt retia vitat
av^s: Ovid.
for no other end than to surprise. Besides, that which strikes the spirit and
the sense with too much splendour, wearies and oppresses. In fine, it is
necessary that the matters themselves be not without beauty to bear those great
Ornaments which become ridiculous in little Subjects; for there is nothing more
contrary to Art, than to adorn what merits it not: And it is not of the least
importance in this Art, to know what is to be neglected, and what is not. To be
too expensive in Ornaments, is but a vain and fruitless prodigality; for we
often find, that which glisters most in Discourse is most usually false. Those
studied Figures, those fine Antithesies, and those splendid Epithites, are not
always conformable to good sense. True Eloquence does not dazzle or surprise,
but insinuates by little and little into the spirit. The Reasons that are most
capable to move, are ordinarily the most common, as Aristotle teaches us.
Topic. 1.
And the most natural Language to which we are carried, by the sole desire we
have to make our selves understood, is most proper and the best. Those
Discourses which require much of spirit and ornament, as Panegyricks, and
Funeral Orations, contain little that is very solid, and generally owe their
success to the pronunciation: We may discover the truth when they come to the
Press; which I advise those that make them, not to publish. When they want that
heat of action which first gave them life, they make no longer any impression.
There are Images in Eloquence as there is in painting, which sometime must be
shown to the view ar a distance, and sometime near at hand.

. 22.
There is required in Eloquence less of Genius to invent things, than to place
them in order: For that place which we must assign (to have them disposed where
they ought to be) will cost more than the pains we are at in cogitation and
invention; for every reasonable spirit may have reasonable thoughts; but it is
not so easy to give to our thoughts that grace which renders things agreeable,
and which makes them to be admired. This is it in which consists Eloquence: I
mean not that Eloquence of words which we ordinarily know but too much, but the
Eloquence of things, which we seldom well understand, and have little knowledge
of; and the perfect attainment of which, we cannot hope than from an happy
Nature. We may know the price of this Art, by the great difference in the same
things diversified. This right disposal of things ordinarily makes the beauty
of an Oration; and though this Air be usually the bounty of our Nature, yet we
have means to acquire it, when Nature has denied it; as a frequent use of
Composition under a good Master, or an intelligent friend, and a diligent
commerce with ancient Authors; it is from them that we learn that justness
which gives to the Spirit that agreeable variety, and which the spirit
communicates to all its thoughts and Imaginations when we have a Genius for it.

. 23.
There is not, according to the sentiment of Cicero, any true Eloquence,
Eloquentiam quae admirationem non habet nullamjudico. Cic in Brut.
but that which does attract an admiration; and there is nothing more capable
to render it admirable, according to the judgment of that great man, than the
pictures that it makes of manners, and those motions that it excites in those
diverse passions which it touches. This cannot be effected without a perfect
knowledge of the heart of man, which ought to be the sovereign Science of the
Orator. The Portraicts that he makes of manners cannot be false, if he know
well the principal, which is the heart; and he will know without doubt, how to
move with success the most hidden Parts of the soul, that is to say, the
Passions, by the same knowledge of the heart, which is the sourse. The little
cares (that the most part of those that speak in public have to know the depth
of that abysm which appears so difficult to descend) is the cause that we have
so few successful Orators. For this cause those who make profession of
Eloquence, ought to make very serious Reflections; for all being well
considered, no man is properly eloquent, who knows not the heart of man, and
all its intricate Maeanders, to expose them to the people.

. 24.
Quis ignorant eloquentiam descivisse a veteri gloria, no inopia hominum, sed
desidia juventutis parentum negligen tia, et inscitia precipientium.
The evil Education of Youth, caused by the extreme luxury and delicateness of
this Age, by the indulgence of Parents, by the little experience of Masters,
and by the ignorance of the most part of those with whom we converse, is one of
the most certain Causes that there is so little success in this Art, it being
one of the greatest obstacles to Eloquence. We conduct our Youth through false
and unequal paths, and through very unskilful methods, who being corrupted even
in their principals, it is no wonder if their success be so little happy, and
their purfuits unprofitable.

. 25.
I do not affirm that there are not yet some sparks of wit remaining, which
eminently shine in some of the Orators of this Age, who cease not to merit
applause and reputation: but because Eloquence purely natural cannot atchieve
any thing without the succor of Art, as may be usually observed either by the
false principles which we assume, or the little application of those who make
profession of it: it cannot arrive to merit the general admiration of the
people, by the marveilous effects which it would produce upon their hearts if
it were accomplished.

I have thus finished the Reflections, as may be made upon the use of the
Eloquence of this Time, considered in general; and upon that which may hinder
its effects in those occasions which it has to make appear its power over
hearts. Those that follow are Reflections upon the use of Eloquence in
particular, and the two principal Species of it, The Eloquence of the Bar, and
that of the Pulpit; wherein I have remarked the abuse which may be committed in
the one and in the other, and the means to succeed with moderate felicity in
both.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Eloquence OF THE BAR.
ELoquence in General may be reduced to two Species: Whereof one is occupied in
Interests of State; The other in those of Religion: also one is profane, the
other Sacred. The first has a vaster Cariere than we are able to think; she is
not bufied only to sustain an Ordinance, nor to defend a Law; she exercises
her self in the Campaign, as well as in the Cabinet; she presides over States,
and is employed in Councils of War; she rules in the Camp, and has the
greatest part in the Government and Ministry of Kingdoms. But because she is
at all times more particular in Cabinets, where we cannot penetrate to come to
the knowledge of her, where she passes for a Mystery, and is no where so
public as at the Bar, I Will confine my self to the state which she holds
there, being the place where she appears with most advantage.

. 1.
At the Bar we give no time to the study of Eloquence, but what we gave in the
first studies of our Youth, which are ordinarily too precipitate, too confused,
or too superficial. This renders us unable to form any just or reasonable Idea
of it. Besides the great advantages that the Greeks and Romans had by the force
of their Genius, and by their great natural dispositions they had to speak,
they made Eloquence their continual study during their lives they traveled all
the World to understand the most choice Masters of this Art, they laid out a
long time and study to form their spirits upon the great models which they went
to seek out of other Countries; they did not occupy themselves as if they were
to gain nothing by it; they placed their pleasure, their hopes, their fortune,
and all their ambition in the study of it, for ir was then able to elevate them
to the greatest Honors. But the young men of these Times (with a very
indifferent genius's) believe that the reading of a Romance or a Comedy, is
sufficient to acquire all the Eloquence which is necessary to the Bar. We are
not excited by the same hopes of Glory as the Greeks and Romans were, amongst
whom Eloquence attained so much splendor, because it was the way that
conducted to the highest Honors, even to the Sovereign power it self.

. 2.
When all the Qualities requisite to succeed in the Eloquence of the Bar
concur in an Orator, with all the perseverance of Application, and is
encouraged in it by a prospect of Interest and Ambition; yet those little
condescentions to which he must submit in a scrupulous and exact usage of the
practick, would be able to weary the spirit, and to take away the power to form
an Idea according to Art and Nature; he must have a care to shun this default,
and to prevent it by an anticipated study of Eloquence, where we must form the
spirit, before we abandon the Imagination to the barbarous terms of the
practick.

. 3.
The Eloquence of the Bar is too much subjected to the diverse Fantasies of
Language, which reign in this Age, according to the different gusts which
prevail, and corrupt it by taking away the natural beauties, and in giving it
false and adulterate. There was a tedious kind of Eloquence which had once the
vogue amongst the Romans, which consisted in a long and perplexing Discourse:
But this gust changing with the Age, one more judicious succeeded. Nevertheless
it is true that the Eloquence of the bar demands a Manner diffused and
extended: Subselia grand iorem et pleniorem vocem desiderant. Cic. in Brut.
But that Embarras of words to which these kind of Declamators usually abandon
themselves, always displeases: We are not now taken with things so little
real and solid.

. 4.
Too great a care to appear regular, exact and just in our Discourse, is
sometime very dangerous; it wearies both the attention of those that speak, and
those that hear. We ought to shun this fault, and must not always be so
scrupulous to speak nothing but what is exact; it suffices to have a care to
maintain a certain equality and evenness; for there is nothing more essential
to him that speaks, than to speak according to his Genius, without force or
constraint. Besides, those scrupulous Orators that speak with so much
circumspection, have nothing of great or elevated; the care they take to speak
things so correctly renders flat their spirit; and they have not the power to
move the heart by the greatness of their thoughts; they expose our Language by
this constraint, and too much scruple, to loose its force and abundance, being
too desirous to preserve its sweetness and delicateness.

. 5.
There is also another extremity to be avoided, which is a too great
negligence, not only in the ornament of the words, but also in the right order
and disposal of things. Those which have already established their Reputation,
and which are accustomed to a long usage of the air of the Bar, are most
subject to fall into this Error; for when they arrive to above forty years of
age, and to great employment, they think then of nothing but of what is
profitable and solid; they abandon the ornaments of Eloquence, for they have no
time to spend in the thoughts of it: And the care of Interest surmounts that of
Glory and Ambition.

. 6.
There are some occasions notwithstanding where this negligence is pardonable,
and where the heat of a Discourse, and the impetuosity of the Genius succeeds
sometimes better than all our care, the most exact words, or all the Ornaments
of Art. The difficulty is to know and distinguish it; when we have sufficient
force of spirit and understanding to know it, we need not be much troubled to
surmount the scruples which may arise from the negligence of certain places in
our Discourse, which regularly ought not to have been neglected.

. 7.
There are also certain manners peculiar to the Bar, which are known but to
few Orators, for that they are not discovered but by a great penetration of
spirit, a serious inquiry into the sourses, and in studying with much
meditation the great models of Eloquence which we have amongst the Ancients.
These are the extraordinary efforts of this Art, which surprizeth the Judges,
and which works unforeseen and unexpected effects in their spirits: Such was
that which Cicero praises in one Canus Ruffius, who being accused with much
vehemence by Sisenna, cried out with a very touching and animated voice to the
Judges, O ye Judges, I am circumvented, except ye succor me, etc. That show of
fear that he had to be surprised, and the protection he so passionately
demanded of his Judges, touched them so much, that they became favorable to
him. There are an infinite of like places in Demosthenes and Cicero; but we
must make reflection that these are not the glistering parts of an Oration, or
that splendor of words that works these effects. These Charms of Eloquence are
more in the things themselves, than in the words; whose beauty we cannot
unfold, nor give certain Rules to it, for that they are inexplicable: yet we
cannot fail, (if we have a right judgment,) of a true discovery. Sometime in
these great Subjects of Eloquence, we must imitate that Masterpiece of the
Painter, who to express the grief of Agamemnon at the sacrifice of his
Daughter, drew him with his face covered, despairing that his Art could express
the sorrows of a Father, after he had expressed that of his friends in a manner
so vigorous. These also are the expressions that Cicero requires in matters of
importance, Significatio saepe major erit quam oration. Cic. in Brut
These places ought to be prepared by a passionate and tender Discourse, and by
all the most studied attractions of that Art, to have that success that they
ought to have.

. 8.
Nothing has so much power on the spirit of his Judges, Melior moderatio et
nonnun quam etiam patientia bonus altercator vitio ira cundiae carcat. Quint.
l. 6. c. 4.
as the opinion of a general probity, and especially a moderation in the
affairs which wound his own Interest, or that of his Party. An affair becomes
suspected, when it is managed with transportation; and Choler may ruin the
most just Cause; for we are apt to believe that Cause to be unjust, which uses
only passion for its defense. Moderation, above all other virtues, knows the
best how to regulate the outward motions, and wherewith we are the most
sensibly touched: And indeed they must have a very ill opinion of their Judge,
who think him capable to take pleasure in their Choler, and in their ill
humor.

. 9.
Loci inanes, nec erudita civitate tollerabiles, Cic.
Nothing so ill consists with the Eloquence of the Bar, as that fruitles cumber
of Common Places, wherewith our Pleaders swell their Discourse beyond
proportion, and serves only to weary the patience of the Judge, and make him
distaste that which may be good in the rest. They are ordinarily the young men
that are most subject to this default; they wander about, because they want
force of spirit to enter immediately into the matter: We should render them a
great service, if we could make them resolve to leave that length and circuit
of Discourse which is so much contrary to decorum, and becomes odious and
insupportable. A Discourse spun out with these childish amplifications, becomes
languishing, it only makes the Judges yawn, and lulls them into a slumber.

. 10.
It is also the delight of young men to glister in all they say: But true
Eloquence seeks not after that vain splendor, which is only proper to dazzle
the spirit. We always fall into error when we study too much to please. That
Lawyer which relies more upon a passage of Seneca for defense of his Cause,
than upon good Reason, very much deceives himself; those glistering passages
have not any force to persuade, they serve only to waken the spirit of the
Judge, when it is weary.

. 11.
We seldom take any care of the exterior part which relates to action, which
Cicero calls the Eloquence of the Body, whose perfection consists in the
gesture and pronunciation, because we do not enough comprehend the necessity
and importance thereof: Quintilian only has given us any precepts of it, which
Aristotle and Cicero have omitted, possibly believing that it was a gift only
of Nature, which could not be reduced into Art or Method, and have contented
themselves only to note us the importance of it, which they have done in
several places of their works. This right pronunciation is so important, that
we cannot neglect it without renouncing what is most powerful and persuasive in
Eloquence: It is that which rules most in Discourse, and which irresistibly
invades the soul, and in which consists the greatest force and ornament. The
great Talent of Hortensius who equaled Cicero in Reputation, was the skilful
mannagement of the action: He was so admirable in an ardent manner of speaking,
that Roscius and Aesop, the most famous Comedians of that time, went always to
hear his Orations, to learn from him their measure. Having so little care to
form our selves to this action, we need not be astonished that we see so few
tracts of that Eloquence which wrought so many wonders in the Times of Cicero
and Demoit henes, who always endeavored to express in themselves, by their
ardour and vehemence, those passions which they intended to excite in the
Spirits of their Auditors. It is true we have seen Orators some years past, who
gave weight to all their Reasons by the force wherewith they animated their
Discourse: but after all, their ardency was so ill managed, that what they
said, lost its grace, by the desire they had to be too passionate: for when
once the fire mounted to their faces, we could understand no more, their
pronunciation became so confused by their excessive transport. Some others
appear too cold, they show in their greatest affairs little of that emotion
which is necessary to inflame the spirit of the Judges, which are not at all
touched in these great Subjects, but by great movements. We may say to these
languishing Declamators that of Cicero against Calidius, who spoke things very
touching with an air of tranquillity, An ista si vera essent, sic a te
dicerentar? All those which speak at the Bar are subject to add to the evil
pronunciation, which they learned at the College; One constant and disagreeable
tone, and an impression of the accent in the penultima syllables, which
occasions rather laughter than persuasion.

. 12.
The Subjects which furnish the present condition of the Bar, having nothing of
great or elevated, cannot give to Eloquence those advantages, which is found in
the more important matters of the Ancients: Such were the deliberations of War
and Peace, the considerations of the good of the State and the public
interest, the accusations and defenses of Princes and Kings, which the great
Orators discoursed with so much splendor. The interests which are at this time
the Subjects of the Bar, are sometimes so little considerable that they are
not capable to furnish matters of such worth to Eloquence, as made it in those
times to triumph over hearts. His accedebat spl endot rerum, and magnitudo
causarun, quibus ipsa plurimum elo quentia praeslat. Dialog. de cous. co. eloq.
Crescit cum amplitudine rerum vis ingenij: nee quisquam illustrem orationem
facere potest, n^si qui causam paremi invenit. 16.
This was one of the advantages (that Messalla notes in the Dialogue of
Quintilian) the ancient Orators had above those of his time: in effect, petty
Subjects make petty Orators; and the Spirit of him that speaks in public, is
elevated by the merit and elevation of the Subject.

. 13.
There is an Eloquence of pure Authority which is of very great use at the Bar;
and though it be not passionate, and its manner of declaiming be cold, and
serious, yet it has the dignity that is required to imprint respect and
veneration; we hearken to it as to an Oracle, being preingaged in its favor.
This is the Eloquence of the Judges, and those which make Orations to Princes
and great Lords, who ought to observe this calm and peaceful Eloquence, who
must speak without emotion to preserve their Character, for it ought to have
nothing in it but submissive and respective, and ought to be regulated
according to the rank and quality of those to whom it is addressed, either more
or less respectively, according to their degree or merit.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Eloquence OF THE PULPIT
It Is a thing above wonder, that in so great a number of Persons who apply
themselves to Preaching, we find so few who succeed, seeing they have so many
advantages infinitely above all others who speak in public. The Eloquence of
the Bar cannot furnish its Orators with matters so important to treat, with
things so touching to speak, nor with such great motives to persuade, as this
Eloquence of the Pulpit: all those Engines which she imployes in moving the
Passions are so powerful, the Figures of Rhetoric (which are as sanctified in
the Mouth, by the commerce it has with the holy Spirit) so glorious, and the
mysteries that it unfolds are so transcendent, and it speaks by the dignity of
its Character with so much authority; that if there be any Eloquence which is
perfect Mistress of hearts, by the power that it has to move, and by its
natural independance, it must be this; from whence comes it then that we have
so few good Preachers? It is not the fault of the Auditors, since Faith
prepares their Spirits to a perfect submission to what they come to hear? the
sight of Altars inspires them with respect, and they are already persuaded by
the principles of their Religion, of what they come to attend. Finally, since
the Preacher speaks as the Ambassador of God, and his words are the words of
his eternal Master, when he preaches everlasting recompense to those that
believe, and threatens unspeakable punishments to those who disbeleive; it must
be his own fault if he have not all the success that his function merits. But
as it is too true that amongst all Professions, there are the fewest in this
who succeed well in this Art, it will not be unprofitable to search out the way
to remedy it, since it is a thing of so great importance, which I pretend to do
by these following Reflections.

. 1.
We seldom enter into serious consideration of that disposition of mind, which
the honness of that ministry of the word of God, and the dignity of a Function
so sacred, requires. There is not only expedient a great Application, and long
study to replenish the mind with great Images, which are necessary to form the
Character of this Eloquence; but there must be also long retirements from the
noise of the World, to prepare the heart by solitude for the reception of the
holy Spirit, whose Interpreter the Preacher takes upon himself to be: It is
from this eternal Spirit that he takes his immediate mission by the principles
of the interior life, Quomodo praedicabunt nisi mittantur. 5. Romans 12.
to dispose him to take his Orders from those who are established in dignity,
and have received the power of God to communicate it to others: He must then
take great care that he be not too much abandoned to himself and to his Genius;
but first he must passionately seek the succors of Heaven, by the frequent use
of Meditation and Prayer. Without this divine assistance it is impossible to
penetrate into the mysteries and hidden truths of the Gospel. How many does
this? who ever thinks of it? what studies or what retreats do we make to
dispose our hearts? or what preparations of Spirit do we bring to this holy
Function? do not we see every day young Preachers without Virtue or Science
ascend the Pulpit, with the same end that a Comaedian mounts the Theater? they
invite their Friends by Letters, and fill a great Circle with their Relations,
who engage a great assembly of their honest acquaintance, to grace the audience
and to encourage those young Declamators; they raise their Eyes to Heaven with
a feigned complaisance and counterfeit admiration, when they have pronounced
two or three ill arrang'd periods without stumbling; and when they have a
little confidently said what possibly themselves have not the courage to act;
when these trifling Orators have done what they can, they are but pitied by
those who judge without preoccupation, even in those performances wherein they
think they have reason to triumph. They have a very false Idea of so holy a
Function; if they think to advance its reverence by such preachings, a Preacher
must have other qualities to enable him to represent with success the Sword of
Gods word like a flame to the Eyes of the Offenders, to reduce, Libertines
under the sacred Yoke of the Gospel, and to cast into our Spirits the terror
of the last Judgment, by a vigorous representation of the pains of Hell, and
the dreadful consequence of our unbeleif, and to sustain in some sort the
Dignity, Grandeur and Majesty of the Subjects, whereof our Religion makes
profession. It is also without doubt for this reason, that the two Apostles of
our Lord were called the Children of Thunder: for the word of God which they
proclaimed, with that dignity which it merited, was bright and terrible in
their Mouths. Few of our Declamators are thus qualified, they usually Preach
for their recreation, or to perform the Injunctions of their Physicians, to
discharge themselves of some troublesome Fat: these are profanations so
deplorable that we should with great difficulty believe it, had we not so many
examples of it in this Age.

. 2.
We do not enough consider that it is on Gods account we speak when we Preach,
by which means we deprive the Word of its weight and authority; for the
greatest part of Preachers speak only of their Patrons; to whom they make a
merchandise of themselves, and extinguish in some manner the Spirit of God, to
give place entirely to their own exorbitant and extravagant, Fancies. This was
not the practice of the ancient Prophets, who were the Preachers of the old
Law, they spoke not as private men to the People, Pro Christo legati one
fungimur tanquam deo exhortante per nos, 2 Cor. 5.
but as men sent from God; and the grandeur of that Master whose commands they
delivered, attracted the respect of their Auditors. I have sometime seen an
Ambassador of a petty stranger Prince, who had no Talent in speaking, but
because he was to speak on the account of his Master, he assumed on himself an
air of authority by which he procured attention, and persuaded merely by the
address he had to make himself considered: What weight then should we give to
the Word of God, if we know the Art to treat of it as the word of God, and not
as a pure invention of the wit of man? he therefore that would Preach the Word
with success, must do as Saint Paul did, Per arma Justitiae in verbo veritatis
in virtute Dei, Cor. 2.

. 3.
As this sacred Eloquence travels in a Field infinitely more large than
Eloquence profane; It proposes an eternal Kingdom for the object of our hopes;
and torments which endure for ever, of our fears and caution. The sanctity of
our mysteries, the purity of our morality, the Majesty of the God which we
adore, of whom we find so many great Idaea's in the holy Scripture, and all
those glorious Truths which render our Religion so august, are the most
ordinary Subjects wherein this divine Eloquence is exercised. It demands also,
to work the effects which it proposes to it self, greater natural qualities,
and a genius more elevated than is required in humane Eloquence. A Preacher
therefore ought to have great exterior quaties, Gravity in all his Person,
Dignity in his countenance, Devotion in his Eyes, a certain ardeur in his
Pronunciation, a Freedom in all his Action, and the Air of a Prophet; but a
sole assembly of these exterior qualities, is so rare, that I have not known a
Preacher in this Age that came near this description, except one; this one had
an excellent natural disposition for Preaching joined with the vivacity of
imagination, and a fineness of Spirit, which he possessed in a sovereign
degree, and which gave him a wonderful facility in expressing himself, the
greatest that I have ever seen in any person; he had yet a Talent in
pronunciation the most extraordinary in the world, that one might say that he
was an Orator in his countenance, in his voice, in his gesture, and in all his
actions; he could make his Eyes with an easy motion speak any thing, give an
inflection to his voice, an air to his visage, any grace to his gesture, and an
agreement to to his discourse, such as he pleased; and all these in such a
degree as never had Orator an equal power to him to raise attention, and as
never any person was more Master of what he said, nor of the manner wherein he
spoke; he could give to the Spirits of his audience what impressions he
pleased. The greatest places where he Preached was too little to hold the
concourse of those that followed him. Though this great facility he had in
speaking betrayed him into a neglect of preparing himself, yet by the mere
power of his action in the most indifferent and neglected discourses, he could
impose upon the People by his manner of speaking: the most common things that
he said, were listend to with the same applause and admiration, as those which
were the most extraordinary things the choicest Preachers could say. He had
certainly been the most accomplished Preacher that ever was, had his judgment
and his capacity answered to his other Talents; and if he had not been so
excessive in his action, which was too significant, and besides had not all the
gravity that the sanctity of the place required.

. 4.
These natural Talents sometimes exert themselves in so much splendour, that
they rob (if it be lawful so to speak) the word of God of that esteem and
veneration which we ought to have for it; they often procure themselves
attention, not for that it is on Gods account they speak, Non in sapientia
verbi, ne. vacuetur crux Christi. 1 Cor. 3.
but because they speak agreeably, because they are Eloquent, Preach novelties,
or bear some Character of dignity or advancement in the Church, or for some
other out^ard qualities, like the People of Jerusalem, who went to hear Ezekiel
because he was Eloquent. For this reason it was that Saint Austine went first
to hear Saint Ambrose before he was converted. The Preacher ought to shun, as a
thing too humane, and too sensual, the giving place in his discourse to the
curiosity of the people; which he may easily do, in taking the resolution to
profit, rather than please. He cannot fail too of success, if he know how to
speak of good things, and to speak them with judgment and knowledge.

5.
I do not intend that it is necessary for all those that are called to the
ministry to have all those great qualities that I have numbered; it is good that
in the Church there should be men of different capacities, to be accommodated
to those of their Auditors, which are so various: It suffices to a Preacher
that preaches to the common People, to know the principal duties of
Christianity. An indifferent Preacher is sufficiently qualified to entertain
Religion, and make it subsist in a Village, maugre the ignorance and stupidity
that reigns amongst us; for that mediocrity of genius, may always be in an
estate to instruct, especially if it have joined with it any Talent inspeaking;
and though he want the Genius to raise deep concernments, yet he may be numbered
amongst those Preachers who have the power to make a great noise by an animated
manner of speaking, which oftentimes works the same effect upon the hearts of
the People, as the Drums and Trumpets do upon the Soldiers in a Battle: The
noise astonishes them, and makes them run with precipitation upon the Enemy,
without any reflection whither they go. It is not the impulse of Reason which
moves the grosser Spirits and awakens them to their duty, for they understand
it not; but it is the emotion and ardeur with which they speak, and the
loudness of their Exclamations, which makes the impression; it is not the
things themselves that move, but the manner of delivering them, because the
manner is sensible, and the things are not: It is also manifest that the People
judge not so much by the reasons (as has been said) as by the tone of the
voice; they believe him that speaks most loud, and with most confidence; and it
is to this boldness that they owe the success of their persuasions: for the
truth is, the Soul is not ordinarily moved, than by what first vigorously
strikes the sense. But after all this, these popular Preachers must be let to
understand, that they become ridiculous when they strive to be numbered amongst
the fine Spirits, and endeavor rather to please, than to edify; it suffices
in Preaching to the People, to propose simply to them the great verities of
Religion, and the sanctity of its morals, without laboring so much for Forms
and Ornaments, which oftentimes serve only to burden the Preacher as well as
his Audience.

6.
The most part of Preachers are rendered very ignorant, by mingling themselves
too much in the commerce of the world, neglecting to apply themselves (with
that diligence that is required) to the work of the Ministry; it is this reduces
them ^oa necessity, to copy one from another, to furnish themselves with
matters for their Sermons. They take not the pains to fetch it from the
Sources, nor indeed have they any knowledge of them; this is the cause that
they use such ill Reasons to persuade to virtue, for they have not a capacity
for good reasons, nor the Art to make them understood when they have them. They
usually ruin themselves by this copying from other men, and extinguish their
own Genius, by striving to assume that of others: From hence I may say, all
those deformities which are so ordinary amongst them, first receive their
birth; and that which makes so many ill Preachers, is the false method they
choose; they ought not to serve themselves with the designs, nor the thoughts
of others, till they be able to transform them and make them proper to their
own Spirits.

. 7.
This Eloquence only becomes solid in a great capacity, nor can any hope to be
fortunate in this Art, who has not before replenished his mind, with all the
knowledges necessary to treat the word of God with dignity: The most important
is that of Divinity, without which a Preacher cannot with that confidence and
authority give clear resolutions in the subjects whereof he treats. It is a
great weakness in him that preaches, when he cannot determine precisely what is
of Faith, and what is not, or to hesitate, when he should decide. But we know
that there is nothing more great, necessary or agreeable in this Eloquence of
the Pulpit, than Divinity, which is the Science of Religion, and there is
nothing more miserable and disgusting, when it is not treated with that
sufficiency and dignity with which it ought to be.

. 8.
A too frequent commerce with the Schoolmen, brings a much greater prejudice
than advantage to the Preacher, when he knows not how to make use of it as he
ought, and wants Wisdom or a necessary precaution in the reading of them; for
there is nothing so contrary to Eloquence, as the learning of the Schools, and
I am persuaded that the Lecture of Thomas Aquinas, how solid and methodick
soever he be, has made more ill Preachers than good, for he writ in a very
miserable age, whose gust was universally corrupted; and that difficult manner
that he has to express things, is as much opposed to Eloquence, as the things
themselves are proper; for though a simple and plain style is fittest for
instruction, yet it becomes very much contrary to what we ought to use in
public, if we take not great care. The Divines which succeeded him, have
imitated the same manner, and it is now become the general method of the
Schools, and so dangerous to this kind of Eloquence; it is busied only in
desertations and subtilties, which may perhaps give the Nerves and force to
discourse, but deprives it of the grace and beauties; hence it appears that
Logic though it teach the Art of reasoning, yet it is not absolutely necessary
to Eloquence; for though without it a discourse is but a prattling in the Air,
which signifies nothing: yet its succors are not to be received in that naked
manner which is usual; they must be clad in the Ornaments of Eloquence, to add
a grace to its discourses.

. 9.
There may be made the same observations upon the writings of the Latin
Fathers, which are also much contrary to Eloquence, by reason of the miserable
estate of those times, in which they writ; every one knows to what extremities,
all that which was called good sense, was reduced to at the time of the
departure of the Barbarians from Italy: All the Fathers of the first age, even
to Saint Bernard, have writ after this hard and dry manner, excepting a very
little number which are not corrupted, by this Gusto, by reason of some
tincture which they have conserved, as Minutius Felix, Salvian, Arnobius* and
St. Jerome; to which we might add some places in the works of Saint Ambrose and
Saint Austin. The Greek Fathers are more Eloquent than the Latin Fathers,
though the order of their designs, and the matters which they treat on are very
little just or conformable to the precepts of Art; for they have taken an Air
of Eloquence, more natural and easy, but thereby they become more apt to be
abandoned to their Genius, as we may observe in Saint Basile, and in Saint
Chrysostom; Saint Gregory of Nazianzen is indeed more polished, and without
doubt has more of Art; but when I advertise the Preachers of the danger of
reading of the Latin Fathers (by exposing their Eloquence) to the end to
oblige them to take caution that they ruin not themselves on that part, I
pretend not to decry all commerce with them, which is not only profitable, but
absolutely necessary for a Preacher to furnish his Spirit with Idea's of
sanctity, and of the Grandeur of our Religion, which we find in all the works
of these Authors. In the reading of these, the most pure of the Christian
morality is to be found; from whence the Preacher may draw it, as from the
proper source, the most clear and undisturbed, The Fathers are the Interpreters
of the Evangelists, and the Church honors them with the Title of holy, because
their works are as a heritage and patrimony which they have bequeathed to the
faithful, as to their true Children.

. 10.
It Is not enough that the Preacher lay a foundation by a long study of
Divinity, and a frequent reading of the Fathers, which he ought to do with
method; but he must also study a Rhetoric proper to the Pulpit, whereof we
find not any Character amongst the Ancients, who have not had any perfect Idea
of it; nor amongst the Moderns, who have only copyed from the Ancients. The
Majesty of our Religion, the Sanctity of its Laws, the purity of its Morality,
its exalted Mysteries, and the importance of all its Subjects, ought to give it
an elevation which cannot be sustained by the weakness of a spirit purely
humane. It is in vain to search for it in the Rhetoric of Aristotle, in the
Idea's of Hermogenes, or in the Institutions of Quintilian, even that sublime
kind which Longinus has formed of all the great expressions of the Ancients
which he has collected, are feeble, and low in comparison of that which our
Preacher ought to possess to maintain the dignity of his Character. That divine
Air which the grandeur of Christian Religion, and the Incomprehensibility of
our Faith demands, is only to be sought in those excellent Idea's which are to
be found in the holy Scripture by those who know the secret to penetrate into
the depth thereof. This is that pure and plentiful Spring from whence all those
magnificent expressions flow, whose Author is the holy Spirit. It is from hence
he ought to take those glorious Images, and that elevation which makes up the
essential Character of this Eloquence* he must read with diligence the
Prophets, and lay out his time in hourly meditations of them, if he would
preach terror, Naturaliter plus valet apud plurimos malorum timor quam spes
bonorum Fab. l. 3. c. 8
which must be his most general practice; for to preach well, he must terrify
the Sinner, and awaken him from the Lethargy and softness of a vicious age, by
casting a terror into his Spirit. To this I add, that the Scripture is a
Fountain abounding with all the Riches, and all the Ornaments, whereof this
Eloquence is formed; and that all kinds of writing are there to be found:
Esaiah is elevated, Jeremiah moving, Ezekiel terrible, Daniel tender, and all
the other Prophets in general contain something so great and excellent, as is
not in any measure to be equaled by what is most esteemed in profane Orators.
Good sense and right reason, was never so clearly unvayl'd in any work of
morality, as in the Books of Solomon; never has any History been writ with an
Air more simple and elevated, mixed together, nor in a manner more perfect than
that of Moses, whereof Longinus only cites two words in the beginning of
Genesis, (...). c. 8
to give the greatest and most sublime Idea that conception is capable of, so
far above the highest elevation of profane Authors. Never was any thing writ
more tender or delicate, for the thoughts of Devotion and Piety, than the
Psalms of David: the most refined politics and worldly wisdom, are to be found
in the Book of Wisdom and Proverbs: Finally, nothing has been ever conceived in
the utmost extent of humane capacity, more profound and penetrating than those
sacred and adorable mysteries of Grace, and predestination, which Saint Paul
has delivered in his Epistles. And to say a word of the New Testament, which
is the most essential Book of our Religion, to which all that has been writ by
the Prophets is but Preface and Introduction; what can one say more great or
expressive than what our Savior himself said in two words, Verba quae locutus
sum vobis Spiritus and vita sunt? Job. 6.
all the other Books may be said to contain only words, but this is a rich
Treasury of things: And as it is the Character of the Spirit of man, to speak
much, and in effect to say little; so it is the Character of the holy Spirit to
speak little, and therein to comprehend much: all the holy Scripture has in it
most excellent things couched in the most humble and simple expressions, which
ordinarily enlarge our conceptions beyond the Letter. What is more plain and
more succinct then these words, Verbum caro factum est, Joh. 1. Joh. 19.
-- and crucifixerunt eum? how many Commentaries has been made upon these
words, how many dissertations at this day? how great must then be the
penetration of Spirit, which is necessary to discover the depth of These
Mysteries? We stay our selves upon the superficies of words without searching
to the bottom, by meditation. Who is at this day a Preacher so illuminated, to
penetrate into all these mysterious darknesses and holy obscurities of sacred
Scripture, to discover the hidden Treasures thereof? alas our want comes from
our little meditation thereof. Parvuli petierunt panem, and non erat qui
frangeret cis. Lament. Jer. c. 4.
It is the unhappiness of this age, that there are so few persons found capable
to break the holy Bread of Gods word, which ought to be the most ordinary
nourishment of the faithful; that is to say, there are few Preachers so
illuminated, as to unfold the whole sense of the holy Scripture to the People;
or who know how to make use of Art, which is the most certain means to succeed
in their Preaching; they Preach their own Imagination and thoughts, abandoning
the thoughts of the holy Spirit. Is not this to be wanting even in the
principals? for we cannot have a true Idea of Christian Eloquence, but from the
holy Scripture, which is the first original.

. 11.
There is required (besides this reading of the Fathers, and a diligent study
of Divinity, joined with that Art of Eloquence, which is formed upon that of
the Prophets, that the Preacher forms a morality, whereof the principles must
be taken from the Gospel; for all other morality is no more than a certain
Pagan probity, and pure Philosophy. This is not only to be found by the study
of the Evangelists, but as well in the Epistles of Saint Paul, and in the
Homilies of Saint Chrysostom, where it is so well explained: These Homilies
ought to be the most ordinary study of the Preacher, whereof also he will find
great instructions in Saint Austin, Saint Jerome, Saint Gregory, the great, in
Saint Bernard. This diligence ought not to be in the search after beautiful
thoughts, and shining words, which is the fault of most young Preachers, which
in truth conduce little to the edification of the People, or true compunction
of heart.

. 12.
This true morality cannot be taken then from these pure and holy sources,
whereof I have spoken, especially in these times, where every one frames to
himself morals according to his own fantasy; and we find so many extravagant
Preachers, who impose from the Pulpit their own morose humors and sour
temperaments for pure morality, which are accompanied with the ridiculous
Visions, which their Spirit of novelty, or their preoccupation inspires. Have
we not seen some Preachers, who notwithstanding their profound ignorance in all
that a Preacher ought to know, undertake a decision of all things, with the
utmost rigor, and deliver, with the assurance of a Prophet and an unparalleled
confidence, the greatest absurdities in the World, and in matters of morality
to hazard every novelty, when the Smoke of their Zeal has once mounted to
their heads

It Is the custom of our Nation to run after all that is new, or that has any
air of singularity; but when we have sounded the depth of those Preachers, who
practice (to derive respect on their discourses) an affectation of severity on
themselves, we shall find that they are not altogether so hard to themselves,
as they are to others. Such a one was a young Doctor, who Preached five years
ago before an honorable Audience; who who commenced his Sermon by promising in
a tone of a Reformator that he would Preach nothing but severe morality, and
the pure rigor of the Gospel; and a little after he canted forth the story of
the new Pope, wherein he forgot nothing that might rejoice or give a subject
for entertainment to the more sportive part of his Audience. Those that would
Preach this severity must do as Jesus Christ has done, that is to say, Preach
by his example. The Character of Christian severity is to be sweet to others
and hard to our selves; to do otherwise is to play the Impostor or Comoedian,
not a Preacher. We have seen in this past age, false Zealots who made
profession to preach ^n morality more rigid than others; during which they were
lifting up their impure hands to Heaven, and fomenting error upon Earth.
Finally, these Preachers who are so excessive, only because they are ignorant,
and who make Enormities and abominations of mere trifles, who will damn a Woman
for wearing of Lace or colored Ribbonds, or for having been a promenading upon
a Festival day; these Preachers I say dishonor their ministry, by the excess
of their sottish exaggerations; they discourage the faithful by making false
Images of crime, and authorize Libertinism by these terrible Ideas they give of
Virtue; whereby they render it more dreadful and salvage than it is.

. 13.
The little success that most Preachers meet with, comes from the little care
they have to understand the morals of our Religion; and the small Talent they
have in dispensing it for nothing, so sensibly touches the Spirits, as the
pourtracts which we make, when we make them well, in which we are often rendered
wanting by a vain curiosity, and a too scrupulous kind of ratiocination. This
way we take to shun the difficulty we find in the well painting of manners,
which is a thing not only the most capable to attract admiration to the Orator,
but also the most difficult to succeed in this, he must commence by a perfect
knowledge of the heart of man, he must know the particular of all its motions;
to make a true pourtraict, and to paint men so naturally that they may know
themselves in the Pictures that are made of them. It Is in this that almost all
Preachers are wanting, who represent false Images of manners to their Auditors,
in making them too difficult, or too easy, so that they fail of the intended
effect, for that the Images being false we know them not; and what he says is
quite lost, because no person can take it as spoken to himself; they Preach to
the rich as to the poor, to the Courtier as to the Citizen, they make the
morals of a City the Subject of a Village Sermon; and they make elaborate
Sermons, where simple Catechismes and naked instructions are most proper. Every
one knows the story, of the Preacher, who preached all the species of sin
against the sixth Commandment, to a house of Religion. This is the most
ordinary defect of the whole Clergy, because the necessary discernment, and
understanding of the persons to whom they speak, and the perfect knowledge of
the manners of men are Talents very rare; for the great experience of the world
which he must have, joined with the light of Philosophy and Divinity, (which
are the first sources of this discernment) are the most essential to a
Preacher, and I am persuaded that none can succeed, but according to the
proportion of his knowledge of the manners and heart of man.

. 14.
The heart of man is an abysm of unknown Depth; whatsoever discoveries we make,
still there remains something not yet discovered. It is not alone sufficient to
make a true picture, though we had so much power of penetration, as to know its
impostures, deceits, dissimulations, weaknesses, suspicions, its distasts,
jealousies, irresolutions, its several Meanders, and inequalities, its
delicatesses which surmount interest, its pride, presumption, and that confused
Miscellany of all its affections, and finally, its natural and inconceivable
propension to malice and disguisement. He must yet know how to take off the
mask of virtue, of candor, and sincerity, which are used in the more successful
and refined exercises of dissimulation; he must make him see that by his self
love (against which all the Fathers have declaimed with so much heat) and by a
false modesty which he conceales from himself, the evil of his own intentions,
to shun under this disguise the confusion that it would bring him. And as man
has not any virtue of himself, but on the contrary, his nature is corrupted
with vice, he must show him that the joy which he seems to have in the exercise
of virtue, is but a counterfeit joy; that he flatters himself with a false
appearance of sorrow and Repentance in the exercise of Repentance; that his
Faith, his Hope, his Charity, and his other virtues, are no other than
imaginary, wherewith he amuses himself, and a deceitful tranquillity amidst the
vain and confused projects that he frames of his salvation. Finally, for to
discover him wholly, and to give him a full prospect of his deformities, he
must depaint to him his false modesties in the things he seeks after, his
artificial excuses in what he flies, the perversity of his Judgment in what he
esteems, the frailty of his resolutions, and the continual agitation and
inquietudes in the pursuance of any good: I should never find an end, if I
would discover all the changes and varieties of his thoughts. I have said
enough to make out in general the principal sourse of all its motions, which
ought to be the subject of a perpetual meditation to him who pretends to be
distinguished from other Preachers: For in effect, the knowledge of this heart
of man, more or less great, is almost the sole thing which makes the true
distinction of the different Talents of Preaching, in the infinite number of
diverse manners that there are of preaching. The little care that most Preachers
take to gain a perfect knowledge of man, is one of the most ordinary causes that
there are so few in number of those that succeed; for that when they speak
things so much in the general, and descend not in the particular enumeration of
Manners, none seem to be interessed in what they say. It is this
particularizing of morals, when it is natural, which gives success to the
Preacher; and as this secret is rare, so is the success also.

. 15.
Besides this Morallity which is a part of Eloquence, which contributes the
most to render it admirable; the Art to excite the Passions contributes also
not a little: For it suffices not to a Preacher to speak good things, but he
must speak them well, and with a moving air; for when he says any thing that's
touching, without seeming moved himself, it is only taken for a Grimace,
wherewith he mocks his Audience. I once heard a Doctor, who preached with words
very well chosen, and all that he said was very good; but he spoke it so
coldly, without that action and heat that is necessary to work concernment,
that he gave cause to the pleasant to say, that he could not be so calm,
without being in some fashion resigned to the Reprobation of his Auditors,
since he appeared to take so little interest in what he said. And in truth,
this cold and languishing manner of speaking upon the great subjects of the
Gospel, is a great obstacle to the virtue of the Word of God, the which being
not delivered at least with some sort of zeal and ardeur, fails of his
expected fruit. But alas, how few Preachers are there, who at this day can
boast that they have moved the least of their Auditors, by representing the
horror of sin, and the greatness of the pains to which he is destined? Though
we have known a Jerome Savan. in Flor. one Lewis of Grenada in Sevil, and one
Delingendes in Paris, (not to exclude some famous men of our own nation) who
have made all their Auditors tremble whenever they opened their mouths of
matters so terrible. Whence proceeds this, but from that languishing way of
Preaching, whereof the manner is so little touching. It is remembered of a
Capucin named Philip of Narny, who under the Pontificate of Gregory 15.
preached at Rome with so much power, so much of action, and so much of zeal,
that he never spoke in public, that he made not mercy to be cried to the
people through the streets when they went from the Sermon. It is likewise said,
that having one day preached before the Pope of the obligation that Bishops
have to reside, he so terrified by the vehemence of his discourse, thirty
Bishops who were at the Sermon, that the very next day they posted to their
several Diocesses. These great effects are wrought by an extraordinary talent
in pronunciation, to which eloquence oftentimes owes all the doing of its
miracles, especially amongst the common people, whose apprehensions are too
gross to be moved by Eloquence, but only as it is sensible: Such is this ardent
and pathetick kind of declamation: this is a thing very little studied because
it demands so much diligence and application, whereof very few persons are
capable, and for which reason the greatest part of Preachers scarce ever think
on it.

. 16.
It is but too true, that few Preachers allow themselves time to the exercise
of pronunciation to form it true, and to grace it with suitable action; they
think altogether on other things; they study the Fathers, they study Rhetoric,
they study the Tongues, but they neglect the study of this Art of action, which
only has the power to animate what he says, and to give an agreement necessary
to engage the attention of the Auditor. The negligence of this part is alone
capable to render all the other unprofitable; but yet after all this, there are
in this, as in other things, some extremities to be feared and avoided: For
those Preachers who are all passionate, and who begin their Exordiums in
thunder, least they should seem to be wanting in any thing, ruin all by giving
themselves too much to their humor. It is good to make them comprehend that
they never were less capable to move, than when they most strived to do so. I
have sometimes seen a Preacher who was of this humor, who notwithstanding
preached with very good success: indeed he had a rare talent, and many tracts
in his discourse which did exceedingly affect the spirits: His way of speaking
was very strong, and his whole air was vehement, but he lost these great
advantages by a too great passion that he had to move, and to make vehement
discourses against the Times, so that his declamation became too full of
Transport, his gestures too expressive, and his countenance too Comaedian;
finally, his manner was so very much corrupted by the Grimaces, and violent
agitations and constraints of his whole body, that all his motions became so
many real Convulsions. A Preacher must shun these extravagant transports of
zeal, which become blameable as often as they are excessive; he must therefore
consider well this rule, that he never moves less, than when he betrays this
too earnest desire to his Auditors: it seems but a false passion which indures
so long; and that zeal becomes suspected which is continued with so much heat,
and whereof the Preacher makes too great ostentation.

. 17.
There is in most a too great desire to please without putting themselves to
the trouble of working real concernments in their Auditors; this is another
extremity which ought to be avoided: For he that would perfectly succeed in
preaching must commence by moving first the heart before he think to please:
What way he should take to effect this, I have already described. I deny not
but that there may be found in this Age a species of good sense joined with
excellent things, but by a too great passion that most have to please, they
bring themselves in danger to loose the true fruit of things, by a too careful
search after the flower: For that which pleases opens the heart and dissipates
the spirits, which only profits by its close entertainment, and he looses what
is solid by a too eager pursuit of what is agreeable. It is without doubt from
that disposition of spirit that there are so many Preachers who endeavor more
to please than to persuade, and who introduce into the Pulpit all those various
gusto's which reign in the world, which they make their study, that they may
appear the more al a mode. We have lately seen many Preachers of this kind, who
prepare themselves to go to a Sermon, as to a Ball; where he meets all the fair
world assembled, whom he entertains with the morality in fashion, delivered in
an amorous style, and with an air very lascivious: What is the effect of these
agreeable Sermons but the dissipation of the spirits, than which there is
nothing more opposed to devotion. Unhappiness be to these Preachers al a mode:
The Evangelists nor the Apostles did not thus: What indecence is it to preach
the severities of our Religion, the abjection of Christianity, and the contempt
of the Cross with an air undisturbed, and with fine and studied expressions,
and to mix these feeble ornaments with the greatness and majesty of our
Religion? This is the most ordinary defect of those who preach to persons of
Quality; they amuse themselves to make Religion agreeable to the manners of
those, whom they ought to terrify, in letting them understand that their
condition has an essential opposition to Salvation, and that they find not any
tract or footstep of the Gospel, or of true Christianity in the life that they
lead at Court. It is true, he ought to have compassion on their blindness, who
are poisoned with a pestilential air which reigns amongst them. But this ought
so much the more to excite the Preacher to speak the Truth: For we are taught
by the Fathers, that the Court always followed the manners of their Preachers;
if they were holy, it failed not to be holy also.

. 18.
There are some others who fail of success, because their respects are too
humane and too interess'd; they are more attentive to their own establishment,
than to the Salvation of their Auditors; they preach themselves, and not Jesus
Christ. Let those Preachers reflect, that the great success the of Apostles
came (as St. Chrysostom says) from their disinteressment. St. Paul perfected
an entire conversion upon the people, because he pretended no benefit by his
Sermons: But it happens sometimes to those who have resigned all their temporal
hopes in renouncing the world, yet have no power to subdue this foolish vanity,
which makes the Preacher labor too much after reputation; who after he has
renounced all, cannot, without much pain^, renounce the pleasure of being
praised. Let the Preacher that would cure himself of this weakness, consider
(if all these praises that are given him were sincere, which they scarce ever
are,) that he has but preached very indifferently, whilst he has left still a
liberty to his Auditors to say that he has done well, and that his preaching is
not to much purpose; whilst he has given them leave to say that he has
preached agreeably, he has only given them a little pleasure, but no fruit. The
greatest praises of a Preacher is the silence of his Auditors, and when they
rise all pensive from their seats after Sermon, and depart from the Church
without speaking a word, this is a sure mark that they are nearly touched. and
that they think on what they heard. This agrees with what the Great Symachus in
one of his Epistles said to the Emperors Theodosins and Arcadius: Magnitudo
stuporis locum plausibus non relinquit. Lib. 10. Epist. 22.
(The greatness of our admiration and astonishment seals up our tongues, and
deprives us of the power to praise) An example of this I have seen at the
Sermon of a Preacher, who preached in a manner so vehement and touching, that
when they departed from the Sermon, and astonishment of the Auditors, and the
compunction of heart which they suffered, imposed a general silence, which
spoke loud to his advantage. I cannot forbear the relation of an Adventure
which happened to me a few years ago. I went to hear a Sermon one day in Lent to
the Court; the Preacher that day preached upon the passion of our Lord with an
air very brisk and polish't: The Ladies from time to time lift up their eyes
to heaven during his discourse, saying, that was excellently expressed! that
was graciously spoken! whilst I was almost mad with indignation to hear him
discourse so pleasantly in a subject so worthy compassion, and take so much
pains to please his Auditors, whom he ought to have endeavored to affect with
grief and compunction. There is one other vanity yet more foolish and
deplorable. When those that have gained a reputation of good men, and to be
excellent in this Art, they attribute to themselves the glory and success of
their persuasions, when they have done no more than what is effected by the
impression of the voice, and the exterior part of speech upon the heart: Our
Religion teaches us, that it is the holy Spirit alone which does the rest.

. 19.
Another cause of the ill success in preaching, is the Preachers being too much
abandoned to himself, without ever thinking to implore the assistance and
succors of heaven; whereby he is driven to mix his own imaginations and
weaknesses with the grandeur and sanctity of our Mysteries: like that
impertinent Preacher, who preached one day very miserably before a reverend
Bishop, making this complement after Sermon, that he was forced to abandon
himself to the holy Spirit, because he had been allowed but a little time for
preparation: Adding that hereafter he hoped to acquit himself better. There is
something so great and elevated, which I know not how to name, in our
Mysteries, that it suffices to expose them simply, and without Art, to the
people, to merit all the glory that can be hoped from Eloquence, (were it
honest to preach for Reputation.

. 20.
He treats unworthily the Word of God, who debases himself to the childish
amplifications of petty subjects, and to mere trifles, amongst the great number
of important matters which furnish our Religion; following the example of those
trifling Preachers, who spend their Zeal against Paintings, Garnitures,
Dresses, and other vanities of Women. A good man begins by throwing a terror
into our Souls, by a remembrance of the Judgments of God, and making us tremble
by proclaiming the dreadful consequences of our Sins; this is the most powerful
means to extirpate Luxury, and the most capable to introduce Modesty in our
Habits and Behavior: He does but trifle, that thinks to effect it any other
way. And in truth, in so great and rich abundance of great matters which the
Gospel affords, he must have a very low spirit who can stay and busy himself
about such trivial subjects. I know not by what unhappiness our Preachers
become so nugatory in the great subjects they have to treat; when the ancient
Pagans were even great and elevated in the least things that they had to say.

I am ashamed when I read the Oration of Eschines against Ctesiphon, where that
Orator makes shine with so much Art the power of a Pagan Eloquence in these
Trifles. We (says he) are come to the Feast of Corbeils; the Victims are upon
the Altars, the Sacrifice is ready, and you are all prepared to beg of the Gods
what is necessary for the State: But consider before with what voice, with what
spirit, and with what assurance you can present your Vows, if you leave the
Impiety of those who have violated their Mysteries, unpunished. See how much
spirit, and how much greatness there is in solittle a subject, in comparison of
that languor and weakness of most part of our Preachers; who instead of being
elevated by the Majesty and Greatness of our Mysteries, amuse themselves in
little things, because they have not that force of spirit to fasten upon the
greater; The grave and serious kind is the character most essential to the
Pulpit, which admits of nothing that is low, cold, trivial, or childish; to
obtain this he must imitate the Apostle, who in lieu of busying himself in the
search of profane Ornaments, made all his Art and all his Eloquence out of the
continual meditation of the greatness of Jesus Christ: Non doctas fabulas
seculi, notam fecimus nobis Jesu Christi virtutem, speculatores facti illius
magnitudinis.

. 21.
The most refined and sublime matters are not the most proper for preaching;
but on the contrary, those that are the most edifying and simple: For these
reasons we ought to blame that extravagancy of wit which reigns in this age,
and labors after curious designs, and ingenious distributions and division of
discourse, which gains so much approbation from the Ladies. Such was that
division of the Preacher, who preaching on the suffering of our Savior,
thought he had acquitted himself very dexterously, when he had shown in two
parts of his discourse, The pleasures in sufferings, and the sufferings in
pleasures. This affectation in discourse appears so childish, smells so much of
the Scholar and Declamator, and so little of the gravity of the Pulpit, that
it is pitied by every one who has the least use of their reason; for in those
studied oppositions there is seldom any thing that is solid; though sometime
possibly they may be witty, yet the parts are oftentimes comprehended the one
in the other, when they are exactly discussed: And this contains but one and
the same thing in effect, though they are two in appearance. Beside, they often
weaken the Subject by this too curious care to give it an agreeable variety,
which would be more strong if it were more natural.

It is for the most part the younger Preachers who seek after this fineness in
the division of their discourses. It was not the manner of St. Chrysostom, nor
those great men of the Church; they found the most common distributions, as
being most natural, always the best; they had a noble contempt of the
reputation of being witty in these kind of things, which only can succeed by
being natural, by their simplicity, and by the strength of the reasons that
recommend them.

. 22.
Nothing so much contributed to the great success the Apostles had in preaching
the Gospel, than their own practice of it; their example was the best
instruction, and their preachings were rendered more powerful by their humility,
by their mortification, and by their poverty, than by their reasonings or
Discourse. And indeed the most effectual way of persuasion to Christianity, is
by the Life and Manners of those that preach. It was the Eloquence of Jesus
Christ, first to practice himself what he taught. He that preaches a severe
morality, with a cheerful and vermilion countenance, will not easily persuade
to what he exhorts; for he gives cause to believe that he practiceth not what
he teaches, and his visage destroys his Reasons. All the world has seen the
little success of some, who could not by all the emotion of their zeal, make
the least impression, because the rigor of their morality had diminished
nothing from their thriving Carkases; for the Auditors oftentimes regard more
his Countenance, than his Reasons. The Countenance of the Preacher gives not a
little consolation to those who cannot accommodate themselves to that severity,
which these sanguine Complexions dispense with so much zeal. I do not say but
that the people whose understandings are dull, may be imposed upon; but the
exterior part cannot do it, for they judge according to appearance; and though
the Preacher may speak never so great a truth, if his Manners be suspected, his
Reasons will be so also. It is sometimes necessary to speak little, to persuade
much; for all appears false that a Preacher says, if he have once the
reputation of one that will amplify.

. 23.
Imposumus populo oratores visi sumus. Cic. in Brut.
Every one is very well persuaded of the Reflection that I come to make, That
the most ordinary Artifice of Preachers is to impose on their Auditors, and to
make themselves appear what they are not. The morality that they practice is so
much the more severe, as that which they practice is sweet and commodious; and
because in preaching the Gospel he must necessarily edify his Auditors to
maintain the dignity of his Ministry, he is constrained to take upon him at
least the appearances of severity; whilst the sweetness of the life he leads,
convinces us of the little disposition he has to a real Mortification. But of
all these pretended Zelots, who would be distinguished by the severity of the
morals they deliver, the most dangerous sort are those shallow and presumptuous
Devot's, who preach to the people Chimerical Devotions, and their own
Fantastic Visions, who without distinguishing what is essential from what is
not, they bring all things to the last extremity. I know some that have this
Art to impose, without understanding any thing of fineness or subtlety, by a
strong natural imagination, which is fed by the little Light they receive from
the reading of the Gospel: So that it is not the Spirit that is always Master;
it resigns it self up to the conduct of the Imagination; and as often as that is
transported, all that the Spirit says by its impression, is so also. A
Preacher must avoid this with a particular care, or else he will make very
strange disorders amongst the people, but especially amongst the Women, who are
naturally feeble and ignorant; for the more extravagant a Preacher is, and the
more extraordinary his Conduct, by so much he is rendered more capable to make
the greater disturbance: This disorder is but too frequent in this Age, as well
as in that of the false Devot's whose virtues were all counterfeit, which has
given occasion to decry so very much that devotion, whereby they have made at
present in the world a species of Intrigue, and a manner of profession to be
distinguished from others. But they cannot be very devout, who seek only to
distinguish themselves by a bare profession, that they make to be so.

. 24.
How many Preachers are there, who by the vehemence of their discourse, seem to
throw stones at the heads of their Auditors, to compel them to amend their
faults, and scarce ever think of preaching those to which themselves are
subject? They study the Fathers Divinity and Rhetoric, and all things else
that may contribute to render them renowned. In fine, they study all things,
but the knowledge of themselves: Their ill pronunciation, their minds, their
grimaces, their action, their gestures so little conformable to a true decorum,
and whatsoever else that is violent in their persons and outward behavior, to
suffer to stick to them, they, without any care of Reformation, by this
negligence of their persons: they corrupt oftentimes their best natural
qualities, which possibly might contribute to render them more successful and
profitable, if they would give themselves the trouble to think on it: For how
can they so much neglect this, without making it believed, that they yet more
neglect their Auditors? what respect can we have for what they say, when we
have no difference for their persons. We have seen not long ago, a Preacher of
this kind, who could not put off his air of the Village, whereby he corruped
his other talents, because he would not take the pains to amend it.

. 25.
A Christian Preacher ought to shun nothing so carefully as that which is too
glistring, either in words or thoughts; he must know how to speak in a style
polish't without affectation. All that is studided and artificial is false, and
little agreeable to the eloquence of the Pulpit; his discourse ought to be
simple, reasonable, and natural, to which the commerce with the Italilian and
Spanish Simonists, is very contrary. This reading of the Moderns does but amuse
him, because he knows not the Ancients; and he frames to himself a false Idea
of that Eloquence, whose true Character is very much opposed to what is
studied, dazeling and witty. The true Eloquence of the Pulpit ought not to
endeavor to sustain it self but by the greatness of the Subjects of which it
treats, by its simplicity, and by its reasons: He does but weaken it, who
pretends to adorn it with the Riches of the Pagans. The Preacher ought to
banish from the Pulpit all Citations of profane Authors, all reflections upon
their Maxims, and all their stories, as unworthy of so sacred a Subject. The
holy Scripture is rich enough to furnish him with Ornaments of all kinds which
are of use to this Eloquence; when he has well meditated it, he will find
plenty of Reasons and Examples to strengthen and establish his discourse; all
other Authorities ought to have no place in the Pulpit, as too estranged, and
too little conformable to the Sanctity of his Character. A Preacher, which
ought not to put in usuage any thing, but what is holy, ought to be extremely
scrupulous in serving himself with any thing that is not so: He must also fly
the affectation of making the entrance of his discourse too glistring, whose
fair thoughts surprise and dazzle the spirits of their Auditors, but are very
far from having that junction which accompanies the Word of God, reducing it to
a dryness, which renders it sterile, and unfruitful.

. 26.
Finally, the most essential character of this Eloquence, which we likewise so
miserably neglect, is the Art to allot diverse days to the same thoughts, which
is done by varying them after different manners; for that the common people,
which usually makes the greater number, whereof every Audience is composs'd,
wants prompt and easy conceptions: So that it is to great purpose (if the
Preacher would have them reap any fruit or profit) that he propose the truth of
the Gospel in such a manner as may insinuate little by little into their
spirits, and to dispose in order their impressions upon their hearts and
resolutions; which cannot be effected, but by those variations that he must
give to the same proposition, to imprint them more deep in the spirits of his
Hearers, insinuating by frequent repetitions the same things under different
forms of speech. It was thus that St. Chrysostom preached in the first Ages of
the Church, and the famous Grenade in this last Age: Both which have been the
most perfect models that can be proposed to a Preacher. A discourse (to answer
this Character) must not be over-charg'd with matter, lest it too much oppress
the Auditor. That rapid Eloquence, which so much pleases the lesser wits, and
is only recommendable for its impetuosity and transport, is not at all proper
for the people, who have neither so much penetration of spirit, or promptitude
to keep pace with it, and retain its fruit. I cannot forbear to note, that some
Preachers owe all their success to the weakness and ignorance of the Auditors;
but that success ought not to authorize an evil custom, because that it happens
only from the little reason and stupidity of those to whom they speak.

. 27.
The choice of matters we ought to treat of in the Pulpit, is of a greatter
importance than we commonly think it is. We seldom consider the great
Importance in the choice of matters which ought to be treated of in the Pulpit:
They fall into an ill custom, who upon that portion of the Gospel which they
propose, preach only what others have done before: The choicest Preachers know
how to distinguish themselves from the indifferent; in effect it is one of the
essential talents of great Genius's to make choice of great Subjects in all the
matters that they treat of, to which they know how to add that natural variety
that it ought to have: For as every Subject is only great so far as it is
solid: All that passes the test of a Preacher, who has a great and firm
Judgment, becomes proportionably solid, and whatsoever is so, is always proper
to preach. But because this talent is rare, and common Preachers are much
wanting in the choice of worthy Subjects, I have thought it not unprofitable to
propose some of them, that may be the most proper to this Eloquence of the
Pulpit.

1. The Greatness and Majesty of God, as it is described in the Prophets, and
in other places of Scripture. To give an Idea of him to the greatest part of
Christians, who know so little of him, the Preacher must render him terrible to
the wicked, and amiable to the good; and so (by making him appear such as he
is) they both may be equally edified.

2. The truth of our Religion, which has been attested by the wisest men of the
world, and those which were most exempted form Interest or Passion, and has
never been contested but by those whose sentiments were corrupted by the
contagion of their manners.

3. The necessity and importance of Salvation, and the difficulty to attain to
it, by reason of the uncertainty of death, which oftentimes surprises us in our
disobedience.

4. The greatness of the act of Redemption, and the unspeakable bounties of our
Savior, the acknowledgments and thanks that we owe to him, and which he has
merited of us by his Sufferings, and by the effusion of his Blood.

5. The unprofitableness of the life of most part of Christians, especially the
rich, who do so little to gain Heaven; which being proposed only as a conquest,
cannot be gained by sloth and softness of life, as is that of Courtiers and
Ladies.

6. The terrible account that he must render to God of his misspent life, and
the use of those graces that he bestowed on him, when he receives from death
his last arrest.

7. The Sanctity of the Mysteries of our Religion, as that of the Resurrection,
which is the establishment of our Faith: the Ascension, which is the motive of
our Hope, by the assurance of a Mediator with God; the descent of the Holy
Spirit, which is the ground of our Charity, and the love we owe to God, by a
bond so holy.

8. The greatness and dignity of the name of Christian, which we receive at our
Baptism; which consists in the honor we have to become the Children of God by
Adoption, and in the right to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: This right, and
that honor is a thing so glorious, that we cannot given an Idea great enough
to a Christian, nor make him well comprehend the obligation that such a name
lays upon him, to lead his life answerably in all purity and holiness.

9. The frequent Elogy of our Faith, which only can calm the inquietudes, and
the eternal Agitations of curiosity, to which the spirit of man is subject, and
which is capable to sweeten the perpetual troubles of this life, by giving us a
clear prospect of the Recompenses which we hope for, fide sperandarum
substantia verum.

10. The holy use that we ought to make of the Sacraments, which are the most
essential things in our Religion; he must show in that usage, what perfection
the quality of a Christian (which we receive by our Baptism) does obliege us;
he must make him understand that penitence is a sincere Reconciliation with
God, which oblieges us to a true Repentance for our offenses, and a firm
resolution to offend no more: He must explain, that the Eucharist is not only
the sacred nourishment of souls, but that it ought to be taken as a lively
Image to refresh in us the memory of that great act of Redemption which ought
never to be effaced from the heart of a Christian: That Marriage is not only a
Christian society of man and woman, but also a means to elevate Christians to
acknowledge and honor God: And in this manner to explain all the Sacraments.

11. The sufferings, humiliations, contradictions and poverty, which are the
blessings of Christian Religion, and the mosts certain paths that lead to
Heaven; as wealth and greatness are the greatest obstacles.

12. To stir up in the faithful that spirit of fear and trembling, in which
they must travel to their salvation, according to the advertisement of the
Apostle: It is good to proclaim in the ears of sinners the terror of the
Judgments of God, to awaken them from that sleepiness into which their crimes
have plunged them; and to raise a fear even in the better Christians, by
representing the peril to which they expose themselves, by neglecting the least
Graces which they receive from God, who severely punishes the least contempt
or misimployment of them.

13. The confidence in God which he must excite by frequent Discourses upon his
Providence, which we are not very apt to acknowledge, by reason of the ill
habitude we have got to impute all evenements to Chance, or to our own
industry, without reflecting on what we are taught in the Gospel, that there
falls not a hair of our Heads, that is to say, there arrives nothing in the
world, how indifferent soever it appears to our eyes, but by order of
Providence, which we ought to acknowledge and adore in whatever comes to pass,
if we would render our Duty and Obedience complete.

14. The obedience and perfect submission we owe to the Church, and the
authority of its Decisions; without which no society can subsist; and because
it is the Rule of what we ought to believe, and of what we ought to practice,
without which we are always exposed to the mercy of our extravagant
imaginations, and our changeable and unbridled desires; and Religion, which
ought to be the most sure and established thing in the World, becomes the most
light and inconstant.

15. The virtue of the Word of God, which converts sinners, and humbles the
wise of the World by the mouth of Babes and Ignorants.

16. The Panegyricks of the Saints, which they must propose to the Faithful as
the true Models of that perfection which God demands of them according to their
diverse Conditions and Vocations.

17. Finally, the strange misery of the most part of Mankind, especially of
great men, who run after falsity and mistake, and who occupy their minds in
Chimera's and illusions, whereof they serve themselves to maintain the Maxims
of their Libertinism.

There are a great number of other Subjects of equal importance with these, as
that essential Character of a Christian, which is the Jove of our Neighbor,
with an universal Charity, which does not exclude our greatest Enemies; the
pardon of injuries; conformity to the Will of God in our adversity; alms; the
distrust of our selves; the good use of our time, and a faithful employment of
our Graces, penitence, humane respects, which are so contrary to the profession
of Christianity, the horror of sin, the care of our salvation, the
omnipresence of God, fervency in his Service, prayer; and all things that are
most capable to move the hearts, and contribute to the edification of the
people, we must above all things endeavor: He cannot too often propose to the
people the innocence of manners, which the sanctity of our Religion requires,
which cannot easily be attained, but a by holy retreat, and a love of solitude.
The commerce of the world, how holy so e're it be, infects the heart with a
contagion, which will corrupt our manners in spite of all our precaution. The
purity of Christian Religion is so great, that we cannot attain any perfection
in it, but by a desertion and holy separation from the world, and from men.
This is that which the great Martyr of Sieily Saint Agatha had so well learned,
when she blessed God with all her heart, that he had taken from her the spirit
and care of the world. ( Qui tulisti a me amorem seculi.) In effect there is no
man so good as he that lives concealed; and the most secret way is the most
secure to arrive at Heaven.

It remains (to atchieve fully these Reflections) that I propose some Model
(Those who have good natural disposition for this Eloquence, may frame
themselves.) To effect this, I have given two examples of the most perfect
Preachers that I have known in this Age; though their accomplishments may
appear miraculous, yet those who have heard them speak, will acknowledge, that
I have not represented them greater than they really were; and that those whom
I have described are not only Preachers in Idea, but such as were so indeed,
without which I might be suspected to impose and amplify.

The first had the greatest natural disposition for Eloquence that I have seen;
his person was graceful, his visage was very agreeable, he was grave and
modest, and all his outward behavior was very taking: his voice was not the
most excellent, but very clear and intelligible, and I know not, so
insinuating, as irresistably engaged the attention. The qualities of his spirit
were answerable; he had a great penetration and exquisite understanding, a
strong reason, an easy comprehension, a fine imagination, and a judgment very
solid; his learning consisted in a perfect knowledge of Divinity, which enabled
him to decide all matters clearly, and without ambiguity: To this he had joined
a perfect knowledge of the Fathers, of which he made use with so much happiness
and address, that they seemed to have been writ purposely for him: But nothing
contributed so much to the renown of his learning, as that admirable Eloquence,
wherein he was extremely happy; he could make what impression he pleased upon
his Auditors, by a pleasing variety he gave to every thing: His reasons so
mutually supported each other, that the last was always more strong than the
first; and besides, he had nothing false or sophistical in his reasonings, but
all exceeding solid; the force of his discourse increasing by degrees, the
nearer it approached to the end, striking the spirit with more vigor at the
conclusion, than at the beginning. Finally, his true talent was to enlighten
fully the understanding, and to touch yet more sensibly the heart: all his
discourse was a marvelous illumination of the matters whereof he treated; and
after he had cast into the spirit the seed of the movements that he proposed;
by the wonderful power that he had, he set in an instant all the engines of the
soul on work, by those movements that he judged most capable to be touched, and
inflamed the heart by all the heat and ardeur of the passions, whereof he
perfectly knew the art by a peculiar Rhetoric that he had formed; they
hearkened to his Sermons with pleasure, because it entered into their minds by
this pleasing artifice; and he never preached so long, but his Auditors could
have wished his Sermon longer; and they never apprehended him near his
conclusion without a very sensible Regret: For in those moments that he took
possession of their hearts, he became absolute master to do what he pleased; he
had this Art in so eminent a degree, that I have known some Libertines, who
could not resolve to hear him, out of fear of being constrained to render
themselves to his reasons; for whosoever heard, became without resistance, his
captive: But nothing spoke so much to his advantage, as the profound silence of
his Auditors. When he had finished his Sermon, one might always have seen them
rise from their seats with their countenances pale and disfigured, with their
eyes heavy and dejected, and to depart from the Church strangely moved, and
pensive, without saying a word, especially in the most touching Subjects; and
when he took occasion to speak of what was terrible he showed, that he had the
same reflections with that great Master of this Art, Naturaliter plus valet
apud plurimus timor malorum, quam spes bonorum. The spirits of the people are
less sensible to the hopes of good, than to the fear of evil: This made him
always say, that a Preacher should generally preach terror, and this indeed
was his chief Character; but as he sometimes preached out of humor, to which
the greatest men are subject, he had in certain subjects such a heaviness of
spirit as would not have without difficulty been understood, with out that
touching and pathetick Air, which was his first talent.

The other Preacher that I have known, had an equal natural disposition, and I
dare say all the learning of the former, but he possess't it in a very
different manner: I never saw more of Art in any Orator, nor never more
diligence to conceal it; for under the appearance of a simplicity and
negligence, he covered the greatest Art that ever was. This negligence was
accompanied with so many graces, that always charmed, because his Auditors
were persuaded by his manner of speech, that he thought of nothing less. His
sovereign Talent, was the secret that he had found to make it believed that all
his Art was natural, because that it was couched under the most studied
negligence in the world, so that his Audience easily abandoned themselves to
the pleasure that they took in hearing him; they suffered themselves to be lead
without caution, or any resistance; as his reasons were strong, and as he knew
how to expose them with all their powers, they made extraordinary and
proportionable impressions; but his manner of delivering them was so pleasing,
that they could not understand them without being ravished: This was the
ordinary effect of that Eloquence which was less in the words and things, than
in the manner of ordering and speaking them: And as he had an Art to please in
all that he said, and that when he spoke he seemed seasoned with the graces
which he had delivered; he became soveraignly Eloquent, for thereby he never
failed of persuading; he knew how to mix the force of his reasons with
Authority, and with a temper which adorned all that he said, insomuch that he
led the spirit of his Auditors in Triumph which way he pleased, because they
could not defend themselves from the pleasure by which he surprised them: All
his Morals were correct, because his reason was so; the Subjects that he
treated of were always rendered great by the importance of those Truths whereof
they were composed; he had nothing false in his thoughts, nor superfluous in
his words; and when he made any digression, he always returned to his Subject
with all imaginable facility, and without the least maim in the sense or
connection. By these agreeable ways he went more directly to the heart, than
the other, who fetched a larger circuit, making his way first through the
Spirit: One was indeed more moved and struck by the force and vehemence of the
former; but more charmed, penetrated, and surprised by the graces and
agreements of the second. After all, both the one and the other were fully
accomplished in the Character that they assumed, and in that Eloquence which
they had formed to themselves. A Preacher so perfect as these were, whose
Images I have drawn, is one of the greatest gifts that God can bestow on his
Church, because it is a means to sanctify whole Provinces and Realms, by
reforming the Licentious, and the irregularity of manners which reigns amongst
the People. This is that sacred leaven, which God by the care of his Providence
has opposed to all the corruptions which have course in the world. So that I
believe the few good Preachers that we find in these days proceeds from the
little care they take to ask of God these kind of Graces, which cannot be
sought with too much passion. Let us then pour out our tears at his holy Altars
with a Lively Faith, with ardent Vows, and with a long perseverance. Let us
always make to God that Prayer that he commended to his Apostles, which after
their example we are bound to practice.

Messis quidem multa operarii vero paucirogate; ergo Dominum Messis ut mittat
operarios in messem suam, Luke cap. 10.

Thus I have finished these few Reflections. I have chosen this Method, that I
might not seem to speak like a Master of a Science which is no less universal
than delicate: I might be justly accused of presumption, if I pretended to give
my Opinions as Rules from my self; on the contrary, I confess I have drawn some
of them from the writings of the best Oraors, and some I may modestly challenge
as the result of my own observation upon the little conformity I have found
amongst the Orators of this Age, to those ancient Precepts of Demosthenes,
Ciceto, and Quintilian; whom if I have not cited so often as I approved their
Opinions, it is not that I would have attributed to my self any part of the
glory that is their due, but to avoid breaking the thread of my Discourse by too
frequent Citations. The death of the most excellent Mr. Cowly is very much to
be lamented, which with that of his Life, gave an unhappy period to the design
he had conceived to give us the pattern of several Styles fitted for several
Subjects: His example might have put some bounds to that Poetic rage, from
whose invasion our holy places have not escaped: Certainly none knew better
than he, how modestly to confine that Wanton: And in this it may be truly
affirmed, he has lefvery few successors. The Styles of our most witty men,
seem the dictates of the same spirit which inspires them in their raptures.
Though our Common Laws allow but very little place to this Art, yet methinks
the desire of glory should inflame them; and the care to support the Majesty of
our Law, and the Dignity of its Professors, should engage the Students to lay
out some time in the acquisition of this Art, and those gentler Sciences that
complete an Orotar. But so far are they now from it, that when they enter upon
that Study, they think it necessary to bid adien to all those Sciences which
teach Humanity, Modesty, and sweetens Conversation. How miserable a thing is
it, and how ridiculous to hear in common discourse Plato and Cicero cited out
of Cook and Plowden; as if the treasures of the Greek and Roman wisdom were to
be found couched in those mangled fragments. I know not why it should be
inconsistent in a well formed and tempered mind to mix these beautiful Studies
with those which are more severe; this I am sure would add to the honor of our
Laws, the want of which renders them deformed and despised. For though our Law
deserves those just commendations, by which it is preferred to all the Laws of
the world, yet lex est mutus Magistratus, says Cicero, the Law of it self is
dumb, and speaks not, but by the tongue of a learned and eloquent Lawyer. Much
might be said in commendation of our Language, which possibly equals the most
celebrated in Europe in the plenty of soft, grave and majestic expressions,
fit for all arguments: But since it is a Subject fit for another Discourse, I
omit further enlarging upon it.

FINIS.

