PRACTICAL DISCOURSES CONCERNING DEATH AND HEAVEN.

DISCOVERING The great Necessity of a speedy Preparation for Death; with the
danger of neglecting or delaying such Preparations.

ALSO The Excellency, Glory and Happiness of Heaven opened and explained, as
the Portion of all true Believers after Death.

By Nathanael Ranew, late of London, Bookseller.

London, Printed for N. R. and sold by J. Robinson, A. and J. Churchill, J.
Tailor, and J. Wyat. 1694.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE Desire of all Men is to be Happy, and the Design of these Discourses is to
bring Men to the Enjoyment of the highest Happiness.

The former Treatise, being a Discourse of Death and the Grave, which are as a
Way through which all must pass to the attaining of this Happiness, is that
which is not acceptable but grievous unto Flesh and Blood: The Dissolution of
the Union between Soul and Body; a turning to corruption and rottenness in the
Grave, where Worms shall gnaw and feed upon those Bodies, that now are the
Beauty and Comeliness of this lower Creation, as quickened and animated by
Rational and Immortal Souls that inhabit in them; this is that which Nature
dreads, and of all things in the World most abhors; and where there are in any
no higher Principles to act from, than what is founded in Nature, to such Death
must needs be very terrible because it is that which tends to its ruin and
destruction.

Now it being the State and Condition of all Men by Nature, since their
Apostasy from God, to have a prevailing Principle and Inclination in them unto
the Creature, and to take up with the Enjoyments of this World for their
Happiness; when Death comes to break asunder the Bonds of Life, such Persons
are of all Creatures most miserable; and no wonder then if Death be formidable
unto them.

If now upon this, or any other account, there be any thing in the pale face of
Death, that makes it have a grim and ghastly Aspect, so that the thoughts of it
are frightful and amazing to thee, and thou startest back as one that is afraid
to die; yet be not discouraged from studious Meditations of Death; for though
at the first they may be terrible; yet when thou have accustomed thy self unto
such Contemplations, thou will find them very profitable, and such as will by
the Blessing of God work thy Heart into such a serious frame, and put thee upon
those Endeavors and Practices, as have a tendency in them to fit thee for the
approach of Death, which will much abate the fears and dread thereof unto thee.

And as a farther encouragement unto so beneficial an employment, take into thy
most serious thoughts the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, unto which Death
brings all those that are prepared for it; which is the subject of the second
part of these Discourses, and truly this is a State of so great Bliss and
Happiness, as may well lift up thy Soul above all the discouragements of the
pains and torments of Sickness, the horrors and fears of Death, in the
separation of Soul and Body thereby, and the loathsomeness and corruption of
the Grave, and fill thee with vehement longings and desires after the
possession and enjoyment of it.

I need not, I hope, make any Apology for the publishing of that which may be
helpful to prepare Christians for Death and Heaven, and such is the design of
the following Discourses; and that they may be so, read them over attentively,
meditate on them seriously, pray over them fervently, and practice what is
contained in them diligently and constantly, and through the Blessing of God
they will be effectual to bring thee unto the Happiness of Heaven; which is the
earnest and hearty Desire, and shall be the daily Prayer of the Publisher. If
thou reapest any benefit hereby, give God the Glory for his Assistance herein,
and let him have thy Prayers, who desires nothing so much as the Honor of God,
and the good of Souls,

Farewell.
An Introduction. Practical Preparation for Death.
CHAP. I.
Of Death in general. Of the sorts and kinds of Death mentioned in Scripture.
Death befalls all Men; there is no withstanding of it, nor any privileged from
it. The time of Death urknown unto us, yet Fixed and Appointed by GOD. Death
makes all equal. Sin subjects unto Death.

DEATH is a Subject every Christian should often have in his thoughts, because
it is that, unto which he is liable every moment of his Life; neither the
hearing, thinking, nor speaking of it, can therefore be unseasonable at any
time: And though Considerations of Death to living Men, are usually most
unwelcome, yet are they as profitable to promote the Interest of a Christian as
any other; for no Man can live well, till he can dye well; and no Man is so
prepared for Death, as he who frequently imploy's his Thoughts in the
Consideration of his own Frailty and Mortality. Indeed Custom has made it
become almost an improper thing, either for a Minister to Preach of Death,
without the Representation of a Funeral, or for one Christian to speak unto
another of their Latter End, without it be in the House of Mourning, where an
Example of their Mortality is before their eyes: But if the Mouths of
Christians were more frequently filled with Discourses of Death and the Grave,
to which all are hastening (but know not who shall get thither soonest) they
would find such Benefit and Advantage thereby (in the quickening and hastening
their Preparations for their dissolution, that they might always be in a
readiness when Death shall come) as would infinitely make amends, either for
the unaccustomariness of the Work, or whatever pains and labor they had taken
with their hearts, to render them fit for the coming of their Lord.

What Death is, is as little known unto some, as it is considered by most; many
take it to be nothing but a Cessation of Life, and all actings in this World;
and it were well, if there were not too many to be found, who think this to be
all that Death does, and when they are thus dead there is an end of them,
making themselves no better than the Beast that perishes. Happy were it for
all wicked Men, if Death were no more than this: But though Death be a
Cessation of Natural Life, and so of all Natural Motion and Action, yet is it
more properly a Separation between Soul and Body, whereby the Body becomes a
dead unactive thing, because the Soul which is the Principle of Life and
Operation has forsaken it; but yet Death, as it reaches not the Soul at all,
for that lives after its Separation from the Body, so it shall not for ever
keep Soul and Body asunder, but only until God's appointed Time, and then shall
the Body be raised again out of the Grave by the mighty Power of GOD, and
united to the Soul, to live together in a state of Blessedness or Misery for
ever, according to what they have both been and done together in this World,
whether it be good or evil.

But because Generals do not so much affect us unto our Edification, I shall be
a little more particular in my Discourse upon this Subject; and so I shall
speak something concerning Death, in a Threefold Sense, as the Scripture holds
it forth unto us; And so there is,

I. A Death in Sin. II. A Death to Sin: And, III. A Death for Sin.
First, There is a Death in Sin; this the Scripture mentions often, 5 John 25.
The hour is coming and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live: So 5 Ephesians. 14. Awake thou that sleep,
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. So let the dead
bury the dead, Mat. 8.22. This Death in Sin, consists in the want of a
Principle of Spiritual Life, being the deprivation of the Life of Grace and
Holiness, which is the Life of the Soul, and without which the Soul is dead.
And thus all Men naturally are dead; because they are without the Spirit of
Christ, which enlivens and quickens the Soul to all Acts of Grace and Holiness,
wherein this Spiritual Life does manifest it self, as the Soul enlivens and
quickens the Body unto all Acts of Nature, wherein the natural Life does
manifest it self. That all Men are thus dead in Sin, naturally is evident from
Scripture, 2 Ephesians. 1, 2, 3. The Apostle writing to the Ephesians, who by the
Almighty Power of God were raised from this Spiritual Death, as he tells them
in the First Verse, And you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins, that he might beget in them a grateful Sense of God's Goodness toward
them herein: He describes to them their former deplorable Condition; Wherein,
says he, in times past, ye walked according to the Course of the World,
according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that works in the
Children of Disobedience: And in Ver. 3. the Apostle puts himself into the
Number, Among whom, says he, we all had our Conversation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature Children of Wrath, even as others. And then in the fourth Verse
he gives them to understand, by whom they were raised out of so miserable an
Estate; But God, says he, who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ; by Grace ye are saved. Now this Spiritual Death, or this Death in Sin,
is the fruit and effect of our first Parents Apostasy from God, whereby we are
not only deprived of the Image of God, which is the Beauty; yea, the Life of
the Soul, but are also depraved with the Image of the Devil, which is not only
the Deformity of the Soul, but even as Death unto it. And because this is a
Spiritual Death, and reaches chiefly to the Soul; it is therefore the more
hurtful and dangerous, though the effects of it extends it self to the Body
also, being that which is the Cause of Natural Death, for therefore the Body is
a frail dying Body, because it is joined to a sinful Soul; but this is not all
the Mischief it does; for this Death in Sin, unless Grace prevent, is that
which ends in Eternal Death, which consists in an everlasting separation of
Soul and Body from the eternal Enjoyment of God in Heaven, in whose presence
there is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand there are Pleasures for
evermore.

Secondly, There is a Death to Sin; of this we read, Romans 6.2. How shall we
that are dead to sin live any longer therein? So in 1 Pet. 2.24. That we being
dead to sin should not live any longer therein. This Death to sin consists in
the Spirits indwelling in the Soul, by its sanctifying Operations, enabling the
Soul to mortify sin: Hence the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.13. That if through
the Spirit we mortify the deeds of the Body we shall live. Such therefore who
have felt the Efficacy of an Almighty Power from the Death of Christ, by the
Operation of the Spirit, applying of it to their Souls, to break the power and
strength of sin, so that it does not reign in them, they may be said to be dead
to sin, because sin is dying in them: As those Persons over whom Distempers
have prevailed so far, that they have lost their bodily strength, that it
cannot be recovered again, are said to be dead even while they live; so, though
sin still live in the godly, by reason of the Remainders of it, yet are they
dead to sin, because the Power and Strength of it is abated and lessened, the
Spirit of Sanctification prevailing daily over sin, so that it does not rule
and reign as formerly it did. Thus to dye to sin, is to be made alive to God,
and blessed are they that have a part in this Resurrection from the death of
sin, to the life of Grace; for on such the second Death shall have no Power.

Thirdly, There is a Death for Sin, or because of sin. Now this is Twofold,
Temporal and Eternal.

1. Temporal Death: This is contained in that merciful Threatening God gave unto
Adam in Paradise, to prevent his Apostasy, Genesis 2.16, 17. where, after God had
so largely expressed his bounty and goodness unto man, in giving him liberty to
eat of every Tree of the Garden, restraining him only by a Command from the
Tree of Knowledge, for the Trial of his Obedience, as Ver. 17. Of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat; which he backs with a Threatening
in the next Words: For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely
dye. The Truth of which Threatening the Experience of all Mankind to this day,
is a standing Confirmation; so true is that of the Apostle, As by one Man sin
entered into the World, and Death by sin; and so Death passed upon all, for
that all have sinned, Romans 5.12.

2. There is an Eternal Death for sin, and this follows upon the Death of the
Body, consisting in the separation of Soul and Body, from the Presence and
Favor of God for ever in Hell, and is in part executed on the Souls of wicked
Men at Death, and perfectly upon Soul and Body at the Resurrection, when the
Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power; which in
Scripture is called the Second Death. Rev. 21.8. Where wicked and unregenerate
persons are said to have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the Second Death. This is the height and perfection of all
Misery.

This now is the Substance of what is contained in this Word Death, so far as
Words can explain it, which if we consider in all the forementioned Senses, it
is that which we cannot comprehend; all that has been said of it, is but like
the painting of the fire to the eye, which expresses not the pain and anguish
that is in it, unto the Senses: For if we understand by Death, a Temporal,
Spiritual and Eternal Death, I may allude to what the Psalmist says of the
Power of God's Anger, Who knows the Power of thine Anger? So who knows the
dreadfulness of the Horror and Pain that is contained in thee O Death,
according to our Fear of thee? So, yea, and much greater, is the Misery which
the wrath of God by thee inflicts upon all those that live and dye in their
sins.

But though Death be thus terrible, yet is it the more common acceptance of
it, that chiefly affects the generality of Mankind; for, as for Spiritual
Death, or Death in sin, because of the present pleasures and Delights which
bewitch the Senses; this they are insensible of: And as for Eternal Death, that
is looked upon by many as a Dream, or Notion, as a thing that may never be, or
if among some it be credited for a Truth, yet is it looked upon as that which
is a great way off; and if the terror of it does startle the Consciences of
some, yet are they soon quieted with such thoughts as these, Christ dyed for
all, and God is a merciful God; and so they hope all shall be well with them.

But now for Temporal Death, which consists in the separation of the Soul from
the Body; this is so much Death to them, that they think there is no other but
that, at least, they apprehend none so prejudicial to them This is a Truth so
evident, that which way soever they go or turn, objects of Mortality present
themselves before their eyes in the Death of Friends, Relations, and others,
whereby the reigning Power of Death over all is visible, sweeping away all Men
before it into the Grave, the place of silence and rottenness; yea, themselves
are not without some symtoms of their approaching dissolution, diseases and
distempers, as well as business and employments, wasting and consuming their
bodies daily, whereby they may be convinced that they also are made of the same
Mould, and must shortly be crumbled into the same Dust with others. Thus Death
meeting with them so often, and staring them so frequently in their faces,
gives them to understand that there is no way for them to escape its stroke,
the thoughts whereof cannot but now and then make them fear and tremble.

But though nothing be more certain than Death, yet nothing is more uncertain
than the Time of Death: For though all shall dye, yet all do not dye at the
same time, nor after the same manner: To some God gives long Warning, Nature
wasting and consuming in them by lingering Distempers; with others God is more
quick, shooting them with an Arrow as it were, and suddenly they are wounded
unto Death and Destruction; Some their hoary Heads are found in the Way of
Righteousness, and they come to their Graves in a good old Age; others arise
early to that height of Impiety, that the Earth groans under the burden of
their great Wickedness; and God is so provoked thereby, that he causes the
Earth to swallow them up quick; to some the Promise of Long Life, made for an
Encouragement to Obedience and Holy Walking, is turned into a Performance, God
satissying them with length of days, and then leaves them to depart in peace,
showing them his Salvation; others God cuts off in the midst of their days, and
of their sins also, and they go down quick into the Grave, and into Hell too.
Though the days of a good Man, at the most are but few, yet because of some
special Goodness, they are often prolonged: so though the days of a wicked Man
at the most are but few, yet because of some special Wickedness they are often
shortened: The Wise Man proves this Assertion, Prove. 10.27. The fear of the Lord
prolongeth, or adds to days, but the days of the wicked shall be shortened. As
every Man because he is a Sinner shall live but few days; so some shall not
live half their days, because they are Notorious Sinners. The short of it is
this, Death does not always give Warning, how many rise in the Morning, that
make their Beds in the Grave before the Evening? How many go well to Bed at
Night, whose Sleep is their Death, and they arise no more until the Morning of
the Resurrection? How often have we seen many projecting for themselves and
theirs, great things in the World, laying house to house, and land to land,
that with the Fool in the Gospel, they might eat, drink and be merry for many
year, when on a sudden, or in that very Night their souls have been taken from
them? To presume therefore of Long Life, and thereupon to neglect to prepare
for Death, is the great (...) piece of Folly imaginable; for scarce is (...)
Week passes over our heads, wherein we may not hear of some or other that are
suddenly gone into another World, and that which has been the Case of others
may be ours also. It is the sad Condition of a wicked Man, let him dye how and
when he will, he dies miserably; if Death cut him off suddenly, then he goes
down quick into Hell, that Gulf of all Woe and Misery: If Death gives him long
Warning by a succession of many years distempers, yet all this while he does
but pine away in his Iniquity, and increases his Misery when Death shall cut
him off, and throw him into that place of Torment, the pain and anguish whereof
is so great, that it cannot be sufficiently expressed, no not by them that feel
it But now it is the happiness of a godly Man, let him dye never so suddenly,
yet he always dies happily, because he is in a state of Peace and
Reconciliation with God; it is true, he may dye without a sense and feeling of
that Peace, and so his passing through the Valley of the Shadow of Death may be
terrible to him, but still God is with him; and though the eye of his Faith be
held, so that he cannot discern him to be his God, though his Rod and his Staff
do not comfort him, yet they do support and strengthen him, and as soon as
Death has opened his eyes, he beholds the face of God to his everlasting joy
and satisfaction. Does Death then come certainly, and sometimes suddenly? It is
thy Wisdom, O Christian, always to be prepared for it, and then let it come
when it will, though this Night, thou may bid it welcome.

But as Man's Life is short and frail, so is his Death sure and certain, for it
is the common lot (...) Men. Man, says Job, that is all Men, are good (...)
dye; it is the way of all the Earth, it is the end of all Men. Who is he that
lives and shall not see Death? No Man can redeem his Brothers, no nor his own
Life from Death; that he should still live for ever and not see Corruption,
such a sufficient Ransom no man can give to God: Christ is indeed become a
Ransom for Believers, but it is to deliver them not from the first, but from
the second Death; for as to the first Death, it is appointed unto all Men once
te dye. Some have a longer time in this world, and others a shorter, but all
dye; one goes before, and another follows after; one Man rots in the Grave and
makes it empty, that he which is yet alive, may have a place to lie down
therein. We all dwell in houses of clay, whose foundations are in the dust,
which will shortly tumble down into it. Earthly Tabernacles we have that must
be dissolved, and laid in the Earth; here we have no abiding place: Death and
the Grave will shortly take all, for all go to one place, all are of the dust,
and all turn to dust again, Eccles. 3.20. Some are sent before, and others
follow after, but all go the same way; some have a long Race to run, others but
a short, but Death is at the end of both. To him that is old Death is certainly
near, and to him that is young, Death is not far off: He that dies not till he
is old, travels a long way before he meets with Death; whereas he that dies
young has but a short way to his long home, Death meeting him betimes; but
still whither young or old, all must dye, the decree is gone forth, and there
is no reversing of it. There is an appointed time to Man upon Earth, as Job
speaks, and when that is expired, Death cuts him off and throws him into the
Grave, the house appointed for all living. Death is inexorable, it spares none,
and the Grave is in atiable, it is not satisfied with any, when it has the
Husband, it gapes for the Wife; when it has the Parent, it gapes for the
Child; when it has one Generation, it gapes for another; one Generation
passes away, and another Generation comes, and the latter crowds the former
out of the world. No Man has a dispensation against Death, there must be a
dissolution of all things, and therefore, a dissolution of all Men.

No Man has more Privilege than another against the Sentence of Death; the
greatest Prince dies as soon as the meanest Peasant: Neither Power, nor Wisdom;
neither Strength nor Riches, neither Beauty nor Honor, nor any outward
Excellency whatsoever, can protect any against the stroke of Death; these
things can do much among Men, yea every thing, but they avail not against
Death, powerful Death despises them all. Power can do nothing to ward off the
stroke of Death from any; where is Alexander, and Casar, and all the Great
Conquerors of the World; why they and all their Greatness and Power are gone
down into the Grave; and after all their Conquests over others, have yielded
themselves up as conquered by Death. There is no Title can be given unto Man,
which sets him farther off from Death, than to call him God, and this high
Title God himself has honored, some Men with, Psalm. 82.6.7. I said ye are
Gods, but least they should be lifted up with Pride; with the same Breath he
adds an humbling Consideration to take down all proud and lofty Thoughts, but
ye shall dye like Men. Kings and Princes that are the greatest for worldly
Power, and have the privilege to be called Gods, yet have they not the
privilege of God, not to dye like men.

No Man's Wisdom can save him from dying, Death will be too hard for the most
cunning Politician: Wisdom is an excellent Gift of God, and renders a Person
lovely in the Eyes of all, it makes a man's face to shine; it sets a Glory and
Beauty upon a Man's Person and Actions; a Man can hardly give a greater
Commendation of any Man, than to say he is a Wise Man; and yet of Solomon, not
only the wisest of Kings, but the wisest of Men; it is said, than he stepped with
his Fathers, as well as others; and though he tells us Wisdom excells Folly, as
far as Light excells Darkness; yet we know wise men dye, as well as the foolish
and brutish person: We read indeed of a poor Wise Man, that by his Wisdom
delivered a City; but we never read of any that by their Wisdom delivered
themselves or others from Death no, for as there is no work, no levise in the
Grave whither we are going; so is there no Knowledge or Wisdom that can keep a
man from going into the Grave, Eccless. 9.10.

No Man by his strength can overcome Death: Bodily health and strength are no
defense at all against Death: It is true, they are great Mercies where God
gives them unto any, a sickly weakly Man is burdensome to himself and others,
though God heaps upon him other Mercies in abundance, as Wealth, Honors and
Relations, yet he takes little delight in them, the want of Health imbitters
all; whereas a Man that is hcalthful and strong, takes delight in every Comfort
and Enjoyment, though it be even poor and mean in comparison of what others
have: but though health and strength be so great a Mercy, yet can they not
withstand the Power of Death, they may make a man dye with strong pains upon
his bed, but they cannot defend him against Death. If God bestow upon any of us
a strong healthy Body, it is a great Mercy, and we ought to be thankful for it,
but we may be soon laid in the Grave for all that. Death should not be a
stranger to us, because sickness and distempers are strange things to us, for
we have not long Life, much less can we escape the stroke of Death, because we
are bealthy and strong, for in the fullness of our strength we may be in Death;
one dies in the fullness of his strength, when his Bones are full of Marrow:
As for the strength of any Man, though he be a Sampson, yet this great
Leviathan Death counts it but as straw, and the soundest and purest health, but
as rotten wood. David complains that the Sons of Zerviah were too hard for him.
But there are none such that are too hard for Death; Death stays not to take
men at advantage, when they are weakened with age and sickness, as Simeon and
Levy did the Schecemites when they were sore, Genesis 34.25. No Death can do its
work as easily and as speedily in health as in sickness, in strength as under
weakness.

No man by his Riches can protect himself against Death; all the Riches in the
world are too low a Value to ransom any from Death and the Grave. Solomon
tells us, Money answers all things; and indeed rich Men can do great things by
their Wealth; many seek the favor of such, their Riches make them many
Friends: The Wise Man tells us, The rich man's wealth is his strong City, Prove.
18.11. by reason whereof they trust to their Wealth, and boast themselves in
the multitude of their Riches, thinking they are well provided for against all
Evils: What made the rich Man in the Gospel else so confidently say to his
Soul, Thou bast Goods laid up for many years, eat, drink and be merry: But
Death would not be put off so, for that Night was his Soul taken from him,
notwithstanding all his great Possessions. It is in vain to cry out on a Death
Bed with that wretched Cardinal Beauford in Henry the Sixth Time, Wherefore
should I dye being rich, will not Death be bribed? Will Money do nothing? No
truly it cannot; for as Riches profit not in the day of Wrath to pacify the
Justice of an angry God; so neither will they profit in the day of Death to
bribe that King of Terrors.

Beauty, is another outward Excellency that many glory in; and indeed it is a
great Ornament, a Gift of GOD and no small one, it is a taking thing. We
delight in things that are beautiful: Beauty to some is a Portion among men, to
others a favor from God. It is a silent Eloquence, a tacit Persuasion, and
works much upon some: What is said of the Church, Psalm. 45.11. So shall the
King greatly desire thy Beauty; I know it is spoken there of Spiritual Beauty,
the Graces of the Spirit of God, which beautify and adorn the Church in the
eyes of Christ; for it is said the KING's Daughter is all glorious within: But
yet it is true also in some me sure of outward Corporeal Beauty, it is a
desirable thing, and may duly be an attractive of Love; it is that which draws
the Eyes and Hearts of many, though often it is an incentive to Lust, both to
great Men and to good Men. Solomon loved strange Women, the Scripture says,
and they turned away his heart from God; and having smarted severely for it, as
a fruit of the sincerity of his Repentance, and to prevent so great wickedness
in others he has left us many Excellent Cautions and Counsels in Sacred Writ,
against the ensnaring Temptations and powerful Charms of Beauty But though Men
are deluded and deceived by beautiful Objects and Persons, yet Death is not: A
beautiful Face is as mortal, and as soon, yea sooner many times turned into
duct and corruption, than a face that is deformed. Death regards a goodly well
favored Joseph or Absalom, no more than a leprous Vzziah or Gebazi; nor does
it spare a beautiful Rachel more than a blear eyed Leah: Favor is deceitful,
and Beauty is vain in this respect, for they profit none in a dying hour; the
beautifulest Person, and the most lovely Complexion is quickly turned into
Paleness and Corruption, when once the time of their dissolution is come; Death
soon making those, that for their Beauty and Comeliness were most admired by
others become most loathsome and intolerable, and they most desirous with
Abraham to bury such dead out of their sight.

By what has been said, it appears that all Men, notwithstanding all their
great Attainmen's in Worldly Excellences, are not exempted from dying: And as
no outward, so no inward-Excellency and Perfection can privilege any from
Death, no not Grace it self Grace is as Salt to the Soul to preserve it from
Moral Corruption for ever, but it cannot preserve the Body from Natural
Corruption in this World: In Heaven, where there shall be nothing but Grace and
Holiness in the Soul in perfection, there, there shall be no dying; but here on
Earth, where Grace is insperfect, being mingled with Sin and Corruption, there
is a necessity of dying. Death is become domestical to us, we have the Seed of
it within us, we carry it daily in our bosoms; I mean in the body of Sin, as
the Apostle calls it; that we carry about with us, which will never be
extirpated and destroyed till the death of the body.

All our Prayers and Tears cannot prevent Death. Prayer can do great things, to
instance in particulars of its Prevalency would be endless. Our Lord himself
tells us. That whatever we ask the Father in his Name he will give it us, John
16.23. That is an Astonishing Scripture. Esaias 45.11. Thus says the Lord, The
Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come, concerning my
Sons, and concerring the Works of my hands command ye me. As if, says one, God
was as ready to do them service, as if they had him at their Command. There is
a kind of Omnipotency in Prayer, and therefore it is said of Jacob, that as a
Prince he had power with God, and prevailed, Genesis 32.28. And the Apostle tells
us, The effectual fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much; how much the
Apostle could not tell us, but leaves it to every one to make Observations from
their own Experience. But though Prayer can do such great things, yet it cannot
prevent Death: We read indeed that the Prayer of Faith does save the Sick; but
though it can even restore from a sickbed, yet it cannot raise from a
Deathbed. Nay, Christ himself has not so Redeemed us that we should live for
ever, and not see Corruption; he has Redeemed us that we shall live for ever
in Heaven, but he has not Redeemed us that we should live for ever on Earth
and not dye; no, it was the Privilege of Jesus Christ the Redeemer, that he
should not see Corruption, and therefore of him only it is said, Thou will not
leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption.

But may some say, this necessity of dying seems not to be unalterably imposed
upon all Men; for some have lived who never dyed; and some shall live hereafter
that shall not dye.

I Answer: It is true, the Scripture makes mention of Two, and but Two, that
lived here o^ Earth, and by special Grace and Favor were exempted from Death,
ascending up unto God, leaping over Death and the Grave as it were in their
passage to Heaven, and they are Enoch and Elias concerning Enoch, it is said,
That by Faith he wa^ transtated, that he should not see Death, Heb. 11.5^ He
was a Person eminent for Holiness; for it is said, That he walked with God
three hundred years and obtained this Testimony before his Translation^ that he
pleased God, Genesis 5.22. And being such an Eminent Proficient in Grace, as that
there wa^ none that we read of like him at that time; he obtained such Grace
and Favor from God, as none did; for it is said, He walked with GOD, and he
was not, for GOD lock him. O the Excellency of Grace and Holiness, how highly
does it ennable and advance a Man! Enoch walked with God, and God thinks the
Earth not good enough for him, and therefore he takes him to himself into
Beaven; nay, this is not all, so much was God taken with the Holiness of Enoch,
that he shall not go to Heaven in the ordinary way as other Saints do by Death,
but he shall be translated from Grace to Glory without so much as looking into
the Grave. The like we read of Elias another eminent and zealous Servant of
God, 2 King. 2.23. That he was taken up in a siery Chariot by a Whirlwind into
Heaven. So great was his Zeal for God and his Glory, and so highly did God
esteem it, and him for it, that he must not abide any longer on Earth, but be
taken up into Heaven, and that in no other way, but by a fiery Chariot; a
Passage to Heaven that did bear some Resemblance to his Zeal for God while he
was here on Earth. The Apostle also tells us, 1 Cor. 15.51. That at the last
Day we shall not all dye, but we shall all be changed; and 1 These. 4.17. We
that are alive, and remain, shall be caught up with him in the Clouds to meet
the Lord, and so shall we be ever with the Lord. These Exceptions of some few
that have not dyed, nor shall not dye, do not at all make void this general
Truth that all shall dye, but rather make for the Confirmation of it. The
general Rule or Law says, all must dye, none escape but by special Grace or
Privilege; and though the Saints that shall be found on Earth at the
Resurrection of the dead, dye not, yet they shall undergo that which is
equivalent unto Death, for they shall be changed. Death is called a Change; so
says Job, All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change shall
come: And they that are alive at the Last Day, undergo a Change also: The
Change of Death is a putting off of our Mortality, but the Change at the Last
Day, is a putting on of our Immortality; The one is a Change by being
uncloathed, the other is a Change by being clothed upon, but both is a Change:
And thus all dye, or shall be changed.

By what has been said, it is very evident, That Death befalls all men one
time or other, sooner or later. But for the Manner, how, or the Time when any
shall dye, this is unknown unto any. The Living may and do know that they shall
dye, but they know not when they shall dye. What our Lord says of the day of
Judgment, is true of the day of Man's Death; of that day and hour knows no
Man. Many a Man has been mistaken concerning the purpose of God; I said says
David, in my prosperity, that I shall never be moved, but he was mistaken; for
he adds in the next words almost, But thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled. Much more may we be mistaken concerning the Time of our Death. I
said, says Hezekiah, in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of
the Grave; I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the Land of the Living: I
shall no more behold man with the Inhabitants of the World Good Hezekiah
thought there was no way for him to escape Death, but he was mistaken; for
afterward he tells us, God had in Love to his Soul, delivered it from the Pit
of Corruption, and he Lived fifteen Years longer after he had given himself
over for dead. A Man may have the Sentence of Death in himself, when as to that
particular time, God has given out none against him: So on the other hand, the
Rich Man in the Gospel reckons not of Death till many years hence, and he is
very liberal to his Soul, because God had been bountiful to his Body; he had
got a great Stock of Riches, and he gives himself a rich stock of Time, even
many years, he resolves to make his Life larger, as he had done his Barns; and
because they are full of Corn, he also will be full of Days; whereas the Word
came out against him from God, Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be taken
from thee, and he that before resolved to Live many years, could not now Live
till the next Morning. It is our Wisdom always to be prepared for Death, but
its more than belongs to us peremptorily to determine the Time of our Death, or
the Length of our Days.

But though the Time of our Death be unknown to us, yet is it known to, and
fixed by God, he has determined, not only the Time when, but also the Place
where, and the Manner how we shall dye, with all the Circumstances relating
thereunto. It is God that turns up the Giass of our Time, and puts such a
Measure of Sand into it, and no more; such a Measure, that it may and shall run
so long, and no more; that it shall run no longer than his Appointment. God
speaking after the manner of Men, is said in Scripture to have a Book, wherein
is written down, not only the Number of our Sins, but also the Number of our
days; and as we cannot commit a Sin but it is written down in some Leaf of his
Book; so can we not live a day, or hour, that has not our Name written down
upon it in Gods Book. That some have the Time of Life confined only to the dark
Cell of the Womb, and never see the Light; that others are strangled in the
place of breaking forth of Children, and are only Causes of Grief to them that
bear them: that others dy^ in their Infancy, without the Knowledge of good or
evil, and leave only sad Remembrances to their Parents, that once they were;
that others grow up to years of Discretion, but are cut off in the prime of
their days. and in their full strength; and that others live to extreme old
Age, till Nature is wholly spent and consumed in them: All this is from the
Appointment of God; they all fill up the Number of those Days, and the measure
of that Time, that God has allotted to them, and then they depart according to
his Will. How many have we seen cast upon sick beds, whom God has there
visited with strong pains, bringing them so low, that their Lives seemed to be
brought unto the Grave, and themselves numbered with them that go down into the
Pit, free among the dead, and as the slain that lie in the Grave, given over by
themselves, and all others for such; and yet even these God has raised up
again, showing Wonders as it were to the dead, as the Psalmist speaks, causing
them to arise, and praise his Name. What Is the Reason of all this? Why God's
appointed Time was not come, and so Diseases could have no further Power over
them: And what is true of Sickness, is as true of Men, who are but like
Diseases, Executioners of God's Decree upon Man; even they have no Power to
lengthen Life, or to hasten Death, but what is given them from above. God has
not only set us the bounds of our Habitations, but the bounds of our Living
also. Job speaks much to the stating and determining of this Case, Job. 7.1. Is
there not an appointed Time to Man upon Earth: Now in an Appointment of God,
there must be a Certainty, or else we make him like unto a mortal Man, that is
changeable, which cannot be. Therefore Man having an appointed Time by God upon
Earth, he must reach to it, and he cannot go beyond it: But Job further
explains it in the next Words, Are not his days as the days of an Hireling? Now
an Hireling is one that has days or time prefixed or set, which he must
fulfill, and then he is discharged from his Employment: And so it is with Man,
God has set him his Time, which when he has accomplished, Death by God's
Appointment comes and discharges him from his Work; so in Job 14.5. Job tells
us, Man's days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have
appointed his bounds, beyond which he cannot pass. And all the days of my
appointed Time, says he, will I wait till my Change shall come. Man's Life is
appointed and fixed by God, his days are determined by him: We know not how
long we shall live, but God does; he gives us out our days and our months by
Tale, the number of his months are with thee. Whatever Man is Lord of, he is
not Lord of his Time. We cannot dispose of one minute for our selves or others.
We live not by our own Wills, if we did, who would dye? Nor do we live at the
Will of others, for who of us then would live, or at least ^ive long? But we
live at the Will of God, Tenants we are at his Will, he gives us the Lease of
our Lives, and for what Years he pleases; He is Lord of Time, and therefore he
has Power to appoint to one man a greater, to another man a lesser measure of
Time, as seems good unto him. David therefore, when his Enemies were taking
Counsel against him to take away his Life, bears up his Spiris with this as a
comfortable Consideration, My Times are in thy hands O Lord, Psalm. 31 15. The
Jews we know designed the Death of Christ a long time, but they could not
accomplish it, till his hour was come, and therefore when he was brought before
Pilate to be judged, says Pilate to him, Know thou not that I have Power to
Crucify thee, and have Power to release thee; No, says Christ, thou have no
such Power of thy self, neither could thou have any such Power, except it
were given thee from above. What Christ said of himself, is true of every Man,
he lives not after, nor dies before his hour is come: Our Friends cannot
lengthen our days, nor can our Enemies shorten them; no, it is God that holds
our Souls and Lives in being, and when he pleases, and not before, we return
unto our Dust. God has determined our days to us, and God keeps the reckoning
of our days for us; and if, as our Lord tells us, That a Sparrow falls not to
the ground without our Father, and that the very hairs of our heads are all
numbered: Surely then the days of our Lives are numbered. The hairs of the head
are the meanest part of us, and indeed but a stringy Excrement, and there are
such numerous multitudes of them, that it is a kind of a Wonder that they can
be numbered, or any Account kept of them, but yet to show that the Providence of
God extends its self to the least things, it extends to the numbering of our
hairs, much more than to the numbering of our days: But.

Though Death observes the Order and Appointment of God, yet it observes no
Order among men: It fears none for their greatness, nor spares none for their
goodness, nor despises any for their lowness. Though Christians are Soldiers,
and in a continual Warfare with their Spiritual Enemies, obeying the Commands
of the Captain of their Salvation while they live, yet do they observe no
Order, nor keep to any Rule in dying. The Old go not always before the Young,
nor the Rich before, and the Poor following after. Death has no Master of
Ceremonies, but it takes promiscuously, here a Child, and there a Man; here a
Rich Man, and there a Beggar; here a strong Man, and there a weak Man; here a
Master, and there a Servant. The Law of Nature says, that a Man in his full
strength is not so likely to dye, as one that is withered with Old Age; it sets
Death further off from one whose breasts are full of milk, and their bones
moistened with marrow. The Law of Nature says, O Death, go to the wrinkled
face, to the dry bones, to those, the Infirmities and Weaknesses of whose Age
are so many and so afflictive, that they seem to have no Pleasure in their
Lives, but are desirous of thy presence and company, O Death, for their ease
and relief; But O meddle not with this g^odly young Man, or that beautiful
Woman, alas, they are but now in the flower of their days, and in the prime of
their years, and therefore spare them. But Death will not Answer nor Regard
these Requests; for Death observes not the Law of Nature, but the Appointments
of God, who is the Lord of Nature. We see it therefore daily, Death knocks as
often at the young Man's door, as at the old Man's; and as frequently carries
the strong and healthful Man Prisoner to the Grave, as the weak and sickly.

And as there is no Order observed in Death, so is there none in the Grave.
Death and the Grave are the two great Levellers of Mankind. While Men live,
there is, and there ought to be distinctions among them, God has appointed it
so, and Men ought to observe it, acknowledging the power and greatness of those
that are in high Places: For as the Scripture observes, as there is one Glory
of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars, for
one Star differs from another Star in Glory, 1 Cor. 15. and 41. And as there
is difference in the Celestial Glories, so also is there in the Terrestrial;
there is a Glory belonging unto Kings, there is a Glory belonging unto
Noblemen, and a Glory belonging unto Common People; all have not, nor ought to
have the same Glory, but one Man differs from another Man in Glory. But when
Death comes, there is an end of all these distinctions; the Grave mingles the
Dust and Pones of the one with the other: We cannot there distinguish the rich
Man's Dust, from the poor Man's; nor the Bones of Kings, from those of their
lowest Subjects. Rich Men indeed descend with greater Pomp into the Grave, and
are buried in more eminent Places, and under more stately Monuments. But though
great Men's Tombs differ from their Inferiors, yet their Bones do not; but the
Worms feed upon all alike. While Men walk upon this Dust, their distances are
many; but when they lie down in the Dust, they are all alike. Civil Differences
then all cease, and Moral Differences only take place; and according as Men
have been or done, good or evil here, so shall they be differenced for ever
hereafter.

If it be demanded now, how Man came to be notal;

I answer, Not by Creation; for he was created, as in a holy, so in a deathless
State. Immortality was a part of God's Image at first imprinted upon Man. God's
Image being defaced by Sin, Mortality took place. Man never had an
Impossibility not to die, but he had a possibility not to die, and that was the
State of Man's Immortality. In his State of Innocence, his Life was made as
long as his Obedience. In God's dealing with our first Parents, he backed his
Command with the threatening of Death, Genesis 2.17. Of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil thou shall not eat; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely die. Our first Parents disobeyed this most righteous and equitable
Command of God, and thereby brought Death upon themselves and all their
Posterity: For though God formed Man, as the Holy Story tells us, out of the
Dust of the Earth; yet so long as Man stood, he never said, to Dust thou shall
return; but only put in a supposition or threatening, that in case he did fall,
he should surely die. But when by Sin he had fallen from God, then he hears
what he must be, Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return. So that the
Justice of God stands engaged to inflict Death upon every Transgressour. And to
this the Apostle ascribes it, Romans 5.12. By Sin Death entered into the World,
and so Death passed upon all, because all have sinned. Death therefore seizes
upon us not as we are Men, but as we are Sinners. To die, is a penalty
inflicted upon Man for Sin. If Man had not sinned, he had not been under a
necessity of dying; but by sinning, he became mortal. Sin therefore is not only
the Sting of Death, but the Cause of Death: It is that which gives it not only
its Terror, but its very Being; and therefore it is somewhat remarkable, that
among all the Creatures in the World Man only is termed mortal. It is certain
other Creatures decay and perish as well as Man; yet among all perishing things
Man only has the wretched Denomination of being mortal, and there is good
Reason for it; since he alone of all perishing things, being created immortal,
voluntarily subjected himself unto Death, and by his own default brought upon
himself the Name of Mortal, as a brand of perpetual Infamy.

CHAP. II.
Thoughts of Death ought to be laid to heart by all. It is a Christian's great
Wisdom, and ought to be his greatest care to provide for Death. The great folly
and danger of neglecting or delaying such Preparations upon hopes of long life.
Sickness a very unfit time for such a work. Men very prone to put off thoughts
of Death and Preparation for it, with the Reasons thereof. Time short, though
long enough for our great work, if diligently improved. Excellent Essects that
the Consideration of our latter end would produce. It is a very comfortable
thing to have all things set right between God and the Soul before a dying
hour. Time ought therefore to be valued, and our days wisely to be numbered.

THough the Life of Man be very short, frail. and uncertain; though Death has
nothing of a peradventure in it, but is that which will most certainly
over-take all Men; none being able to withstand it, nor any privileged against
it. Yet how strangely besotted are the generality of Men in putting far from
them this evil day; as if because God has not told them the exact time when
they shall die, they were not bound to take any notice that they shall die? But
doubtless this is as great a piece of Folly as most we can be guilty of: For
why does God so often visit us with Pains and Distempers upon our Bodies, which
threaten Death? Why are we so frequently called to the house of Mourning, to
accompany others unto their long home? Is it not that hereby we might reflect
upon our own Mortality with the most serious thoughts, by beholding the Death
of others? Doubtless much of a Christian's Life, should be spent in the
thoughts of Death, and in a right numbering of his days, so as to lay to heart
his latter end: It is not that which should be forced upon us by some
unexpected Providence of God, in snatching some away out of the World by some
sudden stroke, by the hearing whereof we are amazed, and by whose Funeral the
thoughts of Death force themselves into our Minds, but we should make it the
Matter of our daily Meditation, the thoughts of which we should accustom
ourselves unto; and that not only when with old Barzillai we have not long to
live, when by Reason of Age our Strength is departed, when Infirmities and
Distempers upon us are so many, that we can taste no sweetness in any outward
Enjoyments; but even with Joseph of Arimathea, who made his Sepulcher in his
Garden a place of Pleasure: so should we in the midst of all our Delights and
Recreations, and when we are best able to relish what sweetness there is in
them; even then should we check all such Inclinations in us by accustoming our
Minds unto the frequent, serious, awful thoughts of our latter end. For this we
have the practice of our blessed Lord, who when he was transfigured before his
Disciples, the Glory whereof was so great, that St Peter's weak Eyes were not
able to behold it; yet he then thought no Subject so fit to be discoursed of,
as that of his Death which he was to accomplish at Jerusalem, Luke 9.31. It is
therefore a wicked Proverb that is frequent in the Mouths of many, They thought
not of such a thing no more than they thought of their dying Day. Alas poor
foolish Man, what, not think of thy dying day? Do thou know what thou say?
Is the day of thy Death of no more Concernment to thee than so? What, not so
much as to think of it? Do thou not know, Oh vain, trifling Man that thy
dying day will be to thee the beginning of a state of Happiness that shall
never cease, or an entrance on a state of Misery that shall never know an end?
And what, is it not worth thy bestowing a thought upon it? For Shame, O foolish
Man, (for I scarce know how to call thee, Christian,) thy talk is so profane,
and thy Life so loose, that it savours little of Christianity; to be sure not
of the power of Godliness, if thy ways be according to thy Words. It is said of
the Old World, that they eat, they drank, they married, and were given in
Marriage until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and they knew it not,
till the Flood came and swept them away. What, was the Old World destroyed,
because they knew not of the coming of the Flood? No, Noah was a Preacher of
Righteousness, and doubtless he had told them of it many a time; but yet, it is
said, they knew it not till the Flood swept them away; that is, they knew it
not, so as to consider, and make Provision against the Deluge came; so they
knew it not. So is it now with many in this Case; they are not undone
eternally, by not knowing they shall die; for there are none how profane and
Atheistical soever, but will own that they must die; but this ruins them for
ever, that they consider it not so as to make timely provision for a dying hour.

The Care and Wisdom of a Christian discovers it self much by his Preparations
for Death. The Prudence of a Man appears in nothing more than in making a good
choice for himself: Now there are two Estates that do abide all Men, a State of
Happiness in Heaven, and a State of Misery in Hell; and these are both of them
eternal. Life is the time of our choice; Death, which comes at the close of our
days, discovers what our choice has been: The daily Improving of our Time in
the preparing our Souls for our Dissolution, is a good Evidence of a wise and
happy choice. Job complains of some that die without Wisdom; the Reason is,
because they live not wisely, that is, they do not with Care and Wisdom prepare
themselves for Death. This Wisdom is wanting in most Men; in regard whereof we
may say of them, as the Psalmist, Psalm 49.20. Man that is in honor, and
understands not, is like the Beasts that perish: That is, though in their
Lives they be Men of great Honor and Excellency; yea, though wiser in their
Generation, as our Lord speaks, than the Children of Light: Yet they perish
like a Beast; for he that dies unpreparedly, dies foolishly. For the Wisdom of
a Man discovers it self much in serious Meditations of, and diligent
Preparations for his great Change. This was that which God so passionately
wished for his People of old, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that my people were wise that
they understood this, that they would consider their latter end. And the truth
of it is, it is a great piece of Wisdom, and a high attainment in a Christian,
with Care and Prudence to consider of and prepare for his latter end; yea, so
great is it, that it is too wonderful to be gained by Art or Study, we must get
it upon our knees by Prayer. Holy David therefore, as one convinced, both how
necessary and profitable this Wisdom would be; and being sensible also of his
own inability for to attain it, makes it his earnest Prayer unto God, that he
would instruct him herein, Psalm 39.4. Lord, make me to know mine end, and the
measure of my days, what it is that I may know how frail I am. As if he had
said, Lord, I have taken this and that and the other thing into my thoughts
(for possibly his mind had been in the dust, and he had been handling the Clay,
out of which he was taken) yet by all these Considerations of the Natural
Constitutions of my Body, and my Subjection thereby unto Death, and the Grave,
being a poor feeble Creature, I cannot bring my Heart to be so thoroughly
sensible of my frailty as I ought: Lord, therefore do thou make me to know it.
The same Holy desire we find breathed out, by Moses, in Psalm 90.12. So teach
us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom: as if he had
said, Lord, I have been at the work my self, I have endeavored to number my
days, to count over the time of my life, but by what I can do, I cannot tell
how long or how short my life will be; it is true I can tell to threescore or
fourscore years, which usually is the longest term of Man's life, and I can
tell no farther, but yet for all that I cannot apply my heart unto Wisdom; this
I must have from thee; therefore, O Lord, teach me. Though we need but little
Arithmetic to number our days Naturally, yet we need a great deal of Grace to
number them Spiritually. Dying is a great work, and requires great care and
circumspection. We can die but once; how careful should we be then that we die
well? Man had need be very exact in doing that which he cannot do a second
time, and such is the work of Dying. An Error in Death is like an Error in
War, which we cannot commit twice. O what Reason have we then to be careful
that we do not Err at all, where it is impossible of Erring again? Actually to
Err twice, is more sinful, but not to have a possibility of Erring twice is
most dangerous. We transgress the Laws of living a thousand times over, but the
Laws of dying, no Man ever transgressed a second time. And that we so often
transgress the Laws of Living is an aggravation of sin upon all Men; and that
we can transgress the Laws of Dying but once is the Seal of Misery upon most
Men. How should we then cry unto God for Wisdom to make us careful always to
live so that we may be prepared for a dying hour?

If now the Wisdom of a Christian consists in making preparations for Death,
then those Persons are guilty of great folly and run desperate hazards who upon
hope of long life, neglect such Preparations. Yet if a Minister in a great
Congregation should go from Man to Man, and ask them whether they are prepared
to die, would not, must not most, if they will speak the Truth, be forced to
say they are not? if upon this you deal faithfully with them, and show your
selves a true Friend to their Souls, laying before them, their great folly and
danger herein, by such Strong and Powerful Convictions that their Consciences
are forced to yield to you, and themselves brought with Tears to confess their
foolishness; hereupon what Resolutions do they take up, and what Promises do
they make, binding their Souls to God by many Vows, witnessed with many Prayers
and Tears, that they will make it the business of their Lives for the time to
come, to prepare for Death: but alas, how soon do these seemingly strong
Resolutions die and come to nothing? and Death that under those Convictions
they feared was ready to seize upon them every moment, is now as far from their
Persons they hope, as he is from their thoughts. He threatens them not as
formerly, and therefore they fear him not as formerly. Distempers of Body which
sometimes frighted them into an awe and fear of Death are now departed from
them, and so is Death with them, at least as to their Apprehensions. They have
now a Healthful strong Constitution of Body, and what does this Prognosticate
but long Life and many days yet to come they hope? Does not the Word of God say
that the Age of Man is Threescore years and Ten, and many times by Reason of
Strength, which they feel no want of, it is Fourscore; and for their parts they
have not lived above Thirty or forty years as yet, and therefore surely they
have a great deal of time still to come, and then they will bethink themselves
of dying, and that will be time enough. But O foolish Man, what vain confidence
is this in which thou trustest; who gave thee this Knowledge of thy Life and
Time, that thou art thus strangely bold and presumptuous as if thou had the
Lease thereof in thine own hands, and at thine own dispose. Indeed we read of
good Hezekiah, that upon his recovery from a fit of Sickness, God gave him a
Lease of his Life for fifteen years, but who ever had the like Scripture and
Experience, speak of nothing more plainly than the Frailty and uncertainty of
Man's Life. It is therefore compared to the Wind, to a Leaf, to a Flower, to a
Shadow, to a Vapor; by all which the Spirit of God sets forth to us, the
Frailty, Brevity and uncertainty of Man's Life endeavoring hereby to take us
off from all foolish conceits and vain hopes of long life; for what is our
Life, but a Vapor that appears for a while and then vanishes away? a little
breath turned in and out by the Nostrils, a narrow passage that is soon stopped
and we are gone. We have no Assurance of our Life, no not for a moment, Death
lies in Ambush every where for us. We have a Proverb, that the young Man may
die, but the old Man must die; whereas Observation will inform us, that
incomparably more die young than old. And did we but seriously consider, by
what small pins this Frame of Man is held together, it would appear no less
than a Miracle, that we live one day or hour to an end, so many dangers, so
many Casualties do we pass through every moment: and are the thoughts of Death
and thy preparation for Death and that Eternity that follows it, to be put off
to such uncertainties. Are not all thy days on Earth few, and thou have spent
some of them already, and possibly those few days of thine that are already
past and gone, are all the days thou have to pass: say not then to God, to thy
Conscience, or to others that put thee upon a present preparation for Death and
Eternity, I will do it to morrow, or hereafter; boast not thy self, O vain Man,
of to morrow, for thou know not even what this day may bring forth to thee;
possibly this day may bring forth thy death, and where then will be thy to
morrows preparation for it?

But suppose Death should not cut us off suddenly, but give us warning of its
approach by Sickness and Distempers of Body; yet how unfit a time is that to
prepare for dying? for Diseases sometimes come with that Violence, that they
quickly take away Men's Senses and Understandings, and having lost the use of
their Reason they are fit for nothing And have thou, O presumptuous sinner,
that trustest to a Sickbed preparation for Death and Eternity, and Assurance,
that this shall not be thy State and Condition then; nay, thou have just cause
to fear that thus it shall be, because in the time of thy Health and Strength
when God called after thee to look toward himself, and to mind thy Everlasting
Concernments, thou wou'dit not: therefore now that thou art come to lie upon a
Death bed, and thy Conscience is awakened with horror, because of thy former
negligence, and the prospect of thy future Misery; that now the Violence of thy
Distempers should be so great, as to render thee incapable of such a Work. Or
if God should be so merciful to thee, (which thou have no reason to expect) as
to continue to thee the use of thy Reason and Understanding, so that being
apprehensive of the approach of Death, and Conscience also be awakened and
terrifying thee with the fears of a strict account, that thou art going to give
unto the Great God of all that thou have done in the Body, whether it be good
or evil; dreading also what the Consequences thereof may be; by reason of thy
negligence and carelessness in the time of thy Health and Strength, to make
preparation for thy Eternal State. It being thus with thee, and thine Eyes
being opened to see whither thou art going, thou art very desirous it may be
now to set thy Soul in order, because thou fear thou shall die, and not
live. Yet thy Sickness may be so sharp, and pains may come upon thee with that
Extremity, that all thou can do will be little enough to mind thy Body. God
may visit thee with such strong pains upon thy bed, as may make thee cry and
roar with such horrors, as may make thee a terror to thy self and to all that
come near thee; so that all thou can do for thy self, or what others can do
for thee, may not be able to give thee any ease, or relief. And is this the
time thou choosest to prepare thy self for Death and Eternity in? What, when
thou can hardly tell how to turn thy Body upon thy Bed, for a little ease?
Do thou think this a fit time to turn thy Soul fron Sin unto God in? Suppose
thou were now cast upon a Sickbed, and thy Body full of pains, if any one
should come and put thee in mind of some Worldly Business, would thou not
think it a good excuse, to say, Pray trouble me not now, because I am Sick;
Speak to me of these things when I am Well again? And do thou think it
Reasonable to be excused from Worldly Business, because thou art Sick; and yet
do thou Judge it the best time for thee to be employed about thy Spiritual
concerns when thou art sick, yea when thou art dying? Surely desperate folly
and madness is in the hearts of these Men, who thus live, and thus think to
die. Alas, the time of Sickness is a time of spending not of getting; it is not
a time to gain Evidences for Heaven, but to use them, and to take the comfort
that flows from them. Alas poor Man, thou should now be solacing thy Soul in
God as thy Father reconciled to thee in Christ; and having made it the business
of thy life to serve and please him sincerely, though not without weaknesses
and imperfections; thou should now be able to say, thou have through Jesus
Christ received the Atonement, and art continually rejoicing in hopes of the
Glory of God; the comfort whereof should be so great, as to swallow up all thy
Bodily pains and distempers, and carry thee cheerfully through the Pangs of
Death; so as that thou should be able to say, Blessed be God I am not sick,
for mine Iniquities are forgiven me. This should be thy State and Condition
upon a dying bed. But if thou have thy work to do, thy Preparations for Heaven
and Eternity to make when thou art upon thy Sick, yea thy Deathbed, Oh how
miserable, I had almost said, how desperate is thy Case! How many Gracious
Souls have found it work enough upon a Deathbed to attend the Pains and
Distempers of their Bodies? and believe it, O Sinner, who ever thou art, thou will find it a great truth, that to suffer, and be sick is work enough for any
Man at one time.

But suppose God should be so Gracious to thee, as by some lingering and gentle
sickness for many days, yea months together, give thee warning of thy
approaching Dissolution; and thy Conscience also should be awakened to stir up
in thee some serious thoughts and endeavors to prepare thy self for thy
departure hence; yet since thou have so often turned thy back upon God, and
refused to hearken unto those many Calls that he has vouchsafed unto thee in
the time of thy life, to be Wise for thy self by considering thy latter end,
but thou would not; how justly may he now reject thee at the time of thy
death, though thou follow'st him with never so many earnest cries, yea and
Tears also? That is a most dreadful place of Scripture, Oh that it were
Engraven with a Pen of Iron, and with the Point of a Diamond, upon the heart of
every careless negligent sinner! Proverbs 1. from 24. to 31. Because I have
called and you have refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no Man regarded.
But you have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my reproof. What
then O dreadful, O Soul confounding words! I also will laugh at your Calamity,
and mock when your Fear comes. When your fear comes as Desolation, and your
Destruction as a Whirlwind. When Distress and Anguish comes upon you. Well,
but what follows upon this? will not God be Entreated? cannot Prayers and Cries
do any thing with God? No, for it follows in the next words; Then shall they
call upon me, but I will not Answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me; for they hated Knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord:
They would none of my Counsel, they despised all my Reproof. What Is the
Conclusion of all this? why, that we have in the next words, therefore shall
they eat the Fruit of their own ways, and be filled with their own Devices.
Whoever thou art that Read these Lines, if through thy carelessness this
should ever come to be thy Case, because thou will not take warning, I have
only this doleful Word to leave with thee for thy serious thoughts and
meditations, and from my Soul I wish it may do thy Soul good; this State, that
I am speaking of, will be a State so full of dismal anguish, and perplexing
horrors, that no words are able to express the misery of it.

Moreover, a sickbed Repentance, and Preparation for thy Eternal State is very
questionable. How hard a matter will thou find it then to satisfy thy own
Conscience, or to convince others, that what thou now do is done in the
uprightness of thy Heart, and not in Hypocrisy? Alas the present feeling of
the wrath of God, and the future expectations of fiery indignation in Hell, may
constrain thee unto all that thou do. It was a very sad Relation, (and I wish
the reading of it may do some Soul good) which once I received from the Mouth
of an eminent Godly Minister, of many years standing in the Ministry: I have,
says he, been called to visit abundance of Persons upon their Deathbeds, who
reflecting back upon the wickedness of their lives, have professed a great deal
of grief and sorrow, and made many Promises what they would do, and how they
would live, if God would restore them to their health again; but among them
all, says he, thus dying, I could never yet meet with one that could give me
good ground to believe the Happiness of their future state and condition in
another World. O let the consideration hereof cut thee to the Heart, O thou
slothful and delaying Sinner.

But if thou should be sincere then in thy turning unto God, and thy
Preparations for Death and Eternity, such as are sound and not hypocritical and
feigned; and God should be graciously entreated of thee in this last and
greatest hour of thy distress; yet will it not wound and pierce thy Soul to
consider what Peace of Conscience, what joy in believing, what comfortable
testimonies of God's loving kindness to thy Soul thou have lost; the sweetness
and delight whereof would have born up thy Soul in a dying hour, and have
carried thee triumphantly through the gloomy valley of the shadow of Death, so
that thou should have feared no evil. But now instead thereof, by reflecting
upon the former course of thy life, which has been a continual trade of Sin
and Wickedness, whereby God has been dish moured and provoked by thee all thy
days, he now appears to thee as thy dreadful Enemy, visiting thee with nothing
but terrible Rebukes of horror and wrath in thy Conscience: And though God may
have mercy upon thy Soul eternally, and the state of thy future Happiness may
be sure and certain in it self; yet thy passage to it may be very
uncomfortable; insomuch that as to thy sense and feeling thou art but leaving
Earth to go to Hell, God's bringing thee to Heaven being by the Gates thereof.

But though delays in this case are dangerous, and sickbed preparations for
Heaven and Eternity at best, but uncomfortable; yet how prone are most Men to
put off the thoughts of Death and their Preparations for it? Solomon tells us,
Eccles. 7. That it is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the House
of Feasting, for this is the end of all Men, and the living will lay it to
Heart. We ought indeed daily to familiarize Death to our Souls, by frequent
thoughts and meditations of it; but when we go to the House of Mourning, to see
any laid in the Grave, this is a special proper time and season for the living
to lay Death to Heart; and it is probable if Men will at any time lay Death to
Heart, surely they will do it at such a time as that is; for when will Men
think of Death, if not when they see it before them? It is true, some do lay
Death to Heart, when they are called to such Solemnities: O then they have a
fit of grief upon them; but as soon as they have vented their Passion, the fit
is over, and so is their thoughts of Death with it. And though Solomon seems to
promise for the living, that in the House of Mourning they will lay it to
Heart; yet there are very many, that have been so often there, that they are
grown familiar with Death; but in a bad sense; for the frequency of such
occasions, have worn off all impressions of Mortality from their Hearts; so
that now they can go to the Grave again and again, and not be affected with it;
they look upon it as a matter of Custom and Formality for Men to die and be
buried, and when the solemnity of the Funeral is over, the thoughts of Death
are over with them; and as soon as they can get out of the sight of the Grave,
their Preparations for the Grave are out of their Mind. The Holy History tells
us, in 2 Samuel 10.12. that when Amasa was slain by Joab, and lay wallowing in
his Blood in the midst of the high way, every one that came by stood still,
being astonished to behold so dismal a Spectacle: But afterward we read, that
Amasa was removed out of the High way into the Field, and a Cloth cast upon
him: And what then? why, the Holy Text tells us, All the People went on after
Joab. So is it with us, if we behold a Person lying upon a deathbed, gasping
and bleeding, and with dying groans ready to expire his last breath; here we
make a stop, and pause with some astonishment at so sad a sight; but let a
Cloth be thrown over the Dead, and the Corpse drawn aside into the Grave, and
covered with Earth; presently we go to our employments and trading, and
possibly some to their sinful Practices again; as if the last Man that should
die were now buried.

Now the Reasons of this stupidity and carelessness may be such as these.

First, The great Love and Affection Men have to the World, and the things
thereof. These take up all the thoughts and time of some Men, so that they have
no leisure nor desires to think of Death, or to make Preparations for another
Life. The Pleasures, Honors, and Profits of the World are fine things in their
Eyes, they please their Fancies, and so possess their Minds with a fond desire
of long Life, that they may delight their senses in these earthly things, and
these ardent, earnest desires of theirs will let them think of nothing less
than many days to satisfy their sensual part in these delightful enjoyments.
If we should look abroad into the World, we may easily perceive which way the
Inclinations of most Men carry them; How eagerly do some pursue the Pleasures
of the World? How unweariedly do others follow the Profits of the World? And
how impatiently do others thirst after the Honors and Preferments of the
World, as if their Happiness were wrapped up in these outward Accommodations?
Whereas our Lord tells us, that a Man's Life consists not in the abundance of
the things that he enjoys here in this World. And by these things the thoughts
of Death are not suffered to come into Men's Minds; and if they will crowd in
upon them sometimes, they are soon cast out again as unwelcome Guests, that
come to disturb their Peace.

Secondly, Men put off the thoughts of Death and Preparation for it, because
they generally look upon it as that which is afar off: And this is the greatest
sottishness in the World. If you go to those that are young, and tell them that
they must die; it is true, say they, and Old Men ought to consider it, and
prepare themselves for it; but surely for us there is no such have yet. Alas,
they think they must of right and course live till they are Aged. If you go to
Old Men, and tell them that they must die; alas, their Age tells them so, they
cannot deny it; but though God visit them with weakness and infirmities, the
Companions of Old Age, which impair their Health, and waste their strength
continually; yet they Hope these decays are not so great, nor so violent, but
that they may yet weather out a few years more; those that are healthful and
strong think they need not prepare for Death, till they have warning given them
of its approach by Sickness: And those that God does summon to the Grave by
Sickness and Diseases, they have a secret hope, that because they have formerly
escaped from other distempers, therefore they may do so again. Thus now most
Men thrust Death from them, and put the evil Day afar off. And it is a true
saying, that usually the hopes of a long life, is the cause of an evil life;
for because Men hope they shall live long, therefore they are careless how they
live at present, presuming they may have time enough to repent and amend all
hereafter.

Thirdly, Men put off the thoughts of Death, because such apprehensions bring a
great deal of Fear and Terror with them. Death is that which Nature abhors to
think of; it cannot endure the thoughts of Separation, between those near and
dear Companions of Soul and Body. Oh to think that this Body, that is here
pampered and made so much of, should become vile and loathsome in the Grave,
laid in a Bed of stench and rotteness, covered with Worms, mouldring away into
the dust of Oblivion! This is a sad and melancholy subject for our thoughts to
muse upon; O this King of Terrors, Death! How un^^ come is he unto the
thoughts of most men; especially considering him as having his sting in him
which is Sin: O then it is no wonder that those wh^ are Conscious to themselves
of (...) ^^^^ing, guil^ dare not think of standing before the dreadful Tribunal
of God, whither Death, God's Sergeant; will bring them; but cry out with
Horror, Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire! Who among us can dwell
with everlasting Burning! (...) it is no wonder that such put far from them the
thoughts of Death, because they know that day whenever it comes, will be to
them ^n evil day.

But if Men would seriously consider, how shou^^ their time in this World is,
the hazard and danger^ they run by their delays would be prevented. Surely they
that have a lively sense of the things of Eternity upon their Hearts, that know
their time her^ to be but short; and believe that upon the improvement of this
short time, their misery or happiness for Eternity does depend, will not be so
foolish as to put off their Preparations for Death and Eternity till hereafter,
when they have no assurance of their lives, no not for a moment. This is so
weighty a consideration that if it were laid to Heart, would, prevail with all
Men that have the right use of their Reason and Understanding; Our time in this
World is short and uncertain, yet is our work very great: We are but of
yesterday, and possibly before to Morrow we may not be, and the Great God has
suspended Eternity upon the improvement of this moment; a few days, or a few
hours, nay possibly a few minutes, will determine our everlasting State and
condition; and according as we are in spending of them; so shall our Doom be
either to Eternal Happiness, or to Eternal Misery; and why, Oh why should our
precious and immortal Souls be so vile in our Eyes, as to lose them by sloth
and carelessness? Why should any of us be such Fools and Madmen, to hearken to
the solicitations of the Flesh, or to the allurements of a flattering
deceitful World, so as to put off and neglect our everlasting concerns? Should
we not rather say to the World, or whatever it be that would hinder us in our
great work; Stand off, for we are working for Eternity, an Eternity that is but
a few days, it may be but a few hours hence; a boundless, a bottomless, endless
state and condition, into which we know not how soon we may be cast; and
therefore we have no time to dally in, or to trifle away.

But though our Time be short, yet is it long enough for our great Work, if
diligently improved. We have so much time allotted us, as will serve to do our
real business in, and to answer the ends of living. A Christian's Work in this
World, is not to incumber himself with many things; or to vex himself about the
accomplishing of great designs for the World, to get a great Estate, to abound
with Pleasures, to grow great in the esteem of Men; these things are as much
below a Christian's Work, as they are below his Reward: And whoever thou art
that designest these things for thy self, thou may not have time enough for
the attaining of them; but yet Heaven may be got in that time that the World
cannot; thy Salvation may be wrought out, God may be made propitious to thee
through Christ, the one thing needful, the better part that shall never be
taken away from thee; these may be obtained by thee, and secured to thee as thy
Portion, in that time that God has given thee, if thou art diligent in
improving of it: Do not sigh and mourn therefore that thou can number no more
days; do not murmur and complain at the shortness of thy Life: What would
thou do if thy days were more? What use would thou make of thy time, if it
were longer? Is it that thou might save thy Soul, and make thy Peace with
God, that thou desire more time? Why thou need not more time for these
purposes than God has allotted thee already; thy Life is long enough if thou
did use it aright. It is not a little time that we have; but it is a little
that we use: God has not given us a little, but we throw away much. Our
Portion is not small; for what we are to Trade, but our mispence is exceeding
great. God is not niggardly and sparing in wha^ he has given us; but we are
prodigal and profuset foolishly wasting away our hours; they that have,
abundance of time given them, through their Imprudence and Mispence are utterly
undone; and then they whine like Beggars, as if they had had no time; whereas
those that have less time than others, that make these Complaints, have so
improved that little, that, Thanks be to God, they are rich in good Works, and
say it is enough, let God call for them when he pleases.

If now upon the serious Consideration of the shortness of time, any shall be
stirred up and provoked to a diligent Improvement of it, so as to prepare
themselves for their latter end, they shall find such Benefits as these
redounding to their Souls thereby.

First, It will be a great means for the Prevention of much Sin. He that shall
seriously consider with himself, I must shortly die, how soon I know not, will
presently reflect upon himself under a Temptation to Sin, and say, Why should I
commit this or that Evil, which if it be not a means to hasten my end, yet will
certainly make it more uneasy and uncomfortable, when I come to lie upon a
Deathbed, and consider what I have done amiss: Possibly I may die to morrow;
for who knows what a day may bring forth? O why then shall I venture to commit
that evil to day, which will be as Gall and Wormwood, and like Bitterness and
Vexation to my Soul then! Would I do it did I believe that I were to die to
morrow? Why should I then do it to day, that know not whether I shall live till
to morrow; for it is possible this may prove the last day of my Life?

Secondly, He that shall seriously consider his latter end, and shall
diligently employ himself and his time accordingly, shall find his life most
comfortable and contentful, and his Death most easy and peaceable. As for the
Contentment of Life; if you look abroad among Men in regard of their outward
Estate and Condition, you shall find that that Man, who by his Industry has
got to be aforehand in the World, has much more Peace and Quietness in his
Life, than he that is behind-hand or gone back, and is continually struggling
with Necessities and Wants. So is it in Spirituals also; he that has been wise
in improving the Opportunities that God has vouchsafed him for the getting of
Grace, and making his Peace with God through Christ; he that has done thus, a
great part, yea a chief part of the business of his Life is done; he is
prepared in some measure for all Conditions the wise Providence of God may
dispense to him, be it Sickness or Health; be it Life or Death; for he is
aforehand, as it were, in the business of his everlasting Concerns; so that if
God lengthen out his Life in this world, he carries on his great work and
business unto greater degrees of Perfection, not only without Trouble and
Disturbance, but with great Ease and Pleasure: Or if God see good to cut short
his days; and call him to give an Account of his Talents, his great business is
not now to go about, but his Accounts are ready, and he in some measure
prepared to give them up unto his Lord and Master; and, O blessed is that
Servant whom his Master when he comes shall find so doing.

But this is not all, the frequent considering our latter end brings Ease and
Peace in Death; it abates, if not removes the fears of it. Death in Scripture
is called the King of Terrors, and many times the fear of Death is more
terrible than Death it self: Now that which makes Death thus terrible to us, is
the knowledge of our Guilt, and the Apprehensions of God's Wrath and
Displeasure justly deserved thereby; this gives Death its Sting and Terror. Now
he that makes it his business to live in constant Preparation for Death, by
Acts of Repentance for former Sins, and by frequent Applications of the Blood
of Christ to his Soul by Faith, he removes both the Sting and the Fear of Death
at once: For how can he be afraid of Death, whose frequent Thoughts and
Meditations of it make it familiar to him: And as for the Sting of Death, that
cannot hurt him neither; for where Sin is truly repented of, it is really
pardoned; and Sin being pardoned, the Power and Sting of it, whereby it hurts
and wounds others, is taken away as to him; so that though others are held in
Bondage under the fear of Death all their lives, and feel the deadly Sting of
it when they come to die; yet he fears not either the suddenness of its
Approach, nor the power of its Sting.

Now dying being a work of great weight and difficulty, it is not only of great
Concernment, but it will be full of Sweetness and Comfort to us when we come to
lie upon a (...) had to be able to say, that all things are set straight and
right between God and our Souls: Such Persons are no small Proficients in Grace
and Holiness, but are strong in the (...)

CHAP. III.
The State of Man considered under Death. What it is to wait for Death, with
Reasons why we must prepare for it. Dying is an important, difficult Work.
Death continually hastening toward us, yet few consider how suddenly themselves
or others may Die. Death comes violently to Wicked Men, yet no Man dies before
his time; however in Scripture some are said so to do. An Exhortation to
prepare for Death, with Motives to quicken Christians thereunto, and Directions
to help them therein.

HAving spoken something of the Life of Man, as it has Relation unto the
Subject I am speaking to, which by Reason of Sin is become short, frail, and
uncertain; I shall now consider the State of Man under Death, which is the end
of his Temporal, but the beginning and entrance upon his Everlasting State;
which that Christians may with the more profit and advantage meditate upon, I
shall reduce all that I have to say of it unto three particulars. The State of
Man under Death is a State that admits of no returning unto Life; a State that
admits of no amendments; and a State that is fixed and determined.

First, The State of Man under Death is a State that admits of no returning
unto Life again. When once the Sun of this Life is set, it will arise no more
upon thee for ever. Are not my Days few, says Job Cease from me, that I may
take comfort a little, before I go whence I shall not return. And Job 10.20.
When a few Days are come, says he, I shall go whence I shall not return, Job
16.22. That Is a strange Journey indeed that admits of no return. That which
pleases us while we live, is the hopes of returning to our Homes again; but
when we die, we take a Journey whence there is no returning; for there is no
recovery out of the Grave, when once we are Dead. Indeed it is a fundamental
Article of the Christian Faith, to believe the Resurrection of the Dead; for
the Scripture tells us, that all Men shall stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, to receive according to what they have done in the Body: Now if there
be not a Resurrection of the Dead, how can this be? therefore our Lord tells us
plainly, John 5.28. that the hour is coming when all that are in their Graves
shall hear his Voice and shall come forth; but this time is not yet come, and
till this time comes, the sentence of Death is irreversible upon all. And
though God has already stretched sorth his hand to the Grave, for the raising
of some Persons from the Dead miraculously; yet, as those few that have escaped
Death, make no breach upon this general Truth, that all must Die; so it does
not at all infringe this general Truth, that God will not now by the
manifestation of the same miraculous Power, raise any from the Grave, because
some have been raised and recovered out of it.

Secondly, The State of Man under Death admits of no amendments or alterations.
Life is the Time of Working, in Death we receive the Reward of our Work. Our
Lord tells us of himself, I must Work the Works of him that sent me, while it
is Day, for the Night comes wherein no Man can Work, Joh. 9.4. Death puts an
end to all Works whether they be Natural, Civil, or Religious. There is no
eating or drinking, nor any pleasure to be taken in any outward enjoyments in
the State of Death: there is no buying, or selling, or getting gain when we are
Dead; nay, Death puts an end to all Spiritual Works; those Duties that upon
Earth were the Saints exercise, in the Grave there is an end of them; there is
a dying and perishing for ever, in respect of Faith and Repentance, in respect
of praying and hearing the Word, these are Heavenly Works; but the Time for the
performance of them is while we are here upon Earth. None of these Labors are
in Heaven or in Hell, no nor in the Grave, whither we are all going. In Heaven
there is nothing but rest; in Hell though there be no rest, yet there is no
labor: In Hell there is nothing but Wages, in Heaven there is nothing but
Reward; our whole Work lies in the few Days that are on this side both. What we
do for the obtaining of Heaven, or for the avoiding of Hell, it must be done
now, for there is no Work, no Device in the Grave, whither we are all going.

Thirdly, The State of Man under Death is a State that is fixed and determined.
He that dies under the Guilt of Sin shall never have it forgiven him, The Blood
of Christ that was appointed for the Pardon of Sin, and for the Justification
of a Sinner, shall never make God propitious to a Soul that dies under the
Guilt of Sin; though that Blood now speaks better things than the Blood of
Abel; and crying aloud to Heaven, nay in Heaven, for Mercy, has obtained
Pardon and forgiveness for thousands of Souls now in Glory; yet has it no
virtue in it that shall be applicable to any Sinner for the remission of his
Sins, when once the Sentence of Death is executed upon him. There is a
Sacrifice appointed by God, to take away Sin in this Life, even the Blood of
Christ that cleanses from all Sin; and now he entreats and beseeches Sinners
to come unto him, that they may have Life by him: but those that will not now
accept of his Gracious offer, but continue in Sin, and Disobedience all their
days, and die under the Guilt thereof; there remains no more Sacrifice for
them, and it is impossible they should ever be Pardoned, because the Sufferings
of Christ were never Ordained as an Expiatory Sacrifice for their Sins. His
bleeding and dying upon the Cross will do them no good at all now; the Time and
Season of Mercy and Grace with them is gone and past for ever. Nay, let me add
a dreadful word unto all such, instead of any Benefit and Advantage that will
come to them by the Blood of Christ, it is that which cries loudly against them
for the Wrath and Vengeance of God to fall upon them to Eternity. Besides, he
that dies under the guilt of Sin, dies also under the filth and pollution of
Sin, from whence he shall never be cleansed. We read in Scripture of a
Refiner's Fire; but Hell Fire is not of this Nature, it enrageth the Sinner,
but it does not Refine him. No, that Sin or Holiness that accompanies Men out
of this World, shall abide with them for ever; he that dies in a State of Sin,
his guilt remains upon him for ever: there are no Seasons of Grace to be
enjoyed in another World, nor are there any Operations of the Spirit of God,
vouchsafed to Renew and Change Men hereafter. Whilst we are in this World,
though the Law Condemns us for our sin and guilt, and the Gospel disowns us for
our filth and pollution; yet even such as we have been Washed, have been
Justified, have been Sanctified; and so may we, for the Blood of Christ is
still a Fountain open to wash in for Sin and for uncleanness; and the Infinite
though Provoked Majesty of Heaven condescends so low as to entreat us with more
Earnestness and Affection to pity our own Souls and accept of a Pardon, then
Guilty Condemned Sinners desire to obtain it: but when this Life is at an end,
there shall be no more Offers of Mercy, but the Blood of Christ, shall then be
a Spring shut up, and a Fountain Sealed that none can wash in it and be
Cleansed. Death Seals up the State of a Sinner for ever. You know what Abrabam
tells the Rich Man in Hell, in Luke 16.26. Between us and you says he, there is
a great Gulf, fixed, so that they that would pass from hence to you cannot,
neither can they pass to us that would come from thence. The State and
Condition that Men enter upon after Death, is fixed and unalterable. Therefore
O Sinner what thou do for God, for Heaven, for thy Soul, do it quickly, for
this is the only Time and Season for thee to work in, and as thou now Sowest so
thou shall Reap for ever.

The State of Man under Death being thus, it greatly concerns all Men to wait
for Death. Job tells us, it should be his Practice, Job 14.14. All the days of
my appointed time, will I wait till my change comes. Now waiting as it relates
unto Death may include three things. Meditation, Expectation, and Preparation.

First, Meditation. He that waits for the Accomplishment of any Worldly
Business, especially if it be of Concernment to him, how busy will his Mind
and Thoughts be in musing upon it? He now that is waiting for the coming of
Death, considering both the certainty of it, that it will come, and the
uncertainty of it, when it will come, and believes withal that Eternal
Happiness, or Eternal Misery, will be that State to which Death will bring him,
cannot but have his Thoughts much taken up about it. This will make a Soul
Truly and Spiritually Wise, and therefore the Psalmist Prays, Lord teach us to
number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. He that is truly
Wise will Meditate of Death, and he that Meditates of Death, will be truly
Wise. The more we number our Days and think of our Time; the fewer Sins we
shall have to number; for as a Copy is then safest from blotting when dust is
thrown upon it, so are we from Sinning, when we remember we are but Dust.

Secondly, Waiting includes in it Expectation. That which we wait for, we are
in Expectation of; and that Man, may be said to wait for Death, that in every
Action of his Life, in every Alteration of his State and Condition, says to
himself, well, I must Die; when though his Bones are full of Marrow, though
Riches come in upon him like a Flood, yet says he, I must die, I have no
abiding Place here, I am but a Stranger and Sojourner in this World, as all my
Fathers were. I have now Wife and Children, Friends and Lands, but I cannot
enjoy any of these for ever; no nor my Life it self, for I have but a Lease of
it, and that but a short one too, which will soon expire. I expect Death daily,
even in the midst of all my Enjoyments; I am but a Steward of all that I have
here, and I must shortly be called to an Account; such and such are gone before
me, and I am following after. The other day Death snatched away such a dear
Relation from me, this day it has seized upon such a Friend and Acquaintance,
and to morrow the same Messenger may come for me. It is that I expect, and
therefore I wait for it.

Thirdly, Waiting includes in it Preparation. He that waits for Death, ought to
be preparing for it. This now is exceeding Requisite, because it is above the
reach of Words to express how much depends upon this Preparation; it is that
our whole Life should have respect unto; every thing that we do, ought to have
a tendency in it to make Death Comfortable. But of this Preparation for Death,
I shall speak more hereafter in its proper place.

This waiting for Death by way of Meditation on it, by way of Expectation of
it, and by way of Preparation for it, is very necessary, considering what an
Important difficult Work the Work of dying is; and this will appear if we
consider two things. First, what Death is. Secondly, what Death does. First,
what Death is, and here are three things considerable. Death is a Deprivation,
Death is a Desolution, and Death is a Destruction. All which make Death
terrible, and the Work of dying difficult.

First, Death is a Deprivation. It strips us of all those Comforts that in this
World did Refresh us. Friends, Relations, Lands, Houses; these have often
delighted us while we live; yea it may be too much, by setting our Affections
inordinately upon them, and now what Grief of Soul does it create to us,
violently by Death to be torn from them? but part we and they must whether we
will or no, and that for ever. Job tells us, We came naked into the World, and
we shall return naked out of it. The Apostle indeed seems to intimate as if
some Men in our days could scarcely believe it, and therefore to beat Men off
from such a conceit, he tells them, 1 Timothy 6.7. We brought nothing with us into
this World, this is true, and all Men will grant it; and says the Apostle, it
is certain we shall carry nothing out of it. Death makes all lie equal in the
Dust.

Secondly, Death is a Dessolution. In Life Soul and Body are united, and live
lovingly together; there is a near union between them; a union, which because
of their long Acquaintance and Co-habitation together, is become so dear, that
no union can be more desirable as to the continuance of it, nor no union more
dreaded as to the Dissolution of it, except it be the Spiritual union between
Christ and the Soul. There are several kinds of unions, and generally Love is
the ground of them all. There is an union of Friendship between one Friend and
another, whom Love has united so strongly, that they seem to Act as if one
Soul animated them both; so Jonathan loved David even as his own Soul: This is
a strong union. There is also a Relative union between Parents and Children; so
Jacob loved Benjamin, so that it is said his Life was bound up in the Life of
the Lad: This is a stronger union than the former. There is also a Marriage
union between a Man and his Wife, and this is a stronger union than either of
the former, Man and Wife making but one Flesh, as the Scripture speaks. But yet
there is a union that is stronger and nearer than any of these Unions, and that
is the Union between Soul and Body, for these two make but one Person. Now all
dis-unions are uncomfortable, and some dis-unions are dreadful; and as some
dis-unions are dreadful, so those dis-unions are most dreadful which rend that
from us that is nearest and dearest to us. For Friends to be parted, never to
see the Faces of one another again, this is sad. And therefore when St. Paul
was taking his leave of the Saints in Macedonia, in Acts 20.38. it is said,
They fell on his Neck and kissed him, sorrowing most for the words that he
spoke, that they should see his Face again no more. But it is sadder for
Parents and Children to be disunited. David found it so, when he cried out so
Passionately for his Son, 2 Samuel 18.33. O Absalom my Son, my Son, would God I
had died for thee, O Absalom, my Son, my Son. It is yet more sad to have a
disunion made between a Man and the Wife of his Bosom, when God shall take
away with a stroke the desire of his Eyes, one that has been a meet and fit
Yoke Fellow in the Lord; whose Eyes can refrain from weeping, or their Hearts
from bleeding under such a sad stroke of Providence. But yet there is a
disunion, that comes nearer than all these, and that is a disunion between
the Soul and the Body, those two Old, Sweet Intimate Companions, born together
into the World, and who have lived in sweet Society together all their Days;
for Death to come, and make a Dissolution between two so near and so dear
together, by a violent rending and tearing the Soul and Body asunder: Oh this
is exceeding sad and dreadful indeed, and that which must needs make the Work
of Dying hard and difficult.

Thirdly, Death is a Destruction. So David calls it, Psalm. 90.3. Thou turnest
Man to destruction. That Excellent Frame of Man's Body which David tells us,
was fearfully and wonderfully made in secret, and curiously wrought in the
lower parts of the Earth, by God himself, and that with Infinite Power and
Wisdom, Psalm. 139.14, 15. Sickness will not only stain its Glory and make the
Beauty of it to consume like a Moth: But Death will Demolish and pull it down
to the ground, turn it into Corruption, and Putrefaction, yea into Dust it
self, utterly destroying it so that it shall not be any more, until by the
Power of God, it shall be raised up again at the last day. Death now being so
destructive a thing unto Man, that nothing will content it less than his
Annihilation in the Grave, dying must needs be a hard and difficult thing unto
Flesh and Blood.

Secondly, Dying is an important difficult Work, if we consider what Death
does: now this I shall explain by opening these two things. First, Death
occasions our Spiritual Enemies to assault us. Secondly, It awakens Conscience
against us.

First, Death occasions our Spiritual Enemies to assault us most fiercely. Now
these Enemies are two, Sin and Satan.

First, Sin. When does the Guilty Prisoners Crimes come into his Mind, but when
he has a Summons to appear before his Judge? And when does the Guilt of Sin
fly in the Face of a Sinner, but when Death has him under his Arrest, to carry
him before God, the Great Judge of Heaven and Earth? Multitudes of Sins, that
before lay hid, and seemed to be quite forgotten, now show themselves, and come
fresh into a Sinner's mind, as so many Witnesses against him, which upon the
Review, he cannot but Remember, though formerly he had forgot them. Oh what a
number of horrid Wickednesses do now haunt his Thoughts, with dismal
apprehensions in the dark night of Death, walking up and down like so many
Frightful Ghosts, scaring and terrifying his Soul! Well may an Impenitent
Sinner say then unto Death, have thou found me O mine Enemy? art thou come O
Death to call my Sins to Remembrance and to slay my Soul?

Secondly, The Devil will then be very fierce and furious in his Assaults. His
Time now is but short, and therefore his Rage is great: This is his hour; yea,
his last hour, and therefore the Power of the Prince of Darkness is now most
put forth; he knows he has but a few hours more to wait, and if he can but
keep the Sinner so long, he is then his for ever. Assure thy self therefore O
Sinner, he will be diligent in watching thy Sickbed both by night and by day;
and if all the Power or Policy of Hell can prevent it, neither Cordial shall
benefit thy Body, nor Counsel and Advice profit thy Soul. The Devil is the
great Enemy of Souls, and because he is miserable himself, he therefore labors
that all others may be as miserable as he is: now the ways by which he
expresses his Enmity against Souls, that he may keep them from Eternal Life,
are these: Sometimes by obstructing the Work of Grace in the Souls of Men; and
thus he works with all his might, by all his Wiles and Devices that he can to
draw men unto and keep them in a way of Sin, that they may not set their Faces
toward Heaven, much more that they may not with earnest endeavors of Soul
seek to obtain it. It is true, God always has the Devil in a Chain, and can if
he pleases, restrain and hinder him in all his Malicious Attempts against his
Children, and many times he does manifest his Power and Grace toward his
Servants in a dying hour, by curbing in the Malice of that Evil one, that he
shall not be able to trouble and molest them in their Passage into Heaven. But
yet sometimes God does then permit the Devil to show his Malice against his
People; and then how fiercely and furiously does he make his Assaults upon
them? Then it is they meet with the sorest Trials; and because he could not
prevail upon them formerly as a Tempter, now he turns to be their Accuser,
charging all their Sins upon their Souls, with all the bloody aggravations of
them, upbraiding them with all their Profession, as if they had been but
Hypocrites in all that they had done. This God sometimes permits him to do,
that their Grace being exercised, the Trial thereof may appear to be more
precious than Gold that perishes, being found to the Praise and Glory of God,
and the Shame and Reproach of their Adversary the Devil in a most Glorious
Conquest over all his Temptations; for through the Grace and Strength of Christ
they overcome him in all his Accusations, and notwithstanding all, they go not
only quietly, but sometimes Triumphantly into Heaven and Glory.

Secondly, Death awakens Conscience. The Practice of a Sinner is to lull
Conscience asleep, that he may the more quietly and undisturbedly go on in Sin;
but when Death comes, usually the Conscience of a Sinner is awakened, if the
Sinner be not past feeling, and given over to a reprobate sense. Conscience
has its Times and Seasons of stirring in the Souls of Men; as sometimes under
the Preaching of the Word Conscience begins to stir within a Sinner, and tells
him that those Duties that have been laid before him by the Minister, are the
Commands of the Great God, and therefore ought to oblige him to Obedience: Here
Conscience is an honest Informer. Sometimes when a Sinner is taking the Word of
God into his hand and falls a Reading of it, where he meets with some things
Commanded by God, which possibly through ignorance or heedlessness he did not
take notice of before to be his Duty, Conscience at such a time takes part with
the Word of God, and by its Admonitions, helps forward the Convictions of the
Word upon the Heart of a Sinner, that so there may be an Obediential Conformity
thereunto: Here now Conscience is a Faithful Monitor. At another time, when a
Sinner has, not only through carelessness, but through wilfulness and
presumption fallen into the Commission of some great and horrid Sin; possibly
at such a time some Friend comes to him and deals plainly and freely with him
by reproving him sharply and severely for his Sin: Conscience now joins in with
the Reproof, and becomes as true a Friend unto the Sinner as any he has, if he
will but hearken unto him; here now Conscience thunders out both the
Threatenings of the Law, and the Vengeance of the Gospel; telling the Sinner,
that they that do such things, are worthy of Death; nay, that they deserve
Hell, for because of these things sake, says Conscience, comes the Wrath of
God upon the Children of Disobedience. Conscience here now shows it self an
exact and upright Reprover. But then there is another Office that Conscience
has, and that is to be an Accuser, and this Office it commonly makes use of
when it is thoroughly awakened upon a Deathbed; for when a Man comes to lie
upon a Sickbed, and sees the Visions of Death and the Grave before him, the
Charges of Conscience at such a time upon a Sinner, are most quick and smart:
for Conscience being just as it were a going to give up its Accounts unto the
Great God, the Judge of all Flesh, where it will speak nothing but the Truth,
begins now to give the Sinner some Account of what it must and will say before
the Tribunal of God then. And this is one Reason, why Conscience is so strict
and so severe in its Charge against the Soul, that it will let nothing pass
that comes into the mind of a Sinner, without leaving some stinging
Remembrances of its former guilt, even such as are more bitter than Death it
self. This now makes Dying to be so hard and difficult a Work. O happy Souls
are they who at such a time have their hearts sprinkled from the Evil of an
Accusing Conscience by the Blood of Jesus Christ, for they only can have Peace
and Comfort in the hour of Death.

This Work of dying though it be so hard and difficult a Work, yet is it that
we must all undergo, for Death is continually hastening toward us. The Blessed
Apostle St. Paul thought Death always to be near, it made such speed to him,
that he looked upon himself always as a dying Man, and therefore he tells us,
That he did die daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. and in Romans 8.36. For thy sake, says he,
we are killed all the day long, we are counted as Sheep for the Slaughter. And
if we make Hezekiah's Reckoning to be our own, (though he was under a fit of
Sickness when he said it, but we are in Health) yet we shall not be much
mistaken in the Account, when he tells us, From day even unto night, says he,
thou will make an end of me. What though Death has not laid his cold hands
upon us by some Mortal Disease, yet may he not lie in Ambush for us, and cut us
off suddenly? Time has Wings and flies away swiftly from us; and truly Death
does not creep, but with the same swiftness posts toward us. Man is wasting
and consuming every day; his Body wastes, his Strength wastes, his Parts waste,
his Time wastes; yea, his very Life wastes; and whither tend all these
Consumptions and Wastings, but only to the hastening of Death? neither will
these end till they terminate in Man's Dissolution.

But though Man in this Life is always hurrying on unto Death, yet how few are
there that consider, how suddenly themselves or others may die? we easily and
slightly pass over the Thoughts of Death, and the suddenness of its approach,
because it is that we have no mind to. We would not yet die our selves, and
therefore we will not think we shall. Guests that are unwellcome to us, we
either keep them out of our Houses, or turn them out as soon as we can. Such
are the Thoughts of Death, either of our own or others, and therefore if
possible we endeavor to keep them out of our minds altogether; but if
sometimes they will thrust in upon us, we turn them out again as soon as we
can, filling our Thoughts with some other things. But alas this will not do
always, for the Thoughts of Death will return again upon some occasions or
other. God by some Providence may be will awaken Conscience, and stir up
Thoughts of Death in our minds, let us do what we can to hinder them; yea,
though we do what we can to stifle them; but this is no thanks to us, for of
our selves we will not be brought to think of, or regard how suddenly others do
and our selves may die, till by some sad Providence, we are brought to the Sick
bed of some Friend, whom Death has bedewed with cold Sweats, and rackt with
Convulsims, so that he lies gasping and dying before us: till our Eyes be
brought thus to Affect our Hearts, our Hearts are seldom Affected as they ought
with the Sense of our Mortality.

Now as Death comes suddenly upon many, so commonly it comes violently upon
wicked Men, their Souls are not surrendered or delivered up unto God, but they
are rent and torn from them by Force and Violence. A wicked Man cannot commend
his Soul into the Hands of God when he is dying. Indeed we have a form of
making the Wills of dying Men, wherein the Person that lies upon his Deathbed,
says, I commend my Soul into the Hands of God which (in the Judgment of
Charity): because we have nothing to do to Censure Men's Eternal State) in the
General we must not wholly Condemn; yet it is to be feared, that few that say
those words, do it heartily and sincerely, and upon such Grounds, as God will
accept and receive, when they leave their Bodies. There are some who have lived
in Sin all their Days, yet have strong presumptions of the Mercy of God upon
their Deathbeds. God is a merciful God say they; and therefore with boldness
and confidence they commend their Souls unto him, relying upon his Mercy for
Salvation: But such are strangely Ignorant of the method of God in saving
Sinners, and by Custom in Sin, and the Judgment of God upon them for it, they
are become insensible, their Consciences are seared and asleep, and so neither
their Sin, nor the misery they are liable to for Sin, does in the least trouble
them. But otherwise the Death of a wicked Man is violent, he does not resign up
his Soul unto God, but it is forced from him whether he will or no.

But though a Sinner's Death be violent, yet no Man dies before his time,
though some in Scripture are said so to do: Hence we read that Caution of the
Wise Man, Eccles. 7.17. Be not wicked over much, why should thou die before
thy time. And God threatens, Psalm. 55.23. Bloody and deceitful Men shall not
live out half their Days. And it is a common saying among us, that such a one
is cut off in the midst of his Days.

To all which I shall only return this short Answer, That simply and in it self
considered, it is impossible but that the whole tale of Days, that God has
appointed to every one, must be fulfilled, according to the Number of them.
They are set down by God, and no Man can die before God's time. It is true a
Man may die before his time, that is, before he is prepared by Grace, or before
he is ripened in the course of Nature: Such expressions as these denote no
more, than either, that God cuts them off in their full strength, and in the
vigor of their years, when yet they might according to humane probability have
lived much longer; or else, comparing the shortness of their lives with the
length of others, God seems as it were to break it off in the very midst before
he has finished it.

And is Death the lot of all Men sooner or later? Though all die not the same
way, and after the same manner, nor at the same time; yet is Death the end of
all Men? Does Death pass upon all because all have sinned? Why then, let every
one prepare for Death. The Spirit of God tells us, that all flesh is grass, and
the goodliness thereof as the flower of the field, which soon withers and dies.
And is it so with these Bodies of ours, that they are frail and dying? The
Wisdom of a Christian then should manifest it self; not in laboring to avoid
the stroke of Death, for that is impossible; nor yet in spending too much time
in daubing over a House of Clay; or in repairing and propping up of an Earthly
Tabernacle, which when we have done all, will at length crumble into dust; but
seeing the Body is appointed for and will turn to dust, to be sollicitous that
when it dies, it may die happily and comfortably.

Christian, whoever thou art, into whose hands these lines may fall, know that
I am come to acquaint thee with a message from the True and Faithful God, that
cannot lie, that the Lease of thy Life is almost expired, and that the time of
thy departure is not far off: What habitation have thou provided for thy
precious and immortal Soul, that it may not at its departure out of thy Body
take up its dwelling with Devils and damned Spirits for ever? It may be thou
have provided well for thy Wife and Children, heaped up much Silver and Gold
together for them, added House to Land, that they may dwell upon the Earth; it
may be thou have settled thy Estate, so as to prevent all disputes and
quarrelings when thou art dead: I cannot say but thou have done well, and that
these things ought to be done, I condemn thee not: But what have thou done for
thy Soul all this while? Have thou not laid out much more care and pains for
thy never dying Soul, than thou have for thy perishing Body? If not, let me say
unto thee, O careless Sinner, as the Mariners said unto Jonah in the Storm,
What meanest thou, O Sleeper? What meanest thou O drowsy stupid Sinner? Arise,
for God's sake, and for thy Soul's sake, and bestir thy self; look about thee;
Whither art thou going? What will become of thee? Is not Eternity before thee?
And must not thy State and Condition be for ever hereafter, as thy Preparations
are now? O that God would open thine Eyes, that thou may see what will make
for thine Eternal Interest, before Death open them, when it will be too late.

Now that I may press this Exhortation the more home upon thy Conscience, I
shall lay down two or three Reasons for thy more thorough Conviction, that it
will be much for thy Interest and Advantage to be ready and prepared for Death.

First, Consider, Conscience will then be very busy and active in reviewing
thy Life. Now if for the most part thereof thou have walked uprightly with God,
Conscience will then give thee some measure of boldness toward God. But now if
at such a time, when Conscience is reflecting back upon thy former Life, it
cannot but say, if it will speak the Truth (as usually upon a Death bed it
does,) I have been considering thy former ways, and the Account that I can give
of them in general is, that they abound with multitudes of Sins and
Provocations, which no Man can number; to particularize them would be endless;
but if it may tend any way to thy Repentance, before it be too late: Remember,
O Sinner, (for I do,) how long God has lengthened out thy Life, how many
tenders of Christ and Salvation by him he has made unto thy Soul, which thou
have rejected. How many years of Sabbaths have thou enjoyed? How often has the
Spirit of God moved upon thy Soul, and stirred up holy motions in thy Heart,
which thou have resisted and quenched? What multitudes of mercies, wherewith
God would have drawn thee to himself, have thou slighted and abused? How many
corrections and afflictions has God laid upon thee, wherewith he would have
imbittered Sin unto thy Soul, that himself might have been more sweet, which
thou have despised and grown more hardened in Sin under? How has the Patience
of God been even wearied with waiting upon thee, whilst thou have pressed him
with thy Sins, even as a Cart is pressed with Sheaves, and yet thou would not
forbear thy wicked ways? Do thou not remember the particular times and days,
the several seasons and occasions wherein it has been thus and thus with thee?
Surely, says Conscience, thou can not forget it, these things are all down in
my Book, though thou thoughtest I took no notice of them, and I am now a going
to open this Book to show it to thy Judge, where I shall justify them all to
thy very face; for I do very well remember every one of them: O that for thy
Soul's sake I could say, I do as well remember thy praying, thy hearing, thy
reading, thy Meditation of holy and heavenly things, with the sincerity; yea,
the fervor and earnestness of thy Soul expressed in all these; that I could
bear Witness to thy Faith, to thy Humility, to thy Patience and Self denial, to
thy Repentance and Godly Sorrow for Sin, to the daily longing and breathing of
thy Soul after the being rid of a Body of Death, that thou might never
offend God any more; but I cannot say these things of thee, and I dare not now
flatter thee and tell thee, that I can, when I cannot, and if I should it would
do thee no good at all; for the Great Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whom
thou and I are now going to appear, knows all these things that I have now told
thee of to be true, and will quickly undeceive thee, whatever thy hopes are
now, and make thee know these things unto thy everlasting confusion; unless out
of the infinite Riches of his Grace and Mercy he give thee Repentance
presently, which thou can have very little hopes of now at Death, since thou
did not turn to him in thy Life.

Secondly, Consider, when thou come to die, thou will then have to do with
God himself immediately. It is true, while we are here in the Body we have to
do with God, and all our Affairs whatsoever are transacted under his Eye and in
his presence; therefore we read in Heb. 4.13. That all things are naked and
open unto the Eyes of that God with whom we have to do. There is no Prayer we
make, no Sermon we hear, no Holy Duty we perform, no Mercy we enjoy, no
Affliction we lie under, nor any Action we do in our whole lives, but we have
to do with God in it: But when we come to die, we have to do with God in
another way and manner than what we have to do with him in this World; here we
have to do with God in Duties and Ordinances; but it is in such a way as is
becoming our present state of distance from him; of which I may say, as the
Prophet does in another case, it is neither clear not dark, insomuch that Faith
it self has much a-do sometimes to discover God unto the Soul; and no wonder
then, if a Carnal Eye cannot discern him: But when as the Wise Man speaks, the
Soul shall return to God that gave it, the Soul then goes into the immediate
Presence of God, having to do with him in such an immediate way and manner,
that there is nothing in the Eye of the Soul to obscure or hinder the sight of
the Divine Presence; no vail of Flesh between God and it, but naked Majesty and
Glory discovers it self to the Soul with the rays of its own light, which is so
full of wonder and astonishment, that we know not now how to conceive of it,
much less to express it. And if a holy Prophet, seeing but a Vision of God,
cries out, Woe is me, I am undone, for I am a Man of unclean Lips, and mine Eyes
have seen the King, the Lord of Host, Isai 6.5. O how much more may it
overwhelm a Soul, when stripped of its Body, to see not only a Vision of God,
but to see God himself as it were face to face! But this is not all; for the
Soul is not by Death barely brought before the Great and Glorious God, but it
is brought before him to be judged to an Eternal State. In this Life we come
into the presence of God upon a Treaty of Peace, between God and our Souls. God
is now in Christ reconciling Sinners unto himself, and is willing not to impute
their Sins and Trespasses unto them; and if they will accept of his terms they
may make Peace with him, for he says now unto Sinners, let them take hold of
my strength and so make Peace with me, and they shall make Peace with me; but
if Sinners will not throw away the Weapons of their Rebellion out of their
Hands, I mean their Sins out of their Hearts, whereby they fight against God;
but Death comes and strikes them dead with their Weapons in their Hands, I mean
in the embracements of their lusts; God and they must treat after another
manner, not upon terms of Peace, but upon terms of Judgment; for away they go
immediately after Death before God as a Judge, the Spirit then returning unto
God that gave it, to receive a determinative sentence of Happiness or Misery
for ever. And who would not then be always prepared for the stroke of Death,
that carries the Soul into the presence of such a Judge, who has power to, and
who will determine its everlasting State?

Thirdly, As a farther Argument to persuade Christians unto a preparation for
Death, Consider the misery of those who when Death comes upon them are
unprovided for it: And this I shall do in these following particulars briefly.

First, An unprepared Sinner at Death loses all his outward comforts and
enjoyments. In this Life it may be Providence did abound toward him with
variety of outward enjoyments, as Riches, Relations, Pleasures, Profits, and
the like; but Death is now come and has swept away all of these things that
were desirable. It was a doleful expression of Ahraham unto the Rich Man in
Hell, Luke 16.25. Son remember thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things. Oh what a cutting word was this to his Soul, when he was passed into
another World? And will it not wound thy Soul as deeply, O Sinner, who have not
made thy Preparations for Eternity, when thou come to pass through the Valley
of the Shadow of Death, to consider thou have received all thy good things
already? yea, and having received them, if thou could always live with them,
and keep them always with thee, it might be something to thee; but alas thou
can not; for when Death comes it will turn thee out of all thy possessions
and enjoyments; when thou die thou shall take nothing in thy hand with thee
of all thy labor, as the Wise Man speaks, Eccl. 5.15. The things of this World
will not go one step with thee beyond this present Life; and think, O Sinner,
if thou can, what a doleful thing will it be for a poor Soul to be (...) down
naked upon the vast Ocean of Eternity, having nothing to relieve and support it
self with, all its Riches and Treasures being left behind it in another World.

Secondly, The Misery of an unprepared Sinner for Death appears in this, that
then he shall be deprived of all the Seasons and Opportunities of Grace. It is
no mean Mercy to thee, O Sinner, had thou a Heart to improve it, that thou
now enjoyest the Ordinances of Life and Salvation, that thou have the tenders
of Mercy, the entreaties of Ministers, the motions of the Spirit, invitations
to come unto Christ, leave and liberty to cast down thy self at the Feet of
God, and by Prayer and Supplication seek his Face, and be as earnest and
fervent as thou will or can be for Mercy: But let me tell thee at Death the
door of Mercy will be for ever shut, there will be no Praying, or Preaching, or
Hearing in the Place whither thou art going; no declaring this loving kindness
of God in the Grave, nor this faithfulness of his in Destruction. Now the
Ordinances of God, though precious to others, yet are they tedious and irksome
unto thee; the Church of God to thee is little better than a Prison, the
Sabbath Day is the longest day in the Week in thy Account, thou would fain be
rid of it; the Commands of Christ, which to a Gracious Soul are sweet and
delightful, are no better than Bonds and Fetters unto thee, which thou would
fain break asunder and cast away from thee; the Language of thy Carnal Heart is
this; (though the Sermon be commonly measured by the space of an hour;) yet
thou cryest, when will the Glass be out, when will the Duty be done, when will
the Sabbath be over, that we may follow the World again; thou think Prayer
too long, and Sermons too long, and Sabbaths too long: Well, be patient, O
Sinner, for a while, and in a short time thou shall never be troubled with
these long painful Duties any more; Death will ease thee of all these Burdens;
that Night is coming upon thee, wherein there shall be no more of these Works
done for ever; and then though with Esau, thou should carefully seek a place
of Repentance, with Tears, to bewall thy former Folly, yet thou should not
find it.

Thirdly, The Misery of an unprepared Sinner for Death lies in this, that he
then ioseth all his hopes and expectations. Hope, it is the Anchor and Support
of the Soul in time of Trouble; sometimes the Soul is brought to such straits,
and under such sore pressures, that it has nothing to live upon but Faith and
Hope; Faith believes there shall be a happy issue out of those troubles the
Soul is under, and therefore Hope encourages the Soul to wait patiently till a
time of Deliverance does come; it will come, says Faith, for God is Faithful
who has promised; I will wait therefore, says Hope, and my expectations shall
not be in vain, for they that wait upon him shall not be ashamed: But now all
the Hopes of a Sinner will fail and disappoint him at Death; for indeed he had
no true well-grounded Hope. We read in Scripture of a true and lively Hope, 1
Pet 1.3. but this is found only in the Saints, Blessed be God (says the
Apostle) who has begotten us again to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of
Christ from the Dead: But a Sinner's Hope is not a lively but a dead Hope; and
what can the Fruits of such a Hope be but shame and disappointment? When a
Wicked Man dies, says the Wise Man, his Expectations shall perish. Prove. 11.7.
And what is the Hope of the Hypocrite, says Job, though he has gained, when
God takes away his Soul, Job 27.8. why nothing but shame and disappointment.
And if Hope deferred, makes the Heart sick, as Solomon tells us, then Hope
frustrated, especially a Hope of Heaven and Happiness, must needs kill, even as
with a thousand Deaths.

Fourthly, An unprepared Sinner at Death loses his Soul; and this is such a
Jewel that its worth and value is not known on Earth, but shall be fully known
in Hell. Were it possible for thee, O Sinner, to understand what is included in
the loss of thy Soul, it would be as a Dagger at thy Heart; the thoughts of it
would make thee mingle thy drink with weeping, and imbitter all the Comforts of
thy whole life unto thee. In Matt. 16.26. What is a Man profited if he gains
the whole World, and lose his own Soul, or what shall a Man give in exchange
for his Soul? Behold here, O Sinner, of what an incomparable worth and value
thy Soul is, and what an irreparable loss it is if thou losest it; this is such
a loss, as there is none like it, for the gain of the whole World cannot
balance the loss of one Soul. It is also an irrecoverable loss: God has given
thee two Eyes, two Hands, and two Feet, and if thou losest one Eye thou have
another, or if thou losest one Limb, thou have more; but God has given thee
but one Soul, and if thou losest that, thou have no more. If thou losest thy
Estate, by thy diligence and the Blessing of God upon thy endeavors, thou
may recover it again: yea, if thou losest thy Life, thou may be a gainer
by it, for thou may find it again, for he that loses his Life for my sake,
says Christ, shall find it. How so, shall he live again here on Earth? no, but
he shall find it with infinite gain and advantage in Heaven; for instead of a
Temporal Life, he shall gain an Eternal Life. But if thy Soul, O Sinner, be
once lost, thou art undone for ever; this is such a loss, that the thoughts
thereof may make thy Hair stand on end upon thy Head; yea, it is that which
when ever thou read or think of, may make thy Heart to ache; do not thy
Ears tingle, and thy Loins tremble to hear of it?

Having thus laid down some quickening Considerations to stir up Christians to
prepare for Death. I shall in the next place endeavor to propound such
Directions as may, by the Blessing of God, be helpful to them in their
Preparations for their latter end.

Now the General Direction for a Christian's Preparation for Death is to get an
Interest in Christ by a Work of Conversion, changing the State and Condition of
the Soul. This now is the main Work of a Christian, without which he is no real
Christian. Profession of Christianity gives a Man the Name of a Christian, but
it is only Implantation into Christ by believing, that gives a Man the being of
a Christian. It is Essential to a Christian as a Christian, that he be in
Christ. By Nature all Men are Strangers; yea, Enemies to God and Christ; and
therefore it is necessary, that there be a Manifestation of the Power of
Converting Grace to change our Hearts, and Sanctify our Natures, and till this
be done, we are but Nominally Christians; we have only a Name to live, but we
are dead. He that is not in Christ, is not a Christian in Deed and in Truth.
Now this being in Christ, which is always accompanied with Conversion and
Sanctification, is that which makes Life comfortable, Death easy, and Heaven
sure and certain. He that has an Interest in Christ, may live joyfully in any
Condition, if he knows but his own Happiness, he need not be troubled, let what
will befall him; whether he has more or less, he has it with the Love of God;
all his Mercies come swiming to him in the Blood of Jesus, and therefore he may
well sit down and be content; yea, be thankful and rejoice, knowing that all
things shall work together for his Eternal Benefit and Advantage; there being
no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. And as for Death how easy a
thing is it to such a Soul? I confess Death is very terrible to one that is out
of Christ, but to one that is in Christ, Death is his Friend; yea, his best
Friend next to Christ; what says the Apostle of such, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things
are yours, that is for your Benefit and Advantage, whether Paul or Apollo's, or
Cephas, or things present, or things to come, or Life, or Death, all is yours.
But how comes all this about? why because you are Christ's, and Christ is
God's. Death therefore cannot hurt such. The Happiness of those that are in
Christ, lies in the Manifestation of the Divine Love and Favor unto their
Souls; now this Death cannot hinder them of. I know many of God's People, have
not the Light of his Countenance liftted up upon their Souls in Death, but
their passage to Heaven is dark and uncomfortable; God loves them, though they
know it not; yet by this darkness and uncomfortableness which Death brings upon
them by their passage through it, Death is but bringing them to the most clear
Discoveries of the Love of God to their Souls in Heaven, with which they shall
then be filled and satisfied to all Eternity. Our Comfort in Death lies in the
Knowledge of our Interest in Christ, but so does not our Happiness, that lies
in our Interest in Christ, whether we know it or not. Our Consolation in a
dying hour springs from our Assurance that Christ is ours, and we are his, but
our safely and security in that hour, arises from the certainty of our
Interest in Christ. Indeed our Ignorance that we are in Christ when we come to
die, may prejudice our present Peace and Comfort in Death; but it shall not
prejudice our future Happiness after Death. They that are in Christ are always
in a safe Condition; they may die uncomfortably indeed, but they cannot die
miserably; they are built upon the Rock of Ages; and therefore though they fall
by Death into the Grave even as others, yet they perish not with others. Death
may kill them, but it cannot hurt them. He that has an Interest in Christ,
being united to him by Faith, need not fear what Death can do unto him. True
and thorough Conversion from Sin unto God, is a sure Foundation for Peace and
Safety both in Life and Death. He that is interested in Christ is built upon a
Rock that is Impregnable, the Gates of Death and Hell shall not prevail against
him. To behold a Man dying that is in Christ, this is Comfortable; for such a
one dies that he may live for ever, and changes only a Temporal for an Eternal
Life. To behold a Christless Person, but not in a dying condition, this is
something tolerable, for who can tell but that the next Sabbath, or the next
Sermon, God may make it a time of Love to his Soul, even such a day of his
Power and Grace toward him, as thereby savingly to draw him unto Christ. But
to behold a dying Man, and a Christless Man also, this is dreadful; yea, even
intolerable, for such a one dies from Earth to be Damned in Hell. It was a sad
and doleful Complaint (and Oh that it might startle and awaken some secure
Sinner to look after Christ) that was once uttered by one upon a Deathbed,
being just a dying, Oh I want nothing now but a Christ to Save me. O miserable
State and Condition indeed, for in having him, the Soul has all that can do it
good, or make it good; but in wanting of him, the Soul has nothing that can do
it good here, or make it happy hereafter. Interest in Christ is the only true
Preparation for Death. This now is the general Direction for our Preparation
for Death, without which there is no dying happily or comfortably. But the more
particular Directions are these that follow.

First, Would thou be prepared for Death, then die unto Sin, by daily and
constant endeavors to mortify and subdue the Power and Strength of it in the
Exercise of a Holy Life. The Apostle tells us in Romans 6.23. That the wages of
Sin is Death. By which he means Temporal and Eternal Death: This now is the
Fruit of Sin, for Lust when it has conceived, brings forth Sin, and Sin,
when it is finished, brings forth Death. But is there no way to escape this
Death? yes, from Spiritual and Eternal Death, there is a deliverance, and
therefore the Apostle tells us, in Romans 6.13. That if we through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the Body, that is the deeds of the Body of Sin, then we
shall live and not die; that is we shall live Spiritually, and not die
Eternally; and as for a Temporal Death, though we cannot escape the stroke of
it, yet we shall be free from the Curse and Sting of it. Would thou
therefore, O Christian, be prepared for Death when it comes, then take from it
now its Power and Strength. When the Philistines saw Sampson was too strong for
them, they labor to know wherein his great Strength lay, and when they found
it was in the Hair of his Head, they would not be quiet till they got his Hair
cut off. Every Christian has to deal with a dreadful Enemy unto Nature, and
that is Death. Assault he will all of us at one time or other; yea, and be too
hard for us. If now we would overcome him, we must find out where his great
Strength lies; the Spirit of God now tells us, that the Power and Sting of
Death is Sin, so we read in 1 Cor. 15.56. The Sting of Death is Sin. And the
Power and Sting of every Man's particular Death lies in his own Sins. Death
cannot hurt any of us but by that Power and Strength that our sins put into its
hands. Christian, the way how thou may overcome thine Enemy Death, is set
open to thee, his Strength is discovered to thee, that thou may have thine
Advantage against him, to weaken him, and to take away his Strength, and that
is by dying unto Sin, this will be the Death of Death. Yield not therefore at
any time to its Solicitations, for this is but to make Death the more strong
and Powerful to wound thy Soul and Conscience. When therefore thou art tempted
unto any Sin, though it may seem pleasant and delightful, yet before thou
yieldst unto the Temptation, say to thy self, O my Soul, how will this relish
with me when I come to lie upon a Deathbed, and my Soul sits trembling upon my
Lips ready to take its Flight unto the Tribunal of God? What Peace and Comfort
will it procure to my Conscience then? Will not the Remembrance of it prove
more bitter than Gall and Wormwood, and the grating Reflections of Conscience
more stinging and tormenting to the Soul, than a thousand Deaths could possibly
be? Would thou not have Death bitter then, let not Sin be sweet now. Part
with Sin betimes, get that removed that is the troubler of a Deathbed, and the
Sting of Death; and that is Sin. Make it your daily business to be dying unto
Sin. Now this dying unto Sin implies our constant endeavors to subdue the
Power and Strength of Sin, and this is done by daily Mortification. It is true
in the People of God Sin does not Reign, and that is Comfortable to consider.
Sin in the Work of Conversion has received such a Wound as is incurable; but
yet wherever Sin is in any Soul, it does not use to lie dormant; but where it
cannot Reign, it will molest and struggle; yea, and it may be, prevail to a
Victory sometimes, even over those, over whom it shall never prevail unto
Condemnation. This now calls for a constant work of Mortification. Every day
there are corrupt Inclinations and Propensions to be kept in, sinful thoughts
to be contended with, Evil motions to be suppressed; and it is not the mere Habis
and Principle of Grace received in our first Conversion, without the vigorous
and constant Exercise of it in a way of Mortification, that will overcome all
these. Though Regeneration has given Sin its Deaths wound, yet Mortification
must daily weaken and subdue its Power and Strength; and according as the work
of Mortification is successful in the Soul, so will be our Peace and Purity in
Life, and our Joy and Comfort in Death.

Secondly, Keep Conscience clear, that it may not have the guilt of any known
sin to charge you withal. Now Conscience may then be said to be clear, when it
is pure, and when it is a Peaceable Conscience that is peaceable must be pure,
and a pure Conscience, usually is a peaceable Conscience. When Conscience is
free from all known and willful defilements, and not justly burdened with the
guilt of Sin, then is Conscience clear. If it be possible do not wound
Conscience, and if you would not, have a care of Sin: he that is not watchful
to avoid Sin, cannot have a clear Conscience. It is impossible for us, while we
are surrounded about with Infirmities, and oppressed with a Body of Sin and
Death (which the Apostle complains of) to keep our selves free and unspotted
from all Sin, for in many things we offend all. Those Sins now that are Sins of
weakness and Infirmity, as they are usually small Sins, and so hardly
discernable many times by our selves nor others; so they do not break our Peace
with God, nor obscure the clearness of our Consciences; but they are known and
willful sins that waste and wound the Conscience, and they that are not careful
to keep themselves from sinning thus, can never have a clear Conscience, nor be
in a prepared State for Death; for how can Conscience speak Peace unto the Soul
upon a Deathbed with the guilt of any known sin upon it? If you wound
Conscience by sin now, Conscience will wound you for sin hereafter. Any known
sin committed against Conscience, will exceedingly discompose and trouble the
Soul in a dying hour. Reader, does thy Conscience reprove thee for living in
any sinful way, or for being careless and remiss in looking after Heaven and
Eternity? hearken unto Conscience now, that Conscience may hearken unto you
another day. O Sinner, when thou shall come to lie upon a Deathbed, and begin
to examine thy Conscience how things are with thee, and how it is like to go
with thee for ever; thou would then be glad to have Conscience give thee a
comfortable answer, and say all is well, and all shall be well with thee to
Eternity; thou have been Faithful in following my Counsels and Reproofs, that
from the Great God according to his Word I delivered unto thee, and now I will
be as Faithful in declaring to thee, the Truth of things as to thy future
State, fear not therefore, for it shall certainly go well with thee for ever.
Would thou now have Conscience speak thus comfortably to thee at Death?
hearken to what Conscience says to thee now; for if thou do not hearken unto
Conscience in thy life time, when it Faithfully Admonishes and Reproves thee;
Conscience will not hearken unto thee at thy Death, to excuse and acquit thee,
but will prove thy great Accuser and Condemner. Guilt lying upon the
Conscience, makes the Soul ashamed and afraid to come before God even in this
Life, much more at Death. A Guilty Sinner chooses rather to run away from God,
that if it were possible God might not find him. Thus we imitate our
Grandfather Adam, who as soon as he had sinned, endeavors to hide himself
from God among the Trees of the Garden. And who of us is there but may observe
the same by himself; what slavish fear, what dejection and sinking in our
Spirits does seize upon us when we come before God in the Performance of a Duty
after we have provoked him by some known sin? with what Doubtings, with what
Fears and misgiving of heart do we come into his Presence, as if we were not
willing that God should take any notice that we are before him; and if we are
not in continual pain while we are performing the Duty, yet we would willingly
enough that the Duty were done and over. And if we cannot tell how to engage in
Duty with a guilty Conscience; how shall we be able to contend with Death with
a guilty Conscience? If the Presence of God in Duty be so dreadful and terrible
unto the Soul under the Apprehension of some known sin committed by it and not
pardoned to it, that it makes it quake and tremble to come before him, what
then will the Presence of God in Death and Judgment, when Conscience shall be
awakened to make terrible Reflections, not upon a particular sin, but upon the
sins of a whole Life, if not Repented of? Oh with what horror and amazement,
with what Consternation and Confusion must such a Soul be filled withal? But
now he whose Conscience is clear, Oh how does he Rejoice to draw nigh to God,
how glad is he to go up unto the House of the Lord, as David speaks, with what
delight does his Soul hasten unto God in Duty, that it may taste how good the
Lord is, that it may see the Power and Glory of God, so as it has sometimes
done in his Sanctuary; O with what Peace and Contentment of Mind, shall I say?
alas these are Expressions of too low and too mean a Signification, to
represent the workings of such a Soul toward God; rather with what Joy and
Rejoying, with what Triumph and Exultation, does such a Soul make its abode and
stay with God in Duty, where it enjoys the sweet and refreshing Smiles of his
Countenance, and sits under the delightful Banner of his Love. Thus it is with
a Christian in Duty, that has a clear Conscience. And if it be thus with him
in Duty, and Conscience continue to keep its clearness and inoffensiveness in
an upright walking with God daily; it cannot be bad or ill with such a Soul at
Death. A Conscience kept clean and pure in Life, will be quiet and peaceable in
Death; nay, let me say more, he who has made it his care and business to walk
continually with a clear and inoffensive Conscience in his Life, shall
certainly have much boldness; yea, and usually a great deal of Joy and
Rejoicing in Death; and though the Devil may and will labor to disturb such a
Soul's Peace and Comfort then; yet a Conscience sprinkled with the Blood of
Christ, shall be too hard for him. And what Conscience does in God's Name on
good grounds upon a Death bed, God will confirm and enlarge to the Soul's
everlasting Comfort and Consolation, when Death shall bring it to appear before
him.

Thirdly, Would you be prepared for Death, get sin pardoned, and labor much
after the Assurance of it. Sin is the cause of death, the means by which Death
came into the World; had there been no sinning, there would have been no dying:
but sin coming into the World, death came along with it. Romans 5.12. As by one
Man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
Men, for that all have sinned. By sinning against God, Man is come under a
necessity of dying. The wages of sin, says the Apostle, is Death; nay sin is
that which gives Death its sting; so we read 1 Cor. 15. and 56. The sting of
Death is sin. This is it which gives Death its power, and makes it so dreadful;
and because of Guilt lying on the Soul, makes it unfit to die. But now where
the Soul is sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, the Guilt of Sin taken away by
an Act of Pardon and Forgiveness, that Soul is prepared to receive and
entertain Death whenever it comes; and though it make not that Death shall
not be, yet it makes that Death shall not hurt, for Sin is pardoned. Sin is
that which makes the Soul cry out bitterly under the Apprehonsions of Death,
and of the Wrath of God. Oh, that I had never committed such and such Sins! Why
know, O pardoned Sinner, thou have thy wish; for God when he pardons Sin, makes
it to be as if it had never been committed. Things forgotten are no more to us
than as if they had never been. Why now says God, I will forgive their
Iniquities, and I will remember their Sins no more. And does God, O fearful
Soul, make thy Sins to be as if they had never been by his pardoning Grace and
Mercy; and shall not thy former fears of Sin, and of Death by Reason of Sin, be
now as if they had never been. Thou need'st not fear, O trembling Soul, that
thou shall ever be questioned again for those Sins that God has once forgiven
thee. God's Acts of Oblivion can never be repealed; for the Gifts and Calling
of God are without Repentance. Guilt binds a Sinner over unto Punishment, no
wonder then that an unpardoned Sinner who is unfit to die, is afraid of Death;
for whenever Death comes to such a Soul, it comes with a deadly incurable
Sting. Death to an unpardoned Sinner, is Death with a witness; for it is Death
and Hell in to the Bargain. But now to a pardoned Sinner, let Death come when
and how it will, he is prepared for it, his Condition is safe, he cannot be
miserable; Death may kill him, but it cannot hurt him; and therefore what need
he fear it. Now if you would know the Safety and Happiness of your Condition,
labor for an Assurance that your Sins are pardoned. Your future Happiness
depends upon the pardon of Sin, but your present Comfort depends upon your
Assurance that Sin is pardoned. He whose Sins are pardoned dies safely, but he
who knows his Sins are pardoned dies comfortably. Pardon of Sin frees from
Condemnation, but it is Assurance of Pardon that brings Peace and Comfort. That
Man is not so ready to die, nor in such a prepared Frame of Soul for Death as
he ought to be in; who, though his Sins are pardoned, and thereby he has a
Right and Title unto Heaven, yet walks in the dark, and is at Uncertainties
whether his Sins are pardoned or not; for as our pardon of Sin is necessary to
our dying happily, so the Assurance of our Pardon is necessary to our dying
comfortably. Take a Man that is at a loss and under Doubts and Fears that his
Sins are not pardoned, if Death should come to him while he is under those
Doubts and Fears, with what difficulty would he make a shift to die? How hardly
would he be brought to it? What Pretenses and Excuses would he make? Alas, says
he, I know not where I am, nor what Death will do with me; and though I am so
sick that I cannot live; yet I am so afraid I dare not die; for I know not
whither I am going, nor where my Dwelling shall be for ever, whether in Heaven
or in Hell. O what shall I do therefore. But now he whose Sins are not only
pardoned, but he walks daily under the comfortable Assurance thereof, it being
sealed and witnessed to him by the Spirit of God, which Spirit as the Apostle
says, witnesses with our Spirits that we are the Children of God: If Death
comes to him he rejoiceth; for, says he, I know that if my earthly House of
this Tabernacle be dissolved, I have a Building of God, an House not made with
Hands, eternal in the Heavens. The Sum of all is this; Pardon of Sin is very
good, for it is our Safety; for they that are pardoned shall certainly be
saved: but to have Sin not only pardoned, but to have the Assurance that it is
pardoned, this is much better. For God to love us so as to pardon and accept
us, is the ground of our Hopes for Heaven hereafter: But to have God manifest
his Love, and to assure us that he loves us, is our Heaven on this side Heaven.
And the more we have of this Assurance, the more joyfully and comfortably shall
we be able to pass through a dying Hour.

Fourthly, Would you be prepared for Death, labor for Hearts and Affections
crucified to the World, and all things here below. It is impossible we should
ever be willing to leave the World, when God calls us hence, till we have first
learned to use the World as if we used it not, 1 Cor. 7. and 31. For if our
Affections are set upon worldly Things, and our hearts engaged in an eager
prosecution of them, it will be as Death to us before we die to think of
parting with them; and much more unwilling shall we be to take our everlasting
Farewell of them, when Death comes to us in good earnest. This is commonly the
Temper, or rather the Distemper of most Men, the Delights and Accommodations
that God affords them for their more comfortable passage through this World,
and to encourage them with greater Cheerfulness to serve him; have got such an
Interest in their Hearts and Affections, that they prize and value them above
measure. The Love of the World, and the things of the World is grown so
prevalent with many, that if they might have their Desires, they would not care
for, nor trouble themselves with any other Heaven, but would be content to live
here always; saying, Let us build Tabernacles; nay, let us have a continuing
City here: But, O Lord forgive them, for they know not what they say: They
never experimentally tasted the Excellency and Sweetness of Heaven, and
heavenly Things, and that is the Reason they are so in love with Earth and
earthly Things. Now what wonder is it, that those who place their Happiness in
the Things of this World, should be unwilling to die; that the Thoughts of
Death which parts them and their Happiness, should be bitter and unpleasant?
This now is naturally the Temper of all Men, till God opens their Eyes, and
discovers to them more excellent Things, even Things of a spiritual and divine
Nature, which as they are more suitable to their Souls, so are they more
durable and satisfying; and having once tasted what present Sweetness, Peace
and Joy there is in God, and in ways of Holiness, besides what is laid up for
them hereafter in Heaven; their Hearts and Affections are now become dead to
the World, and all worldly Things, so that they have no relish and savor of
these Things upon their Spirits: But as St. Paul says of himself, so it may be
said of them; they are now crucified unto the World, and the World is crucified
unto them: The World sees no Glory, or Beauty in them, and they see as little
in the World. How easily now can such take their leaves of it, when God by
Death calls them to it. The Apostle tells us, for his part he did die daily, 1
Cor. 15. and 31. And did we die daily in our Desires and Affections unto the
World, and the Things thereof, it would not be so hard for us to die when we
come to it in good earnest. When Death comes to a Man whose natural strength
and vigor has been wasting and consuming a long time by lingering Sicknesses
and Distempers, his Death is not so hard and strong, as that Man's Death is,
whom a few day's Sickness cuts off in the midst of his strength and Vigor,
Nature being strong in him to make resistance against it, whereas in the other
the strength of Nature is wasted and consumed, and so Death to him is more
easy. So is it here, the Christian whose Love and Affection to the World, and
the Contentments of this present Life, has for many years been consuming and
dying, will more freely and readily part with them at Death, than he whose Love
and Affections are strongly and eagerly bent upon them; such a one must be rent
and torn from them by force and violence in the hour of Death. When our heart's
set loose from all things that are desirable under the Sun, and there is
nothing upon Earth that insnares and intangles our Affections toward it, one
Difficulty; yea, and a great one too, in our way of dying is then removed.
Death will rend and tear that heart that is glued in love to any thing in this
World.

Therefore, O Christian, as to all thy worldly Enjoyments, possess them as if
thou possessed'st them not, rejoice in them as if thou rejoicedst not, and use
the World as not abusing of it; for the Fashion of the world passes away. How
dreadful will Death be to one, who as the Apostle says, minds earthly Things?
and how easy will Death be to one, whose Mind and Conversation is in Heaven?

It is good therefore for us to consider, that we are but Strangers and
Pilgrims here. Heaven is the proper Place and Dwelling for holy Souls. Make
provision therefore by a holy weanedness of Heart and Affections for your
departure bence; send your best things to Heaven beforehand, that is your
Heart, your Love, your Delight, and then you your selves will the more readily
and willingly follow after them.

Fifthly, Would you be prepared for Death, live every day then as if it were
your last, doing nothing therein, but what you would be willing to be found
doing at Death and Judgment. He that shall every day seriously consider with
himself, for ought I know this may be my last day: The shadows of Death may
stretch themselves over my Life, before the shadows of the Evening overtake me.
I have no Assurance of my Life here, no not for a moment. How is it therefore
with thee, O my Soul as to Eternity, what is thy daily Work and Employment? Is
it that wherein if I should meet with Death at the end of it, I can comfortably
give an Account thereof unto the Great God? If I knew this to be my last Day,
would I be thus employed as I now am? If not, why do I venture upon the doing
of that, which I would be loath Death should find me a doing; since I know not
but Death may overtake me, before I have finished what I am about. Reader,
whoever thou art, possibly thou may be guilty of no very great mistake, if
thou should think with thy self, as healthful and as strong as now I am, yet
there may be some secret, invisible Hand of Death stretched out toward me,
possibly this very day I may feel some Symptoms and some Forerunners of it,
some mortal, incurable Disease may seize upon me before Night, and cast me upon
a sick Bed, which to me may prove a Death bed. Supposing now that this were thy
very Case, and that thou had received the Sentence of Death, though not as
Hezekiah did, by a Messenger sent immediately by God unto him, as he had, but
by the Violence of some Distemper, accompanied with those Signs and Tokens that
usually are and have been presages of Death unto others; How then would thou
spend those few small Moments of Time, that thou have yet left thee on this
side Eternity? How would thy Thoughts work? What would thy Words and Discourses
then be? Surely thou would not be so abominable stupid and secure, so
wretchedly careless and negligent of thy Soul, and of thy eternal Interest and
Concerns, when thy Soul is as it were sitting upon thy Lips, and looking over
into Eternity, being ready to take its sudden flight thither; as to be plodding
and contriving in thy Thoughts how to enjoy the Pleasures, Profits and Delights
of the World, which you now find to be nothing but Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit; nor yet would you be so desperately mad and bold, as to send then for
your vain and wicked Companions, with whom you have consumed so many Days and
Years in Sin and Wickedness, that you and they might now laugh and waste away
your last Hours; together also. No, certainly there is no relish and savor now
in any of these Things, unless it be that which is bitter; yea surely the
Remembrance thereof will then be more bitter to the Soul than Gall and
Wormwood. Oh now the Consideration of the Wants and Exigences of the Soul begin
to thrust and force themselves into the Mind and Thoughts of a Sinner! O the
sight of a righteous and a severe Judge, of a strict Account, and of a dreadful
Tribunal! Oh the bitter Vpbraidings and Terrors of an accusing Conscience, the
fearful Reflections upon past Sins, and the Expectations of future Torments,
the Fears and Thoughts of these Things do now fill the Mind and perplex the
Soul, and make a Sinner cry out, O what shall I now do to be saved? Were you
never in all your Lives by the Deathbed of a careless, negligent Sinner, whose
Conscience was then awakened under Horrors and Desperation? If you have not,
others have; and what has been their dying words? Oh, that God would pardon
their sins; that he would Sanctify and Save their Souls; that he would spare
them a little space; that he would grant them a little time longer, that they
might recover their Strength, that they might Repent of their Sins, and Reform
their Lives, or else that he would graciously manifest his Love and Favor to
their Souls, and receive them to his Mercy. This is the Language, these are the
Thoughts and Cares of Men upon a Sick bed, when they see death coming near
them, and staring them in their Faces. And if this were thy Case and Condition,
O Sinner, that thou did now lie tumbling and tossing upon a Sickbed, yea
upon a Deathbed; would not these things be in thy mind? would not the same
Thoughts and Cares possess thy Soul, and the same words and discourses fall
from thy Mouth? why let the same Care, the same Thoughts, the same words, take
up some part of every day and hour of this Life now; for thou know not, but
that this moment thou art as near death, as if thy Friends and Relations, yea
and thy Physicians also despaired of thy life, and had given thee over for
dead. O if we could thus spend every day, as if it were our last, we should
then hardly be brought to the doing of any thing, but what we would be willing
death should find us doing; and how exceedingly would this further our
Preparations for a dying hour.

Sixthly, He that would be in a readiness for a dying hour, must frequently
meditate of his own death and of the death of Christ. To Meditate of our own
death, will make us Studious to prepare for it; and to Meditate of the death of
Christ, will Arm us against the Fears of our own Deaths. He that by frequent
Meditations of his own death, and of the death of Christ, has made death
familiar to his Soul, is not only prepared for death, but in a great measure
also freed from the fears of death. As to the considering of our own death, the
Scripture is often in calling upon us to lay the thoughts of it to our hearts.
Oh that my People were wise, says God, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end. And though a Man lives many years and rejoices
in them all, yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many.
Eccle. 11.8. By days of darkness we are to understand death, or the State of
death during the abode of our Bodies in the dark Grave, or in the darkness of
the Grave. He that frequently ponders of his ways, will at length be brought to
turn his feet unto God's Testimonies, as David speaks of himself. So he that
often thinks upon death, will by the serious thoughts of it be stirred up to
make some timely preparation for it, this being the end to which the
Contemplations of death does tend. This is that Wisdom which Solomon tells us,
the Living gain by going often to the House of Mourning, even so to lay to
heart the thoughts of death, so as to make preparation for it. It is sad, that
the Goodness and Mercy of God should occasion our forgetfulness of him and of
our selves, and yet it is commonly so with us. When God lays his Afflicting
hand upon us, especially under some smart stroke; we are then brought to seek
God, as the Prophet speaks, In their Affliction they will seek me early. There
is some tendency in Afflictions to make us mindful of God, and of our own
Interest and Concerns, which is the design God aims at in Afflicting us. But
when God is pleased to open his hand toward us, as the Psalmist speaks, and
fill us with his Blessings, then we are very prone to forget both him and our
selves; we forget God, because when we are full, we are ready to deny God, and
say who is the Lord? and we forget our selves, because we return not that Duty
and Obedience which such Goodness and Mercy should engage us to. And because
the Streams of Mercy now run pleasantly about us, we consider not how many the
days of darkness are that will overtake us shortly, but put far from us the
thoughts of death and the Grave; and this is the Reason, why when death comes
it finds us so unready and unprepared, and we so troubled and discomposed in
our Spirits, and under so many fears and doubts as to our Spiritual and Eternal
concerns. Frequently therefore, O Christian, make thy private Retirements,
Commune with thy self alone, visit Death and the Grave in thy thoughts; take a
walk now and then in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, suffer not thy thoughts
to be estranged from such Meditations: If thou find thy self shy and
unwilling to engage in such a work, yet bring thy heart to it, inure thy self
to the thoughts of Death in general, and of thine own death in particular. And
that thou may not be afraid of it, to the Meditation of thine own death,
join the Consideration of the death of Christ, who has Conquered death, took
away its Sting. By dying he slew death, was the death of death, as it was
Prophesied of him, in Hosea 13.14. O Death I will be thy Plagues, O Grave I
will be thy Victory. He now that by Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is
interested in his death, may say, when ever the time of his departure comes;
thanks be to God through Christ, I am ready and prepared for it. Muse therefore
much upon the Death of Christ, for herein lies thy support and comfort, O Soul,
against thine own Death.

Seventhly, He that would be prepared for death must labor for an assurance of
a better life, always living by Faith in the Contemplation of the Glory and
Happiness of Heaven. He that is assured of an Eternal Life in Heaven, need not,
nay will not much fear a Temporal death here upon Earth. Christians, the time
is coming when you and all things and persons in this World must take your
leaves one of another and part for ever; what then, O Christian, will bear up
thy Spirit at such a time? why nothing less than the sense and hopes of the
love of God, and of thy Interest in Christ, some Evidences of a work of Grace
upon thy Soul, which is an earnest and foretaste of Heaven and Glory: These are
the only things that will bear up thy Soul in a dying hour. When a Man has
attained to some well grounded Assurance of his Interest in God and Christ, and
thereby of his Right and Title unto Heaven, then are things in a good posture
with him, and he in a readiness for Death and the Grave: And how light will
that Soul make of death, that has the assured hopes of Heaven and Glory to
encourage him to go through it? He that by Faith lives in the daily
Contemplations of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, walking in the Light of
God's Countenance, and is able to say, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that
when this Earthly Tabernacle of his Body shall be dissolved into dust, that he
has a Building of God, an House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens,
which death will bring him unto, and this is all the hurt death can do him; he
that has such an Assurance as this is, cannot but welcome death, and embrace
it not only with Contentment, but with Delight and Joy, and even then when his
Soul is struggling and striving to get loose from his Body, with what Holy
Longing and vehemence of desire will he cry out and say, come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

CHAP. IV.
Of willingness and unwillingness to Die. Difference between Christians in
reference unto Death. Whether it be lawful to desire Death. In what cases it
may, and in what not. A willingness to Die may be even in Wicked Men, and
sometimes they may Die peaceably and quietly, though Death is never comfortable
and happy to them. In the Best there may be an unwillingness to Die, though a
Saint, as a Saint, is always desirous of Death. Reasons that should encourage
the People of God always to be willing to Die. Believers should not only desire
to Die, but they should long for Death.

DEath in it self is not desirable, nor can it be; Nature not only shuns, but
abhors it; nor is it possible that Nature should be reconciled to that which
seeks its Annihilation and Destruction, as Death does: And accordingly as these
Fears are either strengthened and increased by Sin and Guilt, or conquered and
overcome by Grace, so are we more or less inclined toward, or averse from
Death. To be willing to Die, when God calls us to it, is a thing greatly to be
desired, and argues no small attainment in Grace, when we do it upon good
grounds: And yet sometimes to be unwilling to Die is not to be condemned as
evil and sinful. To be willing to Die, that we may be with Christ, when God
calls us to it, is a frame of Soul, in which the People of God should always be
desirous to be found; but yet to be desirous to Live, when either the Great
Work of a Christian is not finished, or when his Life may tend to the Glory of
God and the Good of his Church, is that which is not sinful or unlawful; we may
see this Truth both in David and Hezekiah; in David in Psalm. 6.4, 5. Deliver my
Soul, O Lord, spare me for thy Mercy-sake, for in Death there is no remembrance
of thee. David at this time being troubled in Mind, under the apprehensions of
God's Wrath, and so wanting the assurance of his Love, as you may read in the
Psalm, prays that he might be spared. And so Hezekiah, Isai. 38.2. prays for a
longer time of Life; as for other Reasons, so for this as one, because having
begun a Reformation in the Church of God, he was desirous to live, that he
might carry it on farther to the Glory of God and the Good of his Church. A
Christian ought so to live, not only as to be prepared for Death, but so as to
be willing to die; but yet he is a true Christian, who though he does not die
so willingly, yet dies preparedly; he that dies preparedly and willingly, dies
most comfortably; but yet he that dies preparedly, dies safely and happily.

In reference unto Death, there is a great difference between Nominal
Christians and Real Christians; and also between one true Christian and
another. There is a difference in reference unto Death, between those that are
called Christians, but yet are not truly so: Some there are whose Consciences
are so awakened upon a Deathbed, setting their Sins before their Faces with
such horrible bloody Circumstances, and withal representing the Wrath of God,
and the Everlasting Torments of Hell, as due unto them for their Sins, that
they cry out in Horror and Despair, their Sins are greater than can be
forgiven; and feeling a Hell in their Consciences here, they die under
Desperation of ever escaping Hell hereafter, or of obtaining Mercy and Pardon
from God: This was the case of Judas, who under Horrors of Conscience,
despairing of Mercy, endeavors to ease his Conscience, by laying violent hands
upon himself, and is, as the Scripture says, gone to his own place. Others
there are, who though they would be called Christians, yet are not so indeed;
but yet are so bold and confident in Death, that Heaven is theirs, as if they
were in the possession of it already; Our Lord tells us of some, in Luke 13.25.
who had such strong presumptions of Heaven, that with a confident boldness they
knock at Heaven's Gate, crying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; as if there were no
more to be done, but only the opening of the door, and letting them into
Heaven; but you know what Answer our Lord returns them, I know you not, depart
from me, ye workers of Iniquity. Both these sorts of Persons, the despairing
Sinner, and the presumptuous Sinner, are alike miserable in their Death, though
they differ vastly from true and real Christians; for they die neither happily
nor comfortably; for they die under the guilt of their Sins, and so perish for
ever, which no true Christian does. And as Hypocrites and sincere Christians
differ in their Death; so also do true and real Christians differ in the manner
of their dying; some when they come to lie upon their Deathbeds, God is
pleased to withdraw the light of his Countenance and the manifestations of his
Love and Favor from them; and in their apprehensions God seems to have cast
them off, and will be favorable to them no more; and though their Life draws
nigh to the Grave, yet their Soul is full of trouble; they are so in the dark,
and can see no light, in such a State of desertion, that God seems to have
forsaken them, their Sun is as it were setting in a Cloud; and in this State of
dismal darkness they die, not knowing what shall become of their Souls for
ever; which yet go safely to Heaven, being built upon the Rock of Ages, the
Lord Jesus Christ, against which the Gates of Death and Hell shall never
prevail. Some again there are who though they are true Christians, yet are weak
Christians; though they have the Grace of God in Truth, yet they have it not in
that growth and strength that some have; their Faith is true, but they are not
strong in Faith; they love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, but not with that
fervor and ardour that some do; they have a good Hope toward God, but their
Hope is not lively and operative: Such Christians as these now, though they
take Death patiently, yet they would willingly live; they go indeed when God by
Death calls for them, but they could wish that it would please God to stay for
them a little longer; they have some good Hopes of Heaven when they die, but
they desire a little more time to live here upon Earth; they love God more than
all Things and Persons whatsoever, but yet their affections are not so fully
taken off from the World, nor from their Friends and Relations as they should
be; they are not wracked and tormented with perplexing fears of Wrath and Hell,
but yet they are not ravished with the Joys of Heaven. Concerning the Death of
such as these, we must say, Blessed are they that thus die in the Lord; for
though they have not that assurance that some have, and so die not so
comfortably as to sense and feeling as they do; yet have they that Faith and
Affiance in the Lord Jesus Christ, whereby they die happily: But then there are
others that are strong Christians, grown Men in Christ, who have attained unto
such a full assurance of Faith, that they are not only willing to die, but are
desirous of Death, being persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor length, nor depth, nor any Creature, shall ever be able to
separate them from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus: for they know in
whom they have believed, and with whom they have entrusted the everlasting
Concernments of their Immortal Souls; and that he is able and faithful; yea,
and will also keep that good thing that they have committed unto him unto that
day. And therefore they can with a Holy Triumph through Christ say, O Death
where is thy sting, O Grave where is thy Victory; thanks be to God who has
given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore they can with
cheerfulness commit one half of themselves, that is, their Bodies, unto the
Grave, where though they know it shall turn to Corruption and Rottenness; yet
that troubles them not; because they know also that by the Power of God it
shall be raised up a most Glorious Body at the last Day; for they are assured
that their Redeemer lives, and they believe that he shall stand at the last day
upon the Earth; and not only so, but because he lives they believe that they
shall live also: And though for the present Worms destroy their Bodies, yet in
their Flesh they shall see God; whom they shall see for themselves, and their
Eyes shall behold him, and not another, and that to their everlasting Joy and
Comfort. Now to such as these, Death is both happy and comfortable also; and
therefore they are desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ which is
best of all.

But now a Question may arise here: Is it not Lawful to desire, or wish for
Death?

To this I Answer, negatively, and positively: in some cases it is unlawful and
sinful, and in some cases it may be lawful and commendable.

First, negatively, wherein it is sinful and unlawful. And so for any to wish
for, or to desire Death through impatience or discontent in any condition,
because they cannot have their own Wills; but are crossed in their desires, this
is sinful: This was the Sin of Jonah, who because God had smitten the Gourd
from which he received some refreshment, presently he falls into a Passion, and
in a discontented fit he concludes the matter, that it was better for him to
die than to live, Jonah 4.8. but God knew it was better for him to live than to
die; and therefore in his pity he spares him that he might repent of his Sin.
This was the Infirmity of Elijah, which the Apostle seems to take notice of,
when he tells us, He was a Man of like Infirmities with us, Jam. 5.17. for as
to any other Infirmities of that Holy Man, the Scripture is silent, but it
takes notice of this, that when he was persecuted by Jezabel's Cruelties and
fled for his Life, under fear and infidelity, in 1 Kings 19. and 24. he cried
out, It is enough, O Lord, now take away my Life, for I am no better than my
Fathers. These fits of passion and discontent are sinful, and not to be
justified; and yet how frequent is it for Men thus to vent their discontents
when any trouble befalls them, that crosses their Wills; presently nothing
will serve their turns but Death: O that they were Dead. I will not say what
once I heard spoken to be always true in this case; that such Persons by
wishing for Death, wish for Hell and Damnation with it; I dare not say so,
least I should offend against the Generation of the Righteous: But this I will
say, that there are many wicked profane wretches, who when something does
cross and vex them, instantly cry out, Oh that they were dead! to whom, if God
should not be more merciful to their Souls, than they themselves are to their
Bodies, but take them at their word, and presently strike them dead, it may be
feared he must also by striking their Bodies into the Grave, smite their Souls
into Hell; they allowing themselves no space and time for their Repentance. O
that such Persons would seriously consider what they do when they wish such an
End may befall them.

Again, to wish for Death absolutely is sinful, though we are under pains that
are more painful than Death it self. Nature puts us upon desiring to live, and
Grace should put us upon desiring to live, because God wills it, though we be
under sore afflictions; for as it is our Holiness to do the will of God while
we live, so it is our Holiness to be content to live, while we suffer according
to his will. To desire Death, because our lives are full of troubles, is a
sinful wish or desire; for God may, and often has as much use of our lives,
when we are in an afflicted condition, as when we are in a prosperous
condition; a sickly Body, yea a sick Bed, may bring as much Glory to God, as a
healthful Constitution; and we may do as much service when we are bound in
Chains and in a Prison, as when we enjoy the greatest Freedom and Liberty.
Passive Obedience brings as much Honor to God as Active does. When you lie
under any troubles therefore, wish not for Death; beg of God rather that he
would remove those Evils from you, than remove you from those Evils: God has a
thousand ways to let us out of trouble, though he does not open the door of the
Grave to let us in thither. Pray that your Afflictions may be sanctified, and
that your Spirits may be raised up above your troubles while you live, and seek
not, nor desire freedom from them by Death: For a Christian to bear a burden
well, is more desirable than to be delivered from it; especially, if while we
are suffering our selves, we are doing good unto others. A Christian should be
contented; yea, he should rejoice in suffering Evils that lie upon, when he
does good thereby unto others. He that is of a gracious public Spirit will
triumph over Personal Troubles and Afflictions, so long as he sees God making
use of him as a help or blessing to the public: And though he longs to die for
himself, knowing it will be much to his Advantage, because when he departs
hence he shall be with Christ, which is far better; yet he should be unwilling
to die, so long as he can say with St. Paul, that for him to abide in the Flesh
is and will be more needful for others. To be willing to deferr our Glory and
Happiness for a time, that God may be glorified, and others benefited by us
here, is an excellent frame of Spirit in any Christian.

Secondly, positively, it is lawful in some cases to desire Death. And thus
none but a true Christian can truly desire to die. Now there are three cases in
which it may be lawful for a Christian to desire Death.

First, When God brings a Christian into such a condition, as that he may bring
God more Honor and Glory by his Death, than by his Life: In such a case it is
lawful to desire Death; and this was the case of Sampson, who was a Type of
Christ: The Philistines having brought him into a low and suffering condition,
though partly through his own Sin; yet being animated by the Spirit of God, and
knowing that by his Death he should destroy many of the Enemies of God, he begs
strength from him thereunto, which God in an extraordinary manner granted him;
for he took hold of the Pillars of the House, and so pulled down the House upon
himself and upon the Philistines, slaying thereby more at his Death than he did
in all his Life. This was the case of many of the Martyrs, who being called to
suffer for the Truth, were very desirous to die, knowing that their Death would
tend more to the Glory of God than their Life, and therefore they willingly and
cheerfully sealed to the Truth of God with their Blood.

Secondly, It is lawful to wish for Death, that we may be free from offending
of God. Sin is a miserable Thraldom and Bondage unto a Child of God; to have a
Nature within him that is continually inclining him unto, and putting him upon
that which is sinful and provoking unto God, is that which a Holy Soul cannot
tell how to bear. Oh to find a Law in his Members always warring against the
Law of his Mind, and leading him Captive to the Law of Sin and Death! It is
that which makes his Life burdensome to him. This I know works little upon
wicked Men; for when they are acting of Sin they are in their Element; but to a
Gracious Soul, unto whom the loving kindness of God, as David speaks, is better
than Life, to such a one a sinful impure Nature, whereby he offends and
displeases God, is more bitter than Death; and therefore he is continually
making out after that State, wherein he shall be without Sin; while he is here
he knows he cannot be free from all Sin; but yet he follows after it; if he may
apprehend that for which he is apprehended of Christ Jesus; and therefore
forgetting the things that are behind, he reaches forth unto those things that
are before, pressing forward toward the mark for the price of the High Calling
of God in Christ Jesus, if by any means he may attain to the Resurrection of
the Dead; that is, to that State of perfect Holiness, and freedom from Sin,
which he shall arrive to at the Resurrection of the Dead. And because he sees
he cannot but Sin whilst he is here, and that dying only will be the end of
Sinning; therefore he longs for Death, that he may come to an end of Sinning.

Thirdly, It is lawful to wish for Death, that we may come to the full and
perfect enjoyment of God and Christ in Glory. In this frame of Spirit we find
the Apostle, when he cries out in that Holy Agony, I desire to be dissolved and
to be with Christ. The Scripture it self makes it the Character of a true
Christian, that he is one that loves the appearing of Christ, and this is that
which cannot be enjoyed without Death; now that which we love we wish the
enjoyment of, and consequently we desire to use those means that tend
thereunto. Our Lord himself, in Joh. 17. prays for all Believers, that they
might be where he is, that they might behold and enjoy his Glory; and has
taught us to pray that the Kingdom of God might come; by which is meant not
only the Kingdom of Grace, but the Kingdom of Glory also. And indeed true love
unto Christ will put us upon desiring to be with him; for that is the property
of true love, always to manifest an ardent and strong desire after the
enjoyment of its beloved Object. If now a Christian, who has enjoyed Communion
with God in his Ordinances, desires the sincere milk of the Word that he may
grow thereby: And if that Soul that has tasted how Good and Gracious the Lord
is in any Duty, is ready to cry out with David, in the 42 Psalm, As the Heart
pants after the Water Brooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God; my Soul
is athirst for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before
God, that he may see his Power and his Glory, so as he has seen him in the
Sanctuary. If a Christian now so much desires the enjoyment of God in his
Ordinances, wherein there is always a mixture of Sin and Pollution going along
with them; should he not, does he not much more then desire the enjoyment of
God in Heaven? where there shall be a a perfect freedom from all Sin, and all
sinful mixtures, that here are a continual grief to a Gracious Soul, and a just
provocation to a Holy God; where he shall be for ever with the Lord, beholding
the beauty of his Face, and being fully satisfied and delighted with the
enjoyment of his presence, in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at
whose Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore.

But though it may be lawful to wish for, or to desire Death, when we may
thereby bring Glory to God, when we may thereby be free from Sin, and come to
the perfect enjoyment of God and Christ in Glory; yet in all these cases, we
must take in these Cautions, that for the time of our Death, we must still
refer our selves to the good will and pleasure of God: For though it may be
lawful to wish for Death, when we may thereby glorify God; yet we must not
absolutely wish for Death so, because our Hearts are very treacherous, and may
easily impose upon us and deceive us herein. And though to wish for Death that
we may be freed from Sin, is a holy wish; yet we must not wish that absolutely
neither, but must herein refer our selves to the pleasure of God, how long he
will have us to conflict with our Lusts and Corruptions, bearing about with us
a Body of Sin and Death. And though it be a holy wish, to desire to die that we
may enjoy God and Christ in Glory; yet must we not wish for that absolutely;
for though the Holy Apostle desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ; yet
was he in a strait, and what to choose, he tells us he wist not, and we know
how he qualifies and debates the business; and what the issue came to, you may
read in 1 Phil. 21.22, 23. Still therefore in all our desires after Death in
general, yet as to the particular time when, we must always say, Not our Wills,
but thy Will, O Lord, be done.

This holy desire of Death, now is that which can only be found in the Godly;
for they only can desire Death upon good grounds; but yet there may be a a
willingness to die even in Wicked Men, and sometimes they may die peaceably and
quietly, though Death is never comfortable and happy to them. That they may
sometimes die willingly and peaceably is often seen; they may have no bands in
their Death as others have, as the Psalmist speaks, but their strength is firm;
they are not under troubles and disquietments because of their Sins, and the
Wrath of God; Conscience does not fly in their Faces, by terrible reflections
upon their former wicked Lives; God does not make them possess their Sins in
the bitterness of their Souls; and as for the Devil he will not vex and trouble
them, that is not for his Advantage: for he knows while they are under a spirit
of security and senselessness he has them fast enough, and therefore he will
not Torment them before their time, lest they should get out of his Clutches:
But all is very quiet and peaceable as to outward appearance, and they die, as
it is commonly expressed by ignorant Persons, as quiet as a Lamb: This may be
the State and Condition of a Wicked Man upon a Deathbed; he may die quietly
without any doubting upon his Spirit, as to his Eternal State, as if all were
well and should be well with him for ever; not that his Sins are pardoned and
God reconciled; nor that his Conscience has not wherewith to trouble him,
because it is silent; no the Worm of Conscience is Hungry, and has matter
enough to Torment him in Hell to Eternity, but it is not permitted to prey and
feed upon the Sinner as yet: This peace and Juietness that he now enjoys is not
from any knowledge of his good Estate, but from his Ignorance how bad his State
is; he sees not the Wrath of God hanging over his Head, nor the Justice of God
set in opposition against him; and therefore he goes on quietly to his Grave.
As all the trouble and disquietness of a Godly Man in Death, is because he is
ignorant of the goodness of his State and Condition; so the quietness and peace
of a Wicked Man in Death, is because he is ignorant of the badness of his State
and Condition. If a Godly Man dies under fears and troubles, it is not because
his State is not good, but because he knows not that his State is good: And if
a wicked Man dies in peace, it is not because his State is not bad, but because
he knows not that his State is bad. Did a Godly Man know the goodness of his
State and Condition, his troubles and fears would soon be turned into joy and
rejoicings: And did a Wicked Man know the badness of his State and Condition,
his peace and quietness would soon be turned into mourning and lamentation; and
though now Friends and Acquaintance, yea, his own Heart, and Satan also may
flatter him; yet Death will open his Eyes and undeceive him, and then he shall
know for ever by sad experience, the Truth of that Scripture, in the 57 of Esaias
last verse, There is no Peace, says the Lord, unto the Wicked.

Now, as a wicked Man may die willingly; yea, peaceably; so in a Godly Man
there may be sometimes an unwillingness to die, though a Godly Man, acting as a
Godly Man ought, he is always desirous of Death. That there may be in the best
of God's Children, an unwillingness to die, the Scripture is clear: Thus was it
with the Prophet, Jer. 37.20. Now I pray thee, O my Lord the King, let my
supplication be accepted before thee, that thou cause me not to return to the
House of Jonathan the Scribe, least I die there. And our Lord, forewarning
Peter of the manner of his Death, tells him that he should be carried whither
he would not, John 21.18. It is with many of the People of God, as it was with
Lot, who though his Righteous Soul was vexed day by day, by beholding the
unclean conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.18. Yet O how he lingered when
God would have taken him from thence? as you may see, Genesis 19.16. So is it with
many of the Saints of God, who while they live in this World, are always vexed,
not only with the corruptions of their own Hearts, but also with the wickedness
of the times; yet are they if not unwilling, yet not so willing to leave the
World as they should be; but this unwillingness of theirs proceeds not from the
want of Grace, but from the weakness of their Grace. In the best of God's
Children there is Flesh as well as Spirit; Sin and Corruption as well as Grace;
and if at any time Sin and Corruption prevail over Grace, as sometimes they do,
no wonwonder if they be unwilling to die. Those of the People of God that do
believe, do yet believe but in part; and though the Spirit be ready in them,
yet the Flesh is weak: But though there be some unwillingness in the best to
die; yet they know and are sensible, that it is their Sin and fault; they know
they ought to be willing to die, and even in this their Spirits in them strive
against this weakness of the Flesh, and in the end they conquer their fears,
and overcome their backwardness and unwillingness to die; according to that
Gracious Promise in Psalm. 29.11. the Lord will give strength unto his People,
the Lord will bless his People with Peace. The Nature of Grace is such, that it
will work it self through all fears and doubts, both as to Sin and Death: And
when once the Eye of a Christian's Faith is opened to look within the vail, and
to discover something of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, and of the Soul's
interest therein, nothing then satisfies such a Soul, but to be absent from the
Body, and to be present with the Lord. A Godly Man, acting as a Godly Man, is
one that is always desirous of Death, because he knows the day of his Death
will not only be better to him than the day of his Birth, but better also than
any day of his Life.

Now that the People of God may always be willing to die, there are several
Arguments that should encourage them unto it; and I shall but name a few in
general.

First, the Afflictions and Distresses that the People of God are Subject to in
this World, and that above others, may be one Reason to incline them to a
willingness to die; not out of a discontented mind, because they are weary of,
or impatient under their sufferings: This was the Sin of Moses, Numb. 11.15.
when he prayed unto God, if thou deal thus with me, I pray thee kill me out of
hand, if I have found favor in thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness:
This is a great Sin in the Wicked, and sometimes an Infirmity that the Godly
fall into; but the Scripture allows it not in any. Faith and Patience under the
afflicting hand of God is very becoming a Christian, but Impatience and
Discontent is to be abominated. Though a Christian knows that it is better for
him to die than to live; yet out of a Fit of Impatience and Discontent, because
of Affliction, we ought not presently to wish for Death. St. Paul knew it was
far better for him to die than to live: He tells us so Phil. 1.21. yet durst
not he desire it absolutely, though a Man subject to many and great
Afflictions; but was in a strait what to do, as himself says, and therefore
submits himself to the Will of God. Yet is it not utterly unlawful for a
Christian to desire Death that he may be free from the Miseries of this Life,
because these Things occasion the drawing forth of Sin and Corruption, whereby
God is dishonored, his Spirit discomposed, that he cannot serve God with that
Freedom and Cheerfulness of Soul, as he might and as he desires. Every day a
Christian must look for Crosses and Afflictions, and sufficient to every day
are the Evils thereof, Luke 9.23. And therefore a Christian may upon good
grounds desire to be loosed from those Miseries and Afflictions, if it be the
will of God: But in the mean time till he can have his desires in this Case,
let him in patience possess his Soul.

Secondly, Another Reason that may make the People of God willing to die, may
be in respect of the wicked, that they may not be always Spectators of those
abominable Wickednesses, whereby God is daily dishonored, his Name blasphemed.
This made Rebekah desirous of Death; for when Esau had taken ungodly Wives, it
is said they were a grief of Mind to Isaac and Rebekah, because they knew that
God was greatly dishonored thereby; therefore says Rebekah unto Isaac, I am
weary of my life, because of the Daughters of Heth; and if Jacob take a Wife
among them, such as those that are of the Daughters of the Land, what good will
my life do me, Genesis 27.46. O who can express what grief it is to those that
fear God, to live in the midst of a wicked and ungodly Generation, that are
continually provoking God by their wicked lives? What godly Man's heart can but
bleed, to hear the Name of God rent and torn by cursed Oaths and Hellish
Blasphemies, to behold the Uncleanness, the Drunkenness, the Lying, the
scoffing at Godliness, the corrupt, filthy, scurrilous, idle Talking that
overflows in all Places; so that those that fear God had better be any where
almost than in the Company of most Men? This was a grief and vexation to the
Soul of righteous Lot; for in seeing and hearing the filthy Conversation of
those wicked Sodomites, they vexed his righteous Soul from day to day by their
unlawful Deeds. This made the Prophet David cry out, in Psalm 120.5, 9. Woe is
me that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar. No wonder
therefore that those whose Souls are affected with the dishonor of God, are
desirous to depart out of this World, and cry out, Oh that they had the wings
of a Dove, for then would they flee away and be at rest.

Thirdly, Another thing that may make the People of God willing to die, is
freedom from the Temptations of Satan. The Devil is the great Enemy of Mankind;
miserable he is himself, and envies that any should be otherwise than himself
is; and therefore he makes use of all his Craft and Subtilties against Man. And
herein Christians are much endangered, and hereby he frequently manageth his
Temptations with Success; for many are his Wiles and Devices that he makes use
of to draw the People of God into Sin. What unwearied Assaults from Satan do
many Christians labor under, not only for Days and Weeks, but for Months and
Years, whereby he allures and enticeth them with restless Importunities to the
Commission of some Sin or other, which they are no more able to fly from, than
they are to outrun themselves? Now to any that have tasted the Sweetness of
Holiness, what can be more hateful than daily Instigations to Sin? And to such,
who understand the Blessedness of Communion with God; what can be more bitter,
than to find themselves chained as it were to a Devil, who makes such
Applications of vile Objects to their Fancies continually, that they cannot in
the least turn themselves from? Oh how irksome must it needs be to a gracious
Heart, to be always haunted with the Spectacle and Image of some Sin, even as
black as Hell? Now this being the Case of the People of God, to be uncessantly
followed with the Temptations of Satan; how willing should they be to die,
because never till then shall they be out of the reach of his fiery Darts? For
as it is in Heaven only that there is no Sin, so it is in Heaven only that
there shall be no Temptations unto Sin.

Fourthly, Another thing that may make the People of God always willing to die,
is a perfect freedom from all Sin. While they are here they sin, and are in
continual danger of falling from God; and no Man can tell how far any of them
may fall; for though it be admitted that they cannot fall totally and finally,
yet they may fall dreadfully, and fearfully, as we read of some in Scripture,
who have lain long, sighing and groaning under broken Bones, and wounded
Consciences. Our Natures are so polluted with the Leprosy of Sin, that we
shall never be perfectly cured of it while we are in this World. Under the Law
we read, that when any earthen Vessels were defiled, they could not be
sufficiently purged till they were broken in pieces, Lev. 11.33. The spiritual
Improvement whereof is to teach us; that we can never be perfectly cleansed
from the pollution of our Natures till we are broken in pieces by Death. The
best Man's Sanctification is not perfect here, the holiest Man is not
thoroughly cleansed while he lives, but has much of Filthiness remaining in
him. The wise Man, in Prove. 20.9. silences all Men with this Question, Who can
say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my Sin? Who can say so? Why,
none can. We may do much in the work of Mortification, in the use of Means as
the Spirit of God directs us in the Word; we may by the strength of the Spirit
keep Sin from reigning in our mortal Bodies, Romans 6.10. But though it Reign not
as a King, yet it may Rule as a Tyrant, and we be brought into Captivity by it;
and by force kept in Bondage under it sometimes. How willing therefore should a
Christian be to die, that he may be free from Sin; for he that is dead, says
the Apostle, Romans 6.7. is freed from Sin. Death only will free us from the
danger and possibility of offending God any more; for then we shall come to the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect, Heb. 12. and 23.

Why then, O Christian, should thou desire to linger long here upon Earth,
and to spin out a miserable Life in this World, whereof Sin and Sorrow will
have the greatest Share. Here the best Christians are engaged in perpetual
Conflicts between Sin and Grace; Sin will not yield, and Grace cannot yield;
Corruption compels one way, and Grace commands another. Haste therefore, O
Christian, out of this troublesome Contest; yea, make haste to Heaven; for
there, and there only it is that this Controversy will be ended; for there we
shall no more live in fear of new Sins, nor in sorrow for old Sins; but all
Sorrow and Sighing shall cease; all Tears shall there be wiped from our Eyes,
and which is better, all Sin shall be rooted out of our hearts for ever. Upon
this Account now Death is not only necessary in it self, but it is that which
the People of God should embrace with the greatest willingness and cheerfulness
that may be.

But this is not all; for the People of God must go one step higher, and it is
what the Word of God does require, and that is not only to be content or
willing to die, but long for Death. To be contented to die is a good Temper of
Soul, and may be an Argument of the Truth of Grace, for it is seldom or never
found in a wicked man, to be sure not from a right Principle. But truly,
Christians, this is no such great Matter in comparison of what we should labor
to attain unto. Muse seriously upon it a while, O Christian: Is it not a
strange kind of Expression to drop from the mouth of a Saint, that he is
content to be happy; that one that professes all his Happiness lies in the
hopes he has of enjoying God in Heaven; and that it is the End and Design of
his Life, that he may attain unto this; and that yet when he comes to speak of
Death, he should only say, he is contented to die that he may be happy in the
Enjoyment of God? We use not to speak thus concerning the World; here Men are
not said to be content to be rich, but covetous after Riches; not willing to be
advanced, but ambitious after it: And why then should it be said only of a
Christian, that he is contented to be with God, and contented to be in Heaven?
Why, Oh why should not the Soul, the more noble, excellent Part of a Man be
carried out with vehement and earnest longings after its proper and full
Happiness, as well as the Body, that vile Part of Man is carried with restless
Appetite after Health, Safety, and Liberty? Why should a Soul alone be
contented to be happy, when all things in the World do so ardently court, and
so vehemently pursue their respective Ends, and several Perfections? Truly this
is not that Frame and Temper that Christians ought to content themselves with;
but their Souls should be raised up to a higher pitch, even to a holy longing
after their being ever with the Lord. It is the Duty of a Christian to look out
after so much Enjoyment of the blessed God as we are now capable of; and
because we cannot fully and perfectly enjoy him in this Life, to long after the
time of our departure hence, and with holy Pantings of Soul breath forth
earnest Desires that we may be fully and eternally happy in the Enjoyment of
him.

Be not therefore, O my Soul, contented only, but be holily covetous, and full
of vehement longings after an Eternity of Blessedness in the Enjoyment of God;
and because this Body is that which hinders this desired and longed for
Happiness, though thou may not dissolve and break it into pieces thy self,
yet with Submission to the Divine Will, wish it were broken, desire that it may
be dissolved. And though thou must be contented to live God's time, yet
henceforth be desirous of, and long to die.

To set this a little home upon thy Conscience, O Christian, consider, that
this Frame of Soul is that which the Scripture makes the Temper and the Duty of
all Believers: Indeed there are few Professors that are of this Evangelical
Temper of Soul; yea, but few that are willing to believe they ought to be so:
But yet this Frame of Soul is made the Character of a sincere Christian; the
Scripture abounds with Expressions of this Nature, Luk 21.28. Our Lord speaking
concerning the day of Judgment, for the encouragement of Believers, bids them
look up, and lift up their Heads for their Redemption drew nigh; by with our
Lord means, not a bare speculation, but a beholding with joy and longing for
that day and time. 2 Timothy 4.8. The Lord shall give a Crown of Righteousness to
them that love his appearing. And in Tit. 2.13. we are commanded to live godly
in this present World, as those that are looking for the blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. So in 2 Pet.
3.12. What manner of Persons, says the Apostle, ought we to be in all Holy
Conversation and Godliness; looking for, and hastening to the coming of the Day
of God? By these Scriptures, it appears, what is the nature and temper, the
disposition and inclination of a Godly Man, even to look, to love, to long, and
to hasten unto the enjoyment of God; for that which is of God in any Soul, must
needs carry the Soul after God.

But here I am afraid least some weak Christians should be troubled, because
they cannot find these ardent desires and holy longings of Soul in themselves
after their dissolution and enjoyment of God.

Now that I may not discourage any weak Believer, nor make the Hearts of those
sad, whom God would not have made sad, I shall add a few words, though not for
encouragement unto sloathfulness, yet for support against fears and despondency.

Therefore, O Christian, search thine own Heart, and see how it is with thee;
and if thou find it is so, as the objection intimates; see then if thou
can find out the cause thereof; possibly thou art grown careless in thy
spiritual watch, or thou give too much liberty to thy self in things that are
lawful; the World it may be is got too near thy Heart, thy Affections run out
too much after it. And no wonder then, if while this frame and temper
continues, and things are thus out of order with thee, thou do not long after
Heaven, nor art willing to die, though it be the only way by which thou can
come to the enjoyment of God.

If upon Examination of thy Heart, thou do not find it thus with thee; why
then consider, though this frame of Soul be Characteristical of a true
Christian; yet you must consider also, that the same Character of a Christian,
that is a cause of joy and rejoicing to some; yea, to a Man's own self
sometimes; at another time may be a cause of fear and doubting to him; not but
that, that which distinguishes a true Christian from a Hypocrite, is the same
at one time that it is at another, only we cannot see nor discover so clearly
the State of our Souls toward God by it at one time as at another. And this is
the Reason why some are so lifted up with joy; yea, with holy longing of Soul
in hopes of the Glory of God; when others are cast down under fears and doubts,
as if they had no hopes of, or at least no present Interest in, or title unto
any such thing.

But farther, Art thou fearful, O Christian, of thy self, because thou can
not feel this ardency of desires in thee after thy dissolution, and the
Glorious appearing of Jesus Christ, so as to look and long for the coming of
these things? Why know, O troubled Soul, that every Character of a Christian is
not discernable by all Christians at all times, and in all conditions: Thou
may have that in thee, which is the cause of these longing desires in
others, though at present it does not work so strongly in thee that thou may
sensibly feel the power of its operations, thus drawing forth thy Heart and
Affections in this ardent and vehement manner. Grace though weak and in the
seed has a tendency in it, and is making out after this holy longing and
rejoicing of Soul in hopes of the Glory of God; though there may be the
intervention of some time before there be an attaining to it. If there be the
remainders of the Spirit of Bondage in thee to fear, in this case Grace in thee
is not come to that perfection that it is in others; but yet it will be growing
and increasing in thee; and as thy Grace grows stronger and stronger, so will
thy fears of Death and Judgment grow weaker and weaker.

Furthermore, O troubled Soul, though thou can not feel thy Soul breathing
forth it self in these holy longings and desires after thy Dissolution, the
beholding of the face of God, and the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ; yet
do thou believe that it will be incomparably better for thee to be with
Christ, than to abide here on Earth; and therefore though Death be dreadful to
think of in it self; yet seeing it is the only passage through which God has
appointed our entrance into Heaven; though thou can not say that thou longest
for it; yet art thou willing to entertain it, if God sends it; and though the
fears of Death sometimes discourage thee, yet does not thy belief of, and hope
in a future State of Happiness abate those fears, considering the advantages
that will follow it. And though it be an amazing thing in thy thoughts to think
of coming before the Great and Holy GOD; yet (except when Temptations make thee
fear that God will condemn thee for thy Sins) had thou not rather come to God
by Death, than not come to him at all, the enjoyment of whom is thy Soul's
utmost Happiness? And though the sight of Christ's coming in the Clouds at the
Day of Judgment, in the Glory of his Father, and of the Holy Angels, will be
very terrible to behold; and the thoughts thereof strike thee with fear and
trembling, when thou considerest thine own sinfulness; and therefore can not
think of that Day with so strong a Faith and Consolation, with such earnestness
of desires and holy longing, as some Christians do; yet be not discouraged,
though thou do not long for, yet do thou love the appearance of Jesus.
Can thou say thou would not take all the pleasures of this World, for thy
hopes of the happiness of this Day? And could thou attain to that full
assurance that some of God's People have, thou would then with earnestness of
desire and holy longing of Soul, cry out as the Church does, Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly. Is it thus with thee, O Soul; why then be not troubled; nay, be
comforted; for that which at present is Faith, Hope, Desire and Love, may in a
little time be vehement longing and assurance; yea, the riches of the full
assurance of Faith. Rest not therefore in any weak desires; but labor for this
holy longing of Soul after God, and the Eternal Enjoyment of him in Glory; that
in Life and Death your Soul may part and breath after immediate and everlasting
Communion with him.

This is that frame of Soul that the People of God ought to labor after, and
which many have attained unto; the earnestness and vehemence of whose desires
have been so great, that they have been as it were under sweet and delightful
agonies of pain, and their Souls even breaking with longings after the presence
of God and Christ in Glory. Examples of this Nature that might be instanced in
are many; I shall mention one, of which I was an Eye and Ear Witness; the
Person was one of a middle rank and quality in the World, but of great eminency
in Grace and Holiness while living, and full of Joy and Peace when dying. It
pleased God, who appoints us the bounds and place of our Habitations, to cast
my lot into a Religious Family, where this Godly Person lived, whose Memory to
me is and ever shall be very precious; after I had been there some time, it
pleased God to lay this Person upon a sick bed, which proved a deathbed, whose
Mouth was always full of Holy and Heavenly Discourse, and as Death approached
nearer and nearer, those Heavenly Expressions were with greater earnestness and
frequency repeated; the last Day of whose Life as long as speech continued was
spent in uttering continual expressions, full of holy longings and desires
after the enjoyment of God and Christ in Glory. Methinks the sweetness of the
Melody revives my Spirit still, when I call to remembrance, in my serious
thoughts, what I then heard and saw: Oh with what Joy and Desight of Soul was
the thoughts of Death entertained! Surely nothing was or could possibly be more
welcome to such a Soul, except it were the immediate fruition of God in Heaven;
whose Soul in the delightful, much longed for, and panted-after Happiness, in
the enjoyment of God, breathed forth continually such expressions as these for
many hours together, Come, Lord Jesus, when shall I come and appear before
thee, Oh Lord? when Lord, when? Oh come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. And thus
this Holy Person died, changing a frail mortal Life on Earth, for an immortal
Life in Heaven, where to be and to be most happy is all one.

I could fill up many sheets with wonderful expressions of the loves, longings,
pantings, and breathings, that I have read of Holy Souls after the enjoyment of
God and Christ, both Martyrs and others. O, cries one, the Love of Christ in
my Heart casts a mighty heat; he knows that the desire I have to be with
him paineth me: I have sick Nights, and frequent fits of Love Fevers for my
well-beloved: Nothing is so painful to me as the want of his presence, but it
is a sweet pain: O that he would cool my Love-Fever for him with real enjoyment
of him. O Great King, says one, why stand thou aloof off? why remainest thou
among the Mountains? O well-beloved, why do thou pain a poor Soul with
delays? A long time out of thy Glorious Presence is as two Deaths and as two
Hells to me; we must meet, I must see him; hungring and thirsting for Christ
has brought on me such a necessity of enjoying him, that cost what it will I
cannot but assure Christ to my Soul; one smile of his Face to me is a Kingdom;
a sight of him is worth a World of Worlds. Sweet Jesus, cries one out, will thou
let me see Heaven to break my Heart, and never give me leave to enjoy it? O
fairest where dwell thou? O never enough admired and adored Godhead, how can
Creatures of yesterday be able to enjoy thee? O what pain, cries one, is it,
that Time and Sin, should be as so many thousand Miles between a loved, longed
for Lord, and a pining Lovesick Soul? Hell, and as I now think, all the pains
of it laid on me, could not put me off from loving of him, I would refuse, says
one, no condition, not Hell excepted (reserving always God's hatred) to buy the
possession and enjoyment of Jesus. Oh closed Doors, and Vails, Curtains, and
thick Clouds, cries one, that hold me in pain, while I find the sweet burnings
of his Love within me, which many waters cannot quench! O Death do thy utmost
against us: O Torments, O Malice of Men and Devils, bring Hell to help you in
Tormenting the Followers of the Lamb, we will defy you to make us too soon
happy, and to waft us too soon over the water, to that Land where that Plant,
the Plant of Renown grows. O cruel time that Torments us, and suspends our
dearest enjoyments, that we wait for, when we shall be bathed and steeped Soul
and Body in the depth of this Love of Loves. I half call, says one, his absence
cruel, and that Mask and Vail upon his Face a cruel covering, that hides such
a fair, fair Face from a sick Soul. I dare not challenge himself, but his
absence is a Mountain of Iron upon my heavy Heart. Oh when shall we meet! What
do we here but sin and suffer! Oh when shall the Night be gone, and the Shadows
fly away, and the morning of that long long Day without Cloud or Night dawn!
The Spirit and the Bride say come: Oh when shall the Lamb's Wife be ready, and
the Bridegroom say I come also! O Time be not so slow, but run; yea, fly away
swiftly! O Sun move speedily, and hasten our Banquet! O Heavens cleave asunder,
that the bright Face and Head may set it self through the Clouds! O that the
Corn were ripe, and this World prepared for his hook! How long is it to the
dawning of the Marriage day? O sweet Lord Jesus take wide steps! O my Lord come
over the Mountains at one stride, cut short Years, and Months, and Hours,
shovel time and days out of the way; post, post, haste our desired, hungered,
longed for Meeting; love is sick to hear of till too Morrow; fly, O my beloved,
like a Roe or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Separation. O that thou
would remove, says one, the covering, and draw aside the Curtain of Time;
that thou would rent the Heavens and come down! O that the Shadows and Nights
were gone, that the Day would break, and be that feeds among the Lilies would
cry and call to his Heavenly Trumpeters, make ready and let us go down and fold
together the four corners of the World, and Marry the Bride the Lamb's Wife;
since he has looked upon me my Heart is not my own.

But I shall not proceed farther herein, though the Subject be exceeding
delightful; but notwithstanding what has been said herein, I am far from
thinking that these holy pantings and longings of Soul are to be found in every
Godly Man, or that none are truly Godly but those that find and feel in
themselves these pantings and longings of Soul after the enjoyment of God, in
this vehement and ardent manner; no I dare not say so; for I believe
multitudes; yea, the generality of Believers, through sloathfulness, never
attain to this high pitch of Grace and Assurance of the Divine Love and Favor,
who yet go to Heaven very safely; but where there are any that do attain unto
this plerophory or full assurance, such Souls live as it were on the very
Suburbs of Heaven it self: And by this we may see what is the Duty of a
Christian to labor after, and what sweet peace, joy, and delight we all lose,
who do not come up to this frame and temper of Soul, even such as passes our
understandings to conceive, or our expressions to make known; which made a
Godly Man once cry out in a holy pang of love unto Jesus Christ, If I can get
no more, O let me be pained to all Eternity with longing for him, the joy of
hungring for Christ should be my Heaven for evermore.

CHAP. V.
Death terrible in its self. It is a dreadful Enemy. Wherein its Enmity does
consist. This Enemy shall be destroyed, though it be the last Enemy that shall
be destroyed. Christ by his Death has overcome Death for Believers, and how
far he has done it. Of the fear of Death, and the Causes thereof. How the
fears of Death may be Conquered and overcome. It is very uncomely for
Christians to be afraid of Death. It is possible for Christians to live without
the fear of Death. How Christians may die with Courage and Joy.

Though death as it brings Holy Souls to the Eternal Fruition of God, is
desirable; yet considered in its self it is dreadful, being accompanied with
Diseases and Distempers, the forerunners of a Dissolution, and Separation
between Soul and Body, causing all the Actions and Operations of Life to cease,
in which State the Body quickly turns to Corruption and Putrefaction, and in
time to common Earth. Now, though this be dreadful unto Nature, yet is there
more of Terror in death unto Impenitent sinners, because to them it is not only
a Gate to let them into the Grave, but a Gate to let them into Hell; the first
death transmitting them unto the second death. And yet how great is the folly
of Men that they fear death for that which is least formidable in it, but do
not fear it, for that which renders it justly terrible? Could death do no more
to us than what reaches to pains and distempers on the outward Man, and the
dissolution and destruction of the Body in the Grave, it were then a tolerable
evil, but when we shall consider death as a punishment for sin, as that which
puts us into an unchangeable Estate, this is that which makes it dreadful and
terrible indeed. While we are in this World, which is the time of our
preparation for an Eternal State, of Strangers, yea of Enemies we may become
Friends; but when death has once seized upon us, it is impossible our State
should then be changed. We cannot now say of the vilest Sinner in the World,
that there is no hope of him; we must not write desperation upon the forehead
of the wickedst Man on Earth: but if he dies in that State, then he is lost and
undone for ever; for as the Tree falls, so it lies, as death leaves Men so
Judgment will find them. And this Judgment is such as is conclusive and never
to be Repealed. Hence it is therefore, that take the most hardened Sinner, one
whom Custom in sinning has made past feeling, yet when he comes to die, if
Conscience be but awakened, it is impossible for him to look death in the Face
without great fears and horrors: Nay, it is a sight so amazing and
confounding, that were it not for the Righteousness of Christ, and that
Satisfaction he has made unto the Justice of God, by his death, it were
utterly impossible that any Believer should bear up under it: but Blessed be
God, the Blood of Christ then speaks Peace, and so Believers are not only
supported, but carried comfortably unto Heaven, through the gloomy Valley of
the Shadow of death.

Death being thus terrible now, it must needs be looked upon as a dreadful
Enemy unto Man. An Enemy now, is one that when he comes against us always comes
Armed to do us a mischief: such an Enemy now is death, for ever since the Fall
of Man, death has been Armed with a deadly Sting; now this Sting of death
whereby it becomes hurtful unto Man is sin, so says the Apostle, The sting of
death is sin. Now this Sting reaches not only to the Body, but to the Soul
also; as to the Body, it takes away all those Contentments and Comforts
wherewith it was here Refreshed and Delighted; Death rends the Husband from the
Wife, and the Wife from the Husband; it divides Children from their Parents,
and Parents from their Children; death spoils us of whatsoever is desirable in
this life, strips a Man of all and turns him naked out of the World; But this
is not all, death not only bereaves us of all that is good here, but it brings
many Evils along with it; Sickness, pains on the Body, Grief and Anguish upon
the Mind and Spirit: It is a terrible Enemy to wrestle and contend withal, it
will make a Man sweat and bleed, no Man can Encounter with death, but he shall
feel great Anxiety and Vexation both of Body and Mind, unless he have strength
from above to enable him to go through the Contest. Death in its own Nature is
so furious an Enemy unto Sinners, that it will not cease till it has pulled
the Body down into the Grave, and dragged the Soul into the Presence of God,
and from his Tribunal into the Torments of Eternal Fire; where the first death
terminates in the second death, and the Torments exceed not only all our
Expressions, but all our Apprehensions also: where death that is now such a
dreadful Enemy, would there be counted an unspeakable Mercy, for there they
shall seek death, but shall not be able to find it. But more particularly the
Enmity of death appears in these particulars.

First, The Fears of death do much abate our desires after the Enjoyment of God
in Heaven. It is true, every Believer is one that loves God above all, and
looks upon Heaven as that which shall be his dwelling place for ever, and
accordingly sincerely desires and longs after it; and in his daily Conversation
walks with his Face thitherwards: but when he sees death stands in the way
between him and Heaven, and that there is no coming for him to that place of
Bliss, but he must pass through that dark Valley; this puts him to a stand, and
makes his desires weak and low. The best Christians I believe have sometimes
felt such workings as these within their Souls; for though the Regenerate part
discovering it self in the work of Sanctified Affections, would be soaring
upwards toward God and Heaven, in whose presence the Soul would fain be: but
seeing death standing in its way, how are the desires of such a Holy Soul kept
down by the fears of it, and he turned back as one that was afraid to come into
his Father's presence. Where is the Christian the Eye of whose Faith is so
steadily fixed upon Christ in Heaven, whose Soul is sometimes ready to cry out,
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better; yet
withal, when he sees the rude hand of death stretched out to undress him, and
that there is no coming unto Jesus Christ for him, but by first suffering a
Dissolution, and laying down of his Earthly Tabernacle in the Grave: though he
would fain be with Christ, that he might enjoy him whom his Soul loves; yet
seeing this dismal Enemy death in the way, does not shrink back and cry out, O
I dare not venture; O what a dreadful Enemy is this, and what dreadful Enmity
does it put forth in the obstructing our desires, though after God and Heaven;
causing us to run from God as it were at that time, when we truly and dearly
love him. Happy Souls are they, in whom Faith and Love work so powerfully as to
conquer and overcome these fears.

Secondly, If death as an enemy prevails so as to abate our desires after the
Enjoyment of God in Heaven, it will be apt to endanger our falling in love with
this present World, and so make us miserable, by causing us to take up with the
men of this World, who have their Portion in this Life. Take a Christian whose
desires after Heaven are weak though true, because blunted by the apprehensions
of some frightful difficulties that must be gone through for the attaining of
it; how apt is such a one to be tempted to think that it is best for him to
take up with those delightful pleasures that may be had here, without such
dangerous adventures? but now if that which darkens the Blessed Vision of
Heaven, and our unspeakable Happiness in the fruition of God there, and which
also deadens our desires after this blessedness be once removed, which usually
is the dreadful apprehensions of death; with what ease can such a Soul with a
Holy Scorn and Contempt despise all the trifling Vanities of this World, as
things not worthy to be regarded?

Thirdly, The Enmity of Death manifests it self in obstructing a Christians
endeavors toward Heaven. A discouraged disconsolate Soul moves but slowly, be
it toward Earth or Heaven. Difficulties that should stir up greater diligence,
usually are great discouragements unto our endeavors, and we are apt to cry
out with Solomon's Sluggard, There is a Lion in the way, and therefore it is,
that the hands of the Sloathful refuse to labor. And so it is with us in
Spirituals, difficulties soon discourage and hinder our endeavors; whereas
they should be a whet to Industry. The Kingdom of Heaven says our Lord, suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. But alas, in many Christians the
fears of death are so strong that they keep them in Bondage all their Days. But
now were Death removed out of our way; could Christians be clothed upon with
their House which is from Heaven, without laying down the earthly Tabernacles
of their Bodies in the Grave; were there no such thing as dying to make way for
our Entrance into Heaven, how delightful would the Thoughts of Heaven be to us?
we should not then run with Patience, but with Cheerfulness the Race that is
set before us; we should no longer need Motives to quicken us in our way to
Heaven; but so earnest and vehement would our desires and longings be after it,
that nothing could stop the eager pursuits of our Souls for the obtaining of
it. How delightfully should we pray, Lord let thy Kingdom of Glory come? Our
Meditations thereof would so draw forth our Affections, and ravish our Souls in
the delightful fore-thoughts of it, that we should think nothing hard to part
with for the attaining of it. But that now which abates our Desires after
Heaven, must needs hinder our diligent Endeavors in the use of Means for the
obtaining of it.

Now as Death is an Enemy, so it is the last Enemy, but yet withal it is an
Enemy that shall be destroyed; so the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15. and 16. Now
the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death.

But how or by whom is this last Enemy Death destroyed and overcome.

I answer, Not by our selves; for Death seems rather to have destroyed us than
we it, when it brings the Body down into the Grave, and turns it into
Corruption and Rottenness. But this last Enemy is destroyed by our victorious
Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ, the Captain of our Salvation; he it is who by
the Merit of his Death has overcome Death; and of a deadly Enemy, has made it
become a most comfortable Friend to all that believe in him.

Now for this we must know Christ has not delivered us from our Obligation
unto Death; for since the Fall of Man, Death is become necessary for a
Christian, being the only way appointed by God for our Entrance into Heaven;
and therefore we see that Believers die as well as Unbelievers. Neither has
Christ delivered us from Sickness and Distempers, the usual Forerunners of
Death. David complains, Psalm. 38. My Loins are filled with a loathsome Disease;
there is no soundness in me because of thine Anger, neither is there any rest
in my Bones because of my Sin. But now in these Respects Christ has overcome
Death for Believers.

First, He has taken away the Sting of Death. This Captain of our Salvation
upon the Cross, as in an open Field and pitched Battle, did spoil
Principalities and Powers, Col. 2.15. Now one of these Powers armed against us
was Death, and the Weapon with which Death fights against us is Sin: Our (...)
Jesus Christ now took away our Sins upon the Cross, and so spoiled Death of his
Power. For having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them on his Cross. Death once struck the Lord of Life
and Glory with its Sting, and by striking him lost its Sting in his blessed
Side; so that ever since all that are in Christ, do or may insult over Death,
as being conquered and overcome for them; so speaks the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. and
55, 57. O Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory. The Sting of
Death is Sin, says he, and the Strength of Sin is the Law: But thanks be to
God, who has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Christ delivers Believers from the fears of Death. Heb. 2.14, 15.
Forasmuch then as the Children were Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, that through Death he might destroy him
that had the power of Death, that is the Devil: But is this all? No, the
Apostle adds another end; and that is, that he might deliver them who through
fear of Death were all their lifetime subject unto Bondage. Now that which
makes an Enemy to be feared is his Strength, his deadly Weapons: Christ now by
dying on the Cross took away the Weapons of Death, its Sting whereby it has
Power to hurt, and that is Sin. Now Death being disarmed, Christians are freed
from the Fears of it. It is true Men may sometimes fear a naked Enemy; but
there is no real Cause for it, seeing he cannot hurt them And so the People of
God sometimes may exceed in their Fears of Death, but they have no just Cause;
neither would they be so afraid of Death, if they were strong in the Faith of
Jesus Christ, who has disarmed Death for them.

Thirdly, Christ delivers his People from the Curse of Death. In it self Death
is a Curse, the Punishment of Man's Sin, the Expression of God's Wrath, the
Execution of the Law, and the dreadful Sentence pronounced against Man upon his
Apostasy from God. In the day thou eatest thereof, says God, thou shall die the
Death. But all that die under the stroke of Death, do not die under the Curse
of it; all deserve it indeed, but to some the Nature of it is changed; thorough
him, who is the Resurrection and the Life, they that believe shall never die: A
Voice from Heaven has pronounced them blessed that die in the Lord, Rev.
14.13. The Nature of Death is changed to them that are in Christ, such do but
sleep. To die to a Saint is no more than to undress and go to Bed: Let what
will become of Dives, our Friend Lazarus sleeps, John 11.12. The Just by
Death enter into Peace, they rest in their Beds, and are taken from the Evil to
come. Death to the wicked is like a Malefactor's putting off his Cloths, that
he may be scourged according to Law: So Death uncloathes the wicked, that by
the Wrath of God they may be tormented for ever. But now to the godly Man Death
is but like a Child's putting off an Old Garment, that he may put on a new one:
So Death uncloathes the Godly of the Rags of their Mortality, that they may be
clothed with an incorruptible Garment that shall never fade or change, but
keep its beautiful Luster and Glory for ever.

Fourthly, Christ delivers his People from the Dominion of Death. It is true
when Death has laid their Bodies down in the Grave, in seems to have Dominion
over them; but it is but for a while, for our Lord Jesus has taken away this
seeming Dominion of Death, by the Merit of his own Death, and has declared his
Victory over it, and our deliverance from it, by raising up his own Body from
the Grave. Christ by his Death did meritoriously conquer Death for Believers,
but he did not actually conquer it till his Resurrection, but then he did; the
Day of his Resurrection was the Day wherein Grace did triumph thorough Christ
toward believing Souls; for on that Day Christ did openly show to Heaven, to
Hell, to Earth, that Death was not only conquerable by Believers, but that it
was actually conquered for them thorough him. Blessed Souls in Heaven believe
it to their everlasting Consolation, and are thereby fully confirmed in the
Resurrection of their own Bodies, because their Head is already risen for them.
The damned in Hell have the Knowledge of it to their greater Torment, because
they now know their sinful Bodies shall be raised to suffer for ever with their
Souls in that Place of Torment, and therefore they believe and tremble. The
Saints on Earth also know it, and therefore they rejoice in the believing
Expectations of it; being assured that as the Bonds of Death were loosed, by
which Christ was held in the Grave for the space of Three Days, but could not
possibly be held by them any longer; so neither shall it be possible for
Believers always to be held under them. But there is a time coming, when all
that are in their Graves shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and shall come
forth, Joh. 5.28. And if we believe, says the Apostle, that Jesus died, and
rose again, even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, in 1
These. 4. and 14. for says the same Apostle, Christ is risen, and become the
first Fruits of them that sleep, in 1 Cor. 15.20. And as Christ being raised
from the Dead dies no more, Death has no more Dominion over him. So the time
will not be long before Believers shall also be raised from the Dead, and shall
die no more; for there shall then be no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying, nor
Pain; no more Diseases, or Fears of Death, or the Grave; for behold all former
things are passed away, and all things are become new, Rev. 21.45.

But though Christ has overcome Death, yet is there still a Fear of it in
most: And indeed Death is an Object of Fear; neither is all Fear of Death to be
condemned as sinful. Now for the better understanding of this, that Death is an
Object of Fear, and when it may be lawful to fear Death, and when the Fear of
it is sinful, I shall consider Man in a threefold Respect. As he is a mere Man,
as he is a sinful Man, and as he is a true Believer.

First, I shall consider Man as he is a mere Man, compounded of Soul and Body,
and so the Nature of Man abhors Death; and if it were possible (as it is not)
to find out a Man in the World that were free from all manner of Sin, yet would
he fear Death, were he liable to it, because it is that which tends to his
Dissolution and Destruction. Thus our Lord Jesus Christ himself, though he was
perfectly holy, and free from all Sin, yet in this sense he feared Death; and
therefore he prays, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. Thus
now to fear Death as it is evil and destructive unto Nature is not sinful or
unlawful.

Secondly, Consider Man as he is sinful and unregenerate, and so Death is an
Object of Fear, and full of Horror: For to all such Death comes armed with
Power, not only to make a Separation between Soul and Body, (for so Death rules
over all,) but it comes to kill and to destroy Soul and Body for ever; for to
such it is not Death alone, as it is to the Godly; but it is Death and Hell
together. Rev. 6.8. And I looked and behold a pale Horse, and his Name that sat
on him was Death, and Hell followed with him. It is no wonder if Death be
dreadful and terrible unto such; but it is rather a wonder that such can take
any rest in the night, or enjoy any quietness in the day, that under the Fears
of Death they are not distracted. But here is the Misery of such, they are so
afraid of Death, that they will not let the Thoughts of it come into their
Minds, but do what they can to banish the Thoughts of that evil day far from
them. But know, O foolish Sinner, though thou sleep, and art secure in Sin,
yet thy Death and thy Damnation slumbers not; for Death and Hell are riding on
Horseback, making haste toward thee, and will soon overtake thee, to thy
eternal Ruin and Destruction; and then thou shall know by sad Experience, that
the Fears of the first Death, which now thou labourest to stifle, yea to drive
away from thy Thoughts, were not so full of dread and horror, as the feeling of
the Second Death will be for ever. Death therefore unto wicked Men is an Object
to be feared, and the fear of Death in them is not only lawful but commendable,
and that upon which their Thoughts should much dwell, because it is that which
will prevent much Sin in them while they live, and may possibly render Death
more comfortable to them when they come to die.

Thirdly, Consider Man as regenerate, and become a true Believer, yet so he
may, and often does fear death: For let a Man be never so much a Saint, yet he
will be still a Man; and therefore as death will be death, so nature will still
be nature; and therefore death as death will be abhorred. Neither is there any
necessity that the fear of death should be wholly conquered and subdued in the
Godly, so as that if should not be, because it may and often does turn to their
Benefit and Advantage; for hereby they are made to walk more humbly with God
and more watchfully over themselves; for while they consider that they are
poor, frail, dying Creatures, subject unto death continually, and that they
must pass from thence unto Judgment, to give an Account of what they have done
in the Body; by this means they are kept from falling into many Sins, that now
would wound their Consciences, and break their peace, and hereafter make their
death more dark and uncomfortable. By this fear of death also the Godly are
quickened in their preparations for Heaven and Eternity; for because death is
so certain that it will come, and withal so uncertain when it will come, the
Godly are hereby stirred up unto a speedy and diligent preparation for it, that
so they may be ready for their departure whenever God by death shall call
them hence.

And death now is an Object of Fear in general, so are there Reasons why
Christians fear death in particular, as,

First, Some are afraid of death because of the extremity of those pains which
they must undergo, when they are dying, and because of the Corruption and
rottenness which their Bodies must turn to when they are dead.

But admit what thou say, O Christian, should be true, that thy pains in
dying should be great; yet have thou not sinned, and thereby deserved that what
thou fear, thou may feel; let me tell thee, There is not the most
Righteous man on Earth, but has sinned, and the least sin merits more pains
than any man in the first death ever yet endured: If therefore thy pains in
dying should be great, it is just with God what thou suffer, and it is of
his mercy that thou suffer no more; for there is no comparison between thy
pains and thy sins, between what thou may suffer, and what thou deservest to
suffer: let thy sickness be what it will, and thy pains as great as well thou
can imagine; they are no more, nay they are not so much as thou have
deserved: If God should deal with thee according to the demerit of thy sins, it
is not the most smart and severest pains of a Temporal death that are ended by
dying; but easeless and endless Torments in Hell to all Eternity that would be
thy Portion. Fear not therefore, O living Christian, complain not, O dying
Christian, though thy pains in death should be great, for it is but the
punishment of thy sins, nay let me say to thee, O Christian be thankful and
rejoice, for it is the last punishment thou shall ever endure for thy sins,
either here or hereafter.

But further? Is it the corruption and rottenness that thy body must be subject
to in the Grave, that terrifies and afrights thee?

Let me say this unto thee, It is no very great matter what becomes of thy Body
when it is once dead, though it were burnt to Ashes at a Stake, though it rot in
the Fields as Dung upon the Ground, though in the Bowels of the Earth it become a
Feast for Worms, and turn to corruption and rottenness; this will then be of no
more concern to thee, than if it had with the greatest Cost and Charge been
Embalmed and Buried by thy dearest Friends. The State of death knows nor feels
no difference between the one and the other: And what if thy Body lies in the
Grave for a while, it will not there be miserable, for it feels no pain, but
rests quietly in its Bed, sweetly sleeping away time until the Morning of the
Resurrection, when thou shall awake out of the Dust again, and shall die no
more. And in the mean time thy Soul, [if thou art a true Believer, for unto
such only there is Peace and Comfort in death] upon its departure out of the
Body is advanced unto unspeakable Happiness in Heaven, among the Spirits of
Just Men made perfect, in the Eternal Enjoyment of the infinitely blessed God,
the Fountain of Light and Life; where thou shall have as much Delight and
Satisfaction as thou can possibly contain, and more than now thou can
conceive: And why then art thou so afrighted with the fears of Death, when this
is all the hurt it can do thee?

O but Death is that which will take me from all my Friends and Relations, and
deprive me of all that Comfort and Delight that here I enjoy in their sweet
Society. To this I Answer, Suppose it be so that by Death thou art taken from a
dear Yoke Fellow that is now the Delight of thine Eyes; suppose thou losest all
thy Friends and Kindred in the Flesh, whom thou love even as thy own Soul,
not knowing certainly whether ever thou shall see them, or at least so as to
know them any more again for ever: If this be all thy trouble, how easily can
God make it up unto thee: Alas, when Death has once opened thine Eyes, and let
thee see what blessed Society thou shall enjoy in Heaven, thou will not, thou
can not be troubled for what thou have left behind thee here: when thou art
come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the Living God, to an innumerable
company of Angels, to the General Assembly of the first born, to God the Judge
of all, to the Spirits of Just men made perfect, to Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant, and where the blood of Sprinkling speaks better things than the
blood of Abel: will it then grieve thee that thou have left thy Friends and
Relations on Earth? Why this is the State thou expectest, this is the Company
thou hopest to enjoy hereafter; why then let the believing joyful expectations
of this Association, bear up thy Soul under thy Fears by Death of losing thy
Friends and Relations here.

But thou may say possibly they may want me when I am dead and gone, though
I want not them; whilst I am with them, I see their ^ants and take care to
suppy them, and when they are going into any evil or sinful way, I Council
them, I Reprove them, and I pray for them and endeavor to instruct them in the
fear of the Lord. But when I am gone, I know not who will do any of these
things for them, and what then will become of them?

To this I Answer, can thou say in good earnest that this is thy strait, that
therefore thou desire to live, that thou may be a means if God saw it good
to further and promote their Souls Happiness: why then let me say this to thee,
is it not a time of health with thee now, does God lend thee the sweetness of
such Relations and Friends, show that thou love them indeed, by taking hold
of the present opportunities thou now have to Admonish, to Reprove, and to
Correct, so far as it is thy place? Oh double and treble thy diligence in all
Respects wherein thou may be advantageous to their Souls; multiply thy
Prayers and Tears, thy Sighs and Groans unto God; follow him Night and Day, and
give him no rest until thou have some good ground to hope that God is not only
thy God, but the God of thy Friends and Relations also; and when thou have done
thy utmost, and God by Death calls thee away hence, so that thou can do no
more, quietly resign up thy Soul into his hands, and commit them to the care
and kindness of thy God, who is the Great and Universal Father, that takes care
of all his Creatures, but is by special Relation a Father to them that fear and
serve him.

But may some poor Soul say, when I come to die, the change that I must pass
through by death, is so strange and so amazing, that I know not how I shall be
able to bear it, death will both change my place and company: here I converse
with Friends and Relations and Acquaintance, whom I well know, because I have
lived so long among them; but when I go hence, O what a strange place and
company shall I then see, such as I never saw in all my life, full of dazzling
and astionishing Brightness and Glory, the thoughts whereof may justly fill my
Soul with fear and amazement.

To this I Answer, art thou a Christian indeed, and do thou talk after this
manner as if thou were a Stranger to God, to Christ, to Heaven, and the
Happiness of Glorified Saints there; whom is it thou call Father every time
thou Prayest? is it not the God of Heaven? What do thou make of Jesus Christ
thy Professed Lord and Savior, whose love to thee was so great that he would
manifest it in no other way, than that by which he might most endear himself
unto thee, and most strongly engage thy Love and Affections unto him, and that
was by laying down his Life and shedding of his Blood, a a Ransom for thy Soul,
and a propitiation for thy Sins, whom thou professest also to believe that he
is Aseended up into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God presenting his
Blood and Sufferings before the Throne of the Majesty on high; that both thy
self and thy Services that are Impure and Imperfect in themselves, may yet be
accepted through him: Is it not through his Righteousness alone, that thou
hopest for Justification unto Life and Happiness, and through his Strength that
thou art enabled to perform all thy Duties, and yet do thou not know him;
what a strange thing is this? But alas say thou, it is very little that I
know of him, never did I see him in all my days. But what if thou have not
beheld him with thy Bodily Eyes; yet can thou not say with the Apostle, whom
having not seen, yet thou have and do believe in him; and sometimes, it may
be so as to rejoice with that Joy that is unspeakable and full of Glory; and
though thou have not known him after the Flesh, yet thou have known him after the
Spirit, though thou have known him but a little, and what thou do see and
know of him Spiritually, is but through a Glass darkly; yet be not dejected,
fear not, for he knows thee perfectly, and has separated thee and set thee
apart for himself from Eternity, and has effectually called thee in time,
Justified thee by his Grace; yea, he knows thee by Name, and now in the
approach of Death, he is coming to take thee to himself, where thou shall see
him as he is, and know him as thou art known of him. And as for those Glorious
Creatures, the Angels and Saints in Heaven, methinks it should even Ravish thee
to think how those Noble and Excellent Creatures will flock about thee and bid
thee welcome into Heaven as one greatly beloved of the Lord, saying unto thee,
not as the Angel once said unto the two Mary's, Mat. 28. come see the place
where the Lord lay, but come see the Throne where thy Lord sits in all his
Majesty and Glory.

But may some say, I may well be afraid to die, because it is that which puts
an end to my life and being here: and who can without fear look upon himself,
and see his Body withering and decaying and not be troubled at it? is not Death
the great Dread and Terror of the World? Job therefore calls it, The King of
Terrors. O how does the Expectations of Death appale the Faces, weaken the
Hands, shake the Hearts, imbitter the Pleasures, and damp and cool the Spirits,
even of the Mighty ones of the Earth! Should God say unto many, that they
should set their Houses in Order, for they shall die and not live; should they
see a Tekel, written upon their Walls, their days are finished, this night
shall their Souls be taken from them; what sad Lamentations would most Men
make? Life, O how sweet is it to them, all that they have would they give for
their Lives; does not Nature it self teach us to seek the Preservation of our
Beings, and abhors whatever tends to its Dissolution as death does?

To this I Answer, because of this abhorrency of Death, which is implanted in
the Nature of all Men living, there may be even in the best of God's People a
fear of Death and an unwillingness to die. Our Lord himself, who was without
Sin, discovers something of this, who though to show his great willingness and
readiness to die for Sinners, said, I have a Baptism to be Baptized withal,
which was the Baptism of his Blood, and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished; thinking long for the coming of the day of his Death, whereby the
work of our Redemption was in a great measure to be accomplished; yet when
Death came to him, see how his pure and innocent Nature was put to it, when he
cried out. Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me: It is true in
his Case there was more than Death in it, there was wrath, there was a curse,
there was all the Sins of the World wrung into that Cup to mingle him a bitter
draught; but this was also something of it; for there was Death in the Cup. It
will therefore be the Wisdom of Christians, to whatever measure of confidence
and assurance they may have attained, so as upon good grounds to have overcome
the fears of Death, and to look upon their dying day as the most joyful day in
their lives; yea, though in this confidence their Hearts may sometimes pant
after the coming of that day, and they ready to cry out, make haste my beloved,
come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; yet will it be your wisdom to buckle on all
your Armor, to get all your Evidences and Experiences ready, for the conflict
of that day and hour may be such as that you may stand in need of your utmost
Preparations; for you know not how the Flesh may shrink in the day of Trial.
But if it should be so; yet be not discouraged, O Christian, for possibly this
very instance of our Lord, may be left upon Record for this very end, to
comfort his People when they shall be overtaken with the same fears and
troubles.

And as for the sweetness of this present Life, the losing whereof makes thee
to fear Death, let me ask thee this Question, Who art thou that art so fond of
this present Life? Art thou a Christian indeed and in truth; or do thou only
make a profession of Religion, without the life and power of Godliness? If thou
art only an outward professor, I wonder not that thou should set so high a
price and value upon life, and art so unwilling to part with it, because all
thy happiness is terminated in things that are enjoyed on this side Death and
the Grave; for as for those great and glorious things, that Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, nor can possibly enter into the Heart of Man to conceive, that
God has prepared for them that love him; and which are to be enjoyed beyond
time in Eternity, thou have no lot or portion in those matters: What wonder
therefore, if thou mourn and sigh even to the breaking of thy Loins, when Death
comes to put an end to thy Life; for then it separates between thee and thy
happiness for ever. But if thou art one that truly fear God, thou needst not
be so foolishly fond of this Life; for what is there in it that should make
thee coat upon it; Is it not a Life full of cares and troubles? Have not thy
Sins made it so? The Wise Man tells us, that all that is in this Life, that can
be outwardly enjoyed, is nothing but Vanity and vexation of Spirit; Have thou
not by experience found it so? Thou should therefore with Holy Job bless God,
not only for giving of Life, but for taking of it away also; God gave it thee
for a time, and but for a short time too; and if thou were so wise as thou
should be, thou ought to count it thy felicity that it is so short; for it
is a Life of sorrow, and who will complain because his sorrows are so short? It
may be thou have met with some pleasures here that gratify thy sense; but are
they comparable to what thy Soul has tasted in the enjoyment of God, unto
which God by Death is calling thee to the enjoyment of with himself in Heaven
to all Eternity? Dare thou say that Earth is like Heaven? Is Christ in those
dark and dim discoveries he makes of himself in the Gospel, like to Christ in
the full and open manifestations of himself in all his Glory in Heaven? Can
thou say thy Soul is so like him in Wisdom, Holiness, Joy, and Peace here, as
it will be above, when it comes to be enrolled among the Spirits of just Men
made perfect? If thou will be in love with Life, be in love with Eternal Life;
and henceforth fear not to die at God's call; for the obedience that thou owe
unto God binds thee, and the gain that Death will bring should both invite and
encourage thee. Though Death ends this Life it begins another; and though thou
may rot under ground in one part of thee, yet it is in thy vilest part, thy
Body; and even that will spring up and flourish again shortly: And in the mean
time, thy Soul, thy better part, shall live a more noble and excellent life.
Think well therefore of Death; for as it ends thy Life, so it ends thy Sin and
thy sufferings also.

In these particular Instances, O Christian, thou feast how little cause there
is for thee to be afraid of Death. I shall now in the next place endeavor to
discover how unfit and uncomely a thing it is for Christians to fear Death; and
for this consider,

First, A Christians fearing of Death, brings a reproach upon Religion, as if
there were not that in Christianity, that could lift up a Soul above the fears
of Death. For a Papist that professes no Man can in an ordinary way be assured
that he shall go to Heaven when he dies to tremble at the thoughts of Death,
this is no great matter, it is but to act according to what his Religion
teaches him; but for one that professes the knowledge and assurance of
Salvation and a future happy State, to stand amazed at death, the way and
passage through which God has appointed we must enter into Heaven, where this
happiness is to be enjoyed, shows, if not a want of Faith; yet at least a great
weakness of Faith, and gives occasion to those that speak evil of the good ways
of God, to reflect disgracefully upon Religion.

Secondly, To live in fear of Death, is that State of Bondage and Slavery which
wicked Men are under, and from which Jesus Christ came to deliver his People:
And therefore for a Believer to live dejectedly under the fears of Death is a
very uncomely thing. Indeed the fears of wicked Men are so great, that they
cannot think of Death without horror; and when they come to die they are
compelled to it, for of all things in the World they dread Death most; and
could they but be assured that they shall live here always, they would desire
no other Heaven. Fearfulness and amazedness under the apprehensions of Death is
the proper State of wicked Men, that Slavery and Bondage unto which they are
always subject; for upon good grounds they can have no hopes in Death; but are
full of fearful expectations of Wrath and fiery Indignation that shall Torment
them for ever. But now for true Believers, God has made your state and
condition very unlike unto theirs, as to the issues of Death, because you have
good hopes of Eternal Life even in Death; so says the Wise Man, Prove. 14.32.
The Righteous has hope in his Death. Now since there is so great an unlikeness
between you and them both in Death and after Death, let there not be a likeness
between you and them as to your fears of Death; let a Faelix tremble at the
hearing of Death and Judgment; but let not the Godly hang down their Heads, but
lift them up with joy and rejoicing, because the day of their Redemption
draws nigh.

Thirdly, Consider this, to be afraid of Death, is to fear that which is but
the Shadow and semblance of Death: For to speak strictly, a state of Sin, and
separation of the Soul from God for Sin, this is Death properly; but the
separation of the Soul from the Body only, is but the Shadow of Death. But O
how seldom is it to see Men trembling because of a spiritual Death, because
they are dead in trespasses and sins, though this be infinitely more dreadful
than any temporal Death can be? And therefore to show how full of Woe and
Misery this Death is, it is called Damnation; which is the extremity of all
Misery: This is that now to which this spiritual Death tends, and in which it
will terminate. Hence therefore Wicked Men are said to be condemned already,
and the wrath of God abides upon them, and that they shall have their Portion
in that Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death:
This shall as certainly be their Portion as if they were there already.
Therefore, O Christian, if thou will fear Death, fear not that which is the
shadow and the appearance of it, but fear that which is Death indeed; fear Sin,
that is the cause both of the first and of the second Death also; for if thou
art spiritually alive, and raised from the Death of Sin, as all true Believers
are, how uncomely a thing is it for thee to fear the Shadow, the appearance of
an evil which cannot hurt thee, when thou art delivered from the evil it self?

Fourthly, Consider, for a Christian to fear that which is both common and
certain, is an uncomely and unsuitable thing. Afflictions in general are the
common lot of all God's People in this World; but Death is that which is more
common, because it is that which befalls all both good and bad; from other
outward Afflictions there is a possibility that some may be free; or if they
befall them, they may be delivered from under them again; but no Man can escape
Death. What Man is he that lives, says the Psalmist, and shall not see Death?
shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the Grave? No, he cannot. Now God
has in Mercy made that to be most common, which is most grievous and
afflictive, that he might thereby abate the terror of it to us; and for any
one to strive against that which no Man can avoid or shun, argues that Man to
be guilty of great folly. It is therefore very unbecoming thee, O Christian, to
fear Death, which is the common way of all Flesh; yea, the way by which all the
People of God enter into Heaven and Happiness.

But to proceed a little farther in this subject, I shall in the next place
endeavor to discover, that the fears of Death may not only be overcome for a
time, but that it is possible for a Christian to live without them, or above
them; which though it be a high attainment, yet is it that to which Grace may
reach, and that which many of the People of God do daily experience the comfort
of.

Now by a Christians living without the fear of Death, I mean a holy quiet
ation and satisfaction of Soul, as to his future State of Happiness founded
upon the knowledge of his Interest in Christ, who has overcome Death for all
Believers, whereby the thoughts of it approach, does neither distract nor
disquiet his Mind, so as to bereave him of that Peace and Tranquillity of Soul
that he enjoys is his Hopes and Expectations of Heaven and Glory; but that he
can with a holy Contentation and Satisfaction, resign up his Soul unto God,
whenever he calls for it.

Now that such a State as this is attainable, I need say no more, than that
this was one of the ends for which Christ died, that by Death he might destroy
him that had the power of Death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them, who by
reason of the fear of Death, were all their life-times subject unto Bondage. So
that we being delivered out of the hands of all our spiritual Enemies, (whereof
Death is one,) we might serve him without fear in Holiness and Righteousness
all the days of our lives. In this Heavenly frame was Holy David, when he said,
though he walked through the Valley of the Shadow of Death he would fear no
evil: And so was St. Paul, when he tells us, he was persuaded, that neither
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, should be able to separate him from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. No wonder therefore that he could say,
I desire to be dissolved (though it was by Death) that he might be with Christ.
Thus to live above the fears of Death, will cost much pains with our own
Hearts, great diligence and circumspection over our selves in all our thoughts,
words, and ways; much watchfulness against all Sin and Temptations; for if we
be remiss, and through carelessness, much more through presumption, we fall
into Sin, or neglect Duty, we shall soon be brought into Bondage and Slavery by
the fears of Death.

If therefore, O Christian, thou art one, who have overcome the fears of Death,
and can live above them, thou may then die with courage, and leave this
World, (though Death carry thee out of it,) with joy and rejoicing. And that
thou may be able to do so, let me briefly lay down two or three Directions.

First, Have a great care of blorting thy Evidences for Heaven. Darkness is an
uncomfortable thing: And when Christians have been tampering with the works of
Darkness, I mean some known Sins blotting their Evidences, which should
discover their Title to Heaven, so that they cannot read them; what wonder is
it while they are thus in the dark, that they are afraid to leave Earth, though
it be to go to Heaven, because they know it not, for which they may thank
themselves. God would not only have his People go to Heaven certainly, but
joyfully; and therefore he has made ample provisions for their Peace and
comfort, both in Life and Death; so that they may not only have good hope but
strong consolation through Grace; yea, may with a holy exultation of Soul, cry
out, Thanks be to God, who always causes us to Triumph in Christ. But now, if
when God has spoken Peace, they will turn again unto folly, by venturing upon
Sin, they hereby create their own sorrows. Fear and Consternation of Soul,
under the apprehensions of Death, come from themselves, they are their own
Tormenters, and the hinderers and disturbers of their own Peace and Joy. And
now if instead of being able to read their Evidences for Heaven, which should
comfort them, they can only make wounding reflections upon their Sins that have
blotted those Evidences, so that they walk in darkness, and the fears of Death
continually afflict their Souls, they must thank themselves; for where there is
the apprehensions of guilt lying upon any Soul unpardoned, there the thoughts
of death will be terrible. This made David, when in his own apprehensions he
was drawing nigh to the Grave, beg so importunately of God, that he would spare
him a little longer, that he might recover his strength before he should go
away from hence and be seen no more. If therefore when you come to die, you
would leave this World cheerfully, you must live in the World conscienciously.
Exercise your selves in all things to keep Consciences void of offense toward
God and toward all Men. Take heed of those black Fiends, thy Sins, which will
fright thy Soul in the dark night of death. If thy Conscience be kept clean,
thy Evidences for Heaven will be clear, and the thoughts of death comfortable.
Many be venturing upon Sin, wound their Souls; and when death approaches, O
then they start back, and sain would they be spared a little longer. If
Conscience be raw with the guilt of any one Sin, a very light affliction (much
more death) will make a Man kick and fling, and very unwilling to bear it; but
where the Spirit is sound, and the guilt of Sin taken off from the Conscience
by the love of Christ, death it self will be embraced with courage and joy.

Secondly, Deaden your Hearts and Affections to the World and all the comforts
thereof. The inordinate love of worldly enjoyments, and the imperfect love of
God makes Men afraid to die. He whose Heart and Affections sit loose to the
World, a small matter will make him willing to leave it; but where the Heart is
fastened to it in love and affection, there will be no parting from it, without
much reluctance. He that has laid up his Heart in Heaven, can comfortably
think of laying down his Body in the Grave. Prize therefore Heavenly things
above Earthly. Place your Happiness in spiritual things; count them not only
your Food, but your Feast; yea, make them your recreation. Were Heaven and
Heavenly things, the continual solace and delight of our Souls, with what joy
and rejoicing should we leave Earth to go to Heaven.

Thirdly, Familiarize the Thoughts of Death unto your Souls by frequent
Meditation. Do thou dread this King of Terrors? give not way to thy Fears;
but bring Death often into thy thoughts; there is no such hurt in it as thou
imaginest, nothing that should terrify a Christian. Consider a little, what it
is that Death can do against thee, and what it is Death shall do for thee; and
then tell me if thou have any cause to fear it; nay, tell me what cause thou
have to rejoice in it: What is it death can do against thee? It may part thee
and the World, thee and thy Friends; yea, it will part between thy Soul and thy
Body, bringing it down into the dust for a time, to become a Feast for Worms;
and this is the worst that Death can do against a Believer. But then consider
withal what Death shall do for thee, why it shall bring thee to a Happiness so
great in the enjoyment of God, as is unutterable for thee to express, and
unconceivable for thee to imagine; and this not for a time, but for ever; this
death shall do for thee, O Christian; and surely, if thou believe these
things with a lively active Faith, thou can not any longer set death at a
distance from thee, as an Enemy that thou art afraid of; but converse with it
familiarly as a Friend; yea, as thy best Friend, next unto Jesus Christ. Job
was thus familiar with death, Job 17.14. I have said unto Corruption thou art
my Father, and to the Worms ye are my Mother, and Sister, and Brother. Accustom
thy self therefore, O Christian, unto the thoughts of death, and often think
what a happy change thou shall thereby undergo, even an entrance into Heaven
and Glory: And then though the thoughts of death be full of horror unto
others; yet such thoughts unto thee, will not only be profitable but exceeding
delightful.

Fourthly, If you would die with Courage and Joy, then often meditate upon the
Death of Christ. It is a common Argument and in the Mouths of most Persons,
that all must die; all that have lived before us have gone this way: But who is
there that takes courage to follow others into the Grave, because multitudes
are gone thither before them? No, it is but a poor encouragement to die,
because other Men like our selves have died before us. But when a Christian
shall believingly remember and consider, that Jesus Christ died and was laid in
the Grave, not only before us, but for us; and that he has there conquered the
King of Terrors, even upon his own ground; this makes a Believer die with a
holy courage, and descend into the Grave with an undaunted boldness. But
because Christians so seldom meditate on the Death of Christ, therefore are
they so afraid of their own death. He that has often conversed with death, in
the Meditation of the death of Christ, (as Believers do or should do,) cannot
be afraid to die, if he knows what the death of Christ means which he has
meditated upon. Savingly to know that Christ is gone before us in death, is not
only enough to make us cheerful, but to make us alive in death. He that by
Faith contemplates that Christ is gone before him by dying, and that in dying
he died for him; and that he also is alive, and lives for him; with what
abundant joy and consolation, may he depart out of this World.

CHAP. VI.
Objections against Death, and Unwillingness to die answered, Consolations
against the Fear of Death in general. Comforts against the Death of Friends and
Relations in particular. The Saints great Gain by Death, propounded as a Motive
and Encouragement unto Christians against the Fears of it.

THough it be the Duty of Christians to die willingly, yea with Courage and Joy
to commit their Souls into the hands of God; yet are there many, who cannot
overcome their fears of death, so as to be willing to die; and the Reasons
thereof are such as these.

First, say some, We could be content to die, had we but attained unto sixty or
seventy years as some Men do; but alas, we are young, in the prime of our
years, and in the strength of our Days: The Sun of our Life has not been long
up; and must it go back, and decline, yea and set also already? We are willing
to die hereafter; but O that God would spare us a little longer.

To this, I answer, these are foolish pityings of thy self: For if it please
the Great God, in whose Hands thy life is, thy breath, and all thy ways, that
thou must die young, have thou any Injustice to charge him withal? What wrong
has he done thee in cutting short the thread of thy life? Thou have forfeited
thy life into his Hands long since; and if sparing Mercy has continued the
Forfeiture, and given thee a space and time of Repentance, though not so long
as thou desire; yet more than thou deservest, yea and more than he owed thee:
Thou should therefore rather be thankful for it, and with all diligence
improve it, than repine that it is so short, or be unwilling to part with it so
soon: For though long life may be a Blessing, yea is promised so; yet if thou
art a Believer, a short life shall be no Curse unto thee. To a pardoned Soul,
all things are Blessings, yea Death it self; for the bitterness of it is taken
away. Righteous Abel though young dies, and dies by Murder; whilst wicked Cain
the Murderer of him, lives some hundreds of years after. When God who is the
great Lord of Time, and measures out to every one what number of days they
shall live, has appointed unto thee the day and hour of thy departure; though
the days of thy life be but as a span long, compared with the lives of others;
yet is it in vain to contend with God; thou may trouble thy self, and make
thy life uncomfortable, but thou can not alter God's Decrees; for he is of
one Mind, as Job speaks, and who can turn him? That is, none can; and therefore
cheerfully yield up thy self unto his Will.

But possibly thou will say, I would live longer, that I might serve and honor
God more.

If thou art sincere in what thou say, it is well; but if God will take the
Will for the Deed, and accept of what thou have done already, and reward thee
with the eternal Enjoyment of himself immediately, have thou any Cause to
complain? What if thou gettest to Heaven twenty, or thirty years before thy
Father or Brother, or many other of thy Acquaintance, that are traveling with
their Faces Heavenward, and have been so many years already; Will it grieve
thee that thou art got to Heaven too soon, where if thou art a Christian thou
always have a desire to be? I assure thee thy Friends and Relations, though
they may not envy thy Happiness; yet if they had but once tasted the Sweetness
thereof, their longings after it would be so great, that they would continually
cry out, Oh Time hasten and flee away, that we may come to the full Enjoyment
of our longed for Happiness. Has God cast thee, O Christian, upon a Bed of
Pain and Sorrow, and is it likely to prove thy Deathbed? Are there such
Symptoms of thy departure, that God seems to tell thee plainly thou shall die,
and not live? O do not reply and say, It is too soon yet, thou art too young to
die and go to Heaven: What though God call thee to Glory and Blessedness sooner
than thou expectest, yet shame not thy self, grieve not others that behold
thee; much more, disparage not the Happiness of Heaven, nor of that God who is
to be eternally enjoyed there, by thy unwillingness to go thither?

Secondly, May some say, we shall have so many Evils to encounter with, that
will create us so much fear and trouble, and withal so many Pains will befall
us in a dying hour, that we cannot tell how to think of Death, we are so
affrighted at it.

To this I answer: It is true a Christian cannot expect to die without Assaults
of Enemies, nor without the Pains of Death; but yet a Christian need not fear,
nor be unwilling to die for all this.

First, One Discouragement may be the Apprehension of the guilt of Sin, which
they then fear will stare their Consciences in the Face; and how to bear up
under it they know not. But know, O Christian, if Sin has lost its Throne in
thy Soul; if it has no Interest in thy Affections, so that it is not embraced
with any Love or Delight, it shall never ruin or condemn thee. For it is a
certain Truth where Sin does not rule, there Sin shall never damn. He that by
the Grace and Spirit of Christ is enabled to mortify his Sins, and all sinful
Affections and Inclinations thereunto; and by a penitential Conversion of Soul,
from Sin unto God, has forsaken his sinful ways; all his former Provocations,
though never so great, lose their damning Power: For where Sin is once in the
Exercise or godly Sorrow confessed unto God, it is by him graciously pardoned.
Nay the Apostle tells us, in 1 John 1.9. If we confess our Sins, God is not
only merciful and gracious, but he will be just and righteous to forgive us our
Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. And what greater security can
a Christian desire for his support, than the Truth and Faithfulness of that
God, who is Truth it self and cannot lie?

Secondly, There is another thing that may startle a Christian's Confidence,
and make him unwilling to die; and that is the fears of the Assaults of Satan,
who will do what he can, not only to hinder our future Happiness, but to
interrupt our comfortable passage through Death.

It is true the Devil will be very active in a dying hour. But be not
discouraged; give not place to his Temptations: For where Sin is pardoned as it
is to all Believers; What has the Devil wherewith to shake a Christian's
Confidence, or to undermine his Hopes and Expectance; but what is built upon
Lies and Falsehood. If therefore you will give Credit unto this Father of Lies,
when he endeavors to weaken those certain Assurances the great God has given
you of his resolved Designs to save such as you are; and so come to be
disturbed and confounded in your Thoughts about your present and future State,
you must blame your selves. Till therefore it can be proved, that Sin may be
repented of and not pardoned; that Sin may be pardoned, and yet the Soul perish
and undone; till God or Christ prove either forgetful, unable, or false, be not
dejected. It is the great Comfort of a Christian, that the Devil has no other
Arguments to disquiet a Believer with in a dying hour, but what are bottomed on
these gross Absurdities. And though Satan may be furious in his last Assaults,
yet, O Christian, remember when thou art walking through the Valley of the
shadow of death, thou walk not alone: In that dark and gloomy Valley, God
has his Rod and his Staff in readiness for thy Assistance and Encouragement;
and know further, O believing Soul, that Christ our compassionate High Priest,
knows what it is to die, and has been acquainted with the Subtilties and Fury
of the Tempter, by smart Experience, and his sympathy has taught him pity; and
because he is our Head, he will not forget his Members under their afflicting
Temptations in that hour: For though he be in Heaven, he retains the same
Bowels and Affections now in his glorified State, which he had here upon Earth;
and does continually improve his Intercession in Heaven, for the benefit,
security and relief of his afflicted People in their greatest dangers and
Extremities.

If any poor Believers shall here object the pains of Death, as being so great,
and to their apprehensions insupportable; and therefore they are unwilling to
die;

Let them consider, that they are but short and sudden; and though they are
made by God our necessary passage into Glory, yet they shall soon be over and
forgot, when the Soul by death is set free from the Body, and takes its flight
into the Presence of God in Heaven. And alas, what are the dying pains, and
groaning gasps of departing Saints, compared to the Gripes and Stingings of an
awakned Conscience for sin; and the horrid fears of the Wrath and Vengeance of
God, which though they are not seen by others because inward; yet are they the
frequent and daily Tormenting Exercises of sinners, both in Life and Death. And
though the pains of the Godly in a dying hour, may sometimes be afflictive unto
Sense; yet it often happens through the Goodness and Mercy of God to them, that
their Fears in Life exceed their Pains in Death; and this King of Terrors does
not gripe so hard, nor stab so painfully, as we are apt to think: and if he
does, God many times comes in with such strong Consolations upon departing
Souls. in the Manifestations of his Love to, and Presence with them, as turns
their Fears and Sorrows into Joy and Rejoicing.

But if God should not manifest himself thus Comfortably unto some for their
Support: but leave them to the feeling of their Fears by undergoing great pains
in Death; yet as soon as the stroke is given, the pains are gone, and their
fears are over. How quickly do the first openings of that Eternal Morning
swallow up all the Remembrances of our dying sorrows. O when the Joys and
Visions of our God invade and Exercise our departed Souls; then comes the great
and welcome Pledge of our Eternal Conquest of this last Enemy, and after a
short sleep of Bodies in the Dust, (whilst Souls return to God) the Trump will
sound, the Lord will come, the World shall perish, or be refined by Flames, and
the Dead shall rise and die no more; and then as the Apostle speaks, shall we
be ever with the Lord.

But some may say, we could willingly die, but that we know not what will
become of us hereafter; we cannot tell what our future State will be, and
therefore we are afraid of Death. The desires we have of our Eternal Happiness
puts us upon hoping the best, but our doubts and fears are so many, we cannot
but tremble to think of our departure, because we are under such uncertainties
whither we shall go when Death takes us hence.

To this I Answer, who art thou that make these Objections? Either thou art a
wicked Man, or one that truly fear God. If thou art a Wicked Man, under the
guilt of thy Sins, and in an unpardoned State, I cannot wonder that thou art
afraid of Death, nor can I blame thee that thou art unwilling to die: Thou have
cause enough to make thee fear and tremble. For there is nothing in Death, or
what is to come after it, if thou understandest thy danger aright, but what
might fill thee with the greatest Terror and Consternation imaginable. Whatever
thou fear, is to come; and may come quickly for ought thou know: is
infinitely far greater and worse than what thou can now imagine: what thou
feel or fear, are but the beginning of thy Sorrows: nay all the Miseries
thou can meet with in Life, and all the pains that thou can suppose to be
in Death, fall infinitely short of those unconceivable Horrors, and Miseries
that are the Portion of Sinners in the next Life. And for any Comfort, or
Relief against Death whilst thou art in thy Sinful State, there is nor can be
none. Thy work therefore, must be speedily to get into Christ; labor to have
thy Sins Pardoned. Follow God with earnest Cries, Tears, and Importunities of
Soul, that thy sinful Nature may be changed and Sanctified: and then let Death
come when it will; though thou die under never such fears and uncertainties as
to thy future State, yet Eternal Happiness attends thee, and when Death has
once closed the Eyes of thy Body; the Eye of thy Soul will quickly be opened to
thy everlasting Joy and Consolation.

If thou art one that truly fear God, but yet art unwilling to die, because
thou art uncertain, how it may go with thee as to thy Eternal State. Why then
examine thine own heart, whether these fears do not proceed from thine own
carelessness? God has vouchsafed to thee many means and opportunities for the
increasing thy Knowledge, for the strengthening thy Faith, for the enlarging
thy Love, for the confirming thy Hope, for the establishing thy Soul in the
ways of God, and to provoke and stir thee up unto the continual Exercise of
Grace, that hereby thou might grow up into some Knowledge and Assurance of
his Love toward thee through Christ, and so may groundedly conclude the
certainty of thy future Happiness. But thou have been sloathful, not putting
forth thy self with all diligence in the improving the Helps and Advantages God
has put into thy hands, and therefore thou art so in the Dark, and under
fears; how it may go with thy Soul for ever, if this be thy case, go humble thy
Soul before God, lie low in his presence, beg earnestly the manifestations of
his Love and Favor toward thee: And for time to come, put forth the
endeavors of thy Soul unto the utmost, in the use of all the means God
vouchsafes unto thee for the removing thy Fears, satisfying thy Doubts,
increasing thy Knowledge, confirming thy Faith and Hope in a future State of
Happiness provided for thee; and how soon God may come in, whilst thou art thus
humbling thy self before him, and manifest his loving kindness unto thy Support
and Comfort, thou know not. But however, if he should (for some Reasons thou
can not at present apprehend) leave thee to walk under thy Doubts and Fears
still; yet if thou art sincere one that has the Grace of God in Truth in thy
Soul, I would say thus much, that these Fears and Jealousies about the
attainment of the Happiness of Heaven, if it be a Distemper as it is become so
natural to us all; that it is with much difficulty cured in this present State,
but yet it may be with great diligence and industry of Soul. But for thy
Comfort, O doubting Believer, know; though these Doubts and Fears are sinful,
and thou do thereby provoke God; yet they shall not prejudice thy future
Happiness, though they may and do often hinder thy present Peace and Comfort.
For certainly God will never Damn a Believing Soul, let such a one think what
he will of himself. For though thou art not assured that thou art his, yet God
knows all those that are his, and not one of them shall Eternally perish.
Suppose therefore, that thou should die under Doubts and Jealousies, and thy
Soul should go out of this World, sitting in a Cloud of Tears, this hinders
not, but it may arise in a fair morning of Glory. Heaven only is a place
privileged from Tears and Fears.

But may some Soul say, I am not willing to die, because I fear I have no
Grace, or at least it is but little that I have; for when I compare my self
with others, the most I can say of my self is this: that all my Grace and
Holiness lies in a Love to Grace, and in a desire after Holiness; I hope
through Grace I can say, that there is nothing in all the World, if I might
have my choice, that I desire more than to be like my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. But O how short do I fall, both of my Rule and of my Desires: my
walkings in the ways of God are very uneven and unconstant; the corruptions of
my heart are so great and so frequently breaking forth, by Fleshly Affections
and Worldly Desires, that if there be any Grace within me, it is very hard to
diseern it by reason of the sin that does accompany and go along with it; and
how then should such a one as I dare to think of dying. Were Grace strong and
vigorous, could I sensibly find the strength, increase and growth of it in a
tendency toward perfection, I could then think of dying with some courage. But
the weakness and imperfection of Grace much discourageth me, that I cannot with
any willingness and cheerfulness entertain the thoughts of it in my Soul.

To this I Answer, let not the thoughts of Death discourage thee, O weak
Christian, for Death can no more, shall no more hinder the Happiness of a weak
Believer, than of a strong Believer. It is true, a strong Faith may carry thee
more comfortably to Heaven, but a weak Faith will carry thee as truly to
Heaven: For Faith saves not as it is strong or weak, but as it is true; and a
weak Faith is true Faith as well as a strong Faith. Grace and Holiness is of
Absolute necessity for every Christian; for without them it is impossible to
please God, or to enjoy him. For as the Apostle says, Without Holiness no man
shall ever see the Lord. But yet all Christians are not equally Holy; there is
a measure, or stature to which all Christians are appointed in Christ Jesus:
but this measure, or stature, is not the same to every Christian: some
Christians have a longer term of Life than others; some have more means and
opportunities than others; and some have greater Parts and Abilities than
others. Now God is not a severe Master, expecting to reap where he has not
sown, or to gather where he has not strowed: God does not look for what he
does not give, where he gives more, he expects the more; but where he gives
less, he expects the less. Christians to whom God has given great parts and
Abilities with great means and opportunities of Grace even unto Old Age, from
such God expects much, because he has given much. Ordinary degrees of Grace
must not serve their turns; but they must transcend others in Faith, Love,
Humility, and all other Graces, contending for the attaining unto the State of
the Resurrection from the dead. But now for others, whose parts have been low;
whose means and opportunities are small, and their time in the World but short:
God does not expect that the Beauty of their Grace should shine so Gloriously
as others. Say not therefore O doubting Christian, that thou know not,
believe not, love not, delightest not in God, to that degree that others
do. It may be thou do not; but if thy Knowledge, Faith, Love and Delight be
not so great as others, yet thy Grace may be as true and as real as any others.
In a Star there is as true light as in the Sun, though there be more light in
the Sun. And thy Grace though little and weak, is true Grace; though it be not
so much, nor so strong as others. Quiet thy self therefore, O drooping Soul;
for such may be the weakness of thy parts, such the smallness of the means of
Grace that thou enjoyest, and so few the Talents thou art entrusted withal,
that God expects not so much from thee as he does from others: And if the Great
God will accept of, yea Reward the little that thou have, why should thou be
troubled or disquieted? God does not despise the day of small things, and why
should thou? A little Grace, yea the least of Grace is too good to be cast
away. Though thou could not be Saved without a strong Savior, and therefore
Christ is said to travail in the greatness of his Strength mighty to Save: yet
a little Faith laying hold upon this strong Savior, will keep thee from
perishing: be not therefore discouraged, O Christian, fear not Death, though
thy Grace be weak and imperfect, and so may not give thee that comfort in Death
that thou expectest, yet shall it as truly overcome Death through the strength
of Christ, as the strongest Grace; and though Death kill thee, yet it shall not
hurt thee; nay it shall make for thy Eternal Advantage, for it shall be the
ending of all thy Fears, but the beginning of thy Eternal Joys and Rejoycings.

But may some poor Soul say, I want the assurance of the Love and Favor of
God, and this makes me unwilling to die; were I but assured my sins are
pardoned, and God reconciled to my Soul through Jesus Christ, I could then
cheerfully submit my self to the stroke of Death; but this is that which
afrightens me, I fear lest God is mine Enemy, and then I am sure death cannot
be my Friend, and how then shall I dare to think of dying in this Condition?

To this I Answer; art thou under some fears and apprehensions that God is not
thy reconciled Father in Jesus Christ, though I cannot blame thee that thou art
fearful of dying under such apprehensions; yet I must blame thee for thy former
negligence, that thou have not made this sure to thy self in the time of thy
health and strength. Next to dying in a State of impenitency, and the Horrors
of Conscience, under the fore tastes of Hell and Wrath: dying under the
apprehensions and fears of God's being our Enemy, is the most dreadful
condition that can be, for though our future safety and happiness depends not
upon our assurance that God is at peace with us, yet our present Comfort does:
and it is all one as to the present quietation and satisfaction of our Souls
when we are a dying, whether God be our Enemy or no; if he will not smile upon
us when our Souls are a- departing; but leave us in that hour, as our last
punnishment for some sin that he has been provoked by; to breath forth our
Souls under the apprehensions of his Wrath and Displeasure. Assurance of the
Love and Favor of God, to know that our sins are Pardoned, and we accepted in
the Beloved; to know the joyful sound, to have the light of God's Countenance
lifted up upon our Souls, when we are passing through the gloomy Valley of the
shadow of Death. For God not only to Love us, but to tell us that he Loves us,
and to manifest it to us by shedding abroad his Love into our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost, so as to fill us with Joy and Peace by believing this is Life, nay
this loving kindness of God is better than Life; it is the Suburbs of Heaven;
yea, it is Heaven it self, for it is as much of Heaven as we can desire or
contain of Heaven whilst we are on this side Heaven. On the contrary to be
doubting of the Love and Favor of God, to fear he is our Enemy, that we are
yet in our Sins, liable unto the Wrath and Vengeance of God, this is very sad
and uncomfortable; yea, some resemblance of Hell it self; especially if
Conscience be awakned, and these Apprehensions and Jealousies continue upon us
under the approaches of Death: this therefore must needs be very Afflictive to
a poor doubting Soul. But yet be not discouraged; for it is the Condition of
many of God's Children for a long time to remain doubtful, both as to their
present State in Grace, and their future State of Glory. There are Believers of
diverse growths in the Church of God, Fathers, Young Men, Children, and Babes.
And as it is in most Families in the World, there are more Babes, and Children,
than grown Men: So is it in the Church of God, there are more weak and doubting
Christians, than strong Men who are grown up unto a full Assurance. But
remember the Promise is made to the being of Faith, not to the Knowledge and
Evidence of it; to Faith as it is a true Faith, not to Faith as it is a strong
Faith, Heaven may be sure to those, who yet in their own Apprehensions may not
be assured of Heaven. Live therefore by Faith, O Christian, when thou can not
live by Sense and Feeling; and know that, that God who has given thee a true
Judgment to value Jesus Christ, and a Sanctified Will to choose him, with
ardent and strong Affections to Love him and desire him, and supported thee
under the fears of sin and guilt, will come in with assurance also, if he sees
it good for thee: And know also for thy Comfort, that many of God's People have
languished a long time under the want of assurance, and some of them most part
of their lives, yea, and in their last Sickness, and almost to their last gasp,
and then God has Graciously come in and Sealed up his Love and Favor to their
Souls, whereby they have been filled will Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.
Never fear death therefore, for want of assurance, for that is the most usual
time when God does bestow it upon his People. But if he does not then give thee
this assurance, yet he will put under his Everlasting Arms that shall bear thee
up notwithstanding all thy fears and doubts and carry thee safe through the
pains of Death into Glory, where thou shall have as much of the Love of God,
and of the Assurance thereof as thou can wish or desire.

But may some say, were we prepared to die, we could willingly embrace Death
whenever God sends it. But alas, our State and Condition is such, that we
fear we are not fit for Death, and how then can we Comfortably think of dying?

I Answer, if this be the true case of thy Soul, as thy Fears suggest, that
thou art not really prepared for Death, thy Condition is sad and dangerous, and
if Death seize upon thee in this State, thou art irrecoverably miserable, and
all the Comfort that can be given unto thee is this, that yet there is a
possibility of Salvation, as yet there is some hope because thou art not
actually under the power of Death; God is yet waiting, time is yet lengthened
out, space is yet granted to you to prepare to meet this King of Terrors: And
in the Improvement of these lies all your Hopes for Heaven and Eternity. You
have hitherto been great loiterers in your great work, spent much of your
precious time to little purpose, neglected many opportunities, lost many
warnings vouchsafed to you: Now therefore be diligent: What was the whole time
of your Life given you for, but to prepare for Death, and have you lived so
many years in the World to prepare for your last hour, and are you still both
unwilling and unfit to die? What have you been doing? wherefore is it that you
have lived? have you had any business of greater concernment to mind, than to
be prepared for your latter end? O foolish Souls and unwise, who else would run
such desperate hazaras? God has frequently told you that you must die, how
often has Death by God's appointment come among your Acquaintance and
Relations, and sometimes into your own Habitations, and snatched away many
before your Eyes; how often has it been told you, such a Friend is dead in
such a place, and such an Acquaintance in another place, and such a Relation in
such a Family? And by all these warnings will you not believe that you are
Mortal, and shall shortly die as well as others? If you do believe it, where is
the prepartion you make for it, when you are still crying out, O you are not
fit to die? was not this your Language long since? how many years has it been
heard from you? When God has visited you with Sickness not once but often, and
you were going down into the Chambers of the Grave in your own apprehensions:
did you not then cry out, Lord I am not ready, O spare me yet a little longer,
that I may recover my strength, yet once again, before I go away from hence and
shall be seen no more; and God was nigh to your Voice, and heard your Cry and
granted your Request, and tried you once and again a little longer; and what
are you not yet fit to die? whose fault is it? surely your own. And if Death
take you away in this State, you will justly bear the blame and punishment of
it for ever. Whoever thou art into whose hands these lines may fall, presently
put thy self upon the Trial, how it is with thee, and endeavor to put the
Question out of doubt, think not that God must wait upon you whilst you dally
and trifle away your time: have thou been careless and negligent formerly, be
so no longer; O search and examine thy Soul, and follow the search close and
home to thy Conscience till thou come fully and clearly to discern how it is
with thee; idle not away thy time one moment longer, but begin this day, delay
not thy Preparations for Death until to morrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth. What is requisite to make thy preparations such as may render
Death Comfortable in thy thoughts and Expectations, I have already laid down in
the third Chapter of this Treatise to which I refer thee.

But notwithstanding what has been spoken, because there may yet be some fears
arising in the hearts of some troubled Christian's, which they cannot get the
Victory over, so as readily and willingly to submit unto Death, I shall in the
next place propose some Consolatory Considerations for their Encouragement and
support against a dying hour. As,

First, Consider that Gracious Promise God has made unto his People in all
Ages, that he will never leave them nor forsake them. And this is a Cordial so
full of Divine Consolation, that if Christians did but believe and live up to
the Comfort that might be drawn from it, they would not fear, much less sink
under any Affliction that can befall them. It was no small Trial St. Paul was
under, when after his being rapt up into the third Heavens, where he heard
things that were unspeakable, or impossible to be uttered: he had given him a
Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to Buffet him; upon which he makes
his Prayer thrice, that it might be removed from him. What Answer now does he
receive from God? why the Thorn remains in his Flesh still, and the Messenger
of Satan continues to Buffet him; but yet he has a better return to his
Prayer, even the making good of this Gracious Promise to him, that God would
not leave him nor forsake him: for says God, My Grace shall be sufficient for
thee, my Strength is made perfect in Weakness. And therefore the Apostle orys
out in the deepest of his Afflictions, with Transports of Joy, most gladly
therefore will I Glory in my Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest
upon me; yea, says he, I take pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in
Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for Christ's sake, for when I am
Weak, then am I strong; for I can do all things through Christ that strengthens
me, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. Thus for God to stand by his People, and to strengthen
them under their Afflictions, is more than for God to deliver them out of them,
and he always does the one or the other, if he deliver not his People out of
afflictions, he always strengthens them under them; and the greater the
Afflictions of any of his People are, the more is his Power seen in supporting
them, because they then most need it. Therefore, says God, when thou passest
through the Waters, I will be with thee, they shall not overflow thee; and when
thou walk thorough the Fire, thou shall not be burnt, Esai. 43.2. Take
Courage therefore, O Christian, be not afraid of any Affliction; be not
afrighted, no not at the sight of death it self; though thou see it is a
narrow passage, a way beset with Briars and Thorns; though it be a strait Gate
for Flesh and Blood to pass through, yet fear not; for it is the Gate of
Heaven, the way that leads unto Glory. Be not afraid therefore to walk in the
valley of the shadow of death; though love of Friends, and strength of Body
fail thee, yet fear not, for God will be with thee, his Rod and his Staff will
support and comfort thee, he will be your God and your Guide, not only unto
death, but for ever and ever; for he will never, never, never leave his People,
nor forsake them, till he has brought them to the eternal enjoyment of himself
in Glory.

Secondly, Would thou, O Christian, be comforted and supported against death,
then much and often meditate upon the Lord Jesus Christ. Now though every thing
in Christ, and every thing done by Christ, be exceeding sweet and precious; for
unto them that believe, he is precious. Christ, and whole Christ is precious;
for there is nothing in him, or done by him, that we can tell how to want. But
yet I shall instance in some few things more particularly, which may be of
great Use unto a Christian to meditate upon for his support against the hour of
Death: As,

First, Meditate often upon the Death and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Now though in general these were so great, that they exceed all our Expressions
and Apprehensions; yet how willingly and patiently did he undergo them all;
both from God and Man, in his Body and in his Soul? His Body was racked and
tortured in all the parts of it; but especially in those parts wherein the
sense is most quick; and therefore his Pain and Anguish was most afflicting.
They dug or pierced my hands and my feet, says the Psalmist of him, Psalm.
22.16. He suffered in his Soul also; for he conflicted with the wrath of an
angry God, which was impressed upon him in such a dreadful manner; that had he
not had the strength of the Deity to support him, it had certainly overwhelmed
him, and ground him to Powder: For it was pure Wrath without the least mixture
of sparing Mercy, the great God bated him nothing. That Is a sweet Scripture,
Romans 8.32. God spared not his own Son: And it was well for us that he did not;
for had he spared him, he had not spared us. His Death was not common and
ordinary, but a Death by Crucifixion; he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto Death, even the death of the Cross, which was a violent death, considered
in it self; and therefore he is said to be cut off out of the Land of the
Living, though in respect of himself it was voluntary; and therefore he tells
us I lay down my Life of my self, John 10.18. And indeed Christ must either die
a voluntary Death, or none at all; partly because there was no Sin in him to
deserve Death, and partly because otherwise his death had not been a Sacrifice
acceptable and satisfactory unto God for us; for that which died of it self was
never offered in Sacrifice, but that which was slain in its full force and
strength. This death of Christ was also full of exquisite Pain and Torture; and
therefore when he was going to encounter with it, he screws up his Request to
his Father to the highest pitch, Matthew 26.39. Father, if it be possible, let
this Cup pass from me. It was also a death full of shame, than which nothing is
more cutting to an ingenious, noble Spirit. And truly in this respect, the
Thieves that suffered with him, fared better than he; for they had no Taunts,
Reproaches, and Sarcasms cast upon them; they only encountered with Pain: But
Christ had Pain and Shame also; for the Soldiers, the Jews, the Thieves, all
scoffed and flouted at him: And therefore, says the Apostle, he not only
endured the Cross, but he despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. But this is not all,
for the death of Christ was a cursed death; Pain was bad, and Shame was worse,
but the Curse is worst of all; for he that is hanged on a Tree, is accursed of
God; and therefore Christ that he might show the greatness of his Love to his
People, redeemed them from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for them,
Gal. 3.13. Now though Christ knew that all these Sufferings and this death
should befall him; yet so great was his Love to Believers, that he underwent all
willingly and patiently. What godly Man on Earth, what Saint or Angel in Heaven
can read or hear those Words of his, in Luke 12.50. without Astonishment, where
speaking of his death and sufferings, he says, he had a Baptism to be baptized
withal, which was a Baptism of Blood? And how am I straightened till it be
accomplished? Indeed it is said, when the time of his sufferings drew near,
that he began to be sorrowful, that he was sore amazed and very heavy: My Soul,
says he, is exceeding sorrowful even unto death. Not that Christ repented of
his Undertaking when he was to suffer; no, for when the time of his suffering
was come, the Holy History tells us, he not only went to a place that Judas who
betrayed him knew of, that so he might be the more readily taken; but when his
Enemies came thither to apprehend him, he went forth to meet them, and asked
them, Whom seek ye? And when they told him Jesus of Nazareth, he tells them, I
am he; upon which, they fell to the ground; and as if they were more afraid to
apprehend and bring him to his sufferings, than he was to suffer; he speaks to
them again, and by his Words (Oh how willingly, blessed Jesus, did thou go to
suffer!) he does, as it were, strengthen and encourage them to go on in their
work of laying hold of him; he said therefore unto them a second time, Whom
seek ye? They said Jesus of Nazareth; Jesus answered them, I have told you that
I am he; if therefore you seek me, behold here I am. He was a Volunteer in his
dying and offering up of himself. His death was a Free Will Offering, and this
made him to become a Sacrifice, Psalm. 40.7, 8. Then, said I, lo I come! In the
Volume of thy Book, it is written of me, I delight to do thy Will, O God; yea,
thy Law is within my heart. As if he had said, my very heart is ready for the
shedding of my heart-blood. Therefore, says he, I lay down my life, no man
takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it up, John 10.17, 18. As if he had said, if it were
not my pleasure to part with it, all that Men or Devils could do, they were not
able to wrest it out of my hands.

Now though Christ by his death and sufferings accomplished several ends, as
the satisfaction of the Justice of God, the procuring Pardon and Remission of
Sin, and the obtaining Heaven; yet this also was one end of his death, and a
very comfortable one too, and that is the overcoming of death for Believers.
Christ Jesus the Lord of Life and Glory, has by his death spoiled
Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in his Cross: By his death, he has not only destroyed death, but him also that
had the power of death, that is the Devil, and delivered them, who through fear
of death, were all their lives-time subject unto that bondage. The Blood of
Jesus Christ has slain death's Enmity; not that death is so destroyed that
Believers shall not die, but it is unstung: It still wears its Dart, by which
it strikes all Men, but it has lost its sting by which it hurts. Is death
therefore riding, upon its pale Horse, and making haste toward thee, O
Believer, fear it not, be not dismayed at it; though there may be much of pain
in it, yet there is nothing of the Curse in it; it is as a Serpent without a
sting, thou may take it into thy hand, yea into thy bosom, without danger.
Death poured out all its Poison upon Christ, when he was made a Curse; it
fastened, yea, it lost its sting in his blessed Side: And who would fear an
Enemy that is conquered? Death to a Believer, is not only an innocent, harmless
thing, but it is one of his best Friends: death is yours, says the Apostle,
speaking to Believers. It is theirs as a special Privilege. When Christ was
upon the Cross, there was a Contention between him and death; and as it was
prophesied of him, he was then the plague of death, and the destruction of the
Grave, for he swallowed them up in Victory: So that now death drives but a poor
Trade among Believers; all that it can do is but to destroy the Body, and to
afright some that are weak in the Faith, but it cannot hurt them; Victory over
death is as sure to them as if they had already overcome; and therefore, says
the Apostle, speaking of Death and the Grave, Thanks be to God who has given
us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Meditate upon the Resurrection of Christ. This is a great
Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion, that upon which the Faith, the
Hope and Happiness of a Christian for Eternity is built; for as Christ died for
our Sins, so he arose again for our Justification: And if Christ had not risen,
the Faith and Hope of a Christian is but vain: If Christ be not risen, a
Christian shall not rise; and if there be no Resurrection, there is no Life
everlasting. If Christians have hope only in this Life, they are of all Men
most miserable. But blessed be God, Christ is risen, and therefore the Faith
and Hope of a Christian stands firm; for it is built upon the Rock of Ages,
against which, as the Gates of Death did not, so the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail. That Christ is risen, the Scripture is clear; an Angel declares it,
Matthew. 28.6. He is not here, he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where
the Lord lay. Holy Men, who were Eyewitnesses hereof, give their Testimony to
this Truth, when our Lord showed himself alive to them by the space of Forty
Days, in nine several Apparitions, and once was he seen of five hundred
Brethren together, 1 Cor. 15.6. And, says the Apostle, Acts 2.24. He was raised
from the dead, the pains or bands of death being loosed, because it was not
possible he should be holden of them: It was possible Death should seize upon
him, and so it did, he willingly yielding himself up unto it; because as our
Surety, he owed a death by way of satisfaction to the Justice of God for our
sins, which he had taken upon him, and accordingly he paid it, otherwise Death
could not have taken hold of him. But though death did take hold of him, yet
could it not keep it; though it had possession of him in the Grave, yet it
could not keep him there; no that was impossible; partly, because he is life,
essentially life; so himself tells us, I am the Resurrection and the Life: Now
it is not possible for death to hold life it self longer under its power, than
he who is life it self pleases. And then partly it was not possible Christ
should be held under the power of death in ^espect of us: for having undertaken
the great work of restoring us unto life, if his life had been subdued by
death, if he had been held down a Prisoner under the power of death and the
grave, we had been lost and undone for ever; for as the Apostle argues, if
Christ be not risen, then our Faith is vain, we are yet in our sins: But Christ
being to carry on the work of our Redemption to perfection, though he submitted
himself to die, yet was it impossible Death should have Dominion over him for
ever; Christ therefore is risen, and he is risen as a public Person in the
behalf of all Believers, who are therefore called the Children of the
Resurrection, and said to be risen with him, Ephesians. 2.6. Christ's Resurrection is
not only the Cause of a Believer's Resurrection, but the security of his happy
Resurrection; therefore he is said to be the first fruits of them that sleep:
Now as the first fruits did both assure and sanctify the whole Harvest; so
does Christ do for Believers; by his Resurrection he assures them of their
Resurrection, and sanctifies it also, that it shall be a blessed Resurrection,
even unto an Eternity of Happiness. And therefore it is with respect to
Believers, that Christ is called the Firstborn, or the first begotten from the
dead; who are in their time and order to be born from the dead, the
Resurrection giving New Birth or Being unto those bodies, which while they were
in the Grave seemed to have none. For as certainly as the whole Harvest follows
the first Fruits; so does the general Resurrection of Believers at the last day
follow the Resurrection of Christ: For as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. and 12.
If Christ be risen from the dead, how can it be, but that there must be a
Resurrection from the dead? If we acknowledge the Body of Christ is risen, we
cannot rationally deny the Resurrection of our own bodies, because Christ's
Resurrection is not only the Exemplar of our Resurrection, but the Cause of it;
for because Christ and Believers are but one Mystical Body, he the Head, they
the Members; and the Head being risen, the Members shall not always lie rotting
in the Grave, but shall in due time arise also: For the Spirit of Life that is
in Christ Jesus the Head, will diffuse it self into all its Members, to quicken
and raise them also in the morning of the Resurrection.

And indeed Christ is not perfectly risen till all Believers are risen also:
For though Christ's personal Resurrection, was perfect when he arose out of the
Grave; and though all Believers did then arise with Christ representatively;
yet till all Believers arise personally at the last day, the Resurrection of
Christ has not received its full perfection. How comfortable therefore is this
to a Believer to consider, that by the same Faith that he puts Christ's
Resurrection into the Premises, he may put his own Resurrection into the
Conclusion. If Christ be in you, says the Apostle, speaking to Believers, in
Romans 8.10, 11. The body is dead; it is a poor, frail, dying body, because of
sin: And though you are really united unto Christ by his Spirit dwelling in
you, which is a great and glorious Privilege; yet your bodies must die, as
well as others; but the Spirit, says he, is life because of Righteousness:
Though your bodies die, your souls shall be su'allowed up in life upon your
dissolution; this Happiness Believers have even in death. But this is not all;
for, says the Apostle, if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwell in you; what then, why though your bodies must fall by Death into the
Grave; yet they shall rise and live again at the Resurrection, and that by
virtue of the Spirit of Christ which dwells in you, and is the Bond of your
Mystical Union with him, who is your Head: for, says the Apostle, He that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in you. Because Christ is your Head, and his Spirit
dwells in you, you shall be raised again, and that not as others, by a mere
word of his Power as the wicked are; but by the Spirit of Life dwelling in
Christ your Head; which is an excellent Privilege indeed. O the Consolation
that the hope of the Resurrection fills the Believing Soul withal; it is this
Blessed Hope that supports it, not only under the Troubles of Life, but makes
it Triumph even under the Pains and Agonies of Death it self.

Thirdly, Meditate frequently upon the Ascension of Jesus Christ into Heaven.
Now this Ascension of Christ into Heaven, as it was full of Glory and Triumph
in respect of himself: so is it full of admirable Comfort in respect of
Believers. As to himself his Ascension was Triumphant, a Cloud was prepared as
a Royal Chariot to carry up this King of Glory into Heaven, so it is said in
Acts 11.10. That whilst his Disciples beheld he was taken up, and a Cloud
received him out of their sight; and no doubt, a Royal Guard of Angels attended
the Solemnity of their Lord's Ascension. If when Christ came into the World to
suffer, Angels waited upon him, for even then it was said of him, Let all the
Angels of God Worship him; surely much more then now that he has finished the
work of Man's Redemption, do the Angels Worship him in his return to Heaven
again, where he is exalted to have a Name above every Name, that at the Name of
Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and
things under the Earth, and that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus is
Lord to the Glory of God the Father.

But may a poor Believer say, what is all this to me, what am I the better that
Christ is Ascended and Exalted thus in Glory?

Yes this is much for the advantage of Believers, for it is the same Jesus that
was Crucified for them, that God has made both Lord and Christ. It is he who
took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, who is Exalted
above Angels; being gone into Heaven, Angels, Principalities and Powers being
made subject unto him. It is this Jesus Christ, whom God has raised from the
dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places far above all
Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every Name that is named,
not only in this World, but also in that which is to come, and has put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Christ Ascended into Heaven as a public Person, or
the forerunner of Believers; for he is not gone to take possession of Heaven
only for himself, but also in our Name and for us. So the Apostle tells us,
Heb. 6.20. speaking of the most Holy place, within the Vail; whither, says he,
the forerunner, that is, Christ, is for us entered. And if we will not believe
the Apostle, Christ himself tells us the same thing, John 14.2. In my Father's
House are many Mansions, I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go away, I
will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be
also. Christ is now in Heaven transacting the Affairs and Concerns of
Believers, both for their present Peace and Comfort, and for their future
Eternal Happiness; not only by intercepting the daily cry of their sins, by the
continual Representation of his Death and Sufferings unto his Father, and so
making an Atonement and Reconciliation with God for them; but by the Blood of
his Cross, he maintains this Peace, and keeps up good thoughts in God toward
Believers, sprinkling their poor and weak, but sincer Services with the Incense
of his own Merits: so that though both they and their Services deserve to be
rejected for their own sakes, yet they shall both be accepted for Christ's
sake. This now is something that Christ is doing in Heaven in the behalf of
Believers, since he is Ascended to his Father and to their Father, to his God
and to their God. But yet this is not all, for in that comfortable Prayer of
his to his Father, before his Ascension into Heaven, (which is, say some, the
Copy of his Intercession now he is in Heaven) he does as it were tell us, that
he looks not upon himself as perfectly Happy, until he has the whole number of
Believers with him in Glory; and therefore, says he, John 17.24. Father I will
that those whom thou have given me, be with me where Lam, that they may behold,
that is, that they may enjoy my Glory which thou have given me. O what Comfort
then is here to all Believers against the Fears of Death, for assure thy self O
Believing Soul, that neither Death, nor the Grave shall be a bar to thy
Happiness: thou must die it is true, so did Christ, but he is Risen and
Ascended up into Heaven, and so shall thou also in due time, and therefore says
the Apostle, He has made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2.6. Salvation and Happiness is made sure to a Believer by Christ, for
if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son,
much more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his Life. For certainly, he is
able to save unto the utmost, all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Christ has not lost his Love and
Affection to his People by his Advancement. Harbor not therefore, O Believing
Soul, any suspicious thoughts in thy Heart concerning him, as if by his
Exaltation into Heaven, he were now become forgetful of any of his Members here
below groaning under Sin or Misery; for though the days of his Passion are
ended, yet so are not the days of his Compassion. He retains the same Temper
and Disposition of Soul now he is in Glory; his Heart is not changed, though
his Condition be; but he still bears the same Respect to his People now, that
he did when he was on Earth: for indeed he there Lives and Acts upon the
account of Believers, so says the Apostle, He appears in the presence of God
for us, Heb. 9.24.

Does God, O Believing Soul, by Diseases and Distempers upon thy outward Man,
cause thy Beauty and Comeliness to consume and wither: has long and tedious
Sicknesses almost wasted and destroyed thy Body? and by all art thou brought so
low that thou despairest of Life? Does Death seem to be written upon all thy
helps to Life? And do all the means that are used for thy Recovery, seem rather
to further thy Dissolution, than any way to hinder it? Why, yet fear not Death,
but Remember as God has Glorified and highly Exalted Jesus Christ, whose Form
and Visage as the Prophet speaks, was marred more than any Man's; so he will
Exalt thee also, not to an Equality of Glory with Christ, for in Heaven he
shall be the Light and the Glory of it, but yet there shall be some likeness
and Conformity in all the Members of Christ, unto him who is their Head. Fear
not therefore, O Christian, the worst that Death, or the Grave can do unto
thee, for assure thy self as because he lives, Believers shall live also, so
where he lives there Believers shall live also.

Thirdly, Another Consideration for the removal of the fear of Death, is
frequent Meditation of the Happiness of the Soul in Death. and of the
Resurrection of the Body after Death. As for the Happiness of the Souls of
Believers in death, it is exceeding great, the Body at present suffers loss,
for though once it was an excellent Fabric, the Workmanship of God's hands,
yet being forsaken by the Soul, it is become loathsome, and turns to Corruption
and rottenness; so says the Wise Man, The Body returns to the dust from whence
it was taken; there to consume and moulder away; this is the State of Man's
Body in Death, procured by Sin, and inflicted by God: But now for the Soul that
returns to God that gave it, either to partake of Eternal Blessedness, or to
receive Eternal Punishments. Now that the Happiness of Believers in their Souls
is great at Death, will appear, if we consider, either the Evils they are freed
from, or the Blessedness they attain unto; as for the Evils that accompany our
present State in this Life, Death frees Believers from them all at once; during
this Mortal Life indeed, Sufferings are annexed to the State of a Christian, as
a necessary Appendix to his very Being, for such is our condition while we are
here, that Afflictions are almost become as needful for the Soul, as Food and
Raiment is for the Body, therefore says the Apostle, if need be you are in
heaviness through manifold Tribulations, 1 Pet. 1.6. God sees it needful that
Afflictions should be, and in his Wisdom and Mercy he proportions the
Afflictions of his People to their necessities. This Life is a Life of
Suffering unto the People of God, it is their appointed Path and Way through
which they must walk to Heaven; therefore says the Apostle, We must through
many Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God. It is appointed for us so to
do. And indeed, as Job speaks, Man is born to trouble as the sparks flyupward;
he comes into the World crying, and all the rest of his time between the Cradle
and the Grave he is not much Happier; for his Life is made up of Sin and
Suffering; the Evil of Sin and the Evil of Suffering: there is a kind of a
continual Chaining or Linking together of one Misery or Affliction to another;
a mixture of Pain and Sorrow, or Succession of Evils and Troubles, that runs
through all his days; as one Wave falls upon the neck of another, so one Evil
is no sooner gone, but another comes in its room. One depth as the Psalmist
speaks, calls upon another. Floods and Storms of Miseries and Afflictions daily
pass over our heads. And if Troubles and Afflictions come not of themselves,
nor are caused by others, we can Mint and Coin them our selves by our Sins. Our
Lord tells us, That sufficient to the day, that is to every day are the Evils
and Troubles thereof; but as if they were not enough, we can create Troubles to
our selves before hand, and Anticipate in our Fancies and Apprehensions for our
greater Vexation and Trouble, Evils that are to come, though we know not
whether we our selves shall live till they come. And herein we are more cruel
to our selves, than the Devil is to himself, for that Evil Spirit cares not to
be Tormented before his time; whereas we antidate, and bring Evils that are at
a distance from us nearer to us by unquiet Apprehensions, and sinful
distracting Vexations entertained in our minds; and so the fears of Miseries to
come, make us far more miserable, than when those miseries are come upon us,
and by the Apprehension of an imaginary Evil, we make it become a real
Affliction and an unfeigned Torment to us in our resentment of it. Thus Sin and
Sorrow, Afflictions and Temptations divide our days and time, while we are
here, until Death comes for a Believers relief, and then there shall be an end
put to all his Sorrows and Sufferings, because there shall be an end of
Sinning. After Death there shall be no Cries nor Tears under any Miseries or
Afflictions, no fears of future Evils, nor no grief for past sins the causes of
them, no Poverty or Distress shall come near that Holy place, the Habitation of
Holy Souls; all the Inhabitants there are become Kings, possessed of Riches and
Glory without value. Fear not therefore, O dying Believer, whose Soul by Death
is getting free from thy Body; for thou art but removing from Earth to Heaven,
where thou shall instantly be with thy dear Lord and Savior; thou art but
going to thy God and Father, and the Father of Spirits, to visit those Mansions
of Glory that are there prepared for thee: Cheerfully therefore, take thy leave
of thy Body, and let it know that thou art taking thy flight to Heaven, during
the time that it shall sleep in the dust of the Grave until the morning of the
Resurrection, where thou shall be out of the reach of all Afflictions, and
Sorrows, and where thou can not be endangered by sin, the Tempter, or any of
his Temptations.

And concerning the Resurrection of the Body, it is not only one of the most
Excellent Mysteries of the Christian Religion, but it is also one of its
Glorious Advantages. It is that which the Heathens with all their deep
Reasonings, could never attain to the understanding of; but though Humane
Reason be blind and cannot find out this Glorious Mystery, yet we who are
Christians, have the sure and certain Knowledge of it discovered to us by
Divine Revelation; and when Reason is once savingly enlightened from above, O
how the Justice and necessity of the future Resurrection of the Body, is not
only acknowledged, but admired. I confess when a Believer is cast upon his
Deathbed, and his Soul ready to take its leave of the Body in its passage unto
Heaven, it is no small cause of Joy and rejoicing, to consider that as soon as
it has cast off its Earthly Tabernacle, it shall be immediately admitted into
the Glorious Presence of God himself, where it shall view and contemplate his
Face with infinite and unspeakable delight and satisfaction. But yet that Holy
Joy and that Heavenly Sweetness, which sometimes is so Powerful that it
Ravisheth the Soul of a Believer on a Deathbed, whilst it Contemplates that
Happiness to which it is going; may be disturbed and imbittered by the
Consideration of the poor Bodies being cast into the Earth, there to become a
Feast for Worms to feed upon. But be not troubled at this, O Believing Soul;
for this seeming Destruction of thy Body shall not be Eternal, though it fall
into the Grave by Death, where it seems at present to be lost and forgotten,
yet shall it have a certain Resurrection, and then the Ignominy and Disgrace
under which it lay in the Grave shall appear, not to have been so great, as its
Resurection out of it shall appear Glorious: for it is sown in Corruption, but
it is raised in Incorruption; it is Sown in dishonor, but it is raised in
Glory; it is Sown in weakness, it is raised in Power; it is Sown a Natural
Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body. in 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. Fear not therefore O
Believing Soul, but commit thy Body with Confidence unto the Earth, and let thy
Heart rejoice, let thy Tongue be glad, and let thy Flesh rest in the hopes of a
blessed Resurrection; for assure thy self thy Body shall not always lie rotting
in the Grave, neither shall in there see Corruption for ever; but there shall
come a time, when God shall show it the path of Life again; when thy Soul shall
descend from Heaven to assume its new raised body out of the Grave, to become a
most glorious Body, even like unto the glorious Body of Jesus Christ, being
made more spiritual, and so more suitable to the Nature and Operations of the
Soul, that it may become a fit Partner with it, in the Blessedness and
Happiness of Heaven for evermore.

Fourthly, Consider the Familiarity that Believers have expressed toward
Death. Ordinarily indeed Men put death into such ugly shapes, and represent it
to themselves under such terrible and afrighting forms, that they pass their
lives under slavery and bondage through the fears of it all their days. The
visage of Death appears so grim and full of horror to the minds of some, that
the serious forethoughts of it, seem to them to be a tormenting them before
their time. O how vastly different are the thoughts of a wicked and a godly man
concerning Death and the Grave! the one looks upon death as full of Dread and
Horror, the other looks upon it as a Messenger of Peace and Joy; and how can
it be otherwise? For to the wicked it comes as a dreadful Enemy, armed with the
wrath of an angry God, which burns to the lowest Hell: But to the Godly, it
comes as a peaceable, loving Friend, sent with Tidings of Peace and
Reconciliation, from him who is the God of Peace and Love. Natural fear of
Death in a wicked Man is great; but when natural fear is increased by guilt
lying upon the Conscience, and staring a Sinner in the face; Oh what dismal
Horror and Confusion must seize upon such a Soul under the Apprehensions of
Death? Well may such a one look upon the Grave as a Dungeon, and Death as Hell
it self, an awakened Conscience representing to his view nothing but the Fiends
and Furies of that Infernal Pit, that wait to be the Executioners of the Wrath
and Vengeance of the great God upon him, in the Woes and Miseries of
everlasting Burnings. Who wonders therefore to hear such an one crying out upon
a Deathbed with Horror and Anguish of Soul, Oh I am so sick I cannot live,
and yet I am so sinful I dare not die, and yet die I must! Oh would to God,
that the serious Thoughts of these things might be laid to heart by all profane
Sinners? What a happy means might it possibly be, to prevent the Horrors and
Consternation of Soul in many upon a Deathbed? But if Sinners cannot bear the
Thoughts of these things in their Minds now, for fear of Distraction; how will
they bear the sight and presence of them then? If the thinking and speaking of
them now be dreadful, the feeling of them will be far more tormenting.

But now a godly Man thinks and speaks of death after another manner; for if he
thinks and speaks of death as a godly Man may and ought to do; he is so far
from being terrified with the thoughts of it, that he thinks of it comfortably,
speaks of it familiarly. As it was wont to be the speech of a very Holy Person,
now with God, who was pretty well stricken in years, I hope it will not be long
before I shall be in Heaven; for few live above sixty or seventy years, and I
am now a good many above fifty; certainly therefore it cannot be long before I
shall die: Thus this Holy Soul, being desirous of death, did use delightfully
to reckon how little time there was to pass between it and Heaven, and with a
holy longing of Soul reaching after death, as one that was troubled that it was
so long a coming. Thus certainly did holy Job look upon death, not as an Enemy,
nor yet barely as a Stranger; but as one of his Friends, whom he was well
acquainted with, took a kind of Deligh and Contentment in it: See with what an
unusual, but yet sweet and familiar manner, he salutes and welcomes death, and
all its Retinue, in Job 17.14. I have said to Corruption, thou art my Father;
and to the Worm, thou art my Mother and Sister. The Holy Man makes no more of
Death and the Grave, than as if he were going to be embraced by a compassionate
Father, or a tenderhearted Mother, or Sister, whose Bowels were full of love
and pity to him. Thus St. Paul also speaks of Death, as that which he was daily
familiar with, being in Deaths often, frequently thinking thereof; for said he,
I die daily; Thoughts of Death was that which he accustomed himself unto, and
that was one Cause why he was so willing to embrace it. And thus it should be
with all of us, were our hearts rightly affected, and we so familiarly
acquainted with death as we ought: Those of us who have the most lively Faith,
would not only, not be afraid of death, but we should even court it, as that
which is better than life.

But I would not here discourage any weak Believer; for I dare not say, that
they are no true Believers, who are not come up to this frame of Soul. Though
it is true Grace is the same in all Believers, one Believer has the same that
another Believer has; yet all that are Believers do not attain to the same
degrees of Grace. There are some, and it is their sin, and ought to be their
Humiliation, that Death and they are little acquainted, they seldom descend
into the Grave by frequent Meditations of their Mortality, they look not into
the Pit out of which at first they were taken, and into which they are shortly
to return; now their comfort, in the thoughts of death is little, if any at
all, because death and they are such Strangers to one another: These may be
true Believers, but they are weak and faulty. But now others there are, who are
so advanced in Grace above their Brethren, that by a constant Familiarity with
death, are so composed in their Spirits, that they fear it not, nay they
rejoice in the thoughts of it; not because they think they shall not taste of
death, for they know that death will overtake them as well as others; they are
sensible that the time of their departure draws nearer and nearer daily: These
things they believe, but they do not afflict themselves therewith, so well are
they acquainted with death, both in the Nature and in the Effects of it. And
were they to die presently, this would not much trouble them; for they know the
bitterness of death is past, though death it self be not; the Gall and the
Wormwood is taken out, Christ has been there before them; and therefore the
sting of death which is sin is gone, the dangers, yea and the difficulties also
in dying are removed out of the way: This they believe, and therefore they are
not afraid, though by death they descend through the Grave into Heaven; for
their Jesus, their Savior is there; and they know that till they die, where he
is they cannot be; wherefore they say, though we die, nay therefore will we
die, that we may see him.

Would thou therefore, O weak Believer, attain unto this sweet frame of
Spirit, accustom thy self then to a holy familiarity with death, conceive of it
under the fairest and easiest Notions; this is that the Spirit of God in
Scripture delights in; when it speaks of death with respect to the People of
God, it always makes use of the most comfortable Expressions to represent it to
them by. So sweetly is death enameled, and so richly is it clothed in the
holy Language, that it seems to have a kind of Luster and Beauty upon it, to
draw the Hearts and Affections of Believers to be desirous of it. Look a little
therefore, O Believer, into the Sacred Oracles, and see how the Spirit of God
teaches us to cloth Death with delightful Expressions; sometimes it is called
an undressing or uncloathing: And what Man that has worn a Suit of Clothes
till it is become filthy and nasty, would not be glad to put off his old filthy
Garments, that he might put on Change of Raiment? And why should not a
Christian be willing to lay down the Earthly House of his Tabernacle, though it
be in the Dust of the Grave, that he may be clothed upon with his House which
is from Heaven? Sometimes Death is compared to Rest; they shall rest in their
Beds, says the Prophet: and Job speaking of the state of Man in death, tells
us, there the weary are at rest. Now when a Man has wrought hard, and taken
great pains and labor all the Day, how desirous is he to go to Bed and take
his Rest? And is not Death the same to thee, O Christian? Does not the Spirit
of God call it so! Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest
from their labors. And surely there is no rest like to that rest that a
Christian obtains after his spiritual labors and conflicts with Sin, Satan,
the World, and his own evil Heart; when the Soul is set free from the Body, and
takes its flight at once from all these into the Bosom of God, that place of
Rest and Happiness which remains for the People of God. As there is no Yoke
like unto the Yoke of Christ, when a Christian suffers for him, for it is a
Yoke lined with Love; My Yoke, says he, is easy, and my Burden is light. So
there is no Rest and Happiness like that which is with Christ; for the same
Happiness that he enjoys, his Children and Servants enjoy also. Sometimes death
is called a Sleep; so says our Lord, our Friend Lazarus sleeps, it is spoken
of his death; now who of us, when the day is spent, and the night has
overtaken us, is afraid to go to bed and sleep? And why then should a
Christian, when his Days are finished, and the Night of Sickness is come upon
him, be afraid to fall asleep, though he sleep the sleep of Death? By such
Considerations as these, and the like, that the Scripture holds forth to us,
Christians should endeavor to allay the bitterness, beautify the deformity,
blunt the edge, and take out the sting of death; that all hard thoughts of it
might be buried, and instead thereof there might grow up a sweet Familiarity
and Acquaintance between them and death; Oh how would this facilitate the work
of dying, and cause holy Souls to exult with joy and rejoicing when death is
approaching toward them.

And here I cannot but make a little Digression to reason the Case with some
weak Believers, whose unwillingness to die is very great, because their fears
of death are so many. But why should the fears of Death so amaze and terrify
thee, O weak Believer? Have thou not the same Grace in thee with others? Have
thou not the same Faith, the same Hope, the same Love, acting and working in
thee? Do thou not serve the same Lord? Have thou not the same God for thy
Father, the same Jesus for thy Savior, the same Spirit of Consolation for thy
Comforter? Art thou not going to the same Heaven? nay art thou not going to the
same Heaven, in the same way, that all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
Saints of God in all Ages have gone before thee? Death was the Gate through
which they all entered into Heaven; and why then should thou be so unwilling
to go to Heaven in the same way? Oh how unlike to Christians do they show
themselves, who are so loath to die, that they will not come, but must be
dragged to the Grave, yea to the very thoughts of Death? Oh how unsuitable is
this Temper to those who desire that God's Wills may be done, who profess
themselves to be Strangers and Pilgrims here upon Earth, and to look upon
Heaven as their Country and their Fathers House? The life of a Christian should
be a life of Faith; now the Excellency of the Life of Faith in a Believer with
relation unto Death, lies in this, that it makes him not only submissive, but
cheerfully to come to that to which another must be dragged by force, I mean
Death and the Grave. To a Believer, when his Faith is on the wing, Life (as St.
Paul says of his) is not dear, and Death, (as he speaks of his) is desired. It
was as hard to make St. Paul patient, when he thought of living, as to make
another patient, when he thinks of dying; a most sweet and Blessed Frame of
Spirit, but where is it to be found now? how rarely is it be to seen? the most
of Men, shall I say, nay, the most of Professors; and would to God there were
not just cause to complain and say, whom we hope are real Christians, their
Hearts and Affections are so much set upon the World, even as if their Portion
were not in Heaven, but they themselves were among the Number of those whose
Names are written in the Earth. The Lord humble us, that so much of this Evil
frame of Spirit is to be seen in the best of God's Children; as appears by
their backwardness and unwillingness to die. O Christians, if Jesus Christ had
gone as unwillingly to Suffer and to Die for us; as we go to Pray to him, and
to hear from him, not to say as unwillingly as we go to die, that we may enjoy
him, what had become of our Salvation? but blessed be God he did not. And
surely Christians, if it was Christ's desire to die for us as it was, it should
then be our longing to live with him, though it be by Dying. Oh what a strange
unseemly and unbecoming thing is it, for a Christian to hear his Savior crying
out, I have a Baptism to be baptized withal, though it was the Baptism of his
bloody Death and Sufferings, and oh, how am I straightened till it be
accomplished? And that a Christian, reflecting upon the thoughts of his own
Death, should say, I have a Baptism to be baptized withal, though not a Baptism
of a bloody Death, by the hands of Violence; but the Baptism of an easy,
quiet, and peaceable Death; and how am I straightened and full of fears lest it
should be accomplished? Certainly Christians, a willingness in Christ to die
for us, that we might live by him, should cause in us a willingness to die that
we might live with him.

Would to God, O Christian Reader, that what has been said, might be a means
to work in my self and thee, not only a readiness and fitness for Death, though
that is very good, and that in which the safety of a Christian lies; and happy
are they that have gone so far, for Heaven is sure to them whether they know it
or not: but Oh that we might go further, that Grace might attain to a greater
Perfection in us, even that we might come to a Holy willingness and desire, yea
to a Holy-longing of Soul after Death. This is that Holy covetousness of Soul
that God allows of. There are two things wherein a Christian cannot be too
insatiable in his desires after them, one is, that he may Honor God, the other
is, that he may enjoy God; that he may honor God as much as he can while he is
on Earth, and that he may enjoy God as soon as it may be in Heaven; this is the
most commendable and desirable life, and this will end in the most Happy and
Comfortable Death. Death did I say, nay it is Life in Death; it is Death
swallowed up of Life, even in a Life of unconceivable Glory and Happiness, in
the enjoyment of that God who is all Life, all Love, all Peace, all Joy, and
all Happiness, in the utmost and highest Perfection.

I am sensible I have made a Digression in this particular, but the desire I
had, Christian Reader, to stir up my own Soul and thine also, unto a Duty so
full of Sweetness and Delight, has put me upon it. I now go on to what yet
remains.

Having laid down some Consolations against the fear of Death in general; I
shall in the next place endeavor to propound some Considerations for the
support of Christians under the loss of Friends and Relations in particular,
which unto many is a sore Trial, and hard to be born: for it is as common for
Christians to exceed in their Grief for their dead Friends and Relations, as it
is to exceed in their Love and Delight in their living Friends and Relations;
and in both it is very hard for Christians to keep their Passions and
Affections within due bounds. The blessed Apostle therefore gives us Excellent
Counsel how we should carry our selves under the enjoyment of Relations and
outward Comforts whilst we have them; and how we should bear up under the loss
of them, when God takes them away from us; we have the Direction for both, 1
Cor. 7.29. If we have Relations or Worldly Enjoyments, why then, says he,
Rejoice in them as if you rejoiced not. If you want them, or have lost them,
then, says he, weep for them as if you wept not: and he lays down a very cogent
reason for what he says; for the time is short and the World is passing away,
and so are you and all your Relations and Comforts passing away with it. As if
the Apostle had said, if God has Blessed you with dear and sweet Relations,
with pleasant and delightful Comforts; yet consider it is but a little time
that you shall enjoy them; they and you shall quickly part again, therefore
rejoice in them as if you rejoiced not. And if God has seen good to take away
those sweet Pledges of his Love, and once the Objects of your Delight and Joy,
do not much Afflict your selves under the loss of them; for it is but a little
while that you shall continue here without them, the time is short, and the
World is passing away, and ere long it will not be; yea, you your selves are
passing away with it, yea before it also; weep therefore as if you wept not:
these things are not your great Concerns, your Happiness lies not in the
Enjoyment of them, nor your Misery in the loss of them; but it lies in
something higher, and of greater Worth and Excellency, even in God himself;
it is the Enjoyment of him only that can make a Soul happy, and the loss of him
only that can make it miserable. Therefore with a Holy Moderation and
Indifferency of Affection, carry your selves continually in every condition.

Now before I proceed to lay down particular Consolatory Directions for the
support of Christians under the loss of Friends and Relations, I must here put
in a double caution which Christians must carefully observe. The one is, that
they despise not the Chastening of the Lord; the other is, that they faint not
under them: these are two extremes, the Apostle exhorts Christians to be aware
of, and they are both comprehended in Hebrews 12.5. My Son despise not thou the
Chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art Rebuked of him. When God
lays his Correcting hand upon us, for any to be so bold as to say, they do not
regard it, let God take all if he will; must my Estate go? I care not if it
does; will God take away my Children or Relations, let them die; thus to make
light of the hand of God, is to despise the Chastening of the Lord, and God
will not long bear it, nor with us for it. But then there is another Extreme
that we must take heed of under Affliction, and that is fainting; If when Goods
are taken away, the Hearts of those that enjoy them are taken away also, and
they sink into despondency and distrust. If when Children die the Spirits of
Parents die too, this is fainting under the Rod. A Christian now must walk in
the middle way between both these Extremes, neither carelessly to despise, nor
despairingly to faint under the Chastisements of the Lord.

But though Christians must neither despise the hand of God when it is lifted
up against them, nor yet faint under it, yet they ought to be sensible of it;
for it is a most unbecoming temper in any Christian not to tremble when God
smites him. Weep and Mourn we may under Affliction; God allows Tears to flow
from our Eyes, and Sorrow in our Hearts under the loss of Friends and
Relations. Grief in such cases doubtless is very Lawful. To be without Natural
Affections is a Heathenish sin. Romans 1.29. It is our Duty to take notice of
every twig of God's Rod. Not to be troubled when the hand of God has made a
breach upon us is our sin. To be above Passions is the Happiness of Heaven, and
to rectify Passions, is much of our Happiness on Earth. To be without Natural
Affections, is to be below a Man, but to Order and Manage them aright, is the
Perfection of a Christian.

Having premised this, I now proceed to lay down some Consolatory Directions
for the support of Christians, under the loss of Friends and Relations, which
may be very useful also in the undergoing any other Affliction whatsoever; and
I shall reduce them all unto these particular heads, as some Consider ations
relating unto God the Author of our Afflictions. Some relating to our selves
that are the Subjects of Afflictions. And some relating to the Afflictions
themselves. First, some Considerations relating unto God the Author of our
Afflictions. And here consider,

First, God has more right to and in all our Friends, and Relations than we
our selves have. He is Lord of all, so great is his Dominion and Sovereignty
over all, that what he can do by Might, he may do by Right. He is not
accountable unto any, as we are nor is he tied by any Rule or Law, but his own
Will in any of his Actings: And therefore if God take away any of our Friends
and Relations, it is no more than what he may do; and if God do no more than
when he may do, who are we that we should Complain? When God gives us Relations
or Comforts for our use and benefit, he still keeps the right to them in his
own bands, and when he lets us have the Possession of them for a time, he keeps
the Propriety to himself. If God gives us Comforts it is an Act of Bounty, but
when he takes them away it is an Act of Justice; for he is a Sovereign Lord in
both. God cannot injure his Creatures; his Sovereignty and Supremacy is enough
to bear him out, whatever he does with or to them. Have thou lost a dear
Husband, a loving Wife, or a dutiful Child? Let that Right God has in them,
and the Sovereignty he has over thee and them, quiet thy Spirit under all. It
was so with David, Psalm. 39.2. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou,
Lord. did it.

Secondly, Consider whatever dear Relations God has taken from thee, he is
able to make thee a Recompense with great advantage, and that in the same kind,
if he see it good for thee. Say not therefore concerning thy dead Friends and
Relations; what shall I do for those sweet Refreshments, and those Comfortable
Delights, that once I enjoyed in them, but Death has now spoiled me of all;
for God is able to give thee much more, than what was in all these. God is not
as Isaac that had but one Blessing. Our Heavenly Father has all Blessings at
his Command: what a sweet Title is that which the Apostle gives unto God for
the Comfort of all Believers, 2 Cor. 1.3. The Father of Mercies, and the God of
all Comfort and Consolation Friends, Relations with all the Comforts and
Delights belonging to them, are at his Command, and he can speak them into
being for your Support and Comfore when he pleases. If God take away a Mercy
from any of his People, usually he gives them another in the room of it, and
many times a better. God smote David's Child begotten in Adultry, and David
Fasts and Prays for the life of it, and notwithstanding this, the Child died:
but in a little time God gave him another, a Solomon, a Jedidiab one that was
beloved of the Lord, in his stead. God bestows many comfortable Enjoyments upon
his People in their passage through this World, to some he gives dear
Relations, to others he gives Estates, to some abundance of Health, to others
faithful and loving Friends: now these Comforts, are to continue but for a
while; and those of them that last longest, will consume away at length: and
when these Comforts are taken away, it seems to be a time of darkness and
sadness with the People of God; but if their Faith be active and vigorous, they
may support themselves with this, that God does not use to be long wanting to
the Comfort of his People that wait for him: David tells us as much, Psalm.
18.8. Thou Lord wilt light my Candle, the Lord my God shall enlighten my
darkness

Thirdly, Consider this, does God deny thee, or has he taken from thee some
Comforts which thou countest as great as any thou can enjoy as to outward
Blessings, yet has he left thee many still, and he has far better to bestow
upon thee, even such between which and them there is no comparison. It may be
thou want Posterity to bear up thy Name, when thou art dead and gone, and
thou criest out with Abraham, Lord what will thou give me seeing Igo Childless.
Is this thy Case, O Christian? why then consider, as you have not the Comfort
of enjoying of Children, so you have not the Care and Trouble of Educating and
bringing them up, nor the Grief and Vexation of their wicked lives, and
sometimes more wicked and untimely deaths; which is a constant trouble of Soul
unto many; which made a Holy Man once mournfully complain and say, It is better
to weep for tendead Children, than for one living Child. Little do you know
what a continual grief of Spirit and a constanr aching of heart, some Children
are unto their Parents. What a heart wounding was it to David, when he cries 2
Samuel 16.11. Behold my Son which came out of my Bowels, seeks my life. Oh
how many Children are there to whom the lives of their Parents are a burden?
who instead of Praying to God their Heavenly Father for their Parents, not only
think and wish it in their Hearts, but among their Profane Companions are not
ashamed to speak it with their Tongues, as I have heard of some, wickedly and
impiously desiring that they could invert that Petition of the Lord's Prayer,
and say of their Earthly Fathers what others say of their Heavenly Father, Our
Father which art in Heaven, longing for the Expiration of the life of those who
under God were the Instruments of conveying life unto them. Oh to what a
height of Impiety are such vile wretched Monsters come, for they deserve not
the Name of Children, who cannot be content to stay till God takes away their
Parents from them, but would themselves bury them as it were alive. And let not
any such think slightly to pass over their Sin, by saying, Why, we wish them no
ill, what hurt is it to wish them in Heaven, they cannot be in a better place?
It is true they cannot; but this does not excuse their wickedness, for
doubtless it is not so much their Parents Happiness in Heaven that they desire,
as that they might enjoy their Estates here upon Earth. But let all such wicked
Wretches know, that God will be sure to meet with them here or hereafter: And
if the Blessing of long Life be promised unto those that honor their Parents,
those then that desire the Death of their Parents, shall have cause to fear
their lives may be shortened; for surely of such wicked, (I had almost said)
blood-thirsty Wretches, it may be truly said, that they shall not live out half
their days. But this by the way.

But this is not my Case, may some say, God has not denied me Children or
Relations, but he has taken many of them from me, and such who were very
delightful to me, and this does much trouble me. But though God has taken some
from you, yet has he not left you more than he has taken? so it is sometimes:
But yet it frequently happens, that if God removes away one mercy from us,
presently we are so cast down, as if all our Enjoyments were gone; and we mourn
so excessively that we are become so blind, that we cannot behold the Mercies
God has left us, for the want of what he has taken from us. But why, O
Christian, art thou so unthankful to God, and so unkind to thy self, as to lose
the Comfort of all the other Mercies thou enjoyest, because God has taken away
one Mercy that thou want. Oh vile Ingratitude, how many thousands are there,
as good shall I say, nay better than you, whose whole Harvest of Comforts in
this World, is not a handful to the gleaning of those Comforts you still enjoy;
who in all their Lives never were Owners of such comfortable Enjoyments as you
now overlook in your grief and trouble, if not in your diseontent. But what
do thou mean, O Christian, by all this? What are the Mercies God has left
thee in possession, nothing worth? The Grave has swallowed up a Child, Death
has snatched away a Friend; but still thou have a Husband, it may be, or a
Wife, or Children; or if God has stripped thee of all these, yet he has left
thee a comfortable Estate to live upon, with health and strength to use and
enjoy it; or if this be gone also, have you not the Gospel, the Ordinances of
God; and if thou art a Believer, thou have an Interest in Christ, and in the
Covenant of Grace, and a Right and Title to all the Privileges belonging to
that Covenant, as Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conscience, and Hopes of eternal
Life? And what do thou faint and sink, as if all thy Comforts in this World,
and all thy Hopes of the World to come were dead and buried in one Grave
together? Beware of this, O ye mourning, afflicted ones; for the Sin is great,
and so is the Danger that attends it, as might be showed at large; but I
forbear. Yet before I leave this Head, I shall add one thing more. You who have
lost the delight of your Eyes, and the joy of your hearts, as to outward
Comferts; yet remember God has far better to bestow upon you, even such as
transcend the love of Parents, or the joy of Children; I confess a dear
Husband, a loving Wife, a beloved Child, an affectionate Friend, these are very
great things when they stand by other Comforts and Enjoyments; but, Oh! what
poor, little, small things; nay nothings are they, when God shall set himself
by them, before a gracious Soul? And now that God is taking away these earthly
Comforts, who can tell, but that hereby he is making way for himself the King
of Glory to come into such a Soul, to communicate of himself and his Grace, in
a more sweet and sensible way and manner than ever he has done. And, as one
says, the Death of Children, Relations, and Friends, these dark and
uncomfortable Providence must cast up and prepare the way of the Lord,
removing them out of the heart, that himself may dwell there alone.

Fourthly, Under your Tears and Sorrows in the loss of Friends and Relations,
consider, What wrong has God done you by your Afflictions, that you so mourn
and complain? God has taken from you a dear Relation, from whom you expected
much Comfort; but God had a greater Interest in your Relation, than you had,
for all Souls are his; and will you dispute with him? Who had most Right to
dispose of your Relations, God or you? Your Relation, though never so dear to
you, was the work of his hands; and what, may not God do what he will with his
own? Suppose the Relation thou have lost, was a beloved Child, that you
nourished and bred up, and that with great pains and care, God has paid you
sufficiently for it, in the Loan of your Child so long; and now that your Child
is come to full Age, and to the Time appointed of the Father, may he not take
it home unto himself? Did you, or could you provide better for your Child than
God can? God gave your Child Life and Breath while it was with you, that it
might be a Comfort to you, and you enjoyed it longer than you deserved, or than
he promised you; and now that he is come and claims his Interest in it, it is
but a fitting and becoming thing that you should sit still and he satisfied in
his Will.

Secondly, Consider some Arguments in reference to our selves, for the
moderating of our Griefs and Sorrows under the loss of Friends and Relations:
And here consider,

First, Who or what are we, that we should be discontented or repine at the
dealings of the allwise God with us? Alas, if we reflect upon our Original,
what is it? Dust and Ashes, and out of thence formed by God to be his
Creatures; for it is he that has made us, and not we our selves; and this
shows our weakness and impotency: But this is not all, we are not only God's
Creatures, made by him, and depending upon him; but we are sinful Creatures
that have rebelled against him; the Posterity of Sinful and Apostate Parents,
that have lost our Primitive Beauty and Excellency, whereby we did bear the
Image and Resemblance of God in Holiness, which is the Glory of God himself;
and are run in Debt unto his Justice, more than we or all the Men on Earth;
yea, or all the Saints and Angels in Heaven are able to pay. This God to whom
we thus stand indebted, is become our great Benefactor, gives us all we enjoy,
maintains us continually at his own proper Cost and Charges; for we have
nothing but what we receive from Him; it is his Corn and Wine that feeds and
nourishes us, his Wool and Flax that covers our Nakedness; his Silver and Gold
that enricheth us, Hos. 2.8, 9. He framed us and fashioned us in the Womb, and
gave us all the Limbs and Parts of our Bodies, so that we were born neither
maimed nor monstrous; he endued us with Reason and Understanding; it is he that
is the God of our Health and Strength; our Peace, our Plenty, flow from his
Bounty and Goodness to us; yea, our very Lives and Beings are from him, for in
him, we live and move, and have our Beings. We are but Worms, and if he tread
upon any of us, he leaves us dead behind him. So infinitely below him are we,
that if we do that which is good, we cannot benefit him; and if we will venture
upon that which is evil, we cannot hurt him. Now the Contention is between this
great and mighty, yea Almighty God, the Creator and Governor of all Things and
Persons, and us poor, low, sinful Dust and Ashes, who shall have their Wills in
the disposing of our Friends and Relations, but his own Creatures, whether
God's Will shall stand or ours: We may pretend what we will to excuse our
selves; but the plain Truth of things lies in this Contest, whose will shall
take place, Gods, or ours; whether he, or we shall have the disposing of our
selves and ours: But it is in vain to contend with him; for as he will, so it
is fitting he should do with us and ours as he pleases, whether we will or no.
What says Elibu, Job 34.33. Should it be according to our Minds, he will
recompense, whether we refuse, or whether we choose. There is no good to be got
by contending with one that is so infinitely above us; our wisest way is to be
dumb and hold our Peace when God pleads with us by any Affliction. Does not God
do all things well? Do we not all stand amazed at that infinite Wisdom, by
which the Heavens and Earth, and all the Creatures in both were made, and by
which they are all governed and disposed? Doubtless there is nothing amiss in
his Administrations; he cannot be subject to any Error, who is Wisdom it self;
all his Works are perfect and good? Who date pretend to find fault with what
God does: Shall mortal Man be more wise than his Maker? Have you lost sweet and
lovely Children, or dear Yoke-fellows? Lay your hands upon your Mouths, be not
discontented, but acquiesce in what God has done, for he always does what is
best for his; at present they cannot see it, it may be, but they shall do
hereafter; and in the mean time it is their Duty to believe and to trust in
him. It is not for us to have the Keys of Life and Death to hang at our Girdle,
to let in and out at our Pleasure; Heaven then would be empty enough, for our
Friends should not go yet if we could help it; and our Enemies should never
come there if we could hinder them. Our Relations would then live too long, and
our Enemies would die too soon. But these things whatever we say or think to
the contrary, are ruled by an All wise Providence, to which we our selves and
all our Relation. are subjected: And it will never be well with us, till we can
resign up our selves, our Relations, and all our Comforts unto his wise
disposal, and say not our Wills, but thy Will, O Lord, be done.

Secondly, Consider, your weeping and mourning for the loss of your Friends and
Relations, is but a vain, vexatious thing; it is that which will do you no
good, but may do you much hurt. If a Bullock have the Yoke fastened upon him,
he may by struggling and striving make his Yoke gaul and vex him, but it does
not ease him at all thereby. The Case is so with thee, O Christian, God has
afflicted thee sorely, by taking away thy Yoke fellow, or thy Child; if thou will not bear it patiently, but frettest and murmurest against God, all that
thou gettest hereby, is the more pain and smart, but thou do not help or ease
thy self in the least: What our Lord says of our caring for the things of this
life, is true in grieving for the losses we sustain in this life; Which of you,
says he, by taking thought, can add one Cubit to his Stature? Matthew. 6.27.
Cares may break our hearts, and shorten our days, but they cannot add to our
Stature: So Sorrows under losses may break our Rest, and rend our hearts; yea,
they may hasten our death; for worldly Sorrow causes death, but it cannot
repair our losses nor help us under them. When the Hand of God is upon any of
our Relations, by Sicknesses and Distempers, and the purpose of God in
reference unto their Death is unknown to us. There is now room for Fasting and
Prayer, that the Evil threatened and feared may not come upon us; Tears and
Cries unto God now have the nature and use of means to prevent an Affliction
from coming upon us: But when once the purpose of God is manifested, and the
fatal stroke is given, it is the vainest thing in the World to fret and vex our
selves because our Relations are dead. Holy David therefore, when God had
smitten his Child with Sickness, being desirous of its life, he betakes himself
to Fasting and Prayer unto God, 2 Samuel 12. and 22. For, says he, who can tell
whether God will be gracious to me, that the Child may live. But when once God
had signified his Will in the Death of the Child; now, says he, that it is
dead, wherefore should I fast? It is in vain for me to fast and pray now, Can I
bring it back again? No, I cannot. I shall go to it, but it shall not return to
me. But this is not all; our mourning and weeping for our departed Friends and
Relations is not only in vain, that is, it does us no good, but it many times
does much hurt; for God is not glorified, but dishonored by our repining at
his Providence; but we our selves also are injured, for hereby we are rendered
unfit for his Service, both in our general and particular Callings, as we are
Men, and much more as we are Christians. Cast not therefore away your Tears and
Sorrows upon that which will not benefit you, but be to your loss and damage.
Turn the stream of your Tears into a right Chanel, there is use enough for
them, even for your living, and it may be lively Sins, and not for your dead
Relations.

Thirdly, You that are so prone to grieve and mourn under the loss of your
Relations, consider you your selves are making haste after them. You are almost
ready to go off the Stage of this World, and would you have your Relations
live? It is not likely that we shall bear them Company long here; when a few
days more are past and gone, we our selves shall go whence we shall not return.
It is but a little while, and our Places and Relations that have known us here,
shall know us again no more for ever. We are marching on, not fair and softly,
but very swiftly in the same Road wherein our dead and lamented Friends and
Relations once walked, treading out the marks of their Footsteps while they
lived here. We are almost ready to lie down and rot with them in the same
Grave; we dwell in Houses of Clay which begin to crack; and though we make a
shift to daub and patch them up for a while, yet will they soon tumble down
into the Dust, do what we can. Your dead Relations, that you are now mourning
for, are gone but a little before you, and you will soon be with them; as you
come not into the World together, so you must not go out together; it is God's
Will it should be so, and who can resist it? Nay, it is God's Will it should be
so, and we must acquiesce in it; for if we love God, we must deny him nothing
that he requires; and if we deny not our selves in our dearest Relations for
him, we cannot be his Disciples.

Thirdly, I shall now lay down some consolatory Considerations, in reference to
the Affliction it self, that any lie under by reason of the loss of Friends and
Relations. And here consider,

First, There must be a time when you and your Relations must part, and why not
now? It is fit we should wait upon God for the bestowing of a Mercy, and that
we should be Patient when God takes away a Mercy; but it is not fit we should
know or choose the times when God will give a Mercy, or when he will take it
away. Every thing is Beautiful in its Season, says the Wise Man, and God knows
when is the best time for us both to enjoy a Mercy and to be Exercised with an
Affliction. He is infinite in Wisdom and cannot be guilty of any mistake in any
kind whatever. Now this All-knowing Infinitely Wise God thinks this the best
time for thee to be without thy Child, to want thy Relations; thou can not at
present see and understand the Work of God, and that this Affliction that is
now come upon thee, is come in the best and fittest time and Season. I may here
say to you what Christ did to Peter, when he was going to wash his Feet, John
13.7. What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know hereafter. So say I,
what God is now doing with thee, and what he intends by this Affliction thou
know not now, but thou may know hereafter, and be able to say, not only
that it was good for thee that thou were Afflicted but that it was good for
thee that at such a time and in such a manner thou were Afflicted, by the loss
of such a Child, or such a Relation, God hereby Sanctifying the Affliction, not
only for thy Conviction of, and Humiliation for sin, the Evil whereof thou
never were asquainted with before; but for the discovery of himself in Jesus
Christ, and the Excellency and Beauty of Grace and Holiness unto thy Soul, both
which thou were a Stranger to as to any Sanctifying and saving knowledge of
them; whereby much sin from that time has been prevented in thee, and much
Comfort in the ways of Holiness and Obedience from that time has been
experienced by thee. Let God therefore for the time to come have not only the
sorting of thy Mercies and thy Afflictions; that is, to bestow what Mercies he
thinks best, on thee, or what Afflictions he thinks meet upon thee, as to the
kind of them; but let him also have the timing of our Mercies and of our
Afflictions, that is, when is the fittest time for us to enjoy Mercies, and
when is the fittest time for us to be without them: for certainly he that is
the Lord of Time is the best Judge of Time; and in nothing do we more discover
our Folly and Rashness, than in presuming to fix the times, either of our
Mercies, or of our Afflictions. Leave therefore, O Christian, the timeing both
of the one and of the other unto him, whose Works are all Beautiful in their
Season.

Secondly, Consider you that grieve so under the loss of Friends and Relations,
your Condition might have been worse. Others have felt more, and you deserve
worse. You have lost a beloved Child, or a dear Friend and Relation, and you
Mourn as one that will not be Comforted; but what is your loss unto others?
Aaron lost two Sons at one time, and that by a strange Judgment from God, Fire
coming down from Heaven in an extraordinary manner and consumed them, and yet
Aaron held his Peace. Job lost all his Children suddenly in one day, in an
unusual manner, and yet Job does not murmur, but blesses God, the Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. The Great
God might have taken away all thy Children, all thy Relations and Friends.
Estate, Health; yea, thy Life also. Whatever thou enjoyest it is above thy
desert, how mean and poor soever it be. Know, O Christian, God exacteth of thee
far less than what thine Iniquities do deserve. Nothing but Hell and Damnation
answers to the merit of sin. Wherefore then should a living man complain? shall
he murmur and repine because he lies under some Temporal Affliction, who might
justly be sent unto Eternal Torments, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is
not quenched? Oh instead of Complaining it is so bad with you, be thankful it
is no worse: Let your loss in your Friends and Relations be what it will, let
your Condition be as bad as it can be, yet is it better with you than it would
be in Hell, whither your sins deserve God should have sent you, who has only
laid this gentle Affliction upon you, under which you now groan.

Thirdly, Consider your Friends and Relations, that you grieve and mourn so
for; if they were good, they are not lost; they are but gone before, taken from
the evil to come. Thy Friend or Relation whose loss thou bewailest, was either
God's Friend or not, if he was God's Friend as well as thine, why should not
God have his Company rather than you? and if God has him, thou can not say
he is lost; no he is safe, only he has got the start of thee, being got to
Heaven before thee; and surely, if thou lovedst him, as by thy mourning thou
pretendest to do, thou can not grieve because he is Happy. The World is not
so pleasant a place, neither have the Godly in any Age found it so; that any of
us should so eagerly desire it, either for our selves or our Friends. Happy are
they that are got safe out of it into Glory. If thy Friend for whom thou now
grievest was bad, thou should have mourned for him whilst he was here on
Earth, when by thy mourning thou might have made him better; then was the
proper, yea the only time for thy Prayers and Tears to have done him any good;
but now that he is gone, though thou should weep and mourn never so much, it
is altogether in vain and unprofitable. But if thy Friend were a good Man, to
grieve for his departure, seems to argue that we have but hard, or doubtful and
misgiving thoughts concerning him; for how can we mourn for one that is Happy?
besides thy Friend is but taken from the Evil to come. The Grave becomes a
hiding place for some, and God sees it better for them that they should be
under ground than above ground in such evil days; that they may not behold the
Evil that is like to come upon others, so says the Prophet, The Righteous are
taken away from the evil to come, and certainly it is far better for us to
desire to go to them, that we may partake of their Happiness, than to wish that
they should come to us to partake of our Miseries.

Fourthly, Grieve not immoderately for thy dead Friends and Relations, for
there is hope of their Resurrection, and Eternal Happiness. It is for them to
mourn without measure, who mourn without hope, which no Christian should do. We
are not to look upon the dead, because at present they are turned to Corruption
and Rottenness, as a lost Generation of Men; for Death has not, nor cannot
Annihilliate and destroy them. A Believer may say of his dead Friends and
Relations, what the Disciples said unto Christ when he told them, Our Friend
Lazarus sleeps. Lord say they, if he sleep be shall do well, John 11.12. the
same may Believers say of their Friends and Relations that are asleep in their
Graves, they shall do well, for they shall awake again: so says the Church,
Isaiah 26.19. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the
dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the dead. Now we do not use to weep
and mourn for our Friends and Relations when they lie down at night to take a
short sleep in their Beds, because we know they use to awake and arise again in
the morning: And why then should we be grieved and troubled, when they come to
lie down in the dust; and make their Beds for a while in the Grave, sleeping
away time by Death until the morning of the Resurrection; when they shall as
surely, nay more surely awake and arise out of their Graves than they were
certain in the morning of any day to awake and arise out of their Beds? And
therefore the Apostle brings it in as a Cordial, for the support of Believers
under the loss of their Friends and Relations by Death, 1 Thessal. 4.13, 14. I
would not have you to be ignorant Brethren, concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not even as those that have no hope, for if we believe that
Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God
bring with him. And so he goes on proving the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and
conludes with this, so shall we be ever with the Lord; wherefore, says he,
Comfort one another with these words. When Believers die, though their Bodies
seem to perish in the Earth, yet even then, is their very dust precious in his
sight, for he takes care of it and preserves it in the Grave; and he will
certainly raise it again at the last day unto a most Glorious State of
Happiness; and even then at that instant, when their Souls leave their Bodies,
they ascend up into Heaven into the Presence and Enjoyment of God in Glory. As
our Savior therefore said unto his Disciples when he was going away from them
into Heaven, in John 14.28. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go unto
my Father. The same may dying Believers say unto their Friends and Relations
that they leave behind them, if ye loved us, ye would rejoice, because we are
going unto our God and Father; weep not therefore for us, but weep for your
selves, who are forbidden for a while to follow us unto that State of
Blessedness, which we are now a going to take Possession of for ever.

Now for a Conclusion of this Subject, I have but one thing more to add, which
may be an Argument of great force and strength to prevail upon the Spirits of
Christians, not only to make them willing and contented to die, but to stir up
in them a Holy longing of Soul after Death: and that is to consider the Saints
great gain and advantage by dying. Now here I shall not branch out this Head
into several particulars relating to the Happiness of Believers in Heaven
because I intend a particular Discourse of the Happiness thereof by it self;
all that I shall say now concerning the gain of Believers by Death, shall be
only in General. And so let all such know, that when they die, they shall be
perfectly freed from whatsoever is Evil and Afflictive; and shall have a
perfect Enjoyment of whatever is beneficial and good, they shall be perfectly
freed from whatsoever is Evil and Afflictive; there shall then be no more
sorrowing, or weeping, for Heaven, whither Death brings all Believers, is the
place of the Joy of their Lord, where Tears are wiped away from all Eyes, and
Sorrow from all Hearts; for thither the Ransomed of the Lord are come with
Songs upon their heads, and obtain Joy and Gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away, Isaiah 35, and the last. Where they live without fear, which
here makes the lives of many burdensome unto them; for all cause of fears are
there for ever abolished and taken away. There are no Deformities upon the Body
to render it Contemptible, nor no Reproaches upon the Name to make it
Scandalous; there is no Sickness or Distempers upon the outward Man, nor no
Desertions or Darkness upon the inward Man; there are no Temptations from Satan
to vex the Soul, nor no Weaknesses and Infirmities to annoy the Body; there is
no more Death or dying, but Life for evermore; Mortality is now swallowed up of
Life, Corruption has put on Incorruption, and Mortality has put on
Immortality, and Death and Hell are cast into the Lake of Fire, and which is
more than all this, there, that is in Heaven, we shall no more sin nor offend
God to all Eternity, Earth and Hell are the places both of sin and Suffering,
but Heaven is a place of perfect Joy and perfect Holiness; nothing enters in
there that is either Afflictive, Polluted, or Defiled. When Death parts Soul
and Body for a time, then Sin and the Soul part for ever. Here we are
continually sinning and offending of God, and it is the constant grief of a
Godly Man that he does so; here our Righteousnesses are no better than filthy
rags, and Grace it self has its defects; when we believe most strongly, we
must cry out, Lord, help our unbelief: but now in Heaven there are none, but
the Spirits of Just Men made perfect. In a word, there is nothing there, that
may in the least be an Allay or Diminution unto the Happiness of that blessed
State, that is there enjoyed to Eternity.

But this is not all, Death does not only free Believers from all that is Evil
and Afflictive, but it brings them to the perfect Enjoyment of whatever is
beneficial and good; Death being the means and way by which they enter into
Heaven, where Blessedness and Happiness is to be enjoyed in such fullness of
perfection, as exceeds not only our Apprebensions, but our Imaginations. For
there it is that the infinitely great and blessed God discovers himself in all
his Glory, to be enjoyed by the Saints as their Portion to Eternity. There it
is that they shall behold their once bleeding and dying, but now Glorified
Redeemer, Clothed in their own Nature; who loved them and washed them from
their sins in his own blood, who was dead but is alive, and now lives for ever
more, and because be lives, they shall live also. There they shall Enjoy that
which was the great desire of the Apostle, and theirs also to be with Christ,
which is best of all, and how much blessedness is included in those few words,
to be with Christ, the enjoyment of Heaven only where Christ is, can make known
to us. There it is that Believers fully understand the meaning of that Article
of our Christian Faith, even the Communion of Saints; here it was that they
placed their Delight in the Saints the Excellent ones of the Earth, and there
their Delight shall be in great measure in the Saints, some of the Excellent
ones of Heaven. There shall then be no mixture of sin and Corruption with our
Graces, which here is an Allay to the Luster and Brightness of them, but they
shall Shine forth in their full Glory and Beauty. Grace there shall be in its
full Perfection; nothing shall then be wanting in our Knowledge, nor any thing
imperfect in our Love, our Obedience shall then flow from us with all readiness
and cheerfulness of Soul, and our Joy and Delight in God shall not admit of the
least Diminution or Disturbance to Eternity. This, O Soul, is that in general
which the Happiness of Heaven is made up of, and to the Enjoyment of this
Happiness without Interruption or Cessation for ever, is that to which Death
brings all Believers. And surely if ever those words have any Truth in them,
they are here verified, so that a Saint may truly say, The lines are now fallen
to me in a pleasant place, I have a goodly Herit age. O Blessed and Glorious
State indeed! who is there that knows and believes this infinite unconceivable
Happiness, that would not willingly die to enjoy it? Unto which State of
Blessedness, God of his infinite Mercy bring us all to the Enjoyment of, for
the alone sake of Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.

