A true and Perfect RELATION OF THE Battle and Victory lately Obtained NEAR
LEWENTZ, Against Twenty five Thousand TURKS, TARTARS, AND MOLDAVIANS, By
General SOUCHES: As it was sent to His Imperial MAJESTY, Dated July 20. 1664.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Mabb, living at St. Paul's Wharff, 1664.

A True and Perfect Relation of the Battle and Victory, lately obtained near
Lewentz, as it was sent to His Imperial Majesty by General Souches.
Most Gracious Emperor, and Lord;
AFter that I had received your most gracious Command of the 9th. to watch my
advantage upon the Enemy about Newhawsel, I rose up from Tyrnaw,
notwithstanding my exceeding weakness of body, and gained so much strength from
the great zeal I had to increase the already won reputation of these Arms your
Imperial Majesty has been pleased to entrust me with; that I have been enabled
to perform my Obedience to your Imperial Majesty's most Gracious will in the
manner following:

I sent the bearer hereof Adjutant-General Gregory of Kleindienst to the Earl
of Buchheims at Comorra, to have his Advice in the proposed Design, and to
hasten withal the march of the Pergenish Hussars, and ordered likewise
Field-Marshal Lieutenant Van Heuster (the Enemy being marched away toward
Lewentz) to hasten to me day and night with his own Regiment, a Troop of his
Electoral Highness Palatines Guards, and five Companies of the Montevertian
Foot, for that I intended to relieve Lewentz. VVhereupon he came to the Leaguer
at Freystattle on the fifteenth, and the next day with six days Provision we
came to Neutra, where in five or six hours, our whole Army got over the River.
The same day I marched within a mile of S. Benedict, and at break of day set my
men in Order, and advanced toward the said place. In the mean time came news
that a thousand Tartars had passed the River Gran, and fallen on a Party of
three hundred Dutch and Hungarians, under Colonel Kohari; and the
Brandenburgish Lieutenant-Collonel of Horse, (Commanded the day before our
discamping out of Freystattle) and killed forty three, with the loss of sixty
of their own. Wherefore I hastened on with the Army, and sat down at the foot
of the Hill near St. Benedict. And lest that the Enemy discovering us from the
Hills should again cross the River, and wholly possess themselves thereof, I
commanded out Field Marshal Lieutenant Heuster with the Brandenburgish
Dragoons, and six Troops of Horse, following my self with the whole Body to the
said River Gran, where some of ours in their passing, had little Skirmishes
with the Enemy, who still kept his Body upon the top of the hill. I flung up
presently four small Redoubts to plant Cannon, and lay all night on the Banks,

An hour before day, rose a Gentle wind driving the Clouds before it, and they
moving the Boughs and little trees in such manner, that it seemed as though the
whole Enemies Army were on their March toward the Bergstadt. This gave an
Alarm to the VVatch, the mistake being so genuine, that I my self believed it,
and was a going to put my Men in Order to fore-stall their passage. Yet had we
an advantage by the false Alarm, and got over the Gran in three several
places, setting a Musquetier behind each Horseman, so that within two hours
space, our Army stood in Battail-Array. Now to fulfill your Imperial Majesty's
most Gracious Command, I Ordered Colonel Kohari, (who fell in this Action very
unseasonably for Us) Colonel Caprara, with a Lieutenant Colonel, one Major,
two Captains of Horse, the Brandenburgish Major Marowits, with a hundred
Dragoons (in all they made Eight hundred men) to fall upon the Enemy, who stood
in Battalia all along the top of the hill, which as soon as the Enemy
perceived, and that our Army followed, he purposed with a thousand men to have
taken a pass at the Foot of the hill by a marsh, which in dry weather, is
easy to go over, thinking to surround us there, since he was twice our Number.
But it succeeded ill with him; For I placed the Field-Martial-Lieutenant before
the Right Wing, and showed him where he might best withstand the Enemy, who
already had laid a great Ambush on another pass too on the Right side. Now as
the Enemy thought to come on the Back or the Flanck of our Right VVing out of
this Ambush, the Heusterish Regiment and his Electoral Highness Palatines
Company well received and repulst him. In the like manner fell the best
Janissaries and stoutest Turkish Horse, by the Caprarish Squadrons, and seeing
the greatest danger to be in this place, I made up to it my self, and waited
the Enemy with all manly Resolution. This Squadron beat off the first Onset
with great Valor, but by reason the Enemy was more then four thousand strong,
they were forced a little to retreat, to a litttle Ambuscade, where the
Brandenburgish Lieutenant Colonel lay with a hundred and fifty Dragoons, who
gave the Enemy such a Salvo, that he was forced to scatter, whereby was given a
little breathing room to the Caprarish and other Officers Squadrons who began
to Rally again: Of these were some (Persons careless of their honor) that
came to the Baggage, and cried out that the whole Army was Routed, and
thereupon were some of our Wagon plundered by other Rash Inconsiderable
Fellows. So soon as the Troops were again together, and seconded with three
Squadrons of the left VVing, the Enemy likewise Recruited with fresh men, and
seemed resolved to take a Revenge; but I caused a Regiment of Infantry to
advance with four small pieces, which received him so bravely, that he was
constrained to draw back, leaving behind a great Number of wounded and dead
bodies. Now as soon as the danger was over here, and I could the better confide
in the two Squadrons of Foot, and the four pieces which were planted behind a
great bush on the Enemies VVing; I took from them the Caprarish Regiment of
Horse, and other Squadrons; Whereupon Colonel Count Caprara placed himself with
other Officers before his Regiment, and with Major Marowits, and his three
Companies of Dragoons fought with good Resolution, and Renowned Courage against
more then Eight Thousand Tartars and Moldavians. Ours indeed often did here
Repulse and were Repulst; But I again upheld them with the Saxish, and
Brandenburgish Infantry, and six small Pieces, and caused the Enemy to give
ground.

In the mean time, the Major General, Fought in the middle, where the Enemy
Charged with great fury, but the Major General Answered him stoutly, till we
saw at length, that the Tartars, and Moldavians were totally Routed, and so we
got the Victory on three sides.

After this, we Marched on the Highway to Lewents, and it seemed, as if the
Enemy would again Recover the Hill; But in that they saw us make up anew our
Squadrons, and the Duke of Holstein march toward them with the whole Infantry,
and Artillery, they began to fly. VVhereupon the Squadrons of the Van, and the
left VVing, and after the Heusterish and Electoral Palatine Horse hastened up,
and slew all that Resisted in the first Leaguer (for they had three Leaguers)
Plundered the Baggage, and pursued for two miles, and put all to the Sword, as I
had Commanded. We took but three Prisoners alive, the Number of the dead is
about Six Thousand. And that the Infantry might be flesht with Killing I caused
likewise those of my Old Leaguer to Advance. On the way, they met with five
hundred Janissaries which were laid in Ambush by the Bassa of Offen, and slew
them all. The Booty ours have taken is very great. The few Hungarians which
were with me, behaved themselves also well, and especially Count Valentin
Balassa Fought to a wonder. Colonel Leysz, and the Earl of the Chamber-Baron
Joanelli showed likewise their Valor, and in one word, all other Officers and
Soldiers did their Duty like Soldiers. No less, did the Electors of Sax and
Brandenburgs Forces Fight with an Incredible Resolution. This great slaughter
will doubtlesly force the Grand Vizier to divide his body, and send some great
Force hither, and I am of most humble Opinion, (but prescribing nothing) that
it were necessary your Imperial Majesty (as far as is possible) would send me
more help to pursue this Victory. I shall if I can, break up to day, and do my
best to carry off the Artillery, we have taken, whereof were one whole Cannon,
and in a wood not far off, two half Cannon, and two Quarter ones, with several
Provision Wagon. The Governor here, Captain Joachim Newmitshaw of the
Mersish Regiment with the whole Garrison defended themselves Gallantly, showed
no fear, and would hear of no Treaty. The Enemy attempted to open the Breach
which I formerly made up, and stormed it Twice, but was breat off still with
great loss.

The Governor also fearing the Enemy might at length cut off their pass from
the City into the Castle, set on fire the Palanka which joined the Town and
Castle between the Marish, so that it was left quite open, which was very
advantageous to the defense of the Castle, but no Cavalry could stand there.

The hurt done by shot to the Castle, is reparable with little cost, and though
the Enemy had stormed the Castle where the breach was, yet had he not got in,
for the Governor was very provident and had made good Trenches.

The Enemies force is a great deal stronger then report has gone hitherto, for
no man that ever saw a Soldier in the Field, has reckoned them less then
Twenty five Thousand; the Prisoners say, they are from Thirty to Forty Thousand
and upwards, which yet I believe not; but hold for certain, that they are
Twenty five Thousand strong. The Bassa's of Offen, Erla, and Newhausel, were
not present, but Aly Bassa, who lay formerly in Lewentz, and also another who
Commanded Four Thousand Janissaries, both men of great Experience and Respect
among the Turks, are slain, with several other Officers. The Loss and Terror
of their side is so great, that the Grand Vizier will soon find it. Further my
most Gracious Lord, I pray God from the bottom of my heart, that he would more
and more bless your Imperial Majesty's Armies; what I can do further according
to my poor ability, your Imperial Majesty may most graciously assure your self
of; I recommend my self withal to your constant Imperial Grace and Favor, as.

Lewentz, July 20. 1664. Your Imperial Majesty's most Humble Faithful and
Obedient Vassal de Souches.

Postscript.
THis Relation was sent by an Express from the Emperor to his Electoral
Highness Palatine, whereupon on the 27 of July all the Guns went of at
Frankendale, whose Report was answered by those at Manheim, and trebled by all
the Cannon at Heidelburg, being thrice fired; and all the Windows and Towers
were full of Artificial fires that night. Count Konningsbeck was at the Table
with his Electoral Highness, when this good News was brought, which was
received with all expressions of joy imaginable.

FINIS.
Licensed,

Roger L'Estrange.
August 6. 1664.

