A General Draught and Prospect OF GOVERNMENT IN EUROPE, And Civil Policy.
SHOWING The Antiquity, Power, Decay, OF PARLIAMENTS. WITH Other Historical and
Political Observations relating thereunto. In a LETTER.

Dimidium plus toto.
-- Medium non deserit unquam
Coeli Phoebus iter, radiis tamen omnia lustrat.
Claud. London: Printed for Tho. Benskin, in Greens-Rents near Fleetbridge.
1681.

THE CONTENTS.
TOo narrow conceptions of Parliaments. Civilians, Instruments of servitude.
Common Lawyers how biassed. My Lord Cook's Etymologies. Holy Scripture teaches
not Politics. Caesar in the Gospel. Europeans particularly love Liberty.
Arbitrary sway inconsistent with a civil people. The Gospel disposes not to
slavery. Power, not Titles, makes a King. Declining power casts the greatest
shadow. Modern French Parliament in Scarlet Robes. The English without
Pontificalibus. jupiters Scepter what. Pastors of a m^re excellent species than
the flock. King a Politic Creature. Mixed Government ordinary in Europe. In
Asia and Africa, Tyrannical. Og the King of Bashan. Land of Giants. Excellency
of Kingly Government. (...) Cyclopses ruled without Parliaments. Tyrants
ordinarily men of great Virtues. Tarquin the proud left off the use of the
Senate. Authority of the Senate lost, Emperors but tenants at will to the Army.
The Common Council in Gaul and Britain The German people and Laws transplanted.
The Government in Germany. Pharamond. What Names for the Common Council in
England, France, and Germany. Curia, Hoss. Reichs Versamblung. Conventus.
Placitum. Synodus. Diet. Parliament. Populus. and Principes, often used for the
same Assembly. Hundreds. Sheriffs. Iuries. Queen Edburga. Germany the source of
our people and Laws. Charlemain governed by annual Parliaments. What power they
had in his time. Succession referred to the Parliament. The Elector Princes.
Fallacies of an Aristocracy. The Golden Bull. Aristocracy when begun in the
Church. English Laws in danger. Pretenses of Conquest. Magna Charta. In Germany
Title by the Sword. Imperial Crown. Lex Regia. Civil Law. The French insensibly
enslaved. The English Arms in France. The project of a new sort of Parliament.
It some check upon the King. The Clauses Mandato Regis, expresso Mandato,
expressissimo mandato Regis. Lewis the Eleventh his Character. La Royaute horse
du page. Remonstrances for the Parliament. Abhorrers. The War called le bien
public. Alexander Sforza, his advice. Finesse. Franc-archers laid aside.
Adventuriers Soldiers. Guard of Switzers established. The Parliamentary changed
into a Military Government. Improbe factum. Different times require different
Laws. Radamanthus his way of judging. Kings most reserved when they had no
bounds. The Venetians. How they dealt with their Princes. What the ordinary
policy in Germany. The Emperor adorned with Titles. The Jura Majestatis where.
Count Palatine Judge, when the Emperor is Impeacht. The Legislation where.
Religion. War and Peace. Jurisdiction. The Princes. Furstenrecht. Chamber at
Spires. Taxes. Chief Magistrates. Electors. What they assume. Flowers of the
Imperial Crown. Tarquinius Priseus his Artifice. The Emperors of old time came
to the States. Maximilian. The Regiment instituted. Their Platform. Charles the
Fifth. His new Model. The Assembly of the Deputies. They managed by Ferdinand
the Second. The Privy Council. Expedients. Reason of State. The Jesuits like
not a mixed Government. Turken-stewer, or Aid against the Turk. Caesar and the
Electors combine against the Diet. The Roman Decemviri. The States wanting to
themselves. Differences about Religion. The Protestants out-voted. The German
Diet encumbred. French in a manner defunct. The former from Charles the Fifth.
This from Lewis the Eleventh. The English Parliament still vigorous. Legerete
of the French. The English steady. Dance not after the French Politics. Magna
Charta. Petition of Right. Annual Parliaments. Uncertainty of Historians.
Records not accurate. Forms fallacious. Civilians breath a Foreign air. Rules
of common Law too short. Divines no Statesmen. Kingly Race may degenerate. Sons
of Hercules. Tasso. The Emperor Aurelian. His account of Cabals. Parliaments
necessary. Cyclopean presumption. Hesiod's proverbial paradox. Cyrus moderate.
Cambyses. (...) Romulus torn in pieces. Roman Civil Empire fell to Barbarians.
Charlemain. Austrians influenced by Jesuits. The French Court's Correspondence
with Avignon. Potestate absoluta Mortified by the English Arms. Lewis the
Eleventh. Standing Army. English generosity. Conquest a compendious Title.
Gunpowder-Treason. Pensioned Parliament. Not subject to the mischiefs in
France, or Germany. Division in Religion avoided. Poets and Divines regard not
second Causes. Jure Divino. Latin Service a mark of Roman slavery. Judges
durante beneplacito. The Three States. Stands, Reich-stands. Why so called. Who
they are. The Three governing parts of the Commonwealth in Polybius. The Three
States of Sparta. Of the Romans. Of France. The Clergy a mixed State with the
Laiety. The Three States of Germany according to Tacitus. According to Hincmar
in Charlemain's time. Seniors who. When Hereditary. Proclamations to call the
States. Particular Writs when first used. Imperial Cities. Electors, when a
several State. The Clergy never a distinct State in Germany. The Emperor one
of the States. Charlemain a German. Sacri Imperii Minister. Tricks of State,
(...)

SIR,
SEE the effect of your commands. The want of time, of Books, and assistance in
this my retirement, make me very incapable of the undertaking. But my obedience
and performance with a Kid, will I hope be accepted, when I cannot sacrifice an
hundred Bulls.

Without farther Ceremony or Introduction, according to my apprehension, when
we enquire into the Authority and Nature of Parliaments, our thoughts should be
raised above all prejudice and particularities; we should not conceive of them,
as of some Creature formed and nourisht under this or that Constitution, but
have a Notion as large and general, as is that of Government of Civil Society.

We must not be confined to the Writers of this or that Age, or Country; but
consult the Universal reason and sense of humane kind, where Civil Government
has been exercised.

Much less is any particular profession or Faction of Writers, to be the only
Authors of Credit with us, in this enquiry.

Our knowledge must be something digested; and an impartial result from a
consideration of all as well Times and Countries, as Writers and Customs.

The Civilians, with their Bartolus and Baldus, are not to dictate to us on
this occasion. These were bred out of the corruption of the Roman liberty; and
were instruments of servitude from the beginning. Their work was by hook and
crook, to rap and bring all under the Emperors power; that was their study,
that their Province. But they were always ignorant of the practices of better
times, and utter strangers to the just Rights of a Free-people; their Rules and
their Maxims were, in effect, no other, than so many stripes, so many marks and
items of Slavery to the Subjects.

Then, for the Municipal Lawyers of every Nation, they also are educated under
too narrow a dispensation to think justly in these matters.

The Letter is their sphere where they show their activity, even, sometimes, to
the perverting and turning it against the reason and intentions of the
Legislator.

Their small niceties, and their subtleties, and their inferences, are too fine
drawn to bear or support a matter of this weight and circumference.

Their Deductions and Argumentations must ever be taken with some grains of
allowance; the cause here requires other forms and considerations. We are not
to stick at the Letter, but go to the foundation, to the inside and essence of
things.

By their acquaintance with the Customs and Laws, they may aid and direct, but
not overruled; they may apply their Observations to strengthen the Fundamental
Reason, but are not to perplex and subvert the Form of Government.

My Lord Cook tells us, Parliament is derived from Parler le meant, i. e. from
speaking the mind. He might as honestly have taught us that firmament is firma
mentis, a farm for the mind; or fundament, the bottom of the mind.

My Lord Cook, how sage soever otherwise, in Parliament House is no more
Authority than Thomas Aquinas.

And take him from his ordinary Element, his Reasons are many times as
ridiculous as his Etymologies.

Then for the Holy Scripture; the design of it is no more to teach us
Politics, than to make us Philosophers.

Ahaz's Dial is no President for our time or measures; nor may the Theocracy of
the Jews authorize us to set up for King Jesus.

Our blessed Savior did not distinguish whether Caesar demanded Tribute, as
Tribune and Servant of the people; and whether the Roman Empire remained still
Democratical, (as Caesar pretended) or was Monarchical, as, in effect, it
proved.

The Holy Ghost neither altered the complexion, nor refined the education; but
a shepherd, notwithstanding the Oracles he delivered, continued the same in
other circumstances, as if he never had been inspired.

In like manner, wherever Christ is Preached, the Soul-saving Doctrine in no
wise operates upon the policy or civil Constitutions; but leaves those affairs
to be influenced by the ordinary prudence and discretion.

Whether it be some particular generosity in our Nature, that renders us
impatient of slavery: or whether the temperateness of the Climate inclines us
to a moderation in our Government: Or whether it may be some favorable aspect
of the Planets, (as Ptolomy would persuade us) that disposes Europe to the love
of Liberty.

So far as any Record or History can inform us, That Arbitrary and unlimited
domination, so familiar in the Eastern parts of the world, amongst us did
always show uncouth, and to be stared upon no less than their Elephants. And
indeed to us seem altogether inconsistent with a civil people.

And it can be no more the business of the Gospel to reconcile us to that yoke,
than it is to Emasculate our complexion and nature, to change the temper of our
Climate, or to turn our Stars from their Course.

All power is from God, and we are to be subject to the higher powers; this all
consent to; this is Doctrine alike true in Holland, as in France, at Venice, as
at Constantinople.

But where this high power and Sovereignty rests, in whom it is lodged, this is
a point not so obvious: Nor can the S. S. or holy Fathers any way help us in
the discovery.

The Customs and particular Laws of every Nation, are only capable to direct us
in that scrutiny.

Obedience is as much a duty, and Rebellion as black a sin where the people are
King, as where a single person has the Sovereign sway.

The Title of King, Monarch, or Emperor, the Scepter, the Crown, the Royal
Throne, with all the Robes and pomps and badges of Sovereignty, and the
precedence before other Christian Kings, have the shadow of Majesty, but have
none of the substance, as Bodin truly observes.

The Caesar's were never so absolute, as when the Senate had the show, and the
name of all. But afterward when their power declined, then did their shadows
lengthen, and the Titles swell beyond all sobriety and proportion.

The French Parliaments in their Scarlet Robes, know none of that Sovereign
power which their plain Ancestors so long had exercised in their gray jackets.

The Pontificalibus and Formality, derogates from the antiquity and
independency. And our House of Commons may seem in a manner, (if I may so say)
to have committed some kind of Solecism, in taking a Mace to be carried before
them, but that their simplicity and plainness otherwise sufficiently
demonstrates them the true, sincere, original, fundamental, common Council,
constituted and formed before Forms and Pageantries and Fopperies obtained in
our English world.

For badge and ornament they had Jupiter's Scepter; which Pluto interprets to
be, not a tipped Batoon, or glittering engraven thing, but the Laws and
Legislative power.

Homer has taught the world to call Kings Pastors of the people. We commit not
the charge of our Cattle to any one of the Herd, nor for our sheep do we choose
one out of the flock to be their shepherd; but set over them a more excellent
sort of Animal, some Man is appointed for the Neatherd, and for the Shepherd,
to govern and take the charge of them.

Now since for the conduct and sway over men, the world is not furnished with
any species more noble than Man, Art supplies what wanted in Nature; an
artificial man is framed, a politic creature, a King that never dies, that can
do no wrong, that cannot be deceived, whose Counsels and Determinations are the
result of the joint experience and wisdom of a whole Nation.

Now whether this artificial, may be called a mixed sort of Government, as the
ancients imagined. Or that it be originally, essentially, and fundamentally a
Democracy Monarchical in the administration, as Bodin and our Modern
Politicians seem to understand. This certainly is the Government that always
has obtained in Europe; and that which all, amidst their Commotions,
Distractions, and Convulsions, in some manner or other, with more or less
success and perfection, have tended to, as the center, and only place of rest.

If therefore the Jews had desired a King after the manner of the Europeans,
their importunity peradventure might not have been so provoking to the
Almighty. And we should have found another kind of Catalogue of their fair
qualities, than that delivered us by the Prophet. For however their Asian or
African Neighbors might have domineered it, and bluster'd; a calmer gale was
always wont to breath amongst us in Europe, And, God be thankt, we are many
degrees Northern Latitude from Og the King of Bashan, and the Lands of those
other Giants, Amalekites, and Philistines.

The first Writers amongst us had their imaginations so overborn with the
excellency of Kingly Government, that they fancied in Heaven Jupiter to be the
King of the Gods. And yet they thought the Common Council so necessary and
essential, that Homer represents even Jupiter, upon a great occasion, calling
his (...), his Parliament of the Gods.

(...).
(...).
I have heard Divines observe something of this kind, as figured of God
Almighty from those words, Let us make Man. Those words in the plural number to
them seemed to import, as if God summoned a Parliament of the Trinity, to
consult upon that arduous affair.

Our Christian Poets have taken the same liberty, and fancied this, as an Image
of Greatness, where could be no accession to the wisdom and omnipotence.

But again, Homer (whom Plato in his Book of Laws, mentions as a Prophet, and
one who reveals those things concerning Government, by inspiration, which are
not by humane knowledge to be attained) to show the utmost inhumanity and
barbarity of the Cyclopses and their Government, tells us, They neither held
Parliaments for Counsel, nor had right.

(...).
He joins Parliament and right, as of late days Guicciardine does Parliament
and Liberty; as if Parliament, Right, and Liberty, were to stand and fall
together.

And indeed amongst the Greeks, how many persons, excellent otherwise, have
been branded for Tyrants and Monsters, and made odious to all posterity,
because they affected a more singular and unbounded power than was consistent
with the Customs and Constitutions of their Country?

Nor was this Policy less known or practiced by the Latins. None of the
ancient Kings of Italy or Rome exercised other Government than by Parliament,
till Tarquin the Proud with much Stratagem and Artifice attempted a new way.
But how fatal did he find that innovation?

Afterward that the Caesar's usurped the Empire, when their power was the
highest, they affected to have all done in the name of the people and Senate.
Neque tam parvum quicquam, neque tam magnum publici privatique negotii, de quo
non ad Patres Conscriptos referrebatur.

And notwithstanding the ancient Liberty and Government was so run down, yet on
some occasions, the authority of the Senate would be exerting itself.

They declared Nero an Enemy of the State, and their Sentence had its effect.

Nor could (the delight of humane kind) Titus, though so far engaged in love
and honor, stem the authority of the Senate, in favor of his dear Berenice;
but was forced to dismiss her, because they forbad the Banes.

And in effect, the power of the Senate once gone, that of the Emperors
signified little; the giddy Soldiers broke all Rules and Measures. They
mutinied, and made and unmade Emperors, where, and when, and whom they had a
mind to. So that the Emperor was only Tenant at will to the Army.

Our Botchers of History, show a jolly Succession of Monarchs on their file for
Britain in those days. But Caesar's Commentaries are of much better Credit, who
represents the Government of Gaul and Britain, as muchwhat the same in his
time; says he of Britain, Summa Imperii bellique administrandi Communi Consilio
permissa est Cassivellano, etc. The chief Command and Conduct of the War, was
by the Common Council committed to Cassivellaun. Compare these words with what
he writes of the Gauls, l. 7. Re in Controversiam deducta totius Galliae
Consilium Bibracte indicitur, eodem convenient undique frequentes multitudines,
suffragiis res permittitur, ad unum omnes Vercengentorigem probant Imperatorem.
Here the Counsel of all Gaul, by reason of the War, put it to the Vote who
shall be their General; and it was carried with a nemine contradicente for
Vercengentorix.

And it is beyond dispute, that their Government continued the same in the times
of which Dion Cassius and Tacitus write.

Nor is their uniformity so strange, considering the Authority of the Druyds,
and their correspondence in both Nations.

When the English and French came from Germany to people Britain and Gaul, the
German Liberty and moderate sway were transplanted with them; and still the
Common Council had the main stroke in all weighty affairs; for to that Policy
had they also been educated.

The Scheme of the German Government appears in these passages of Tacitus. De
minoribus rebus Principes consultant, de majoribus Omnes. In lesser matters the
principal men only, in the greatest affairs all consult.

Elsewhere he says of them, Vbi Rex vel Princeps audiuntur Authoritate suadendi
magis quam jubendi potestate. Where the King or Prince are heard for the
reasons they bring to persuade, rather than for any Authority to command.

Hereby it is manifest, that in Germany also the people had their share in
debating and directing all affairs of moment.

When therefore the French under Waramond, or Pharamond, came to settle and mix
with the Gauls, whatever other differences might happen, in point of Government
they were agreed before hand, both resting upon the same Basis, the Common
Council.

Accordingly in those first days, we find them making their Kings, and again
upon occasion unmaking them by general consent. Hence come these Phrases so
frequent in Aimoinus, Sigebert, Engenhardus, and the other Writers of those
times. Consensu Francorum, Electione Francorum, Secundum Morem Francorum, in
Regem electus, etc. On the other hand, Franci regno deturbant, a Francis
repudiatur, depositus ac detonsus in monasterium detrusus est, a Francis in
Monachum tonsuratur, etc. Where we may note, that our Authors intend by their
per Francos, as much as per consensum Francorum, or secundum morem Francorum,
which is, by the Common Counsel, and not in any unusual, mutinous, and
tumultuous way, as some might object.

Nor are we to imagine the Government presently altered, so often as we find
the Historians varying their phrase. We must now and then be content with such
words as the Monks of those times were pleased to coin for us, and have new
barbarous Names for the same old Civil Constitution.

Whether they speak of Germany, of the French, or of our Nation, they
indifferently diversifie, and employ for the same common assembly amongst
others, the appellations and circumlocutions following.

Sometimes they call it Curia, and Curia Imperialis, and Curia Regalis, Curia
solennis, generalis Curia, magna Curia. Concelebranda patrum solenni curia
coctu,
Curia Roncaliis jampridem indicta coiret,
say their Poets. Which is expessed in the German Tongue, by Hove, Koniglicher
Hove, grossen Hoff.

Elsewhere it is called Congregationes, which the Germans render
Reichsversamblung.

Sometimes it is called Concilium Principum, totius Germaniae Concilium,
Concilium generale. Gunther says, Concilium Procerum toto de corpore regni
Convocat.

And the Monk of Paderborn, who lived about eight hundred years ago, in his
Annals of Charles the Great, Anno 772.

Et Rex Wormatiam Carolus collegit in urbem,
Francorum proceres ad Concilium generale.


Imperialia. Concilia postquam cessavere, omnes pene deformitates introductae
sunt, says Cardinal Cusan.

Elsewhere these were called Conventus, Conventus generalis, Conventus
Imperatorem. Convenire generaliter populum suum praecepit. Habuit populi sui
generalem Conventum. Habitoque juxta Morem Conventu generali. The Monk of
Paderborn thus versifies. Anno 775.
Ad Duriam vicum properant, nam rege jubente,
Illic Conventus populi generalis habetur.


Elsewhere, Venit, and ad fontes fluvii cui Lippia nomen,
Conventum fieri Procerum jussit generalem.
Anno 775.
Publicus in Paderbrunon Conventus habetur.


Most commonly it was called Placitum. Compendii placitum generale habuit.
Aimoinus. Rex Pipinus habuit placitum suum in Nivernis Regino, An. 773, and An.
777. Tenuit placitum in loco qui dicitur Paderbrunnon. Abbas Stadensis in Chr.
An. 811* Imperator habito placito, etc. And the aforesaid Monk, Anno 770.
Conventum placiti generalis habere,
Cum ducibus se velle suis denunciat illic.


Regino calls it Synodus. An. 770. Carolus habuit Synodum in Wormatiaa. 771.
Habuit Synodum ad Valentinianos. 772. Synodum habuit in Wormaria. 775. Habuit
Synodum in villa quae dicitur Duria. 780. In Lippa Synodum tenuit. Convenerant
multi Episcopi, Abbates, and, Principes ad Imperialem Synodum. Trithem. Abb.

Afterward in Germany, Diet was the name that generally prevailed, as that of
Parliament in France and England.

Now these Quotations and Authorities show, not only that by all this variety
of Names were understood the same Common Council, but that the Principes,
Proceres, Primores, Duces, Patres, etc. imported no more in truth, nor
signified other manner of Men, than the very same with Populus.

And the same Assembly by one Writer barely called Populus, or Conventus
populi, is by another styled. Conventus procerum, Conventus principum, etc.
which those terms secundam morem, juxta morem, more solenni, ut solebat, more
fully demonstrate; which seem to refer and send us back to Tacitus, Consultant
de majoribus omnes.

This I the rather note, because I find Mr. Petty (amongst many other his
excellent Memorials) observing the like in old Records of Parliament, where
those somewhere called Populus, and Vulgus, and the Commons, are otherwhiles
dignified with the gay additions of Noble, Most Noble, Most Illustrious, Most
Gracious, Seigniors, Monseigniours, and Sires the Commons

And likewise for that some unwary and superficial Readers from this root have
propagated and improved many Errors of pernicious consequence to our ancient
and Fundamental Policy and Government.

The French incorporating and growing one people with the former Inhabitants,
had a much easier Province; they settled, and pursued their Native Customs and
Forms of Government, nor met with that difficulty and opposition which in this
Nation attended the English and Saxons. These had a much harder game to play.
These could in no wise fix, or find any sure footing, without first clearing
their way, and driving the Britains up by themselves, into a corner of the Land.

And after much tumbling and bustle, we find them formed into a Heptarchy.

How regularly they moved as to Civil Affairs, how closely they followed their
Country-Customs, or where they innovated and varied from their German Forms and
Policy, in those dark times, is hard to be traced.

Some footsteps however appeared then, which remained to posterity, as the
division of the Country into Hundreds, after the German manner described by
Tacitus. Besides the other Royalties in the people, as that of appointing
Sheriffs, and choosing Annual Magistrates, the jurisdiction and power of life
and death by our Juries, etc.

And even before all came united under one Monarch, we find the people
interposing their Authority, and (for the miscarriages of Queen Edburga)
providing that thereafter, No Queen shall sit by the King, nor have the Title
of Queen, but be called only the Kings Wife. Gens itaque occidentalium Saxonum
Reginam juxta Regem sedere non patitur, nec etiam Reginam appellari, sed Regis
conjugem permittit, etc. Asser. Menev. and Mals. But I shall not repeat what
Cambden and Seldom, and our other Antiquaries have collected on this occasion;
but Germany being the source both of our people and Laws, I choose rather
petere fontes. And thence it may be concluded how far we do stare super vias
antiquas, and continue firm upon the old bottom.

When the People and Senate of Rome had transferred all their right upon
Charles the Great (or Charlemain, as the French call him) and Germany was made
the seat of the Western Empire, one might think, if there could be an
opportunity of introducing a new form of Policy, this was the time. Yet
Charles, so victorious, so august, so great, the like in no age before him or
since ever known on this side the Alps, notwithstanding all that power and
fortune, and the Imperial Crown that adorned him, his Language was still the
high German, and his Government did still in the old Parliamentary way go on
and prosper.

Therefore we find him every year with his Parliament. Eginhardus, who was his
Son-in-law, and Chancellor, says of him, Rex sic ad publicum populi sui
conventum qui annuatim ob regni utilitatem celebrabatur, ire, sic domum redire
solebat. And Aimoynus, l. 4. c. 74. Generalem Conventum quotannis habuit.

And to these Parliaments, under God, so far as humane reason may judge, does
Hincmar (Archbishop of Rheims, and Chancellor in those times) ascribe his
happy Reign. Secunda divisio, qua totius Regni status anteposito, sicut semper,
omnipotentis Dei judicio, quantum ad humanam rationem pertinebat, conservari
videbatur, haec est, consuetudo tunc temporis erat, ut non saepius sed bis in
Anno duo placita tenerentur, unum quando ordinabatur status totius Regni ad
anni vertentis spacium, quod Ordinatum nullus eventus rerum, nisi summa
necessitas, quae similiter toti Regno incumbebat, mutabat, in quo placito
generalitas universorum majorum ^am Clericorum quam Laicorum conveniebat,
alterum cum Senioribus tantum and praecipuis Consiliariis.

All this seems but a Paraphrase upon the passage afore-cited out of Tacitus,
as to the Form of Government. The Princes and Seniors are for the matters of
less weight; the former here mentioned, was the generale placitum, which the
Germans more particularly call, Die jahrlicke versamblung, the yearly Assembly.
Whose business (he tells us) was to order the state of the Kingdom.

He shows us likewise how binding these their Ordinances were, and not to be
contraven'd unless upon the utmost necessity, not a suggested, invisible,
Courtnecessity, but quae toti regno incumbebat, a necessity that lay upon the
whole Kingdom.

In effect, the Parliament Ordered, and he Executed their Orders; his Office
was the Administration.

Amongst other particulars, we find him in Parliament adjusting the matter of
Succession, as Eginhard, and the Abbot of Staden, An. 813. informs us, of which
the Monk of Paderborn, An. 813.

Vnde Duces, ac Primores solenniter omnes
Atque Magistratus, ad Concilium generale
vndique collegit, Natoque suo Ludovico
Cunctorum cum consilio jus omne regendi
Tradidit Imperii, Successoremque paterni
Imposito designavit Diademate Regni.
And accordingly his Son Lodowic by general consent of Parliament did succeed
him; post mortem patris Aquisgrani summo omnium Francorum consensu
administrationem accepit, Anony. An. 814. de reb. gest. Pip. Car. and Lud.

The same Author tells us, that this Ludowic, Lotharium filium Primogenitum
consortem Imperii constituere volens, Aquisgrani in conventu, more solito,
instituto, eum coronavit.

In like manner we have the Son of Arnulph chosen in Parliament to succeed his
Father. Regino, An. 900. Proceres and optimates ad Forachem congregati
Ludovicum silium praefati principis, quem ex legitime Matrimonio susceperat,
Regem super. se ^reant, and Coronatum, regiisque ornamentis indutum in fastigio
Regni sublimant.

Nor was this done only out of Formality, and for the greater state and
solemnity on those occasions, for we sometimes find them refusing to grant what
the Emperor labored to obtain. Amongst other instances, we have this last
named Arnolph, An. 894, attempting to get the Parliament make his Son
Zundelbolk King of Lorrain. But they would not gratify him. Filium Zundelbolk,
An. 894. Ordinibus Convocatis Regno Lothoraii praeficere voluit, minime tamen
optimates praedicti Regni ea vice adsensum praebuere. Regino, l. 2. But the
next year after he prevailed, says the same Author: Anno vero sequenti in
conventu Wormatiae instituto, omnibus adsentientibus id demum obtinuit.

Hitherto these appear to be the same Germans, ubi Rex vel Princeps audiuntur
Authoritate suadendi, ^agis quam jubendi potestate.

And seeing that this of Succession, is one of those points that are of
greatest importance, it is strange how the right of Electing the Emperors came
afterward to be left in so few hands, and to be settled in the Seven only, who,
in course of time got the name of Princes Electors.

Neither the occasion, nor the time when this Custom began, can be discovered.
Some would deduce it from Charles the Great. Some from Otho the Third, who
Reigned about the year 990. Others from Otho the Fourth, An. 1200. Others again
from Henry the Second, who was Emperor, An, 1001.

From which uncertainty we may only gather, that the Custom was very Ancient.
But it is not to be imagined that the other States by any public Act
transferred the right upon those Seven.

Amongst the fallacies and cheats of State, whereby the rich Men may impose
upon the poorer sort, and worm them out of all their share in the Government,
Aristotle reckons these: That it be penal for the rich to be absent from the
Common Councils, to refuse being in Office, to want, or omit the exercise of
Arms, not to serve upon Iuries, etc. But the poorer sort may use their
discretion, it shall not be penal to them; they may choose whether or no they
will be present in Common Council, bear Office, be at the charge of Arms and
Training, be impannel'd upon Iuries, etc. In these cases this specious liberty
fools and bewitches them: for so long as no restraint is upon them, and they
are not excluded or slighted, or disrespected any way in the matter, they
rather follow their private occasions at home, and the business of their
Family. And thus by degrees insensibly is the Commonwealth and Government
changed. And that is effected by art and trick, which openly and fairly could
never have been brought to pass.

We need not think that the Germans were overreached by any the like Sophistry
and deceitful Laws; but it is likely, that to many it was sufficient, that it
lay in their choice whether they would act or no; and in that security many
sat down: Some could not conveniently spare time from their Family; some were
indifferent which way the world went; some could not part from their dear
delights, their Pots and their Hounds; and some staid at home, because they
could not make that show, and appear in a pomp and equipage like their
Neighbors. By reason of these, and a many the like weighty considerations,
together with a general degenerateness, supineness, and neglect of the public,
the affairs of State became abandoned, and shuffl'd into a very few hands;
insomuch that few besides those now called the Seven Electors, made any great
figure, or much labored in that sphere.

But those seven were suffered from time to time by a silent usurpation to
manage all, till insensibly it grew into a Custom.

So that (under Charles the Fourth, when the Privileges and Rights of every
body came to be stated, and reduced by general consent into a standing Law) in
the beginning of the Golden Bull, this Ministry of the Seven Electors is said
to be an ancient and laudable custom.

Some will have these Electors to be a Committee of the whole Empire, and that
(there being one King, one Duke, one Marquess, one Count, with the Churchmen)
all the several orders in the Empire are represented by them; and consequently
that their Act is vertually the Act of the Empire.

But it seems more reasonable, that this sort of an Aristocracie sprung up to
overtop the ancient more popular Government, by the negligence or inadvertency
of the other Orders; who were satisfied in seeing the Emperor thereby
effectually held within compass, and had no care or consideration farther.

For all their fears and apprehensions had risen from the Emperor, and, so be
that they might be secured against his encroachments and oppression, they were
content to set up those Electors; to oppose the Emperor, and stand as a
bulwark betwixt him and them.

And therefore by their free Act in the Golden Bull, they settle and confirm to
the Electors that Prerogative, which no prescription otherwise could have made
just and authentic:

Above an hundred years before, in the Church had the Government changed face;
an Aristocracy obtained, and the Election of the Pope ceased to be longer
popular.

About the same time, in England also, the old Laws and Policy ran a dangerous
risque from an inundation of Arbitrary power, that threatened to break down all
the ancient banks and Barriers.

For the Normans, having come amongst us, partly by consent, partly perforce,
pust up and wanton with their new acquisitions and swing of fortune, they could
not well be kept within bounds. Now and then Speeches of Conquest and holding
by the Sword, and the like bugtitles, were bandyed to and fro amongst the giddy
Courtiers, with now and then a Sally and Inroad upon the people, trampling
Property under foot.

These Insolences and Invasions kept the Nation awake, and put them upon their
guard, to wait an opportunity whereby their ancient Rights and Customs might be
reduced into Form, and solemnly recognis'd by succeeding Kings in the Great
Charter.

Thus was the Cockatrice crushed in the Egg; and an early stop put to Arbitrary
sway in England; and the Government returned to its old center of Parliaments
again.

Germany, in this juncture, lay most open and exposed. The Emperor, Lord of the
World, and Head of the Nations, Successor to those Caesar's that had broken
down all Forms and Fences, so that Liberty and Property lay wast every where
before them.

These owed all their power to the Sword. The Imperial Crown, the Lex regia,
the whole bulk and body of the Civil Law, were wholly and entirely their own
proper creature; and what more might be devised to make a Prince unlimited,
uncontrolable, great, and barbarous, and render him a Cyclops or a Leviathan?

But the result was, the Customs and Liberties of the Germans were far more
ancient and more Sacred to them, than any New Song that the Civilians could
teach them.

Therefore all this long rattle of Imperial Prerogative only alarmed them, and
made them provide the better for their security.

And as their danger was the most threatening, and armed with stronger Titles
and pretensious than in other Nations; so have they with more care sought their
preservation. And the Golden Bull with them was framed, and had the same effect
as Magna Charta with us; which they strengthen and make supplements to, by new
Capitulations upon occasion, according as the Emperors abuse their power, or
that tricks are devised, by color of the letter, to elude the honest intention
of that Fundamental Law and Constitution.

Thus we see it true, in respect of Sovereigns, as well as of Subjects, That
evil manners are the cause of good and wholesome Laws.

The French have no Golden Bull, nor Magna Charta; peradventure, because no
King of theirs had those pretentions of Conquest, as the Normans here; nor had
that Imperial Title of the Sword, and the Civil Laws, as the Caesar's, to
transport them beyond the bounds of Moderation and Reason.

Which put them upon other Measures, and gave them opportunity step by step,
slily, insensibly, and surely, to effect what more openly could never have
succeeded.

`As in the Fable, the storm and violence of the Wind could not force away the
Travelers Cloak from him; but the Sun coming silently upon him, dissolves him
presently, makes him unbutton, and strips him of all.

Noise and bluster make the people the more obstinate and tenacious. But things
remote affect them not. They never see consequences, nor lay ought to heart
that is not immediately present before their eyes.

If any thing now and then in the course of their Kings Reign happened that was
shocking, all was looked upon as some personal and accidental slip only, without
foundation for continuance, or without giving jealousy of being repeated to
posterity.

About an hundred years after Magna Charta was established, was that project of
the Modern Parliament in France set on foot, to render unnecessary the ancient
Assembly of the States, and consequently to alter the Government.

But the English Arms gave check to their wanton career, and for a long time
diverted them from pursuing that design, or bringing it to any head.

However, this new Assembly and Vice-Parliament was cultivated and improved
daily. They assumed all the Power, they consulted and determined the weighty
Affairs; and in case the King offered any violence to the Laws, they
encountered and opposed his exorbitant courses; they lay before him his
Coronation Oath, and plied him with Remonstrance upon Remonstrance, till they
brought him to Reason.

Neither War nor Alliance could be made, nor could any his Edict or Command
have effect, till Ratified and Approved by them.

So that to the unwary multitude these served the turn as well; these were as
effectual and sufficient, and more ready and expeditious than the great old
Parliament.

But afterward came new-fashioned Kings to Reign, who would not be overcome by
Reasons or Remonstrances.

And yet then also, was a formal compliance of this Parliament thought
necessary; and, as an expedient, when not satisfied in Conscience that an Edict
ought to be Ratifyed, was introduced that clause, Mandato Regis; which
imported, that they did not ratify such an Edict upon their own judgment, but
that they were overruled by the Kings particular command.

Afterward again came the expresso Mandato, and expressissimo Mandato Regis,
according as they passed it with a greater reluctance, and greater violence had
been offered to their judgment.

But Henry the Fourth, who had fought through all opposition into his Kingdom,
and had subdued to his will all that had faced him in the field, grew
impatient, after so great Contrasts, to find his resolutions crossed, and
contested by tame Gownmen; therefore, to rid himself at once of all those
verbal frays and formalities, made a Law, that thereafter the Kings Edicts
should be Ratified and Emologated upon sight, without more formal trifling and
dispute.

Thus were those remains of Sovereign power, that had survived in this
diminutive Parliament, baffled and extinct, without much labor.

But as they never possessed the vigor and spirit of the Ancient Assembly; the
people were never so stupid to trust, or lay much stress on their valor and
performance.

And therefore did more early show their resentment; nor without a general
convulsion and Civil War, could bear the apprehension of a Court-design to lay
aside the old Parliament.

It was the boast of Lewis the Eleventh on this occasion, that he had Mis la
Royaute horse du page, He had so ordered matters, that the Royal State should be
no more a Pupil; in him it came of age to dispose things, and act of its own
head, and should not need to be tutored or be under a Guardian any longer.

This was a Prince of a particular humor, and of singular endowments. It was
no wonder if he did not like the check of a Parliament; he had before attempted
by two or three Rebellions to free himself from the Authority of his King and
Father.

The good old King Charles, the Seventh, weathered the open violence, but fear
of poison overcame him; insomuch, that he durst neither eat nor drink any
thing, but af^^r five days fasting dyed.

And now Lewis being King, his first work was to clear the Court from all who
had served his Father, and pack off all the Princes of the Blood, and ancient
Nobility, and to create a new set of Nobles and Courtiers for his purpose.

The people took the Alarm, and clamoured for a Parliament to regulate
disorders, and prevent the evils that threatened and hung over them. A
Parliament, a Parliament, was the cry and expectation throughout the Kingdom.

The Bishop of Paris and Clergy, the Courts of Justice, and the City, (the
Three bodies of greatest consideration and gravity) presented to him their
several Remonstrances.

He (dissembling being his Talent) took all kindly; and to break their
discontents, or divert them, he took six persons out of each of their
Companies, to be of his ordinary Counsel; in show only; for in effect he was
still the same.

And amongst the prosligate rabble about the Court, there wanted not in the
mean time a sort of wretches who made an Hubbub, and as formally declared their
detestation and abhorrence of their practices that had importuned the King with
their Remonstrances, and called it an unparalleled violation of their duty.
Nay, ( Philip de Comines tells us,) the Courtiers went so far, they called it
Rebellion to mention a Parliament. Nor was it strange such Cattle then should
be sheltered about the Court, when a Mount bank was set up for Lord
Chancellor, Tailors and Barbars (Johan de Doyac, Olivier le diable dit le Dain,
etc.) the prime Ministers of State.

This jarring and misunderstanding was followed by a Civil War, which was
called The public good. This produced a Parliament. And this Parliament would
no longer trust Lewis single with the Administration of Affairs; but appointed
him Thirty six Commissioners, ( Curateurs) to be his Assistants. However,
Lewis's excellency lay in playing an after-game.

In the War, he had sent to his Allie Alexander Sforza for aid; who returned
him answer, that Men he had none to spare, but would give advise which should
be as effectual; so the Italian advised him Always to agree with his Enemies
upon any conditions, then find the opportunity to cut their Throats. According
to this, Bodin speaks of him, Pacem inire coactus est, sed eos omnes clam aut
aperte, paucis admodum exceptis, necandos curavit fratrem, quoque Carolum
veneno.

This is the dexterity which Comines so much labors to gloss over, and set a
countenance upon; these the belles Actions, and the finesse, which the Modern
French so much celebrate at this day; all is copyed from this Original.

Perjuries and Poisons were his ordinary Arms, yet none so devout, none so
superstitious, none made the like largesses to the Church. But his Masses and
Pilgrimages did always portend some strange horrid Murder about to be executed.

These were but personal Vices; his eajoling the Citizens, and affected
Gallantry to their Wives, was politic enough. But what proved most effectual
to his design of changing the Government, and excluding Parliaments, was his
laying aside the Franc-Archers; who hitherto had been the Train'd-bands, and
ordinary Militia of the Country.

In the War (called the pulick good) he found that those Franc-Archers (being
men of a settled Habitation, and way of living) took part with their Landlords
and Neighbors against him; therefore from thence-forward he slighted them, and
by beat of drum from Town to Town, gathered and listed such as voluntarily
offered themselves to his service.

These were then called Adventurers, because they sought their adventure by the
fortune of War; as afterward when Charles the Eighth carried them over the
Alps, they got the name of Soldiers, from the Sold or pay they received upon
that Expedition.

But as this Lewis could not trust the Militia, so within a little time he
began to think himself not safe amongst his Adventurers. These yet were not
remote enough from the interest of their Country, and had some small sense of
its oppression.

Thereupon, for the more immediate guards of his person, he takes into pension
Four thousand Switzers. And by that establishment, seems to have completed his
design, and altered the old Parliamentary, into a Military Government.

And now it was not so hard a matter to borrow Money of the Citizens, and
otherwise make those Levies which no King before him ever attempted.

Thus it was that he brought the Royalty horse du page; or, rather (according to
the Paraphrase of their Historian Mezeray) horse du sense and du raisonne.

Though in Germany the condition of their Parliaments is not altogether so
deplorable and desperate; yet of later times there have not wanted lusty
endeavors by force and by artifice to destroy them.

Right and wrong are ever the same, but Times and Manners vary faces very much.
One while instead of all other penalty for a crime, it was sufficient that the
Law censured it with an improbe factum. To say he that does so, or so, is to
blame, was more effectual and coercive in those Saturnian days, than are Racks
and Gibbets with us.

Radamanthus his way of administering Justice in all causes between party and
party, was by putting them both to their Oaths, and determining their right
accordingly.

This, says Plato, was a proper and ^eady way in that age, when every body was
possessed with the fear of God. But, says he, this would not do, now in our
times, when some make it a question whether there be a God or no; others make a
doubt whether God regards what we do on earth; most and the worst of men have a
conceit, that though there be a God, yet they can pacify him with their vile
Adulations, their Mummeries and their Masses; so that they may still be as
wicked as they please.

Therefore, says he, when men's opinions are changed, the Laws also must be
changed; for, otherwise, if our Judges now were to make Radamanthus their
President, we should all be over head and ears in Perjuries.

The like may be observed in relation to Sovereigns. In old times at first
there was only a simple confidence betwixt them and their people. And never
were Kings so reserved, as then when they had no bounds.

Afterward, the Misbehaviour of some Princes introduced that check of a
Coronation Oath. And where that is the only check, `tis an argument they had
never yet been there tainted with the Atheism, and infidelity, which Plato
mentions; but had continually lived and ruled with that simplicity and
religious fear, so memorable in those days when Minos and Radamanthus were King
and Chief Justice of Crete.

Claude Seisselle reckons several refrains, bridles, that curb the French
Kings. But now when the old Parliament is obsolete, this would be remarkt upon,
as a graceless unmannerly Metaphor, in the refined language.

In the State of Venice, at first their Prince was as absolute as any
Barbarian; till having strayed, and given some instances of humane frailty, new
curbs and new ties were devised for him. But the Italian proved still too witty
to be held by any.

The Venetians however would not be dallyed withal, they would not suffer the
Transgressour to rejoice long in his extravagance, but pursued him with
exemplary punishment: Sabellicus reckons to the number of Twelve that lost
their Heads for slipping their bridles.

At the length, when the Venetians found that neither the simple trust was
sacred, nor the Coronation Oath inviolable, nor the exemplary punishment
effectual to contain their Prince within the bounds that were consistent with a
Free people; They concluded that the public safety could not be sufficiently
provided for, and secured against their Prince, till they stripped him of all the
reality and substance, leaving him barely the Formalities and Trappings, and
empty shadow of Sovereignty.

Now to come to the Germans; what ever shifts other people have been put to, to
maintain their Liberty, they (it should seem) never trusted the Sovereignty out
of their own hands. So that whether it be a mixed, or what other sort of
Government you call it; the great Affairs were always reserved to be determined
in Parliament; there was the Supreme power, there was the Majesty.

Yet no people have been forwarder in adorning their Prince with all the Titles
and expressions of greatness, and an arbitrary, uncontrolable power, than they.

All the Acts and Laws run in his name; and are called Caesar's Laws, and
Caesar's Constitutions.

Where the Emperor and the Empire are named, he constantly has the precedence.

In the public Ordinances and Recesses, every thing from him are styled
Precepts and Commands; from the States merely obedience and prayers, though he
cannot wag a finger without their consent.

They every where speak of, and own in him a fullness of power vollncommenheit.
And this they give also to the King of the Romans at the same time; to show the
emptiness and vanity of it. As both are called Heads of the Empire, though the
latter has no power at all, during the Emperors life.

They and all the world salute him by the Title of Imperial Majesty. And the
German Style will not allow Majesty to any other Kings; die Koniglicher Wurde,
not die Koniglicher Maht, the Kings Worship, not Majesty.

Yet after all, Aeneas Sylvius says, in Germ. c. 43. Imperatorem, and Regem,
and Dominum vestrum esse fateamini, precario tamen ille imperare videtur, nulla
ejus potestas est.

The shadow and flourish only were in the Emperor; but the jura Majestatis,
the vis imperii, the essentials of Majesty were always reserved and exercised
by the common Assembly, as by the particulars may more plainly appear.

1. One of the Rights of Sovereignty is to be above the Law, and to give Laws
to the people.

Neither of these Royalties belong to the Emperor; he may be called to account
for violating the Laws. In the Golden Bull, the Forms and Proceedings against
him are stated. `Tis there said to be the Custom, and accordingly settled and
agreed for Law, that the Electors may Impeach the Emperor, in the Assembly of
the States; and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, as Chief Elector, is to be the
President or Judge.

For the Legislation, or making Laws, the Emperor proposes, the States are free
which Propositions they will proceed upon. When an Act is to be passed, the
Electors have six Votes, the Princes six, the Cities two, the Emperor has but
one (the last) Vote. Without a Majority he can do nothing: They can Decree
without him if he is absent. The Ordinances are to be confirmed by his Seal and
Subscription; but if the States persist, he must of necessity comply. Even
Charles the Fifth in vain contested that point, as may be seen in Sleidan, I. 4.

These Sanctions are regularly subscribed by Caesar, and by some of the States
for the Empire; and are Enrolled (at Mentz) in the Chancery of the Empire. The
several Members of the States are sworn to be true to the Emperor and to the
Empire; and are said to be Subjects of the Emperor, and of the Sacred Empire.

2. In matters of Religion, in all times, the head of the State had the Supreme
direction, as it was said of Tiberius, Deum munere summum Pontificem summum
hominem esse. And the first Christian Princes, before the Papal Tyranny usurpt
upon them, were always the chief Pontifs, and received the Pontifical Habit
from that College.

But upon the Reformation in Germany, Anno 1555. both the Emperor and Pope were
excluded, and their Pontifical Supremacy abrogated. In the point of Religion,
the Emperor was not considered as the Chief and Head of the Empire, but as a
party: for by joining himself to the Roman Catholics, he made their cause and
concern his own. It was therefore agreed and concluded, that the States only
should determine in matters of Religion; and that with a tender hand, in an
amicable way only.

3. War and Peace are transacted in the name of the Emperor; but in effect, all
is reserved to the States. He must at the least have the consent of the
Electors.

Yet any Prince of the Empire may levy Soldiers, may make Leagues and
associations without any bodies leave.

4. For Jurisdiction, and the last Appeal, the Civilians say the Emperor is
fons omnis Iurisdictionis; but here it is far otherwise.

The Princes, in causes touching their Life, their Honor, or their see, always
claimed their Privilege das fursten-recht (they call it) to be tried by their
Peers the Princes of the Empire.

The common Pleas were tried by the Emperor, and attended his motion, till by
the increase of Suits, that Judicature was no longer Sufficient, the Judges
grew corrupt, and many other inconveniences appearing, the States in their
Assembly at Franckford, An. 1489. ordered a place certain for the decision of
those ordinary causes; whereupon the Imperial Chamber at Spires was erected.

All the Process and Decrees of the Court ran in the Emperors name, and are
under his Seal; and it is called Caesar's Court. But it is also called the Court
of the Empire.

The Emperor only named the President; by the States were the rest of the
Judges appointed; and the other Officers of the Court by the Elector of Mentz
Arch-Chancellour of the Empire.

The States likewise execute the sentence. They visit and reform the Court by
their Commissioners; and to these visitors are the Appeals, not to the Emperor.

Yet some voluntary referenccs that were made to the Emperor and his
Privy Council, and to their Arbitration, gave them opportunity of late to usurp
a Jurisdiction.

5. Taxes are all Levied in the Emperors Name; but in truth nothing of that
nature can be done without the Assembly of the States. Nor is the Emperor
trusted with the Money in his Exchequer; the States keep it till it be
employed; they have their several Treasuries.

Sometimes the several Circles keep their respective Money; sometimes a public
Treasury is agreed upon, and one or more Pfenning-Meisters (PennyMasters)
appointed. Anno 1495. They ordered seven Treasurers, one to be named by the
Emperor, and six by the States. These swear to the States. And if any be by
special Oath or obligation bound to the Emperor or other particular State, he
is incapable of that trust. These are accountable to the States only.

If the occasion for which the Tax was raised be taken away, the Money cannot
be diverted to other uses, but by the consent of the States.

6. The chief Magistrates are, none of them, made by the Emperor. The Count
Elector Palatine is Vicar or Protector of the Empire, and has the charge of it
in the Emperors absence. The Three Ecclesiastical Electors, who are chosen by
their Chapters, are of course the Arch-Chancellours of the Empire. The States
appoint the ( Reichs-Skak-Meister, or Reichs-Psenning-Meister) the Treasurer of
the Empire. Sometimes they leave the general to be named by the Emperor, and
the ten Circles appoint their several Directors or Counsel for him.

For the other particulars, as the inspection and care of Coining Money, the
hearing and sending Ambassadors, etc. the Emperor has no great matter of
advantage above the other States.

On a common account, where the concern is general the States must be
consulted; and nothing can be done without their consent and approbation.

The Electors are in possession, and exercise a particular Sovereignty in some
points of greatest moment. They are the Trustees and Representative of the
whole Empire, in their Election of the Emperor. And hereupon they undertake
likewise to loosen his power, or tie it up short; and make what Capitulations
they please with him. And thereby would assume to themselves more than the
other States will ever be content to allow them.

But the Emperor singly, besides the name, and pomps, and empty Titles, has
very little of the substantial Sovereignty entrusted with him.

The Investiture of the great fiefs belongs to him. This is a Prerogative
goodly in show, and were of moment, could he lay any conditions or charge on
the person invested; but nothing is left to his will; he cannot deny, nor delay
the lawful Heir. Nor does the Fee for want of Heirs Escheat to the Emperor, but
to the public Patrimony.

He grants Privileges, where a third person or the Public is not injured. He
founds Universities, grants Fairs, makes Denizens, etc. He Creates Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Marquises, Counts, Poet-Laureats, Doctors, etc.

He gives only the bare Titulary honor of Prince, but not the qualifications;
he cannot make him capable to sit and Vote amongst the other Princes of the
Empire.

So that here the States are not subject to that imposition which the Roman
Senate once suffered under Tarquinius Priscus, who created an hundred new
Senators, to the end he might be sure of a Court-party, by his Creatures, and
have a majority of Votes in the House.

In short, the Germans seem to have observed the rule in Politics, That he who
is the most high in name and dignity, should in real power be the least
considerable.

Yet in the last age, the States gave way to several innovations, which proved
of mischievous consequence afterward.

It had anciently been the Custom for the Assembly of the States, to send for
the Emperor to come to them upon occasion; so Hincmar tells us of Charles the
Great, Rogatu ipsorum in Concilium veniebat, quotiescunque voluntas esset ut ad
eos veniret; similiter quoque quanto spacio voluissent, cum iis consisteret,
etc. Ep. 3. c. 35. Upon their Message to him, he came to the Assembly, as often
as they had a mind he should come to them; and in like manner he stayed so long
with them as they desired. And this custom continued, as may be seen in Lehem.
l. 7. c. 80. and c. 113. till under Maximilian. And then the States began to go
to the Emperor.

This Maximilian likewise, upon pretense of sudden occasions that admitted not
delays, would now and then be acting single, and usurping in several
particulars the power that of right could only be exercised by the States.

Therefore the States, An. 1500. to take off these pretenses, and prevent all
attempts of this kind, and partly, peradventure, for their own ease,
substituted in their absence a Committee, which they called the Regiment, and
the Members Regents. This Regiment was an Epitome of the whole Empire, and was
endued with all the powers and Sovereignty accordingly.

It consisted of Twenty persons, who were chosen out of the several Orders of
the States; and took an Oath to be true to the Emperor, and to the Sacred
Empire.

The Emperor or his Proxy was their President; but lest this might give too
great advantage to the Emperor, an Elector was added, as a joynt-president with
the Emperor or his Proxy.

No person of dependence on, or particular obligation to the Emperor, was
capable of being a Member.

The Emperor had no more Vote than any one of the Twenty Regents; nor could
determine ought, unless the majority were for him.

These were not simply to consult, but had the execution also.

This Constitution held for some years. And then the Annual Assembly returned,
and resumed their power, and acted again. But in case of sudden necessity, left
another expedient for the Emperor. They constitute for him a Council consisting
of Eight persons, Four chosen by the Electors, and Four by the other States.
These were sworn to be true to the Emperor and to the Empire, Scweren der
Keyserlichen Majestat und them heiligen reichs getreu, etc.

But Charles the Fifth coming to Reign, he was upon the new Model immediately.
He restored the Regiment, but the conditions altogether different.

Now it consisted not of Twenty, but Twenty two persons. He as Emperor would
have Two Votes added; thereby in effect to be Master of Five Votes; Two as
Emperor, One as President; One for Austria, and One for Burgundy.

The former Regiment might, according to the old custom, send for the Emperor
to come to them. Now it was ordered that Caesar might call them to what place
he had a mind.

Formerly, if the Emperor came not, they might proceed without him; now,
Charles the Fifth forbad them to make Leagues and Allyances, or do ought in his
absence. The Oath was altered, and the Members were only sworn to the Emperor,
and said to be the Council of the Emperor; whereas the former was called the
Council of the Empire.

In the former constitution, the Elector in the name of the Empire subscribed
their Ordinances; here, with the Electors subscription is joined that of the
President, in the name of the Emperor.

In short, the former was constituted by the States, and entrusted with their
power, to be a check upon the Emperor; this was formed by Caesar, to quiet the
people, and entertain them with a show; whilst he the more insensibly made his
advances to invade their ancient Rights, and usurp all the power into his own
hands.

The next project in case of Emergencies, was the Assembly of the Deputies.
This consisted of the Six Electors, Six other Princes, and Two Cities; to which
were after added Four Princes more. This continued till An. 1606. with some
effect. Afterward it proved of little consequence, Court-artifice prevailing,
and the Ferdinands found a way to manage the Deputies, and render them as
unprofitable to the public, as Charles the fifth had made the Regiment.

The second Ferdinand called what Deputies he knew would Vote for him, the rest
he excluded, and supplied their place with others, who he understood were
entirely at his devotion, as he told my Lord Digby, Ambassador with him, An.
1621. Lundorp, Tom. 2.

Amongst these projects, may be mentioned the Council of the Emperors Court,
and the Privy-Councel. These also, that they might show as if the Empire had
the interest in them, were at the first sworn to the Elector of Mentz, as
Arch-Chancellour of the Empire. Which Oath came after some time to be omitted.

Thus we have seen that the Custom of the Empire was to have a yearly Assembly;
these at the end of their Session always appointed the time and place for their
next meeting. If necessity for them sooner, then was the Emperor to call an
Assembly extraordinary; which happening frequently, the States for their ease
appointed the Regiment, and other expedients.

This gave a President for the Emperors to devise something of the like nature,
which they might more easily pervert to their own Arbitrary Interest and
advantage. If it have but the name or resemblance, the people look no farther;
they see not into the trick and secrets of it; they are led by the appearance
so long, till they are past recovery, and no way is left them for a retreat.

And indeed the Emperors of the last Age ceased to deal bona fide; the old
German honesty wore out of fashion. And they no longer treated on the square
with their people.

Artifice and juggle came in place: and in the days of Charles the Fifth, began
to get a specious appellation, and be named (forsooth) Reason of State.

But more especially, since the Jesuits there have refined upon the
Court-sophistry, and minced away all the old remains of Morality and
Conscience; for the Jesuits could the worst of all other, endure these same
mixed Governments.

They would have the Pyramid inverted, and the whole stress of things rest upon
one single leg, that their art might play the more freely, and they the more
cleverly trip it down. This broad-bottom'd Monarchy, and Government founded on
the people, puts them to other measures; a dose of poison, or consecrated
dagger, will not do the work. They must here go about and about, make slow
approaches, ripen a Plot of many years, and draw a long concatenation of
Intrigue, ere they can think to compass their design.

When the Commonwealth has but one neck, the Jesuit will have it under his
girdle; if not, one blow does the feat, and his dexterity is admirable.

Therefore in Germany the Jesuits have left no stone unturned, for their part,
to bring all the Sovereign power from the States to the Emperor. And to that
end, of late times the Emperor (whether by their influence upon his Councels or
no, is not our enquiry) has employed all the undue practices, and set all
engines a-work, to render the public Assembly useless, burdensome, and odious
to the people.

On this foot, care has been taken that some vexatious Tax should be the only
result and conclusion of every Session; Aid against the Turk, was a constant
perpetual pretense; Money the Head of all his Proposals, Money the effect and
substance of all his Speeches. This affair once adjusted, other Debates were
out of doors, Grievances not then longer to be touched upon, but all adjourned
to another Session. Besides the mischievous devises to embroyl the States
amongst themselves, and turn all their heat upon fruitless disputes and
altercations.

In the second place, the Electoral College have not been too fair in their
respects to the Diet. These could be content that betwixt Caesar and themselves
all the matters of State be transacted. And have sometimes accordingly strecht
a Text of the Golden Bull to serve a turn; and collogued with him, that he
again might be complacent to them; till that amongst them the public patrimony
and common right and Prerogatives of the Empire become engrost in a few hands,
and made a spoil to their unreasonable ambition.

These Electors must every one, under his Hand and Seal, signify their consent
to the Emperor, before he can summon an Assembly of the States.

They got to themselves the making of the Emperor. And now in effect the States
cannot meet without their order.

They were wont to be reckoned six Electors, to some purposes seven, now they
make eight; but before they fill up the number of the Roman Decemviri, they
will remember their fate. These ten (as Livy tells us) having got all the
Supreme Authority for a time into their hands, that they might reign absolute,
took an Oath together never to call the Common Council. Yet their Tyranny held
not long. This cheat would not down with the old Romans; but with a general
indignation they break over the Forms and Captivity of the letter, for that old
Law in Homer, (...). to free their Country from slavery, they executed an
unwarranted piece of Justice upon these ten Usurpers, or Ten Tarquins, as some
body then called them.

Lastly, the States have not a little been wanting to themselves, in the affair
of this their so ancient and fundamental Prerogative. One principal cause
(amongst many others) has been their differences about Religion.

For the Protestants being sure to be out-voted in the Diet, think they can
barter with Caesar for better conditions. And are therefore well enough content
that the yearly Assembly be neglected.

In a word, the German Diet is still on foot, rather incumberd, and clogged,
and puzzled, than destroyed.

The Parliament of France seems quite antiquated and subdued; the Ghost and
shadow of the defunct has appeared three or four times since Lewis the
Eleventh. But to revive that Assembly in its full and perfect vigor, requires a
Miracle like the Resurrection.

So that in effect, we may date the demise of the Parliamentary Sovereignty in
France, from Lewis the Eleventh; and the decay of that in Germany from Charles
the Fifth.

It is in England only that the ancient, generous, manly Government of Europe
survives, and continues in its original luster and perfection.

Were there not something in that saying of the Emperor Maximilian, that the
French King is a King of Asses; yet however that same legerete, on which the
French so value themselves, is but, in plain English, a lightness of humor, by
the which they are easily piped into a new mode of Government.

But our English Ancestors have always been of a more steady principle* more
wise, and more weighed, than to dance after their Politics.

The Reformation of Religion leaves no room at our Court for Jesuitical
infection, so fatal to the Germans.

Nor, on the other hand, have we yet had any Swisse Guards, or Lewisses for our
Kings. Ours have still been true English Original, no Copies of the French.

Magna Charta, instead of being superannuated, renews and recovers its pristine
strength, and athletick vigor, by the Petition of Right, with our many other
explanatory or declaratory Statutes. And the annual Parliament is as well known
to our Laws, as ever it had been famous amongst the Customs of France and
Germany.

I have not formally answered many Objectons that might be started; nor much
regarded the single instances of some Historians; and perhaps may be judged
lame in several particulars that I have slighted.

Take all together, you may as easily find an answer, as raise a scruple. But
the short of what I would have said, is,

You are not to expect truth from an Historiographer Royal: it may drop from
their pen by chance, but the general herd understand not their business; they
fill us with story accidental, incoherent, without end, or side, and never know
the Government or policy where they write.

Even the Records themselves are not always accurately worded.

The style of the Court, and a form of words, imposes upon many. Names are
taken for things, Ceremonies for Essentials.

The Civilians are Vassals to a For reign Jurisdiction. Caesar, the Sword, the
Military, Imperial (or rather Imperatorial) Discipline, is to them for Scepter
and Civil Policy. The Germans, An. 1441. were for excluding them from all
Offices, and places of trust. Limnaeus, l. 1. de jure publ.

Our common Lawyers are for comparing and measuring by their rule, what is
antecedent and above their rules and comparisons.

Christ's Kingdom is not of this world; nor ought the Divines (...) to meddle in
this Political Province.

In the general notion, Monarchy or Kingly Government is the most easy, and
the most excellent. But corruption coming into the world, neither the Sons of
Jupiter, nor the Sons of Hercules, found perfection entayled upon them; nor
were exempt from their share of humane frailty. Many ( says Tasso) are servants
by fortune, who are naturally Princes: some again, though descended from an
hundred Kings, are yet born to be slaves; and (maugre all their high race of
Royal Progenitors) will be commanded, and governed, and managed by a Minion, or
a Mistress. These are, really and indeed, slaves; but are not judged such,
because the people, who only look on the outside, judge of men's conditions, as
in Plays, where he is called a King, who, clad in purple, and glistering with
Gold and Gems, does personate Agamemnon: if he does not represent him well, he
has the name of King nevertheless; only it is said, The King was out in his
part, or, The King acted his part scurvily.

And Flavius Vopiscus, in Aurel. Caes. tells us, Aurelius Caesar dicebat,
Colligunt se quatuor aut quinque, atque unum Concilium ad decipiendum
Imperatorem capiunt; dicunt quod probandum sit; Imperator qui domi clausus est,
vera non novit, cogitur hoc tantum scire, quod illi loquuntur; facit judices
quos sieri non oportet; amovet a republica, quos debebat retinere, quid multa?
ut Dioclesianus ipse dicebat, Bonus, cautus, optimus venditur Imperator.

Aurel^us Caesar was wont to say, Four or five get together about the Emperor;
all their consult is, how to cheat him; what they say, is to be Law; the
Emperor, who is shut up from other Counsel, never knows the true state of
things; but is forced to understand just so much only, as they tell him; he
makes Judges, who the least of all should be; turns out of Commission those who
ought to be the quorum; in a word (according to Dioclesian's saying) the
Emperor, so good, so wary, and so too too good, is bought and sold before his
face.

If then it be true, that he who is of Royal Extraction, clad in Purple, and
called a King, is not always naturally such; it was wisdom, certainly most
seasonable, to find the means that might correct, and (as it were) ensure
Nature against the impotence and Tyranny of the Minion or Mistress which Tasso
mentions.

And if the observation of Aurelius Caesar be just, that Cabals are so
pernicious; and that four or five persons who get the Prince into their hands
and possession, shall abuse, and cheat, and betray him to his face, in spite of
all his goodness, his caution, and Royal Virtues; if, I say, these things be
true, the necessity of Parliaments cannot be disputed. Homer reckoned it
barbarity in the degree remotest from all things of God and goodness, and a
Cyclopean presumption to rule without Parliaments.

Old Hesiod in his homely way gives an Aenigmatical reproof to those Kings that
would be grasping all, and be so absolute, (...).
(...).
as if he had said, These fools know not, how much more the half is than the
whole; and that a shoulder of Mutton, with the love of the people, is more
worth than the ragoust, and the hautgousts, and all the French Kickshaws
whatsoever.

Plato tells us, that even in Asia, they who performed any great Achievements,
or enlarged the Empire, were those (as the grand Cyrus, for example) who
slackened the Prerogative, and admitted the people to a share in the Government.

But such as Cambyses, who against all sense and reason stretched and strutted
upon the (...), the Lordly domination, brought all again into confusion and
ruin.

Amongst the Latins, even the founder of the Roman name, Romulus, because he
took upon himself an Arbitrary power, to rule without the Senate, they (it is
thought) tore him to pieces, insomuch, that they left nothing of his body for a
spectacle to the rabble; as afterward their Successors unluckily did, who
killed Caesar.

The Imperial power that began with the Caesar's, was only Magnum Latrocinium,
one huge horrid oppression. Military Government, Martial Law, barbarous
Nations, Goths and Vandals, overran, and made havoc of the old Civil Roman
Empire.

In Britain, Gaul, and Germany, all this while, liberty, and a participation in
the Government, was the common right and inheritance unalienable; the Common
Council was the basis and hinge, however the administration roul'd.

Afterward, when Germany gave us people, it gave us a German and a free people.

About An. Dom. 800. Charlemain (or Charles the Great) united France and
Germany under one Head, and one Empire; pire; all Histories are full of his
Reign and Actions: he ruled more solenni, secundum morem, in the old customary
Parliamentary way, every where.

The Nations round about submitted and took Laws from him; and he submitted all
again to the ( ordinatum) the Ordinance of Parliament. An annual Parliament was
then reckoned the Custom, and inviolable right of the people.

And thus the affairs of State proceeded, and this Scheme of Government
continued in Germany, till the late unhappy divisions about Religion, weakening
and embroyling the States, gave way to the Austrian ambition, new projects, and
Jesuitical artifice; so that the Assembly of the States, at this day, keeps on
foot (indeed) but sick, heavy, and unweildy.

The French Court had much sooner learnt the terms de proprio Motu, and
potestate absoluta, by their neighborhood and correspondence with the Pope at
Avignon. But so long as the English Arms kept them in mind of their Mortality,
it was no time for them to think of ruling without a Parliament.

But when Charles the Seventh had sent home the English, Lewis the Eleventh,
with ( Olivier le diable) his Barbars, and his cutthroat devils, thought no
attempt too wicked for them. He (forsooth) was horse du page; he wanted not to
be led, he was past an Infant; and a loud outcry he made against the
unmannerly, clump-fisted, bumpkin Parliament. But when the bien public, or
War for the public good, hindered him from bringing about his design openly and
directly, he compast it, in effect, by slighting the Militia, and laying his
project of a standing Army.

In England we have also heard of Minions, and Mistresses, and Cabals; and have
had unhappy Princes. But the Laws and old Customs of the Land, the generosity
of the people, and the Genius of the Nation, have still prevailed, and been too
strong for all their practices and machinations.

When the Normans came to the Crown, after some years of ease and pr^sperity,
they began to forget on what conditions they had entered. Conquest was a short,
a compendious Title, and without intricacy. And now likewise the Churchmen
were every where agog for changing the Government both of Church and State,
into absolute Monarchy. But the best on it was, the pretenses were visible and
notorious. Besides that the Temporal and Spiritual, the Prince and the
Prelatical Lord could not agree who should be Supreme. Which differences gave
breath to the people, and put into their hands an opportunity to assert their
ancient just Rights, and bottom all upon the Parliament again.

And now, since the Great Charter, and Petition of Right, and the many other
declarations, what can threaten us?

Neither the Gunpowder Treason, nor the late more sacred invention of a
Pensioned Parliament, could take effect.

No room is left amongst us for a standing Army, which enslaved the French. And
(our Franc-Archers) our Militia continues after the old Model,

Nor, with us, as in Germany., is the Papist like to bear up against, and
balance our Protestant Votes in Parliament; thereby to render the Constitution
useless and unpracticable.

And it may be hoped, we shall never so far give way, and be gulled by
Jesuitical artifice, to find another division in Religion amongst us; that may
favor their designs, and, under other names, do their work as completely.

You need not be cautioned to distinguish Plato the Divine, from Plato the
Philosopher. Poets and Divines, you know, have a particular way of expression,
and give their thoughts a turn different from that of other people. They
attribute every thing to God; though the whole operation and train of causes
and proceedings ^e never so natural and plain before their face, the Images
they make are often taken in the grossest sense, and worshipped by the vulgar;
and many times the Statesman is willing to contribute to their Idolatry. Hence
it comes, that for the Persians, Zoroaster was said to receive his Laws from
Horomasis; Trismegistus, for the Egyptians, from Mercury; Minos for the
Cretans from Jupiter; Charondas for the Carthaginians from Saturn; Lycurgus for
the Lacedaemonians from Apollo; Draco and Solon for the Athenians from Minerva;
Numa Pompilius for the Romans from Aegeria; Xamolxis for the Scythians from
Vesta; and all these as truly, as Mahomet had his Alcoran from the Angel
Gabriel.

This sort of Doctrine went current enough whilst Monkery and Ignorance sat in
the Chair; but now in an Age of History and humane Reason, the blind Traditions
go hardly down with us. So that Iure Divino at this day makes but a very
litigious Title.

Nor was it consistent with the brevity of a Letter, to observe minutely how
long the remains of the Roman domination continued amongst us; as, namely, That
the Roman was the only authentic Language for judicial matters in Germany,
till the Reign of Rudolph the first, about the year 1287. in England till
Edward the Third, in France till Francis the First.

But in Church affairs, that old mark of slavery is not yet worn off: the
spiritual Emperor will remit nothing, he still holds his Vassals to the Roman
Tongue even in Divine Service; only in England, and where the Reformation has
prevailed, this, with the other appurtenances of Roman bondage, are no longer
necessary.

Nor is it proper in this general draught to reflect on all the several steps,
and little dispositions to change, in each Nation. As how sometimes a practice
has prevailed against the form and letter; sometimes the form of words has been
necessary, but the practice obsolete. The use in Commissions of the phrase,
pour en jouyr tant qu'il nous plaira, was not known in France till Lewis the
Eleventh tried its virtue; which occasioned their Parliament, An. 1467. to
ordain that notwithstanding the clause tant qu'il nous plaira, Offices should
not be void save only by death, resignation, or forfeiture; as Pasquier in his
Recherches informs us.

But peradventure, since it has been so much controverted of late amongst us
who are the Three States, and the word occurring so frequently in the German
Tongue, you may expect some account who they be that have the name of States in
Germany.

They express the word States in their own Language, and call them Stands, and
Reich-stands, because, says Goldastus, the Empire stands and rests upon them,
as upon its basis and pillars. Status Imperii dicantur, quod in illis, ceu
membris, id est, basibus and columnis, ipsum Imperium stet and subsistat.

Those are said to be Stands, who have the right to sit and Vote in the common
Assembly of the Empire. Hi quidem status, Reichs-stands appellantur, ideo, quod
statum and locum votandi and sedendi in Comitiis Imperii habent; hac quippe
unica and propria quasi nota, status ab aliis Imperii subject is secernuntur,
Arumaeus, c. 4. de Comitiis. So that all the question is, how many several
ranks, or distinct orders, there may be of these Stands.

From Polybius we have had a particular account of mixed Governments, where he
calls those that represent the Monarchical, the Aristocratical, and the popular
State (...), The three governing parts of the Commonwealth. So the King, the
Senate, and the Ephori at Sparta; the Consuls, the Senate, and the Tribunes at
Rome, were there the Three States, and had each their particular shares in the
Government.

The like seems to have obtained in France, under the names of the King, the
Peers, and the Third State. Nor did the power of the Clergy, how great soever
otherwise, make any new distinct Order, but they were mixed and included with
the other States; as their Learned Archbishop Claude Seisselle in his Treatise
of the French Monarchy, shows us.

In Germany how the Government has been shared, and who have had a right of
Voting in old times, we may learn from what has before been cited out of
Tacitus; the Rex, the Principes, and the Omnes, denote the Three States, who
had their several shares, and right of Voting in the Government.

The same distinction continued still under the Western Empire. Hincmar, at the
yearly Assembly, or generale placitum under Charlemain, does comprehend all
under the terms of Seniores and Minores. So that the Emperor, the Seniors, and
the Commons, seem to have then been the Three States.

Senior (which the Germans expressed in their Ealdermen) we may suppose, was a
word grew current in the Provincial, or vulgar Roman about that time; and
afterward was diversifyed into Sieur, and Sire, and Sir, and Monsignior, and
Monsieur, and was ordinarily applied to Men in great Office. Cum Seniori urbis
nunciata fuissent, etc. Seniores loci illius, etc. Nihil per me feci, nisi quae
mihi, a Dominis nostris and Senioribus Imperata sunt, etc. Tempore Senioris
nostri, etc. ex part Senioris mei Caroli, etc. These and the like passages, in
Gregory Turonensis, may show the extent of the word, and that the Seniores in
Hincmar, were the same with the Principes in Tacitus. Nor did the Signiories
become Hereditary till Otho the first his Reign.

But what most affected the Government, and proved of greatest consequence in
this affair, was the innovations that happened in Frederic the Third his time:
for whereas formerly a Proclamation was wont to be issued out, for summoning
the Assembly, whereupon, Delecti ex singulis Civitatibus, says Aymoinus, from
every Town and City were chosen the Burgesses and Citizens to go their
Representatives to the Assembly; Now so many grieved at the charge, neglected
the Proclamations, that oftentimes the Assembly could not proceed for want of a
competent number of Members. Wherefore Frederic let the Proclamations alone,
and instead thereof, sent particular Letters to the several Towns; and
henceforward none took themselves obliged to attend, who had not Letters
directed to them. Many of the poorer Towns were glad to be excused, and private
Gentlemen left off going: so that within a little time the Government was
brought into a few hands, and every day rendered less and less popular. Those
Cities that preserved their share in the Government, and right of Voting, by
continuing to send their Representatives to the Assembly, are now therefore
called Imperial Cities.

Although the Electoral Princes had a name much sooner, yet were they still one
and the same State with the other Princes, till under this Frederic, in the
Diet at Francford, An. 1489. they parted, and became a particular Assembly, and
Voted severally, and from that time got the name of a distinct State, and
formed a new sort of an Aristocratie by themselves.

Yet all this while the Clergy did never set up for a separate Order in the
Commonwealth, but always made a mixed State with the Layety; mixed they are in
the Electoral State, and mixed in that of the Princes, where the Geistlicher and
Weltlicher, Ghostly and worldly (as they call 'um) together with the Counts,
Barons, and other Gentlemen, make but one State. They have indeed a particular
Bench ( die geistliche Bank) to sit upon by themselves, save that the Archduke
of Austria, and Duke of Burgundy, only sit upon it above them.

Now whether we fix our Notion of the Three States upon the Doctrine of the
Ancients, as delivered by Polybius; or call them the States, who have a right
of Voting; The Emperor is clearly one of the States. Nor is it material that
the ordinary style and form of words seem to imply the contrary: for if the
saying, Emperor and the States, argues the Emperor himself to be none of the
States, by the same reason the form so frequent in their Recesses or public
Ordinances, chur fursten, fursten, und Standen, that is, Elector-Princes,
Princes, and States, will exclude the Electors, and the other Princes also,
from being either of them States.

The Form Emperor and States, does no more prove him to be none of the States,
than with us the saying King and Parliament, does imply, that the King is no
part of the Parliament.

I shall not trouble you with the disputes, what were the bounders of Anstrasia
and Newstria, or whether by the devolution of this Western Empire, Germany was
added to France, or France to Germany. Or whether more properly Charlemain be
to be reckoned amongst the French or the Germans. His having been born at
Ingelsheim, as most affirm; or at Carolsburg in the upper Bavaria, as many
believe; and his speaking the German Tongue, with this testimony of Eginhardus,
viz. Mensibus juxta patriam linguam nomina imposuit; cum ante id tempus apud
Francos partim Latinis, partim Barbaris nominibns appellarentur, Ianuarium
appellavit Wintermonat, Februarium Horning, Martium Lenkmonat, etc. These, I
say, are urged by the Germans, as no mean Arguments. But these matters concern
not our enquiry.

If you cannot reconcile the Emperor his being somewhere said to be Sacri
Imperii Minister, and elsewhere declared to have no Superior, Nisi Deum and
Ensem, but God and the Sword; Bartolus tells you, De verbis non curat
jureconsultus. The intention is to be regarded before the words. The intention
of the States in that Declaration, An. 1338. was none other than to exclude the
wild pretensions of the Pope; to deny a Foreign Jurisdiction, not to confess
or introduce any new subjection in themselves: Limitata ex certa causa
confessio non nisi limitatum producat effecium.

But I cannot conclude without some reflection on these frauds a la mode, the
ruse and finesse, which the French so loudly boast at this day. Lewis the
Eleventh would not have his Son learn more Latin than qui nescit dissimulare,
nescit Regnare. The old Romans had another sort of Spirit; we are told in Livy,
Haec Romana esse. Non versutiarum Punicarum, neque calliditatis Graecae-apud
quos fallere hostem gloriosius -- dolo quam virtute: it is like a Roman, to deal
openly and roundly; not to practice the Carthaginian Leger-de-main tricks, or
Grecian cunning, whose glory is to circumvent and by fraud not virtue overcome
an Enemy.

The Venetians at this day are commended for the same style. Il procedere
veramente Regio regli affari publici, il negotiare saldo, e libero, e senza
artisicio, O duplicita; non masquerato, non finto, ma sincero, e del tutto
alieno da ogni dissimulatione e fallacia. Their proceedings in public Affairs,
(says our Author) is truly Royal; they negotiate upon the square, frankly, and
without artifice, or double dealing, not disguised, or upon the sham; but
sincere, and every way far from all dissembling and tricks.

And indeed the bugie and inganni, and little Italian shifts, would better
become Duke Valentine and the petty Princes, than any Kingdom or Commonwealth
of true strength and solid reputation.

The (...) and the (...) the Sophistries and State-pretences of this kind.
However furbisht up, and gloss'd over of late by our politic Brokers, were all
stale cheats, and worn out even in Aristotle's time.

Thus have I hinted matters to you, and only touched upon Heads, without
anticipating your reflections and applications. I have not treated you like a
stranger, but as one thoroughly informed beforehand, and to whom all those
difficulties are familiar, which I can only discover at a distance. And after
all, I must fly from your judgment, to your good nature.

FINIS.

