Licensed,

October the 9 th. 1688. Rob. Midgley.

THE Modest Critic: OR REMARKS Upon the most Eminent HISTORIANS, Ancient and
Modern. With Useful Cautions and Instructions, as well for Writing, as Reading
HISTORY: Wherein the Sense of the Greatest Men on this Subject is faithfully
Abridged.

By one of the Society of the Port Royal.

LONDON: Printed for John Barnes, at the Sign of the Bear and Ragged Staff, in
Green-Street, near Leicester-Square. 1689.

THE PREFACE.
IT is as unusual for a Book to be Published without a Preface, as for a man to
go abroad without a Cravat: Something therefore must be said, for Fashion sake:
But, because I am no way addicted to Garb and Dress, what I say shall be plain
and short.

I have lived long enough in the World, to know, that a man who ventures to
make any Work of his own Public, puts himself into Extreme Danger of being
attacked on every side, and by all sort of People, as well Learned as Ignorant;
and these are the worst of the two; for a reasonable man may be satisfied with
Reason, when a Fool will never be convinced of his Error. This has always made
me unwilling to expose any thing of my own: But, having received, in the
perusing of this little Book, both Pleasure and Profit, I thought it would be
but matter of Gratitude in me, to communicate it to the Public.

The Press having of late been prostituted to the Dull and Impertinent, it will
be no great Credit for me to run in the Herd, much less to bring up the Rear of
them that are in Print.

It is not therefore from Vanity, or the fond imagination of raising a
Character, that I send this little Treatise abroad; but merely, that others,
who have the same Notions with my self, may receive from it the same
satisfaction that I have done.

It is not now, as heretofore, when he that could write, or read his Name, was
thought therefore fit to be a Parish-Clerk: Fortunatus, and Valentine and
Orson, etc. are no longer the Entertainment of Men. Nay, so ripe and pretending
is the present Age, that Women pass their time in the best and solidest
Histories.

But though many read, yet all do not read with Judgment and Observation.
Therefore they may learn in reading this Book, instructions how to read and
write too.

Now to do my self some Right, I must ingeniously confess, there are some
Passages, about which I am not fully satisfied, as about the Spartiates and
Lacedaemonians, though the Author has Polybius on his side.

He has not done justice to the World, in not mentioning some late Historians;
I mean, amongst the rest, Thuanus and Sleidan, who deserve not to be passed
over in silence.

It is not to be wondered, that one of the Romish Church should so sharply
censure the incomparable Fra Paolo, whose Judgment and Learning carried him
beyond their Arguments, and whose Honesty was above their Calumny: But the
History of the Council of Trent is sufficient to maintain that Author's Credit
against all their Suggestions.

As for the King of France's busying himself about the Translating of Caesar's
Commentaries, I must beg the Author's Pardon, if I cannot believe him, That
Monarch having business enough of his own, without meddling with Books. And, I
am confident, had He never done more than Translating of that Book, He had
never had the Name of Louis Le Grand.

But, for these, and other such Faults, I will leave every Reader to take the
same Liberty toward him that he has taken with others. To say the Truth, He
that sets up for a Critic, offers a Challenge to the whole World: Therefore,
not to be remarked upon, is the last Affront that can be put upon him. But I
forget the Complaint I made of other People's scribbling, while I thus far
continue my own. Reader, accept this with the same Mind that I offer it; And so
Farewell.

TO THE READER.
I Have neither so good an Opinion of this Work, nor of my self, as to prefix
my Name to it; it being but a rough Draught of the Manner of writing History;
and that made upon a cursory reading of History. A Natural Diffidence I have of
my self, makes me fear, lest Impatience or Precipitation has snatched out of my
hands what could never remain too long with me, to render it self any way
supportable. But that I may not disgust the Public too much, by representing
the Present I here make it, too mean and cheap: I shall ingenuously confess,
That this Work is a kind of Abridgment of what has been written on that
Subject, by the greatest Men of the first, and of the late Ages; That it is an
Extract of what is most reasonable in Dionysius Halycarnassaeus, in his Answer
to Pompey, who asked his Opinion of the Greek Historians, and his Censure upon
their different Characters: That it is a Copy of what Lucian has thought most
judicious in that Admirable Treatise he made of the Manner of Writing HISTORY.
In fine, That those Opinions I give in this Discourse, are not so much my own,
as those of Francesco Patrici, in his Dialogues of Gyrolamo Marucci, Agostino
Mascardi, of Paolo Beni, Lewis Cabrera, and others, Spanish and Italian
Moderns, which have handled this Argument.

But, as perhaps, I have spoiled their Thoughts by adding my own, I declare,
That I do not make it a Point of Honor to my self, to persuade my Readers of
it. Cum judicium meum ostendere, suam legentibus relinquam. Fab. l. 9. c. 4.
I do not impose Laws upon them, having neither Jurisdiction nor Authority to
do so; they are, at the most, but Advices, which every one may follow at his
own Discretion: But, being far from pretending to instruct any body, by a Title
which shall seem vain to Modest Persons, I would willingly have all the World
believe, that I am proud of receiving any Instruction from others. For, if I
have not Wit and Learning sufficient, to be as Exact as so Important a Design
requires; I have Judgment enough to be fearful of my self. But, that I may not
take a False Modesty upon me, by suppressing my Name, I confess, that, in a
manner, I conceal my self out of Pride: For I am too proud to show my self,
being sensible, that in an Age so Learned, and so full of Critics, as ours is,
a Man humbles himself, whenever he takes up the Name of an Author. In effect,
their Rigor is so great, that no Merit, how well soever established, can
escape them; And it looks like a kind of Presumption in a Man, to commit
himself openly to the Judgment of the Public, which daily becomes more
rigorous; and in an Age where Censure spares no body. It is also true, That
there is so great a Wisdom in not endeavoring to seem capable; and that there
is so much good Sense showed in being Modest, that I could willingly have
chosen to add, in those places where I give my Opinion, the May be of
Aristotle, and the It seems of Tully, to be less Affirmative, and to speak my
Mind with more Modesty, could that have suited with the Simplicity I use to
explain my self. For, if a Man has any Measure of Sense, he will hardly give
his Opinion, in an Age so overrun with Positiveness in all things, as ours is;
and then, Woe be to him that offers to decide.

Therefore this Discourse upon History is no ways like that of Lucian's, who
praises good Writers only to detract from those that write ill; hiding, under
the Approbation which he gives to Good Authors, a cunning Satyr, the more to
involve the bad ones: That is not my Design, having no Grudge against any Man.
I pretend only to open sensible Author's Eyes, and show them, that they ought
to tremble when they go about writing History, which is so hard a thing to do
well; and that the Judgment of Dionysius Halycarnassaeus alone upon Thucydides,
ought to cast a Terror in all Historian's Minds that are wise. In fine, to
speak one Word about this Work, after I have spoken of the Workman, I declare,
that good sense alone reigns more in those Instructions, than the Finesses of
Policy; which is the thing curious men look most for in History, Policy being
the Vainest of all Sciences; and that, good Sense, is the most universal and
solid ground thereof. The Truth is, That I do not pretend to say all upon that
matter, which no man can do: I shall, perhaps, say more another time, if this
be kindly received.

THE Modest Critic: OR, REMARKS Upon the most Eminent HISTORIANS.
The Design of the Author.
THE Palate of this Age, it seems, grows very exquisite; for in all things, for
the most part, we attain a good measure of Sense: We esteem that which is Real
and Solid, and we can hardly now endure any thing that is false or frivolous.
This is the Sentiment of all reasonable People, who make the soundest part of
them that pretend to judge, tho it be perhaps the lesser in number.

But nothing shows that ripeness of Judgment better than the Disgust People
have now for Romances, and any other thing that looks like them; so that this
love of Truth and Reason, being a disposition to love History, let us make use
of so favorable a Conjuncture, to serve the Public according to their Genius;
let us bestow our pains in those things that can make us perfect in that Art;
and comprehending the excellence thereof, let us make our selves acquainted
with those things that are needful to attain it: For, what Spirit is not
requisite for it? and what can we imagine finer than Pulchrum imprimis videtur,
non pati occidere, quibus aeternitas debeatur. Pl. l. 5. Epist.
History, which can do justice to Virtue, by perpetuating the Memory of Noble
Actions? This is, in my mind, what can contribute to the Perfection, of which
this kind of writing is capable, which will carry it above all other (if that
love for Sense which establishes it self can but continue) in despite of the
variety of tastes, which fancy and vanity endeavor from time to time to
introduce through false Idea's of fine wit.

I.How to write History.
There is nothing harder than to say very precisely which is the best way of
writing History. Every one ought to follow that which he finds most in Use in
the Age wherein he writes, and that which is most conformable to those Peoples
taste to whom he writes. But, is this enough to please Posterity? It is a Judge
strict, severe, incorruptible, who gives its approbation to true Merit only:
let us see then what we shall do to obtain its suffrage. When a man writes
Nobly, Sensibly, Purely, Naturally; he pleases always in what Language soever
he writes. Those are the universal Principles, which alone can fit every
People's palate: for there are no other general Rules in the World, than those
of Reason and good Sense. That is the reason why Thucidides, Xenophon, Salust,
Caesar, Livy, Buchanan, Mariana, and others like them, have always pleased,
though they wrote in Ages, and to Nations of a different genius: a man is sure
to please, if he writes as they have writ. For, what Grandeur, what Judgment,
what Clearness, and above all, what Integrity shines in those great men's Works!

II. What to write nobly is.
You must then resolve to write nobly, if you design to write History. For,
Genus hoc scribendi incitatum atque elatum esle debere quis ignorant? Cic. ad
Famil. Epist. 7. l. 6.
from the moment you speak to all the world, and to all Ages, you are endued
with a Character which gives you authority to raise your voice, because then
you speak to Kings, Princes, and to the Grandees of all Countries and of all
Ages; and you become, in some manner, the Master and Instructor of all mankind:
Addidit Historiae majorem sonum vocis Antipater, caeteri non exornatores rerum,
sed tantummodo narratores suerunt. Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
Nothing, then, is more essential to History, than to adorn your discourse with
a lofty strain, to speak as you ought. As an Historian quits the low and common
Language, that so by the dignity of his Expression, he may answer the merit of
those things he has to say: let him use himself to think nobly, in every thing
that passes through his mind: let him study to give good weight to his
thoughts, and strength to his discourse, by seeking with care all that can
elevate and ennoble it, to give a mark of greatness to all that he says. The
Patterns of that kind of writing, are, amongst the Greeks Thucydides, and Livy
amongst the Latins. They are almost the only ones that have been able to keep
up with an equal force and vigor, that greatness of Style, without sinking in
Mediocrity and Lowness: and in that they have had but few Imitators. Herodotus
has, by imitating Homer too much, tried to raise his Style in places that
required elevation, as Longinus has taken notice. Tacitus, who for the most
part is only great, because he is short, is not a very good model to propose,
for the greatness of his Style is not natural at all. In short, you must take
great care to distinguish a false greatness from the true one. For, it is not
in high terms, nor in lofty expressions; it is not in the puffing of words, nor
haughtiness of the Discourse, that that nobleness of Style which History
requires, ought to consist; in which Ammianus Marcellinus, Lampridius, and most
part of the Historians of the low Empire have been deceived: It is in a high,
but modest Expression; in a Discourse capable of sustaining the greatest
matters and raising the least; It is, in fine, in that temper of greatness,
which Quintillian attributes to true Eloquence. It is not enough for you to
have Wit, Magna, non nimia, sublimis non abrupta, sortis non temeraria, severa
non tristis, gravis non tarda, lata non luxuriosa, plena non tumida. Fab. l.
12. c. 10.
you must have a genius to write so, and to elevate what you say, by the choice
of Expressions, and by the greatness of your thoughts. That gift is so rare,
that if you separate from the number of Historians, those that have not writ
so, there will be but few true ones that will remain.

III. To write sensibly.
To write sensibly, is to hit directly the thing you aim at, in what kind
soever you write, without going from your Subject, or losing time by the way:
It is to express things with a kind of Wisdom and Modesty, not abandoning your
self to the heat of your Imagination, nor to the quickness of your
Apprehension; that is, when you can suppress that which is superfluous in the
Expression, as those Adverbs and Epithets which diminish things, as they
express them; to let no idle, insipid, and useless thing remain in it: to cut
off handsomely, what is not fit to be said, how fine soever it appears; to allow
ever less to fineness, than to Solidity; not to show Passion or Heat, where
only cold Blood and Seriousness are required; to examine all your thoughts,
Delectus Verborum habendus, and pondera singulorum examinanda. Fab. l. 10. c. 3.
and measure all your words, with that exactness of sense, and that exquisite
Judgment, which nothing escapes, but what is exact and judicious. It is, in
fine, to have Strength enough to resist the temptation Men have naturally to
show their Wit; Luc. de conser. Hist.
as that Impertinent Historian, who in the Parthian overthrow by the Emperor
Severus, makes Osroes fly in a Den shaded with Laurels and Myrtle, wherein he
makes himself ridiculous, thinking to be more agreeable, which is the most
slippery step an Author can fall upon. And that Spirit endued with Sense, that
wise Character which History requires, is a kind of attendance upon ones self,
which allows it self no manner of Exaggeration, and which takes endless
Precautions against those bold Imaginations; which those, whose Spirits are too
quick or too fertile, are subject to; that they may say few things in few
words, as Salust does, who holds Councils, gives Battles, takes Towns, conquers
Kingdoms, with a compendiousness of Discourse, and an overflowing Expression,
which is understood at half Sentences. Tacitus has all the Sense necessary to
be short; but he has not enough on it to be understood. The Readers grow
sometimes impatient in that Author's Precipitations, which loses much of his
agreeableness, and trying to compact in too few words, that which should have
been more extended, falls into Obscurity. The desire he has of being too short,
angers me, because of the small Instructions he gives me in things, which he
does not unfold enough. Polybius and Appian sometimes say too much; there is a
sort of judicious silence, which makes one comprehend often the greatness of
the things one speaks of, better than any words, when they are too weak. It is
a Masterpiece for one to suppress those things he cannot well say; and the
great Discretion in an Historian, is to make a distinction of what must be
extended, or made short, that so he may give to every thing the just measure it
ought to have, to make it acceptable. For Livy, tho very large, is not tedious,
because he is a Man of Judgment, even in his very Prolixity. But Thucydides, by
sticking too close to Sense, sometimes falls in a kind of hardness and dryness,
which one would hardly forgive him, was it not for the pureness and nobleness
of his Style. So difficult it is to write very sensibly, without losing
somewhat of the agreeableness which one might employ, if he had a lesser Wit.
But let an Author imprint well in his Mind, that the greatest Ornament of his
Work, is always good Sense; all the rest wearies one, but Sense never tires.
'Twas the good Sense of Philip de Comines, made him justly deserve the esteem
and approbation of our Age, in despite of the bad and ill-digested Language he
wrote in. But of all Modern Historians, none has written more sensibly than
Mariana in his History of Spain. It is the Masterpiece of the last Ages for
that quality alone. In all that Work a Genius appears, which keeps him always
from neglecting himself in choice Points, and from abandoning himself in those
that are not so. And this judicious equality, which that Author always
observes, tho the matters he treats of be never so unequal, is little known to
our late Historians. But the Art of thinking sensibly of things, is not
sufficient, unless he has also that of expressing them purely.

IV. To write purely.
An Historian, who thinks to commend his Book to future Ages, must think of
Historico sermoni decus conciliet, perspicuitas, proprietasque verborum. Beni
lib. 2. de Histor.
writing purely. Without that advantage, an Historian will be but short lived.
For want of Quid tam necessarium quam recta locutio? Fab. l. 1.
purity of Style, so many Greek and Latin Historians, of whom Photius, and the
other Library-keepers, have made mention, have perished in the general
shipwreck of so many Books; and that, of a number almost infinite, of whom Cura
magna sentiendi and loquendi, sed dissimulatio curae praecipua. l. 9. c. 4.
Vossius speaks, none remain, but those that have writ reasonably enough to
deserve to be read. You must not then pretend to write History, unless you very
well know the Language you intend to write in, and, except you write purely.
For, as soon as your design is to instruct, you ought to think how to express
your self neatly, that you may be understood; for when a man speaks well, every
one is willing to hear him: besides, one that speaks ill, never speaks any
thing right; Nihil est in Historia, pura and illustri brevitate dulcius. Cic.
in Brut.
and that clearness, which is the greatest charm in History, can only be found
in a pure Style. That purity consists chiefly in the propriety of words; in the
natural ordering of the phrases, and in the wise and moderate use of figures.
The style ought not to have any thing In Sententia nihil absurdum, aut alienum,
aut subinsulsum; in verbis nihil inquinatum, abjectum, non aptum, durum, long
petitum, Cic. de op. genesis orat.
improper, strange, bold, hard, creeping nor obscure. Herodotus has that purity
of style, and has excelled in it, above all other Grecians, as Caesar above all
the Latins. The Wits of the following Ages grew rusty, and retained little of
the purity of the Ancients. But Quintus Curtius, thinking to appear more
polished, has lost somewhat of that great and majestic grace, which becomes
Salust and Livy so well. It is true that he flourishes some places too much; as
for example, the Description of the River Marsyas, in the beginning of the
third Book; The Adventure of Abdolonymus, who, from a Gardener, became King, in
the fourth Book: Of the siege of Tire, and of a great many others, where it
appears an affectation of Eloquence little becoming the Gravity of History,
which can bear nothing that is affected. Indeed, that purity of Elocution so
necessary to History, ought to be supported by a great deal of Sense. For, Non
debet quisquam ubi maxima rerum momenta versantur, sollicitus esse de verbis,
Fab. l. 8. c. 3.

Ut monilibus and margaritis quae sunt Ornamenta Foeminarum, deformantur Viri,
nec habitus triumphalis quo nihil augustius, foeminas decer, Fab. l. 11. c. 1.

Ornatus omnis non tam sua, quam rei cui adhibetur condition constat. ibid.


nothing is more fulsome than Eloquence, when empty of things, and which says
nothing. It happens that, sometimes, purity of Discourse too much studied in
great Subjects, diminishes its greatness; as it appears in the History of the
Indies by Maffaeus, and in the wars of Flanders by Cardinal Bentivoglio. The
one and the other have studied too much how to please by the Politeness of the
discourse, not remembering, that Beautys that are sprucely attired smite least,
and that the finest ornaments disguise a thing, whenever they are excessive
and disproportionate.

V. To write with Simplicity.
You are also obliged to write with simplicity, to avoid that Pompous and that
affected Air, which are both so contrary to that Character which is required in
History: because, whatsoever is great, ceases to be so as soon as it is stripped
of that simplicity; and that which is pure and great too, receives an accession
of greatness, and becomes lofty. Si oration perderet gratiam simplicis and
inaffectati coloris, perderet and fidem. Fab. l. 9. c. 4.
Nothing also instructs, and gets the public applause, more than that
simplicity of Style, so beloved of the Ancients, and so little known by the
Moderns. All that which is exaggerated, seems false; and Nature, which you
ought to have for your object, delights not in impertinent flourishes. But that
you may exactly understand that simplicity which is so necessary to a great
Style; you must consider that there are three sorts of it; A simplicity in
words, as that of Caesar; a simplicity in the Thoughts, as that of Salust, a
simplicity in the Design, as that of Thucydides, so much valued by In judicio
de Thucydide.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus.

The Moderns, which have come the nearest to that Character, are, amongst the
French, Phillip de Commines; Guichardin amongst the Italians, Buchanan in
Scotland, Mariana amongst the Spaniards; the greatest part of the rest, seek
only to maintain themselves by the Purity, Politeness, and other Ornaments of
Discourse, when they have not a Spirit great enough to attain that simplicity;
and they disguise the Truth, when they want strength to show it naked. Happy is
the Man that can attain it, when he makes writing his Business; those that are
ignorant may understand it, at the same time that the intelligent are charmed
with it. But nothing is harder to get, than that plain and natural way, which
makes the simplicity of the Style. A Genius extraordinary is required to
express things clearly, without dropping into a low and cold style. For at the
same time that you endeavor after simplicity, you ought to dread nothing more
than flatness: What is then, that admirable simplicity, which is the highest
perfection of a great work, and wherein does it consist? Homerus brevem quidem
cum animi jucunditate, propriam, carentem superfluis eloquentiam Menelao dedit,
quae sunt virtutes generls primi. Fab. l. 12. c. 10.
It is to make use only of the most common and fittest words, but they must
always be full of a great sense, as that Prince does, to whom Homer gives a
brief Eloquence, agreeable, proper, without superfluity. Exponere simpliciter
^ne ulla Exornatione Cic. l. 2. de Invent.
It is to think and speak just what you have to say and to think, without
giving too much quickness to your expression, as Strada does; and without
giving too great a brightness to your thoughts, as Grotius did. It is to have
your Sentiments ordinary and natural, not making so many Arguments and
Reflections, as Davila in his History of the Troubles: for as soon as you argue
so much, it is no more Nature that speak's, it is Art and Study: and those
discourses so labored, smell of the Schools. Non dicere ornatius quam simplex
ratio veritatis ferat. Cic. l. 1. de Orat.
It is not to mix more Ornament in your discourse than the modesty of the truth
can bear. It is to express that natural and free air of Xenophontis illam
sucunditatem inaffectatam, quam nulla affectatio consequi possit, upsae
sermonen Gratiae finxisse videantur. Fab. l. 10. c. i.
Xenophon, which no imaginable affectation can attain. It is, in fine, to
possess that mavelous talent of paring off the superfluous part of the
Discourse, of which Phocian was so excellent a master; of whom, simple as he
was, Demosthenes was wont to say, when he saw him ascend the Tribunal, as his
Antagonist, Plutarch.
Here Is the sword which is going to cut off all the superfluity of my words.
That you may well establish that Character, which, besides a great store of
Wisdom and good Sense, requires much exercise and a great deal of Meditation;
you must avoid the use of those Authors whose imagination is too full, that you
may not fall in that torrent of false thoughts, boundless expressions, and
those confusions which have but a glance of good sense, into which you will
easily fall, if you have not an exact Sense, and an equal Spirit. You must
propose to your self no other rule of that manner of writing, but the Ancients.
And, among those, you must make choice of them which have most of this
simplicity. (...).
Hermogenes propounds Theocritus and Anacreon for great Patterns of it: and
indeed nothing is opener and freer than what they have writ. Herodotus seems to
Longinus too bold. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus finds, that Thucydides, tho a
great Master of that Simplicity, loads some of his Relations with too much of
the matter of fact. Xenophon and Polybius moralize too much, and often hinder
the stream of History by their Reflections. Diodorus Siculus mixes too much
Learning in his Discourses. Plutarch may go for a great original of that
simplicity we look after: for every thing he says relishes of it. Livy seems
not to me more agreeable by all his other great qualities than by that. The
stream of his History is like that of a great River which flows majestically,
as that of Tacitus resembles a deep and swelling River, subject to
overflowings: he never keeps a tenor in his thoughts, but often is immoderate
in his expressions for want of this simplicity. Mariana is one of the most
accomplished among the modern Historians, because he regards it most. For the
simplicity of Style cannot be found in great Subjects, without being
accompanied with greatness and nobleness. Those are the qualities from whence
that first ground which History requires arise, and which we may, in a manner,
call the first Elements of that beauty which it must have, and which ought to
reign more in the mind, and in all the Character of the Historian, than in his
Style and in his Discourse. Here are the other qualities which must be added to
him to make him perfect, which I touch succinctly, without any other order,
than that in which they present themselves to my mind. I begin with the Matter
and the Form; that is to say, with that which is most essential to History.

VI. The Matter in History.
The Matter fit to exercise the Art of an Historian is a vast field, since it
extends it self to all the Actions of men, viz. Peace, War, Councils,
Negotiations, Ambassies, Intrigues, and all the several Adventures which may
happen in this life. In rebus magnis, memoriaque dignis Historiam versari. Cic.
de Orat. l. 2.
Cicero requires two qualities in the matter of an History. Historiam afluetam
discurrere per negotiorum celsitudines non humilium minutias indagare causarum.
Ammian. Marcel. l. 26.
That they may be great things, and such as may be fit to be made public. None
has explained better what choice an Historian ought to make of his Subject,
than Dionysius Halycarnassaeus, in the Preface of his History, and in his
Judgment upon Thucydides, where he prefers the choice which Herodotus has made
of his Subject to that of Thucydides, for the reasons which he brings. But, as
falsehood often resembles Truth, it requires a great deal of discretion and
sagacity, to make an exact distinction of it, to unriddle the true motives of
important Actions, from their colors and their pretexts, and to choose your
Argument wisely, which may become curious and fine by the circumstances well
laid together, and by the order wherein you must reduce that which is too wide
and far diffused, by restraining it within the natural extent of those limits
it ought to have. When it is so reduced, let the Historian render himself
Master of it by a deep Meditation upon his Subject, which he ought entirely to
understand. Equidem non affirmare sustineo de quibus dubito, nec subducere quae
accepi. Curt. l. 9.
But let him also be so exact and religious, as never to abuse the Credit of
the Public, by giving his own Conjectures for truth, or certain things for
doubtful ones. Let him ascend, as much as in him lies, to the Spring of the
Instructions he shall have given him, to make a just distinction of them. Let
him never assure things upon common Reports, of which the Authors are always
uncertain. Let him deliver them upon very sure Memoirs, and upon very faithful
Relations. Let him not abandon himself too rashly to the Historians which have
been before him, lest he should lose his way by following ill Guides. Let him
make a great difference between those Relations that are interested, or
suspected of Prejudice, and those that are not so. Let him always have a care
of the Partialities of those which furnish him with Memoirs, because
preoccupation can never make but false Histories. Herodotus, (whose History
Apud Herodotum sunt innumerabiles fabulae. l. 1. de Leg.
Tully condemns as fabulous) wrote only upon ill Memoirs, as Josephus pretends.
Marcellin. in vita Thucyd.
Thucydides, who had a mind to mend himself by avoiding that fault, confines
himself to the History of his Time, not trusting any body, in writing only what
he had seen, or what he had learned from People worthy to be believed, and from
Memoirs, which he collected with great expenses, not only from the Athenians,
but also from the Lacedaemonians, that he might be informed of both Parties.
Xenophon, Polybius and Procopius, have done almost the same thing. Dio Cassius
confesses in his History, that he had been ten years in preparing the
materials. Salustius marca transgressus dicitur, ut oculis suis crederet de
conditionibus locorum. Petrare.
Petrarch assures us, that Salust went into Africa, that he himself might
observe the Situation of the Places he was to speak of in his History of the
War of Jugurtha, not being willing to trust any other than his own eyes. For it
is very important to be well assured of the ground you write upon. Lucian makes
the Historian of his Time pass for a fool, who wrote the War of Armenia upon
common reports, having never seen any body who had been in Syria, where the
Battle was fought: And Vopisc. in praefat. Hist.
Vopiscus took the resolution to write the History of the Emperor Aurelian,
only upon the assurance that Junius Tyberianus, Minister of State, gave him, to
furnish him with good Records. But it is not enough to have had a share in the
Transactions of affairs; there is also great need of an Excellent Spirit to
deliver them well.

Hist. lib. ^2.
Polibius says, that Callisthenes was eye witness of the Action between Darius
and Alexander, when he gained the straits of Cilicia: yet for all that, there
are a great many very gross errors in the Description of that important
Expedition, and all because he was ignorant of the Art of War, and of the order
which was observed in Battles in those Days. You must then, above all things,
be very sure of your Matter, which shall never be wanting to those that have
Wit: but you may want assurance, if you do not well discern the things you
relate. How many false Memoirs are found, because they are spoiled by People
that were interested? though nothing is more common than Materials for History,
by reason that every thing may serve to it: We may say also, that nothing is
scarcer than a sufficient assurance of them to fit them for it: and it is
hardly found, because Prejudice occurs every where. Boccal. in Raggual. di
Parnasso.
Boccaline upon that Subject deserves your esteem, when he advises you to write
nothing but what you have seen, and not to make it public before you dye. That
way you are sure of what you say, and there is no prejudice against it. But, take
care above all things, to choose great Subjects, which can subsist upon their
own stock: a great matter gives luster and weight to your words; and Art must
play in small Subjects, and supply their weakness.

VII. The Form.
The Form, which ought to be given to History, is that which is most essential
to it. It is that which makes it Great or Little, and it is that from whence
you take the Author's genius. You must then have an exalted Spirit, capable of
great Idea's, if you will write well; that so, becoming a Master of your
Subject, you may give your Matter what Form you please. It is upon that Model
that Livy gives to his History a character of greatness, which is beyond all
other Historians, by giving to all the Subjects he treats of, the colors their
ground is capable to receive. Thus he gives to the last Kings of Rome all the
Pride that an absolute Authority inspired them with; He changes the Spirit of
the Commonwealth, by the austere Virtue of the first Consuls, by the Populary
Motions of the Tribunes, by the austerity of the Government of the Decemvirs;
by the lazy Delicacy of the last Consuls; that he distinguishes each Age by the
Genius which has been predominant in it, not confounding the different motions
of that genius with the different circumstances of Times, which don't resemble
one another, and that he sustains himself always by the great Images he gives
of the things he treats of. Tacitus to the contrary, gives almost to all his
Matters the same form: all is done there by Policy; the People he speaks of,
have always a Spirit higher than others. It is not their Spirit which makes
them move, it is that of the Historian, who having a spirit too compacted, gives
always the same Air to his expressions, and the same turn to his thoughts: all
things resemble one another. Policy is still made the cause and the result of
all things. Tyberium ascitum. quod ejus arrogantiam introspexerit, and
comparatione deterrima sibi gloriam quaesivisse. Tacit. l. 1. Annal.
If Augustus on his deathbed chose one to succeed him, he appointed an
Emperor worse than himself, on purpose that he might be mourned for. If
Dolabella in absurdam adulationem progressus. l. 3. Ann.
Tyberius made Piso Governor of Syria, 'twas only to make him a Spy to
Germanicus, by whom Egypt had been governed, and whose glory he did envy.
Dolabella's flatteries displeased him, because they were too course.
Suspectabat Syllam socors ejus ingenium callidumque simulatorem interpretando.
l. 13. Annal.
If he banishes Sylla, it is because he thinks his silence a wise dissimulation.
That Emperor's modesty; is nothing but a hidden Ambition; his favors are only
snares; his moderation is nothing but pride, and his Religion is nothing but
grimace. He reckons it a sign of the God's displeasure, that Sejanus should
become Favorite of the Emperor, and be raised to be a Minister of State.
Arruntius poisons himself out of Policy, that he might not fall into the hands
of a master more brutish than Tyberius. He finds an agreeableness even in the
Emperor Claudius's folly, and a great deal of Wit in the debauches and
brutishness of Nero. Temporibus Neronis sapientia pro inertia fuit. ibid.
Some of the Blockheads of that Age and Reign, he represents as men of refined
Prudence. In fine, all the characters resemble one another; Nature has no share
in any thing, her Sentiments are always forced, and every where it is the same
genius, which reigns by the impression of the Historian's Wit, and which has no
great variety. Mariana runs on with a fuller career. The Romans, the
Carthaginians, the Christians, the Arabians, the Moors, the Mahometans, make
every one their Figure. The Wit of the Author mingles it self only with the
other Spirits, to distinguish them according to their characters, opening
always some new way as different as the Subjects he treats of requires. We may
say also, that among the Moderns, no History is greater for its form than that
of Mariana.

VIII. The End of History.
Romance only pleases, History instructs: This is the essential difference
between them; this having no other end, than the instructing of the Public.
Alias in Historia leges observandas, alias in Poemate; illa ad veritatem
quaeque, in hoc ad delectationem referri pleraque. Cic. 1. de legib.
For, as it is not compiled only for the present; its aim ought not to be
limited to the time, which passes away, but to Posterity, which is Everlasting.
What folly were it in a Man, that should think of nothing but diverting the
People of the Age he lives in, when he may become useful to all Ages? Those are
the Reasons O pulchra ista pars, quae actiones vitamque been format ac dirigit.
Tacit. Ann. l. 3.
Lucian uses, to oblige an Historian to think of nothing but of being useful,
by ruling the Hearts and Minds of Men by the Instruction he gives them. They
are deceived, he says, who pretend that History can be divided into two parts,
the Useful and Agreeable; for an Historian ought to have no other prospect,
than the profit People draw from a sincere and true Narration. If he intermix
some thing that is agreeable, he ought not to corrupt the Truth, but rather to
embellish it, and make it the more acceptable. And, to justify his Opinion, he
shows the extravagant way of the Historians of his Age, which made themselves
ridiculous by following other Principles. Graecis historiis plerumque poeticae
similis est licentia. Fab. l. 2. c. 4.
Herodotus sought how to please those of the Age he wrote in, but his Sincerity
was so run down in the following Ages, that it Et quicquid Graecia mendax
peccat in Historia. Juv. Sat. 10.
made the Sincerity of the Greek Historians be suspected in Quintilian's Time.
Photius makes mention of an Historian, which thought that his saying incredible
things made him the more acceptable. And Quidam incredibilium relatu
commendationem parant: and Lectorem aliud acturum, si per quotidiana duceretur,
miraculo excitant; and opus suum fieri populare non putant, nisi mendacio
asperserint, Sen. l. 7. quaest. Not.
Seneca complains, that in his Time there were Historians who pretended to make
themselves famous by their fabulous Narrations. This was always pleasant to the
People who delight in Fictions; but not to Men of Sense and Honesty, who love
Truth only. In the following Ages, the Arabians stuffed their Writings with so
many Fables, that they spoiled the greatest part of the Greek Historians of
their Age, by the fancy then in fashion, of mingling surprising Adventures in
all their Relations: they thought the only way to please the People, was to say
incredible things. The same Spirit infected part of the Modern Graecians, which
is the cause why the Account we have of those Times by the Byzantine History,
is not the surest in the World, the Authors of it not seeming very exact; and
when an Author writes by their Memoirs, he ought to take great Precautions
against so false an Idea, to make People believe him, because the least
falsehood spoils all, and converts Truth into a Fable. Even the truest things
ought not to be told, when they appear incredible or extraordinary, unless you
give 'em an appearance, or, at least, a color of Truth. It is what Thucydides
does: and, though he saw Herodotus in so great an esteem, that the names of the
Muses were given to his Books, he thought of nothing but of speaking the Truth,
without minding to please the People. Lucian. de conser. Hist.
I had rather, said he, please by telling Truth, than be pleasant in telling
Tales: because, if I be not pleasant, I may be useful; and perhaps, I might do
hurt in being agreeable. Utilitatem juvandi praetulerunt gratiae placendi.
Plin. praef. Hist. Not. de Thucyd. and al. Hist.
Be then strongly persuaded, that nothing is fine in History, but that which is
real; and that, Truth being its greatest Ornament, an Historian that will
please, ought to speak true.

IX. That Truth is the only mean through which History comes to its end: and
how it is to be found.
Truth being the only mean by which History can surely instruct; Truth ought to
make the chiefest Rule of History, as your History ought to be the ground of
People's Belief. But where is it to be found? Is there any thing in the World
more hidden than Truth? For, besides the Clouds she is commonly encompassed
with, which render her sometimes unaccessible, she is wrapped up with all the
Disguises men's imaginations are capable of. And if the ordinary ignorance of
short-sighted Writers is an obstacle to the knowledge of Truth; their little
sincerity, nay, their fabulous way, is a far greater. For how often do we give
wrong Judgment, through false Idea's which arise from our Passion, Interest, or
Prejudice, which Error or Opinion are wont to inspire Men's minds? In fine,
Truth being of a nature so unknown to Men, either through her own obscurity, or
through the weakness of their Understanding, or for want of application; there
is nothing harder than to make her known to the Public without defacing her.
And, as she is continually corrupted, and even profaned, through the baseness
of her Adorers, the most part of the Historians being commonly Pensioners of
Courts: You ought to set your self above hope or fear, as soon as you meddle
with writing, that you may always dare to say the Truth. But, it is not enough
to have a mind to say it, you must also make your self able, by seeking it in
its purest original, by searching the Closets of the Learned and curious, and
by consulting the Instructions of those who have had a share in businesses, to
unravel what has been most mysterious in the most private intrigues.

You must, above all things, study Men in general; to discover their Spirit, to
dive into their Secrets, to know the greatest weakness of their hearts, to
penetrate their very thoughts, that you may not impose false ones upon them;
and to judge of them by those natural and unforeseen Motions, which slip from
them without their notice. That way you may discover the true sentiments of the
Soul; the heart having no spare time to observe it self and to put on a
disguise: for as soon as it reflects, it forces it self, as Agrippinae pavor
and consternatio mentis emicuit, quamvis vultu premeretur. Octavia, quamvis
rudibus annis, dolorem, charitatem, affectus omnes abscondere didicerat. Ita
post breve silentium repetita convivii laetitia. Tacit. l. 13. Ann.
Tacitus observes in Agrippa, and in Octavia Sister to Britannicus. For, in the
moment that the poison which Nero sent him at the Banquet at which he died,
seized his Spirits; Octavia, as well as Agrippina showed Consternation in their
faces: But, as Octavia thought to marry Nero, and Agrippina his Mother; a Woman
naturally proud, had a mind to Reign, upon a politic Account they resumed
their Countenance; and that they might not anger the Emperor, who was making
sure of his Rival to the Empire; they force their Sentiments, hide their
Sorrows, and continue their Supper with the same mirth, (whilst the Prince was
expiring in the Antichamber) as if nothing had passed of that kind. There is a
great Spirit in that Author, whose design is, to give an exact knowledge of
those whose History he writes. But, our late Authors think but little of that,
and that is the reason why we have so few true Historians. Rerum gestarum
pronunciator sincerus Thucydides. Cic. de Clar. Orat.
There is a Temper of mind, fit to say things as they are, which is not a
common one. It is one of the properties of Thucydides, the most faithful and
sincere of all Historians: There is in his Works a Taste of Truth, and a
discerning of Truth from Falsehood, joined to an exact Spirit, which acquired
him the approbation and esteem of all people. Dionys Halyc. in Judicio de
Thucyd.
Dionysius Halycarnassaeus praises him above all for his sticking to the Truth,
pretending that he never said any thing against his Conscience; in which he has
excelled Herodotus, whose whole design was to please People: for Strabo says,
that he mingles Fables with his Histories on purpose to render them agreeable.
Scribe securus, dicas quod velis, habiturus mendaciorum comites quos historiae
eloquentiae miramur authors. Vopisc. praefaet. Hist.
The Historians of the Low Empire became so great Flaterers, that their want of
Sincerity made Vopiscus change the mind he had of writing the History of his
Time. But, the Governor of the Town, who was a Favorite of the Emperor, took
off that Scruple, in a Discourse he had with him, as they were once walking
together, by showing him, that the greatest Historians had been deceived in
many things. Asin. Poll. apud Florid. Sab.
Pollio tells us, that the same thing had happened to Caesar in his
Commentarys, for not having reviewed his writings. If the greatest men are
subject to err, what will ordinary ones do? Neminem Scriptorum, quantum ad
Historiam pertinet, non aliquid esle mentitum. Vopisc. ibid.
And if Truth does not always show it self in its purity to extraordinary
Spirits, how will it make it self known to small ones, who, through the quality
of their Genius, can say nothing without altering the Circumstances, by
diminishing or enlarging the objects? for there is nothing scarcer than an
exact temper, fit to say things as they are: we say them as we conceive 'em;
and we conceive 'em good or bad, according as our Imagination is: and, of many
that have seen the same thing, there is not often above two that relates it
alike, every one saying what he has seen, according to the Idea he has
conceived of it, and as his mind is turned. The quality then, I say, most
requisite for an Historian, is a Spirit exact and faithful, in speaking the
Truth in all its Circumstances, so as to deserve the People's belief. But it is
not enough for an Historian to say what is true, he must give it also a fine
turn: that turn is the Style; let us see which is the most Convenient for
History.

X. The Style fit for History.
The Style is the Form of the Discourse, and the manner you write in: the
fittest for every body is that which is most comformable to his genius, which
ought to be followed, without forcing it; so that a Style mixed is always
vicious. It is a defect of Strada in his History of the Low Country's, who by
the clearness of his Imagination, and by his great Lectures, had filled his
mind with different characters; and that mixture which is found in his manner
of writing, how agreeable soever it is, diminishes its Perfection. Verum ipsum
inscribentis sinceritate candoreque elucet. Melch. Can. in loc. Theol. l. 11.
c. 6.
Mariana, who was of the same Society, has more strength, and is smoother in
his Style. But the fittest Style for History is that which has most of the
Character of Truth, and wherein that natural light of Sincerity, which commonly
accompanies the Truth, shines most: for, people easily believe things digested
thus. Luc. de conser. Hist.
The Style for History, as Lucian says, must be clean and natural, because that
clearness is the Rule of what it ought to say, as Truth is a Rule of what it
ought to think. Its Quanquam vincta sit, soluta videri debet oration. Fab. l. 9.
c. 4.
Discourse must be free, though well compacted, and that it may have that
freedom which makes it natural, it requires less number than Turn. Historia non
tam finitos numeros, quam orbem contextumque desiderat. ibid.
But because an Historian ought to read ancient Authors, to make himself a
Style according to his capacity, he shall find it necessary to make his
Observations in that Study, and so form to himself a Method fit for his Design.
In Herodoto omnia leniter fluunt: tum ipsa dialectus habet jucunditatem. Fab.
l. 9. c. 4.
Herodotus's Style is sweet, flowing, and agreeable. That of Thucydides
praesractior, nec ita rotundu^. In eo orbem orationis desidero. Cic. in Bruto.
Thucydides is nobler and greater, but not so natural; he has a rough way,
which makes him obscure, and he has less number and less turn than Herodotus.
Obscurus ^t quia pressus. ibid.
Xenophon has a tender and sweet strain. His Discourse, which is not unlike to
pure and clear Water, has no fellow in Antiquity, except Caesar's; for nothing
was ever writ in Latin more clearly. Tribus libris de bello civili Caesari
falso ascriptis nihil durius, nec candori Caesariano minus conveniens Flor.
Sabin. in calum. long. lat.
A Modern Crtick's observation (who remarks some difference of Style in his
Book of the Civil Wars, which he pretends to have not been written so purely as
the Wars of the Gauls) goes beyond me: I have not knowledge enough to find
that, and I am of Suetonius's Mind, who makes no difference throughout. I
confess I am delighted with the Eloquence and Simplicity of that Author, no
body ever wrote more clearly; Genus oration is fusum and cum lenitate quadam a
quabili profluens, sine judiciali asperitate, and Sententiarum forentium
aculeis prosequendum. Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
but the Nobleness of Livy's Discourse charm my Spirits. That Historian has
been read with respect in all Nations, for almost now two thousand years, upon
the score of that Majestic way of speaking, which has been admired by all
Ages. Nothing also fills my Fancy better than that admirable choice of Words
always fitted to his Sentiments, and that expressing of Sentiments always
conformable to the things he Speaks of. In a word, he is the Man of all, that
has better attained to that Style Cicero advises one to follow in History, And
it is by that great Model that Mariana, Buchanan, Paulus Aemilius, Paulus
Jovius, and all those who carried any Vogue after their Age, have formed
themselves in the way of Writing History. Tacitus is not so fit; for that
Luster of his high flights is like Lightning, whose Brightness dazels, instead
of making the Matter plain. Paterculus and Florus have given a small Air,
flourished and delicate, which pleases their Readers. The Writers Augustae
Historiae, as Ammianus Marcellinus, Lampridius, Spartianus, Julius Capitolius,
Vopiscus, and the others, have degenerated in a cold and impure Style, which
has nothing of that Noble Simplicity of former Ages. Salustius rerum Romanorum
florentissimus Author. Tac. l. 3. Hist.
Salust is great and elevate in his way of Writing, which causes Quintilian to
compare him to Thucydides. Salustio vigente amputatae Sententiae, and obscura
brevitas fuere pro cultu. Sen. l. 11. Epist. 114.
Q. Curtius has a polished and bright Style. And by those two Methods, which
are almost the only two fit to be used, you may examine which of the two is the
fittest for History; and that Question is the most important that can be made
upon that Subject.

XI. Which is the properest for History, the Great or the flourished Style?
In a Question of so great a Consequence as this, which is not yet determined;
it is enough for one to give the Reasons which may serve for the decision
thereof, when a Man has not the Authority of determining it. Verba excerpsit
Salustius ex originibus Catonis. Suet. in Aug.
Salust has a Greatness in his Style; but some of his Expressions are harsh,
which makes him look dry in some Places, because he had formed himself by the
rudeness Salustius Scriptor seriae et severae orationis. Aulug. l. 17. c. 18.
of the Remains of Cato; which gives to his Discourse a Gravity which looks
like Severity. And contrariwise, none is more polished than Q. Curtius; It is
an admirable Flower of Expression, which pleases Men of Wit, but the business
is, that we must examine whether the stiff Style of Salust, hard as it is, be
not wholsomer and fitter for History, giving as it does Weight, Strength, and
Greatness to the Discourse. Is it not rich? and don't we find sometimes in that
hard and severe Style, that agreeableness of which Demetrius the Phalerian
speaks; which Homer. Odyss. l. 9.
Homer has so well expressed in his Odyssaea, about the Adventures of
Polyphemus; where Demetrius pretends, in his Book of Elocution, that he is the
first Author of it; that is to say, those Graces which have nothing soft nor
effeminate, and which are agreeable without being affected. The same Author
quotes many Examples of it, taken out of Xenophon, who has the Art of making
things Pleasant, which of themselves are not at all so. Herein that severe
Style properly consists, which Hermogen. de Ideis, l. 1. c. 5. and l. 2. de
invent.
Hermogenes prefers to a soft Style, when he says, that a mere naked Narration
has often more Strength, than a Narration which is adorned and flourished;
because a severe Style may have some Greatness, and a soft Style can only have
a Mediocrity. That is also the Reason why he reckons good Sense, (though never so
naked) amongst the qualities of the Noble and elevated Style. This was, says
he, the Character of Pericles, upon which Demosthenes formed himself to that
strong and fierce Eloquence, wherein he has excelled: Hiperides, says he, in
another place, is great though careless: his Style is rough and dry, but it is
noble and elevate; Austerus graeca consuetudine Cornal. Fron. de differvocum.
for, that Austerity of Style, which was the true Character of the Greeks, is
nothing but Artis severae si quis amat effectus, mentemque magnis applicat,
prius more frugalitatis lege polleat exacta. Pet.
a true and exact Sense, and a just and correct Reason; which, without stopping
at a show of Brightness, pursues Solidity. Si juvenes verba atroci stylo
effoderent, jam illa grandis oration haberet maiestatis suas pondus. Petr.
It has nothing false in its Sentiments; all its Attention is bent toward a
Sobriety of Discourse, which is nothing but Sense and Simplicity. Plutarch also
attributes that Style to Demosthenes, which Dionysius Halycarnassaeus does not
distinguish from the great and elevate. It is, in fine, that strength of
Expression, which alone gives to our Discourse, Nobleness and Majesty, by which
it becomes great and solid. Hence it is that Caesar, tho unaffected, has
something Nobler in the Simplicity of his Discourse, than Tacitus with all the
Pomp of his Words: and there appears a kind of Carelessness in the Ancients,
which is worth all the Diligence of the Moderns. Historica locutio, ubi
munditiem retinuerit, majora ornamenta non requirat, simplex, pura, naturalis
sit, nec Atticum siccitatem refer possit. Beni. l. 1. de Hist.
I don't say, but that a flourished Style may be of use in small Histories,
which have not ground enough to support themselves without help. It is a small
History in French.
The Princess of Montpensier ought to be written with all the Eloquence Art can
allow; but the History of the War of Paris, and of the Late Troubles, ought to
be written with a greater Air; Small Subjects require Finery, great Ones
Strength and Dignity. Let Paterculus be prettily adorned in the Character he
took; but Livy ought to be great and serious: small Beauties ought to be finely
attired to show themselves; but great ones have no need of it, because they
bear a good weight of themselves. Besides, Truth, which is the Soul of History,
becomes suspicious, as soon as it is too much adorned; and Carelessness has more
an Air of Sincerity. This is what was to be observed upon the Style in
particular, after the general Notions I have given thereof: but as it is of use
only in Narration, we'll examine in what manner it ought to be.

XII. The Narration.
History being, properly speaking, nothing but a Historia est narratio rei
gestae, per quam ea quae facta sunt dignoscuntur. Isidor. l. 1. Orig.
Rehearsal of things past, and in the same order as they came to pass, ought
also to be a continued Narration. Expositio praeteritorum Temporum. Fab. l. 4.
c. 2.
Therefore, as it has nothing more essential than the knowing how to relate
well, so, nothing is more difficult. Custodia fidelis rerum gestarum. Tit. Live.
l. 6. Annal.
For it is a great Art to fix an unconstant and fickle Reader's mind. What
wisdom does it not require to manage every where those colors that are
necessary to give the resemblance to things, and to mix constantly with them
those features, those light touches, those graces, that warmth, that quickness,
which hinders a Narration from languishing? how dexterous must an Historian be,
to use both Art and Wit, in what he says, yet not to seem to do so; Dare
orationis varios vultus. gaudent enim res varietate. Fab. l. 9. c. 2.
And by all the variety of Expressions, Figures and Thoughts, to adorn every
part of his History, without the least smatch of Ostentation? what knowledge
ought he to have, to discern what must be said, and what let alone, to speak
and hold his Peace, to dwell no longer than is fit upon the Points he treats
of; to explain things at large, or by degrees, as necessity or a good Decorum
requires; to enlarge or shorten them; to retrench, by a felicity of Expression,
those Topics, which otherwise would be insipid, and never to weary the Reader
by too great an uniformity? In fine, what a Judgment to separate carefully that
which is becoming from that which is not Decent? for upon that chiefly runs
all the Beauty of a Narration, and all the Grace of History. But a Narration is
perfect whenever it has nothing of Superfluity. This is, in a word, the utmost
perfection it is capable of being brought to. The Rules laid down by Cicero
and Circumcisa expositio rei quae supervacuis caret. Fab. l. 4. c. 1.
Quintilian say no more: after them I have nothing to say. For when once the
Superfluities are cut off, the Circumlocutions which are not useful, the
feigned Descriptions which are only fit to make a show, and all the vain
Ornaments of the Discourse are suppressed, every thing comes close to its
point. Densus, brevis, semper instans sibi comitatis affectibus. Thucydides.
Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
The Vigor, the Strength and the Dignity, all support each other, without any
Flatness. In that Thucydides verbis aptus and pressus. Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
Thucydides out-did Horedotus, who is too big in some places, where he gives
himself too much to the fineness of his Imagination. Immortalem illam Salustis
velocitatem consequutus Livius. Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
Salust is of a Character exact and short. He is properly commendable for the
quickness and torrent of his Discourse. Illa Salustiana brevitas, qua nihil
apud aures erudiras perfectius esse potest, captanda. ibid.
That is it which animates him, and makes him so lively. Caesar's Narration is
admirable for its Purity and Eloquence, but it is not quick enough; and he
wants of that Strength which he found too abounding in Terence. Livius in
narrando mira jucunditatis, clarissimique candoris, ita ducuntur omnia tum
rebus, tum personis accommodata. Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
As for Livy, he has a way of rehersing that is very taking, by that Art he has
of mixing in his Narration small things with great ones; because great ones,
when too much enlarged, tire the Reader by reason of the great Attention they
require, and small ones refresh him: it is with that same Method that he varies
his Adventures; that he interchanges sad things for delightful ones; that
Mannages his Light and his Shade with a wise and judicious Temper, that so he
may keep the Reader in tune by that Variety. For a Narration becomes insipid,
as soon as it wants diversity of Accidents, Adventures, Figures, and
Expressions. You must even allow some intervals to things, that your Reader may
take breath, and not intermix your matter by too great a confusion of things.
It is a fault that Dionysius Halycarnassaeus judges Thucydides creber rerum
frequentia. Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
Thucydides guilty of, in the third Book of his History, where he so mixes the
several Interests Dionysius Halyc. tractat. de judic. Thucyd.
of the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and of the other People of Greece, that he
confounds, in a manner, the very appearance of things, by a Narration too much
loaded with Matter: and this failure is incident to those of a copious and
fluent Invention. Though the Rerum ratio ordinem temporum desiderat. Cic. l. 2.
de Orat.
order of Times be the most natural to a Narration, because it unfolds things
passed; there is nevertheless an order of Reason in ranging Events, which ought
particularly to be the study of an Historian. It is only by that secret Order
that you may endear your Reader, so as to imprint your own Sentiments on his
Mind, when you show him Men acting naturally as they ought: and when you show
him their Manners, their Thoughts, their Designs and their Motives, as they are
in a kind of dependency upon each other in the same natural order, which joins
them well together, In rebus magnis, memoriaque dignis, confilia primum, deinde
act^, postea eventus expectantur, Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
An Historian that can well put those things together, is a great Man; that is
the thing which pleases, and not those extraordinary Events which People run
after for want for Judgment; for nothing is more taking than to see men act in
that Order; that alone, when all comes to all, fixes the mind. Livy excelled in
that, because he followed closely that Order, by drawing the Thread of his
History with a connection of Discourse, and by weaving together always those
Actions that are of an equal size. Longin. c. 18.
Longinus has well observed, that Thucydides breaks the Order of things, to
surprise the Reader by that disorder, by bringing in unexpected Occurrences in
his Narration: He tells even sometimes things past in the present time, showing
them as tho they were passing actually, which makes the Reader more attentive,
and affects him most. Tacitus is of a soaring Spirit, who does not say things
in order. His great sense, shut up in the compass of a few words, has not an
extent proportioned to his Reader's minds, who are often overwhelmed with it:
and having not a natural strain in what he says, he scarce ever fits his words
to men's Notions; he does not instruct well: For Example, when on the occasion
of the Papian Law he explains the ground of the Laws; or in another place, he
speaks of Asylums, he does not return to the origin of things; he shows nothing
clearly, or he does it ill; as when he explains the Religion of the Jews, l. 5.
of his History; his very Style is not fir for it, which is a great fault in an
Historian, whose chiefest Profession is to instruct. After all, a Narration is
good (which way soever it is digested) when it pleases.

XIII. Transitions.
The great Art of a Narration, and one of its chiefest Beauties, consists in
the Transitions. In effect, those fine and natural turns, those happy passages
from one Subject to another, make the stream of a Discourse engaging: those
insinuating ways lead the mind of a Reader from one Object to another, and show
him a great deal, without tiring him: In fine, all that admirable Economy of
the Transition, is that which is most delicate and spritely in the Narration,
which seem always constrained, and never easy or natural without that Art. It
is not enough to speak well to attain it: you must be eloquent; you must be
Master of your Subject, and to know the grounds and consequences well; for the
fittest Transitions ought to be much more in things than in words. So that
those Excursions from Kingdom to Kingdom, from Nation to Nation, from Age to
Age, without Method, and without Management, are no way opportune to a well
digested History, wherein all things ought to be well laid and compacted; as in
a great Palace, where nothing ought to be scattered or irregular; for the
compactness, and the proportion of its Apartments, make one of its greatest
Beauties: So History is like a Body, composed of its Members by the Natural
Union; in which Saunder's History of the Schism of England, is very defective,
amongst Moderns, as that of Florus and Paterculus, amongst the Ancients.
Xenophon fluens and fine salebris oration, Cic.
Xenophon's Language is very well knit, sweet and flowing, yet Livy still
exceeds him, his Narration being of one even continued thread; his Transitions
consist less in words than in things. Salust is not so well knit; Tacitus is
still less; his Connexions are forced, and the stream of his Discourse much
interrupted, which surprises the Reader, who must sweat, if he will follow that
Author. The most difficult Transitions are those which are found in the
commonest things; for an Author ought to sustain himself with strong
Expressions, where the matter is but small, and must find a way how to couple
things that otherwise have no Union at all. It is in those places he ought to
show all his Skill. The Reader's mind is so tender, that an Historian cannot
always turn it as he pleases. But he must be conducted from adventure to
adventure, by Connexions well covered for Order's sake. For, in a word, he
often has a foolish pride, and flights, which render him untractable. But there
is need of a great deal of Art to vary those Transitions, which never ought to
be like one another, to give always new Ideas to the Reader, by not showing him
always the same Objects: It is in this an Historian must lay out his Industry;
for herein the gracefulness of a Narration consists, which alone can render it
acceptable and delightful.

XIV. The Circumstances of a Narration.
If a Narration becomes agreeable by the Transitions, it becomes credible by
the Circumstances. For nothing engages one more than a Fact clothed with good
Circumstances, which tho dark and obscure of it self, by the particulars
becomes palpable, clear, sensible and evident; and as the progress of great
undertakings, and of Affairs of importance, is seen only by bringing them into
a good order by the several degrees of their Circumstances; so the Art of
explaining the Truth in all its Dependencies, by unravelling what is
particular, making one of the great Ornaments of History, a Writer ought to
study it with all imaginable care. Here follows the Observations one may make
of it. The great Secret is, to know how to make a wise and judicious choice of
the Circumstances that are capable of giving a great Idea of things, to imprint
in them that Color which can give them credit, and so make way for them to
possess the mind. And this will be obtained by a concourse of great and small
Circumstances mixed with Dexterity, when well chosen. Great Circumstances give
some admiration, and small ones pleasure, provided they are well chosen, and
not exaggerated. But tho an Action, which is not exactly reported, makes no
impression, you must nevertheless shun those Expressions of low and frivolous
Particulars, which make a Subject worse; for you become childish, and even
ridiculous, by sticking too close to little things; As that impertinent
Historian Luc. in Conser. Hist.
Lucian speaks of, who gives a very particular Description of the Parthian's
Vest, and of the Roman Emperor's Shield, when he describes the Fight. Others,
adds he, not thinking of Essential things, lose time in things not useful; as
he, who after having spoke by the by, a word or two of the Battle, which made
then the Subject of his Discourse, stops to relate the Adventures of a Moorish
Knight, the most extravagant in the World. So Procopius, in his secret History,
forgets the Circumstances necessary, and rehearses what is needless. You must
then, in the recital of any Action of Consequence, know well how to lay the
Circumstances which are to make the thing plain, and to sustain it in its
light, by distinguishing the Essential from that which is not so. The most
accomplished pattern we have in History of a great Action, told in all the
Circumstances capable of giving it weight and splendour, is Hannibal's March
into Italy, as it is written in the 21 st Book of the Annals of Livy. It is, in
my judgment, the most perfect part of his History; and there are few things of
that strength in Antiquity. A greater design never entered into a more
extraordinary mind; and nothing was ever accomplished more cleverly. The
Argument was, Hannibal's coming out of Africa, marching through Spain, over the
Pyrenean Hills; crossing the Rhone, at his very mouth, a River vast and swift,
whose Banks were covered with so many Enemies; his opening himself a way
through the Alps, where no man had ever passed before; traveling upon
Precipices; disputing at every step with People that lay in Ambuscadoes, in
continual Filings, amidst the Snow, Ice, Rain, Torrents, defying Storms and
Thunder; making War with Heaven, Earth, and all the Elements; drawing after him
an Army of a hundred thousand Men of different Nations, and all jealous of a
General, whose Courage they were not able to imitate. The Soldiers Minds were
possessed with fear, Hannibal alone remains unshaken, the danger which
encompasses him, abates the Courage of all the Army, but never disturbs his
Mind. All is drawn in a Relation of horrid Circumstances; in every word of that
Historian danger is expressed; never Picture was better finished in History,
touched with livelier Colors, and with bolder strokes. Nothing also is better
adorned with Circumstances in Tacit. l. 2. Annal.
Tacitus, than that Feast the Empress Messalina made to show her Love to
Silius, her Gallant. All the Ceremonies appeared as tho it had been
Vintage-time, that Season favoring the Feast; Mirth, Pleasure, frolic and
lascivious Debauchery, are all expressed with the fineness of an exquisite
Eloquence; and the Relation thereof is particularized succinctly and sensibly,
and made throughout in such a manner, as speaks Life and Spirit; and nothing is
more judiciously placed, rendering by this lively representation Messalina's
Death, which follows after more Tragical and full of Horror. In fine, there are
happy Circumstances, which give an agreeableness every where, where they are
applied; but you must understand them well, to know where they must be applied.
Things become often greater by their Circumstances, than they do by themselves.
Let us then look into those Circumstances which can both instruct and please,
and keep the Reader from doazing. Let us imitate Davila, who is so taking, by
the Art he has duly to cloth what he says with proper Circumstances; yet great
Relations weary the Spirits; so let us make a judicious distinction of the
Circumstances Necessary, and of Importance, from those that are not so. Let us
consult Lucian, and his Discourse upon History; he is a great Master in that.
But to make a complete Narration, we must join to the Circumstances of its
things, the Motives of its Actions; for Motives well touched make a Narration
as curious, as the Circumstances make it likely.

XV. The Motives.
To tell Men's Actions without speaking of their Motives, cannot properly be
called to write History. It is just like a Gazette, where the Author contents
himself barely to report the Events of things, without going up to their
Spring. As Caesar, who gives merely his Marches, and his Encampings, without
telling their Motives; every thing in his Narration being too plain and open;
tho it is true he writes only Memoirs. It is then that curious rehearsing of
Motives which cause Men to Act, by which alone History it self becomes
delicate, and sustains it self chiefly in important Affairs. To say things as
they are passed, without going to their beginning, is properly to stop at the
outward part of Things. Reason will have it, says Cicero, Rerum ratio vult, ut
quoniam in rebus magnis confilia primum, deinde acta, postea eventus
expectantur; in rebus gestis declarari, non solum quid actum, aut dictum sit,
sed quomodo, and cum de eventu dicatur, ut causae explicentur omnes, etc. l. 2.
de Orat.
that as in Affairs, the Design precedes the Execution; The Historian gives an
Account, not only of Events, but also of Causes; and that in relating what has
been done, he explains how, and for what Reason it was done. Tacitus says
almost the same thing; that it is important for History, not only to tell the
Events of things, but to discover the Ground and Principles of them, and to
touch upon the Motives thereof; Ut non modo casus eventusque rerum, sed ratio
etiam, causaque noscantur. 14. Ann.
by this an Historian distinguishes himself, and makes himself considerable;
and nothing is more pleasing in a Narration, than the Explication of what is
secret, and of Importance in those Peoples Designs and Intentions, whose
Actions it relates; and History having nothing more commendable than this, all
the little Historians, even of the smallest Credit, have endeavored to excel
in that way. For, nothing strikes more upon the Curiosity of men, than this, by
which they are made to discern what is more concealed in men's Minds; that is to
say, the secret motions which make them act, even in their ordinary
Undertakings. It is only by going up to the Cause, that you will see the minds
of those you speak of; that you will discover the Spirit which makes them act
what they are capable of, and that you will find the Truth by searching deeply
into their Intentions. But with how many Falsehoods are Histories filled upon
this fair Pretext? And, into how many Errors do unjust, false, and interrested
Historians daily fall, which abandon themselves to their Conjectures;
distribute their own Imaginations to the Public, to express the Designs of
those whom they speak of? As for Example; That Pericles caused the War in
Peloponnesus, because he loved Aspasia: That Xerxes carried that dreadful Army,
History tells us, only to eat Figs: That M. Anthony lost the Empire, merely
because he would not part with Cleopatra: That Francis the First of France,
carried his Armies over into Italy, only upon the account of the fair Lady
named Claricea. There is nothing more ticklish and difficult than to search
into men's hearts, and thence to guess or discover what they think; for an
Author will tell all he knows, and all that comes into his mind, rather than
fail telling the Truth. It is one of the greatest failings in Davila, whose
Discourses are otherwise just enough; but his conjectures in the motives of the
Actions he relates, do not prove very true, if we may take the Truth from their
Fathers. Not but that, after all, an Action very well cleared to its very
Motives, and a Secret well penetrated, might give a great Idea of the
Historian's Ability, and make us judge, that he speaks like a man well
informed, and looks very well in History.

But that an Author, Haud facile animus rerum provider, ubi officiunt odium,
amicitia, ira, atque misericordia. Caesar. apud Salust. in Catil.
who pretends to guess, be always upon his Guards against prejudice; that he
hearkens neither to his Affection nor his Hatred; to avoid Artifice, and those
Colors men are prompt to give to things, in favor of that side he is
prejudiced for; that he inserts no falsehoods, to justify his Conjectures, and
to make things agree with that Air he is pleased to give them; that he neither
diminish nor exaggerate any thing, as Tacitus, who casts a Poison every where;
or as Paterculus, who strows every thing with Flowers. Let him not show men
worse affected than they are, as Herodotus does, when he says, that the
Persians were called into Greece by the Spartiates, because they could resist
the Lacedaemonians no longer, nor suffer them, as Plutarch. de Herod. Malig.
Plutarch reproaches him; let him not also cover an unjust dealing with a good
intention, as Callias of Syracuse, who justifies all the Actions of Agathocles,
because he did him some good, as Excerp^ Constable. ex Diodoro.
Diodorus takes notice; nor as Paulus Jovius, in respect of Cosmus de Medicis,
not long since. There are in all Historians mistakes of that kind, because they
are few that have a mind steady enough to resist their Prejudice. But tho the
motives in great men ought regularly to be better and greater than their
Actions; for the motives depend upon them, but the events do not: yet it is but
a small mistake, as Noble men are, to mix in their Counsels, and in their
Deliberations part of the pride and of the weakness they are subject to: for
oftentimes it is only through some impertinent and ridiculous motives, that the
most part of men are determind. There is an infinite number of Examples
thereof, which I leave, that I may not exceed bounds upon that matter. You
must, above all things, know well the Vanity, the Malice, the Ignorance, and
the Folly of men's minds, which always conforms to their Principles, to know
well the bottom of their Intentions, and search his Weakness, which is the
great Principle of Malice; and above all things, not to be ignorant, that the
Laziness of most great men, in examining the bottom of Affairs, and the
impatience they have to judge of them upon what the Conduct most essential to
their Affairs depends. It is them we must necessarily know, for being, as they
are, the Great Actors upon the Stage of this World, all things, for the most
part, are ruled by their Extravagancies: But it does not follow, that if we
have done once well in this way, by chance, we should be able to do it always.
There are Historians in this Age, which have ruined their Reputation by too
great an itch of mingling their Conjectures with all Events, and imposing their
own Conceits upon the Public instead of History; as Herrera, who says, that
the Duke of Parma did not do the best he could against the Hollanders, to
manage them with Policy. There is nothing more contrary to an Historian's mind,
(who ought to be sincere and faithful) than those conjectures which are built
in the Air, without any Foundation, and all Discourses grounded upon many
conjectures, are either uncertain or frivolous. This is what must be observed
in Transitions, in Circumstances, and in the Motives wherein the chief Art of a
Narration consists. This is also what must be regarded in its other parts,
which are the Figures, the Passions, the Descriptions, the Speeches, the
Reflections, or the Sentences; the Characters of Persons, the Digressions, and
all that can enter in the Economy of the Discourse which History ought to be
made of.

XVI. Figures.
History makes use of Figures only to animate it self: The Speaker, who has a
mind to impose, speaks always by Figures, that the Springs of his Art may play
the better: but the Historian, whose mind is only to instruct, ought to use
them in another way. That very Simplicity which Truth requires in History, does
not take that way of figurating, which would injure its Candor and Ingenuity.
Luc. de conser. Hist.
Lucian, who is admirable every where else, is not here so much as against
those vain Ornaments of Eloquence, which are not convenient for History. If,
says he, you lay on too many of them, you will make it like Hercules, dressed with
his Mistress's Clothes; which is the greatest of all Extravagancies. It is yet
less capable, continues he, of those clear marks Poetry uses, to cause those
motions in men's hearts, by moving the Passions. That History which is candid
and sincere, and does not design to impose upon me, ought to leave my heart
free, to judge the better of what it tells me. Eloquence, which by its
Character, is an Art that imposes, may steal upon my Liberty, by striving to
persuade me against my will. But an History which fixes it self purely within
the Limits of Instruction, cannot handsomely make use of Figures, no further
than to take from the Discourse its natural coldness, and to render it less
tedious. It is only by these means that Herodotus, Thucydides and Xenophon,
keep up the Reader's mind: And Saluji, Livy and Mariana, never use Figures to
impose upon the Public. Tacitus is not so scrupulous; he looks like a man who
thinks of nothing but of dazzling your Eyes: The boldness of his Metaphors, and
of his other Figures, make his Expressions troublesome and too high. Caesar
scrip^ Commen^ (...). Cic. in B^t.
Caesar is upon another Extreme; It is a Discourse naked, without Figures,
unprovided of all Attire. It is not but that a figured Expression, made on
purpose, might please sometimes more than proper words, because it makes the
Images livelier, and more agreeable to the mind, and gives strength and
nobleness to the Discourse; and there is a boldness of Style, provided it be
wise and judicious, which is admitted in places that want Life. But for
Figures, to be well applied, be sure they be modest and familiar, not taking
the flights of Poetry, or high Eloquence; Let them not be, says Lucian, too
bright, nor too elaborate, unless in the Description of a Battle, or in a
Speech, where an Historian may spread the Sails of his Eloquence, without
soaring too high.

XVII. The Passions.
The Passions also make one of the great Ornaments of the Narration, when they
are on purpose, and that they are touched judiciously. The Truth is, that they
do not require that heat which ought to accompany the Stage: one must give them
another Air; for they are not to be acted, but rehearsed. An Historian may make
his Discourse passionate, but he ought not to be passionate himself. Therefore
let him study men to the bottom, that he may lay open in his own mind the most
private motions Passion is capable of raising there, that he may express its
trouble and disorder; and that well applied, is very agreeable in a Narration.
Thucydides has treated that part better than Herodotus; for he is more
eloquent, and more pathetick, as Dionys. Halicar. Epist. ad Pompei. and de
Virt. Sermon.
Dionysius Halycarnassaeus says, tho Herodotus has sometimes more life.
Hermogenes propounds an admirable Model of a tender, affectionate, and
passionate Narration in the Death of Panthaea, Queen of Susiana, which is
written in the Seventh Book of Xenophon's Cyropoedia. It is one of the finest
places in that Author: All is said in a touching Strain. Photius assures us,
that Josephus has a great Art in his Discourse, to move the Soul by the
Passions. Affectus eos praecipue, qui commendavit.
Quintillian affirms, that dulciores sunt, nemo Historicorum Livio magis Fab.
l. 10. c. 1. Livy, of all Historians, has most signalized himself by those
tender and delicate ways, whereby he has entertained the sweetest motions of
the Soul: Affectus eos praecipue, qui dulciores sunt, nemo Historicorum Livio
magis commendavit. Fabius, l. 10. c. 1. The Rape of the Sabins, those tender
motions they showed at that time to take the Arms out of the hands of the
Romans, their Husbands, and of the Sabins, their Fathers; the Death of
Lucretia; Her Body exposed to Public View, to move the People to rebel
against the Tarquins; Vetturia at her Son Cariolanus's Feet, to appease his
Fury, when he came to besiege Rome; Virginia stabbed by her Father; the
Consternation of Rome, after the Battle of Cannae; and a thousand other such
things, touched in his History by the most tender Expressions imaginable, are
fine Examples thereof. And it is in that Historian you ought to study the way
of treating Passions as they ought to be in History; for he animates himself
only in the places where heat is requisite. Tacitus does not mind how to manage
his heat; he is always passionate; and even those Colors he uses, are always
too strong: and because he is still too full in some things, and that he does
not Copy after Nature, he does not move so much. I say nothing of the other
Historians, the greatest number of whom have not understood the Passions, nor
the way they ought to be represented in. It is a particular kind of Rhetoric,
which requires a great Sense, and a very exact knowledge of Morality. But, if
we intend to please, let us beware of those Dry Narrations, which are void of
the moving strokes which Nature requires.

XVIII. The Descriptions.
That Affectation which appears in most Historians, in making Descriptions,
has, in a manner, run down its use amongst judicious people. Nothing indeed is
more childish, than a Description too much polished in a serious History. Young
Authors run headlong into it, without distinction: You cannot be too
circumspect in the use thereof. The Principle which is observable in it, is,
That you must use it no more than is necessary to illustrate those things, the
knowledge whereof is essential to what you write. Such is the Description of
the Isle of Capraea, lib. 4. Annal. Tacit. For it denotes the Reason Tyberius
had to retire thither toward the latter end of his life, which renders it
necessary; and being short, eloquent, and polished, without any Superfluity,
one may say, that it is as it ought to be. The Description Sal. in Bello Jugurt.
Salust made of the place where Jugurtha was defeated by Metellus, serves to
make one know the Fight better. You may see there the Virtue of the Roman, as
well as the Experience of the Numidian King, by the advantage he had taken in
possessing himself of the Hills: and all the recital of the Battle, is better
understood, by that draught of the place which the Historian lays before your
Eyes, as well as the Picture of that place, where Hannibal fought Minucius,
Book 22. Annal. Livii, which is a place well touched. Descriptions might again
be allowed in a great History, to make the Narration more pleasing, provided
they be fitted well to the purpose, and free from that superfluity which
commonly accompanies them, when given by young Historians. The desire they have
to show their Parts that way, makes them fall in a pitiful childishness. Nay,
Luc. de Hist. conser.
Lucian finds fault with the too long Description which Thucidides makes of the
Plague of Athens, in the Second Book of his History; and he is, perhaps, in the
right: for that Author, tho wise, runs into a Narration of that Disease too
particular: But that Critic has more reason, when he complains of that
impertinent Historian of his Time, who took so much delight in making great
Descriptions of Mountains, of Cities, of Battles, which, he says, outdo in
Coldness, all the Snows, and all the Ice of the North. And indeed, nothing is
colder than a description which is too much studied. The Machines of War used
by Caesar, are described in his Commentaries, with a way of Circumstances too
great for so mecanick a matter as that is. That Commander, whose Reputation in
the knowledge of War, is established, seems to have a desire to be thought also
a good Engineer; it looks too much affected for a man so judicious. The
Description of Africa, in the War of Jugurtha in Salust, is too full of
Circumstances. There was no need of so many to mark the Limits of the Kingdoms
of Atherbal and Jugurtha, which were then in dispute: What need was there to
describe all that Country, and to make a distinction of the Manners of the
People, with so much particularity? Descriptions must then be useful, exact,
short, elegant, never studied, having no harshness in them, nor a vain desire
of making your Wit appear more than your Subject, that your Descriptions may
look well, as those of Livy do: 'twere fit you should make him your Pattern.

XIX. Speeches.
I find the Masters Opinions very much divided in that Point. Herodotus,
Thucydides, and Xenophon, have signalized themselves chiefly by their Speeches:
Thucydides did better than any of them; the Speeches of the chiefest Actors in
his History, Pericles, Nicias, Alcibiades, Archidamus, and of all the Nations
that speak by Deputies, are excellent Lessons for Speakers of all Ages; and
Demosthenes formed himself chiefly in that School. Polybius uses more
Formalities: he does not let Scipio speak so much, tho he has reason to do it,
having always been his Companion in War; In Sermonibus effingendis Herodotus,
Thucydides, Xenophon, Salustius nimii videntur: and causa est cur Caesar
Commentarios scripsit, ut id omitteret, in quo alii laborant. Bisciol. l. 7.
hor. subcess.
Caesar is still more sparing; for he makes hardly any Speeches at all,
pretending they are against the Truth of History, and taking rather the part of
writing bare Memories, that he may seem plainer in his Discourse. Dionysius
Halycarnassaeus causes Brutus to make a long Exhortation upon the Death of
Lucretia, that so he might excite the People to Revenge; and that Oration which
he makes Valerius to speak upon the fittest form of Government in a State, Book
7. of his History, is very tedious. Josephus, Appian, Dio Cassius, and
Procopius, are great Discoursers, as well as Thucydides and Xenophon, which
took that Idea of speaking out of Homer: And in truth, if we examine the
grounds of those Discourses, and, above all, of those that are made by
Captains, to encourage the Soldiers to fight, we shall find but little
likelihood in them. Trogus reprehendit in Livio and Salustio, quod Conciones
and Orationes operi suo inserendo, historiae modum excesserint. Just. l. 38.
Trogus reproaches Salust and Livy, with a great deal of reason, for the
immoderate excess of Speeches in their Histories: And indeed all those
Discourses they attribute to great men, have but a false look: for out of what
Memoires could they have taken them? Besides, a Warrier don't speak like one
that makes it his business to speak in public. Livius, Thucydides interserunt
Conciones, quae nunquam abiis, quibus sunt attributae cognitae fuerunt. Scal.
Poet. l. 1.
So when Pericles, in Thucydides, made an Oration in praise of his Soldiers
that had been defeated and killed by the Boeotians: His Speech is feigned, as
well as that which Catiline, in Salust, makes to the Conspirators, which, in
all probability, was secret, and not much studied. This is partly what Ben. l.
2. de Hist.
Beny says, to improve that mistake. Thucydides, who was judicious, took care
of that in his last Books, where he makes fewer Speeches than in the first. But
it is a Natural Lesson; for we never write an History, but we bring in those
that have a share in it, to make them speak; because nothing gives more vigor
to a Narration, which is apt to grow cold by a Discourse too much polished.
There is then a medium to be taken: A small Discourse made on purpose in an
History, by one that bears a Character fit to make it, being also well suited
to the Person and Subject under hand, may please, being put in its due place.
But those formal Speeches at the Head of an Army ready to engage, and those
Deliberations of a tedious prolixity, which are made upon those businesses that
are spoken of, are almost out of fashion in good Histories: And the wisest
choose to make their Hero speak things in few words, without engaging
themselves to say set Speeches; as Livy, in the beginning of his History, has
done by the Ambassadors which Romulus sent to his Neighbors. The most part of
Salust's Speeches are very fine, but never to the purpose; for nothing is finer
than Marius's Speech: It is the best Moral Lecture in the World upon Nobility;
all is reasonable in it; and Antiquity has few of that Strength, to persuade
People to embrace Virtue; but it is set in a wrong place; and the way that he
makes Cato and Caesar give their Opinion in the Senate, how great soever it be,
is not made proportionable to the rest of his History. Of that number is the
long Discourse Dio makes in the 56 th Book of his History, in praise of
Marriage, and of a Batchelor's Life. But on the contrary, there is nothing
firmer than Tyberius's Speech upon the Reformation of Luxury, Tacit. l. 3.
Annal. No Historian ever made a Prince speak with more Dignity. The Speeches of
Agrippa and of Moecenas to Augustus, wherein the one advises him to quit the
Empire, and the other to keep it, are extreme fine in Dio Cassius; but they are
so long, that they take up all the 52 d Book. In fine, to finish this Article,
I am for De Thucydide Orationes quas interposuit laudare soleo: sed imitari
neque possim si velim, neque velim si possim. Cic. declar. Orat.
Cicero's Advice, who speaking of the Discourses of Thucidides, says wisely, I
find them very fine, and I could not do so well if I would, nor would I do it
if I could; which is all that can be well said upon that Subject; For, in fine,
Speakers are always subject to be tedious: And Boccalinus is very pleasant, who
condemns an Old Man to the Penance of reading one of Guichardin's Speeches,
because he had read a Madrigall, with his Spectacles, upon Mount Parnassus.

XX. The Characters of Persons.
Pictures are a great Embellishment in History, when well drawn; but Romances
have spoiled that way; for we make too many, and those such as do not well
resemble: We lose time in describing, after our own Fancy, the Air of the
Person: but this is not the thing Explicentur hominum ipsorum non solum res
gestae, sed vita ac natura. Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
: For what does it signify to me to know whether Hannibal had good Teeth,
provided that his Historian show me the greatness of his Genius; that he show
me a bold and an active Spirit, vast Thoughts, a stout Heart, and all that
animated by an extreme Ambition, and supported too by a strong Constitution, as
Libr. 21. Annal.
Livy has described it? So Salust gives me a great Opinion of Catiline, by the
Picture he makes of him at the beginning of his History: And when I see that
desperate Soldier raise Armies in his Closet, go up to the Senate with a
Silence that shows his Resolution to affront the Consul; to hear, unconcerned,
his Invectives; to put Rome in Allarm, to make Italy tremble; to dare at last
what no Particular ever durst; I am not surpised, after the Description the
Historian has made me of him: I see a Man of Resolution, who stirs all things,
without being seen, because he had taken well his measure. Pompey is far off
with the best Troops of the Commonwealth; tied by a troublesome, tho necessary
War; Rome full of Factious People, the Provinces full of Malcontents: there is
a general Disorder in the Commonwealth, through a Deluge of Vice which
overwhelmed it; and every thing favors Catiline's Design, in the Conjuncture
he found of putting it in execution. So one may guess what might happen of the
War of Atherbal and Jugurtha, after Salust's Description of the Genius's of
both; that I know to the bottom Sylla and Marius, according to the Idea he has
given me of them, and that I take pleasure to see, issuing from their Spring
which that Historian has discovered unto me, the Sequel of Jugurtha's great
Actions, who gave so great disturbance to the Romans, after the Image he has
drawn of that Captain. It is in that manner that the Ancients have mixed in
their Histories those kind of Pictures of the Persons they designed to
represent, to distinguish them from others; which is of great Ornament in a
Piece, when done opportunely: For after a Character is well established by
those Essential Features, which make a distinction of it, all goes on a great
deal better; all things are better understood in the Narration: But it is a
Masterpiece, to hit that Resemblance, which consists only in singular and
imperceptible Features, which alone expresses Nature, and which one hardly
meets with, unless he searches the hearts, and unwraps all their folds, that he
may well know what is hidden. But what strength of Spirit, and what acuteness
is requisite for that purpose? These things that follow are to be observed in
it: First, the Picture ought to be real; and this was Xenophon's miscarriage in
the Picture he made of Cyrus, wherein he gave nothing but the Idea of an Hero.
Secondly, it ought to resemble: in that Tacitus has not been exact enough,
minding to follow rather his Genius, than to imitate Nature; seeking more to
make a good Picture, than to give the resemblance, provided that his Pictures
please; as that of Sejanus, lib. 4. Annal. He cares but little whether they
resemble or not; for he makes him a great deal worse than he is, if we may
believe Paterculus, who praises him much. Thirdly, an Author ought to make only
the Pictures of Persons of Consequence: There Salust mistook in the
Representation of Sempronia, who makes but an indifferent Figure in Catiline's
Conspiracy. But although too much time ought not to be spent in painting the
External Parts of the Person, yet he may do it in some cases, when that may
serve to make the Genius of those you speak of better understood. And indeed
there are several ways of painting: Lucretiam nocte sera non in convivio
luxuque sed deditam lanae inter Ancillas sedentem inveniunt, l. 1. Annal.
Livy, speaking of Lucretia, so fair to her Husband's Eyes, without mentioning
any thing of her Face, paints only her Virtue, and gives in one word, the
greatest Idea that can be given of an honest Woman. Tacitus paints Tyberius
only by his Actions; that way he makes him to be known: Oppressit in Tricliniis
Parasytos suos violis and floribus, sicut animam aliqui efflaverint, Lampr. in
Heliog.
Lampridius makes a right Picture of the Emperor Heliogabalus, saying, that he
stifled his Parasites in heaps of Flowers, after he had drowned them with Wine:
Procopius paints the Empress Theodora by her Gallantries: A drinking bout is
sufficient to the Historian that writes Venceslaus's Life, to draw the Picture
of that Emperor; who caused, says he, his Cook to be put upon the Spit, and
roasted, because he had ill roasted a Pig which that Prince had a mind to eat.
But the best way of painting, is to discover the secret motions of the heart,
which makes the Person better known. It is from thence only that you ought to
take those Features which make a distinction, that you may give a Character
raised from its own ground. All the rest ought to be little accounted of in a
serious History, which can endure nothing but what is judicious. I should not
like also those Pictures which are copied, and taken here and there, as in
Mariana; those he took out of Tacitus: Nor like that of Walstein, in A French
Author, who wrote part of Walstein's Conspiracy.
Sarrasin, which is made up, for the most part, of the finest Pictures in
Antiquity. You ought not to lose time in Copies, when you draw after the Life,
and when you think of making an Original. After all is done, History is the
faithfullest Picture of those you speak of; nothing showing their Character
better than the continuation of their Actions.

XXI. The Reflections and Sentences.
There is much to be said upon that Article, which makes all the delight of
History, when delicately done: but there are many mistakes to be avoided in
this Point, where you can never use too much Simplicity. Xenophon, Polybius,
and Tacitus, are full of Reflections; Thucydides, Salust, and Caesar, are more
reserved. What Party must an Author choose amongst so great Examples of so
different a Conduct, and in so important a matter. And, in truth, the Beauty
which History hopes for from that kind of Ornament, requires to be managed with
exact judgment: For, in fine, a man quits the Character of an Historian, who
ought to tell naturally, what he has to say, without mingling, mal a propos,
his own Conceits with it, when he moralizes upon all sorts of things, turning,
without distinction, the Adventures which offer themselves, great and small,
into curious and Political Reflections. Nothing also is more capable of
adulterating Truth, or, at least, of perplexing it, than those fine thoughts,
which some Authors shuffle in out of their own brains, and which a Reader often
has not Wit enough to distinguish from the ground of History. It is then Wisdom
in an Author to have no srivolous Fancies of his own, to play the Philosopher's
part indifferently upon every thing that presents it self before him; as
Ammianus Marcellinus, who acts too much like a Philosopher, by an Affectation
of appearing Learned, which is but little understood. Livy goes on his way,
stopping at nothing; he says what he knows of the things he speaks of, and
leaves the Reader at liberty to make Reflections, without preventing him with
his own: and when he does it, it is only with few words, but Noble and Great;
Deos esse non negligere humana, superbiae and crudelitati, and si seras, non
leves poenas venire, l. 3. Annal.
as what he says of the Crime and Punishment of Appius, who had stolen away
Virginia. It is a great Gift in an Author, to know how to furnish his Readers
with Matters to apply their Minds to, to draw Consequences, and to give what
Air he pleases to the things related. All Readers will have their liberty to
think what they please upon what is presented to them, without being
pre-engag'd; and the use of that liberty is one of the greatest delights he
takes in reading. Let us then retrench those deep and abstracted Reflections,
if we mean to please; not laboring after much Spruceness in what we write: Let
us be more natural and candid; Let us say the Truth, without commenting upon
it, if our Wit be strong enough to bear it; Let us, above all things, forbear
to moralize upon Fortune, and her Unconstancies, a thing so common in Books;
Let us not affect those Sententious Expressions, which have too much Gayity and
Ornament; Let us renounce those Witticisms, and false Sentiments, which Authors
of a small Genius jingle with. If we mix in our Discourse some Reflections, let
them be as natural as may be, and such as arise from the Subject it self; let
them never be too fine, nor too elaborate; let them be more solid, tho less
ornamental; let them look more like the Arguments of a wise Politician, than
the Affectation of an Orator; Curandum ne sententiaeemineant extra corpus
orationis expressae, Petr.
Let him be neither too frequent, nor too loose, but woven, as one may say, in
the Body of your Work: In fine, let them never have that lofty look of
Reflections, which give an ill Opinion of him that makes them. It is in that
that Tacitus, Machiavel, Paulus Jovius, Davila, and most part of the Italians
and Spaniards, are excessive. But let none adventure to make those curious
Reflections of Policy and Morality, unless he knows the Man entirely, the
Illusions of his Spirit, and the Weakness of his Mind. It is only by that
knowledge that good Historians are distinguished from those of a middle Rank,
as Plutarch in his Lives. Salust, tho unaffected, preaches too much against the
Corruptions and Ill Manners of his own Time; he is always angry with his
Country, and always dissatisfied with the Government: he gives too bad an
Opinion of the Commonwealth, through his Invectives, and his Reflections upon
the Luxury of Rome. In truth, tho there is nothing false in what he says, yet
he runs out of his first thoughts. So Davila would make fewer Speeches, did he
but remember that he is an Historian. It is necessary to understand Morality
well, to make just Reflections; For true Morality is the ground of good Policy.
Therefore Tacitus's Policy is often false, because his Morality is not true:
either he makes Men appear too much corrupted, or he is not candid enough
himself: There is nothing natural commonly in his Reflections, because nothing
is innocent in them; he envenoms, and gives an ill turn to every thing: He has
by that means spoiled many People, who imitate him in that Article, not being
able to do it in any other. And this must be observed upon the use of
Reflections in History. A Sentence may be put in the Mouth of a Character fit
to speak Sentences: Mariana, as well as Strada, do not seem to manage that
well. People also have no great affection for those stiff men which never yield
to any thing, and who, to make what they say seem more important, multiply
Sentences upon Sentences, Reflections upon Reflections, and by a ridiculous
Gravity, will seem Cato's in small trifles. The too great subtilty in those
refinings of Conjecture, is apt to degenerate in a false delicacy; and
Reflections are good only when they least appear to be so.

XXII. Digressions.
Digressions have also their agreeableness, when they are made in fit times,
and that they have nothing too wide, nor too loose, because it gives to a
Narration a Variety so necessary to make it agreeable; but they ought to be
wisely mixed. An Author is apt to err when he goes from his Subject; for one
whose head is not strong enough changes easily; and to quit your matter without
precaution, to seek Adventures, and carry your Reader abroad, does not belong
so much to an Historian, as to a Writer of Adventures, who sticks upon every
thing he finds to stuff up his Relation. He takes Cities, he fights Battles, he
finds Adventures every where; as Herodotus, who continually goes from his Text,
by his too frequent, and often forced Digressions; tho he took Example by
Homer, who is indeed a great Master; for tho he soars often, he goes
nevertheless strait enough to his Mark, without losing time in things out of
season. Thucydides has a better Order than Herodotus; he confines himself
strictly to his Subject: The Conspiracy of Harmodius and Aristogyton, in the
Sixth Book, is one of those Narrations wherein he has excelled most. Xenophon
endeavors to imitate him: If he forgets himself sometimes, as he has done,
lib. 5. of the History of Cyrus, in the Adventure concerning Panthaea, yet that
Adventure has a natural Relation to the Body of his History; Panthaea having
been taken by Cyrus, in the Overthrow of the Assyrians, and Abradatus, her
Husband, by that means coming to Cyrus's side, and becoming one of the chiefest
of his Army. The plain Truth is, I would not be responsible for the other
Digressions of that Author, which are not quite so well coupled to his Subject
in his other Works. Polybius and Salustius ita peccarunt, ut nullam unquam
veniam impetrarint dum digrediuntur, etc. Ex Sebast. Macr.
Polybius has frequent Digressions upon Policy, knowledge of Arms, and upon the
Laws of History, which do not appear very necessary: Salust sometimes commits
the same Fault, wherein a Modern Critic blames them both. Photius praises much
the Digression of Dionysius Halycarnassaeus, lib. 7. to describe the
Consequence of Aristodemus's Tyranny. The Question about the Phoenix, lib. 6.
Annal. Tacit. upon the news which came to Rome, of a Phoenix which had appeared
in Egypt, under the Reign of Tyberius, is according to the Rules of a just
Digression: The Question is examined by the several Opinions of the Naturalists
upon that Bird; his Qualities, his Shape, all is described there in few words.
A Digression of that kind set in a due place, is of great Ornament to a
Narration, and that helps to spur the Curiosity of a Reader, and to rouse his
Spirits. Nothing also in Mariana's History contributes so much to that Air of
greatness which it has, as the Art which he has of bringing into it, by way of
Digression, all that has happened considerable in the World, of admirable
inefabulous Ages, of remarkables in Greece, in Sicily, in the Roman Empire; a
pretty particular Account of the Commonwealth of Carthage, which is no where
else better than it is there; the Sieges of Saguntus and Numancia, the Passage
of Hannibal into Italy, the Series of Emperors, the Birth of Christianity, the
Preaching of the Gospel, the Conquests of the Arabians, and many other things
which look great. He has a Genius which is altogether for great matters, which
hangs always some way or other to the Spanish History. No Historian ever
honored his Country so much by any Work; for he has given his Country the
Honor of every great thing that was ever done in the World. But as there are
but few Spirits strong enough to follow the Stream of an History, without
taking breath, and tying themselves up to their Subject, without going out of
it; so there are few Historians but will sometimes forget themselves, by doing
the contrary in their Digressions. I will not take the pains to mark them; they
every where occur; nothing being scarcer than that exact sense, which knows how
to apply it self to its Subject: I shall only say, that Nihil minus quaeritum a
principio hujus operis, quam ut plus justo abrerum ordine declinarem
varietatibusque distinguendo opera, legentibus veluti diverticula quaererem, l.
9. Annal.
Livy has shunned nothing with more care than those by-ways which led him from
his matter, as himself declares it, nothing being less judicious. But in our
Historians, the same ridiculous humor may still be found, which Luc. de
Conser. Hist.
Lucian met with in his time, in them that wrote the Parthian War, who mixed in
their Narrations the foolishest things in the World, to render them more
diverting, running from Country to Country, from Age to Age, from one
Adventure to another, without any distinction. You must then lay it down as a
certain and indispensable Rule, That Digressions ought to be connected always,
by somewhat or other, to the Principal Subject in hand, as Statuit non
attingere externa, nisi qua Romany cohaerent rebus, Luc. l. 39. Annal.
that Judicious Historian we spoke of just now has always done; And you ought
to examine well, whether in the bottom they have no natural antipathy; for if
they have, they are not fit to be used; for nothing is more essential to the
Digression, than the Affinity it ought to have with the Subject: The great
Secret is, to know exactly how far it ought to go; for it has its Natural
Limits, which are not to be passed. That which renders the Proportion
difficult, is, that the Extent of them ought not always to be the same; for it
must be great or small, more or less, according to the Relation it has to the
chief part of History; and the making a right Judgment here, is the Rock upon
which all Historians dash; for there are few which in their Digressions exceed
not due bounds, it being the greatest difficulty to keep them exactly, and to
rule themselves. In that there is a great deal to be said against Mariana, who
in the beginning of his History has taken many ways to arrive at his Point: He
has need of an Apology upon that, which I do not pretend to justify him in.
The only Model a Writer may propose to himself in this, is Ut quaerere libeat
qui eventus Romany Rebus, si cum Alexandro foret bellatum, futurus fuerit,
Annal. l. 9.
Livy, who would not have left the Roman History to tell his Mind upon the
Success of Alexander's Arms, had he come into Italy, without great precautions,
and satisfying the Reader's mind with ample Excuses: The Discourse he makes
upon it is very curious, and not at all out of season.

XXIII. Eloquence fit in History.
History ought to be Eloquent, and not tedious: In that only its Art consists;
that is its common Effect. But there is an extraordinary Effect, known but by
few people, to say nothing, tho true, but what has the Air of Truth, to gain
Credit in the most difficult things to be believed. Eloquence, which knows how
to give to things the Air which may render them acceptable, ought to be
employed about it. And the setting of things in that admirable Order, which
makes them probable, is its chiefest work; The Matter is given to the Historian
in Memoires, which People furnish him with; but it is his business to lay them
together, and to do it well: He must not think so much what he says, as to the
manner of saying it; for in this, as in all other parts of Eloquence, the
Method is all; That is properly the use the Historian ought to make of
Eloquence, which alone sets every thing in its place. It is the great Artifice
of Thucydides, says Thucydides omnes dicendi artificio vincit, Cic. l. 2. de
Orat.
Cicero, which has surpassed all the other Historians by his Eloquence. Tito
Livio mirae facundiae viro, Fab. l. 8. c. 1.
Quintillian speaks of that of Livy with admiration. It is only by that
admirable Quality that those Two Great Men have distinguished themselves so
much from the Commonalty of other Historians; for it is Eloquence which gives a
man the way of explaining himself. He persuades best, who explains himself in
the easiest manner; it is persuasion only which gives to things that color of
Truth, which they have by no other way but by that turn which is given them,
and by the light they are set in. So nothing is more eloquent than the Picture
Salust makes of the Condition which Rome was in, when Catiline took up the
Design of making himself Master of it: And when that admirable Author
represents the Commonwealth corrupted through Luxury and Avarice, weakened under
the weight of its own greatness; they are the finest Expressions which can be
found in History: It is in those Images your Art must show it self, if you have
any; and the Historians of the first Rate are full of them. It is that
Eloquence which ought to be mixed with History, to animate it with its flame
and Spirit; for without it all is but languishing: and those several turns one
ought to embellish a Narration with, to make it agreeable; all the Art of
Transitions, those so tender and passionate motions which go to the heart, that
Connection of the most Memorable Actions; that ordering of Circumstances, and
those Embellishments which raise the Admiration, are nothing but the Effects of
that singular Eloquence which is proper to History, which ought sometimes to
raise it self, and soar aloft, when occasion requires it. But it is the Effect
of an Historian's Judgment, to distinguish those places. A kind of Eloquence
did rule over the Greeks and the Romans too, in the Speeches of those which
were to speak, which was only mere Ostentation, showing the Wit of the
Historian, rather than the Truth of History; and in that the Authors thought
rather to amuse the people, than to instruct them. That Eloquence is out of
fashion among the wise Moderns, because it had an affected way; and those who
have any Judgment, love only what is natural. The Prefaces of Salustius in
bello Jugurthino and Catilinario nihil ad Historiam pertinentibus principiis
usus est, Fab. l. 10. c. 8.
Salust, which are great Discourses, full of Sense, and very Eloquent, seem to
me of that kind; They are common places, without any reference to his History.
That Author, perhaps, had some Reserve, which he made use of in times of need;
as Habeo Volumen proemiorum, ex eo eligere soleo cum aliquod (...) institui, ad
Atticum l. 16. ep 6.
Tully did, according to his own Confession. I have always, says he, a Volume
of Prefaces ready against I have need of 'em. I would not have suspected him of
so much precaution, had not he himself bragged of it. That may be good for an
Orator that speaks always publicly, and has not always leisure to prepare
himself; but it is not to be endured in History, where the Author is Master
both of himself and his Time: For, to conclude, all those Discourses, tho never
so fine of themselves, cease to be so, as soon as they are out of their places,
and as soon as any Affectation appears: And this is what may be said upon the
Eloquence of History.

XXIV. The other Ornaments which one may apply in History.
There may also be other Ornaments fit to be put in History, to make it more
pleasant, either when it is dull, and when it is too plain, by overlong
Narrations, which are too much like one another: but, of those Ornaments, the
most apparent are not always the most essential: All is not Gold that glitters.
A Mind that is bridled up does not take delight in too much finery; and that
ought to engage a Learned Man to manage those Ornaments without Prodigality,
and accommodate himself to men's Capacity, which too great a brightness dazles;
besides that those Ornaments crowded one upon another, surprise more than they
please. There are hidden ones, which give greater satisfaction to curious
people; and tho they escape others notice, they do not escape theirs; you may
every moment discover new Charms which uphold them, and which are lasting, more
than those which give but a glaunce, and die. Those kind of Ornaments consist
sometimes of eloquent or witty turns, which in a mann^r are surprising, and
cast an unlooked for Effect on the places they are put in; whereof here are
some Examples: Porsenna, King of Clusium, besieges Rome: C. Mutius, moved with
the danger he sees his Country in by so close a Siege, goes into Porsenna's
Camp, kills his Secretary close by him, thinking to have killed him: The
Murderer is seized; they order a Pan of fire to be brought, to force him to
declare his Associates by the Torment of the fire. That Young Man, full of
Courage, in cold Blood, puts his hand in the fire, and without any alteration
in his Countenance, let it be quite burnt upon the hot Embers; speaking in this
manner to the King: Sentias quam vile corpus sit iis, qua^ magnam gloriam
vident. Tit. Live. l. 2. Annal.
See how those that are possessed with true Glory, despise their own Carcass.
That spoken with a firm Countenance, alters the face of things; the Murderer,
tho abominable and odious, casts an admiration on the Spirits of them that were
present; they look upon him with Respect, and they send him home with Praises,
in the same moment that they were preparing to make him end his Life in cruel
Tortures. A resolute word only makes that change; and such a word well placd,
is a great Ornament in a Narration, and has a mavelous Effect. So upon
Fabius's retaking Tarentum, Hannibal, tho vanquished, spoke this fine Saying,
which looked as tho he had still been victorious, praising himself, to raise
his Enemy the more: Et Romani suum habent Annibalem, l. 27. Annal.
The Romans, said he, have also at last their Hannibal. That was a proud way of
submitting himself. Those sayings are frequent in that Historian. Nothing also
gives more the Idea of those who speak so, when they speak well, nor of him
that makes them speak, as when he does it on purpose. Here is one of another
kind, taken out of Tacitus, in that famous Feast Massalina made to her Lover:
In the heat of the rejoicing, and of the Debauchery of that Feast, they got an
Idiot, whose Name was Valens, to climb up to the top of a Tree; and they asked
him what he saw: A Tempest, said he, which gathers in the Air, and comes from
Ostium. That word, spoken by a Fool, cast a coldness and sorrow upon the
People's Spirits, which disturbed all things, tho spoken without design; for it
was a Prognostication of the Emperor's return, which happened a few days
after, and caused the Empress to be stabbed, tired with her infamous Life.
Those mavelous sayings are very acceptable in History, being fit to rouse up
the Reader's Mind by something which is sharp. There are Thousands of others
which an Historian employs to embellish his Work, and which have escaped my
Memory: and I do not pretend to say all that is good in this kind. It is enough
to mark those which can give another face to Affairs; to search other
Conjectures, to give way to other Idea's, and to other Sentiments: In a word,
all those fine sayings, capable of causing some kind of revolution in the
Reader's Mind, to give him Action, and Motion too, being always truly fine, are
never out of use. The business is to place them so, that they may appear
incorporated in a Narration, to play all their part in it; that is to say, to
make the matter pleasant, when, of it self, it is barren and disagreeable.

XXV. The Sentiments which ought to be allowed in History.
There are Sentiments which are fit for the Theater, and are not so for
History, because Poetry says things as they should be; History says them as
they are. So those Historians, which give their Heroes such exquisite
Sentiments, are not always the most judicious; and whatever is not grounded
upon good sense, be it never so fine, is not the best. So that Quintus Curtius
is not always in the right, to represent Alexander so admirable. He does not
make him act by the measure of Prudence, but always puts him upon difficult and
perilous Adventures: Danger charms him; He is not fond of Conquests, but of
the Glory of Conquering: He might surprise Darius, by falling upon him in the
Nighttime, and that way hide his Weakness, the Enemies Army being twice in
number bigger than his own: But that Great Man, who cares less to overcome,
than to make People admire his Bravery, attacks the King of Persia in the
middle of the Day; resolved rather to lose his Life gloriously, than to
overcome by surprisal. Darius, after his Overthrow, proffers to divide Asia
with him, and offers him his Daughter in Marriage; Alexander chooses rather to
pursue his Honor through Perils, than to become Master with so much
Tranquillity: He does not hearken to those Proposals; he will accept of nothing
but what is extraordinary. His Historian does him a great deal of Honor: sure,
a little likelihood would have done well mixed with so much Glory: Does not he
make his Hero more Foolhardy than wise, and more adventurous than ambitious?
Without doubt he sound that way finer; but withal, he has given us reason to
doubt, whether it is a Romance, or an History, which he has left us; for he
pushes things too far. So important it is for an Author in all things to make
Reason his Standard, and to follow rather the Nature of things, than the fine
Imaginations of his own Wit. Let not History then authorize the ridiculous
Conceits of false Glory, which causes vain People to commit so many Errors, the
most part of which contributes little to true Honor, because they have no
sense of it. Let it not attribute to a Mounte-bank the Sentiments of a solid
man, nor the Virtues of a Romantic Hero to a true Knight. Great men are
subject to form to themselves Idea's of Glory, after their own fancy, and
according to the failing of their Vanity. But the Public Interest ought to be
dearer to him who governs, than his own Glory: And the true Honor of a great
Prince, is to gain the People's Hearts rather than their Fears. Those are the
Sentiments which ought to reign most in History, that it may become a Lesson of
Clemency to Princes, and a Pattern of Reason and good Sense to all People. Let
not an Historian therefore be mistaken; let him first distinguish true Honor
from false, and in the Maxims of this Life praise only what is good; Let him
clear the Peoples Errors, without becoming himself a Slave to Popular
Sentiments: Let him never suffer himself to judge of things by their Events,
without running up to their Spring; but let him open their very Principles: Let
him be careful of doing Justice to the true and pretended Merit, that he may
not impose on Posterity, which gives Credit to what is said, without any
examination, and sticks to the Litteral Sense: Let him never show great Events,
without giving notice of Causes, and without discovering their true Motives.
Sometimes it is nothing, or at least, but little; but People lack to see great
things come from small Principles, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus teaches in the
Fifth Book of his History, on the occasion of the Revolution of Government from
the Kings of Rome, which happened through the Insolence of Young T. Live. l. 1.
Ann.
Tarquin, and the Pride of his Father. That is the Spirit which ought to reign
in History, and the Maxim which must be observed therein. Let us see its Genius.

XXVI. How the Genius of an Historian must be.
Nothing can be writ considerable in History, without a Genius; that makes all
in that Art, as well as in others; and it is only that way that Historians
distinguish themselves from one another. A small Genius will make but little of
a great Subject; and he that has a great Genius, will make a small Subject
appear great. Arduum videturres gestas scribere, quod facta dictis exaequanda
sunt, Salust. proem. Bell. Catil.
To write History well therefore, a man must have an universal Genius, capable
of great Idea's, to form to himself a great Model, and great Designs. History
is a thing of importance Magnum quid Historiam recte scribere, and summis
Oratoris proprium, Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
, says Cicero, and the business of a Man above the Common Level. And when
Lucian, who was one of the finest Wits of his Age, which produced so many great
men, confesses, that his Genius was too weak for History, and to attain to that
Perfection which it requires. He frights me, by creating in me a just
apprehension of the difficulty which attends it: For if that Author, which has
written nothing but what is admirable, and gives Rules so full of good sense
for the writing of History, acknowledges that he is not capable of sustaining
the weight of so great a work, what will become of those that in one day set up
for Historians, without any knowledge of what is Essential in History, as he
says it happened in that War in Armenia, which produced so many Authors,
through an Itch of writing, which at that time was a common Disease? But the
Times are changed, says he; nothing is more difficult than for a man to compile
a Work which all future Ages may esteem, as Thucydides has done. For what
strength of Spirit is requisite to speak the Truth, without making Paraphrases,
as those do, who have not Souls great enough to be clear and candid, and to
speak things as they are? What firmness to unmask Vice, naturally disguised
with Dissimulation? What Sagacity to discover the bottom of the Genius of them
we speak of, without sticking to the exterior part of the Person, which seldom
signifies any thing? But when the business is to distinguish People and Times
by what is essential in their Characters, how necessary is a clear and
distinguishing head? As for Example, in relating the Civil Wars of Rome, not to
confound the Spirit of the Commonwealth with that of Monarchy; the absoluteness
of the one with the Dependency of the other; not to write the Reign of Lewis
the Fourteenth, which is no way addicted to Superstition, like that of Lewis
the Eleventh, whose Character was Superstition it self; not to represent
Charles the Great, like Henry the Third, but to mark the Times and the Persons
by the difference there is between them. What integrity, exactly to do Justice
to Vice and Virtue, to distinguish the true from the pretended Merit, and to
use ones self to weigh the Actions, without any regard to the Persons? What
Judgment, to take always the right side, to turn things to the right sense, to
choose always what is most solid; to interpose your Judgment upon the matter in
agitation, without forcing the Reader, by any prejudices, to touch tender
Points with that niceness of Wit which can only be the Effect of an exquisite
sense; not to load your Discourse with too much Matter, which might chance to
spoil the Spirit of it, without giving way to any Reflection whatsoever, made
either by you, or any other Reader; to know how to find the true knot in every
business, without mistaking your self in its explanation; not to deliver great
Actions upon frivolous Motives; not to hide false Thoughts under a florid
Expression; to avoid any thing which seems studied and forced, and to follow in
all things that beam of light and understanding which gives an Idea of the
discerning Faculty of the Historian, by giving a good Opinion of his
Capacities. So that the most necessary part in History is Judgment. An Orator
may forget himself in the flights of his Eloquence, and venture bold strokes,
which may pass upon a multitude of People, who are pleased with nothing more
than boldness. A Poet may ramble from his Text, and has no great necessity to
be always wise. The Historian, who speaks only in cold Blood, ought always to
be Master of himself, and to say nothing but what is just nothing, in fine,
requires so much Sense, so much Reason, so much Wit and Judgment, and so many
other Qualities, to attain to perfection, as History; and after all is done, an
happy Understanding, endued with all those Perfections, is not sufficient,
without a great knowledge of the World. It was only the Conversation Polybius
had with Scipio and Lelius, that made him so able an Historian. We have in
Thucydides and Livy accomplished Patterns of that Genius required in History.
Antiquity has nothing more finished in that kind. There is hardly any thing
wanting in the one, or in the other, but that Thucydides is yet more sincere
than Livy, and the last more natural than the first. Tacitus is admirable in
his way; Lipsius prefers him before all others: Every body is not of his
Opinion. One may say in general, That he is an Historian of a particular Rank,
who has a great deal of agreeableness amongst great failings; but his defects
are somewhat hidden under a greatness of Genius which shines in all he says,
and under a loftiness not well to be described, which raise him above many
Authors more exact, and more natural than himself. He has his Party and his
Admirers. It is true, that he pleases men of Fancy and Imagination, but not
those that have most Judgment, nor those that love good Sense rather than
Flourishes. Among Moderns, I find Mariana, Davila, Fra Paolo, have an admirable
Genius for History. Mariana has the gift of thinking, and of saying nobly what
he thinks and speaks, and of giving a Character of greatness to what runs in
his Mind. Davila brings good Circumstances of things, discourses justly enough
upon the Subjects he treats of, and carries on his Discourse in a continued
Strain, which gives him that obliging Air which he has above others. Fra Paolo,
in his History of the Council of Trent, gives what Colors he pleases to what
he says: No body ever had that Art in a more eminent degree. He shows also a
great Capacity, in searching to the bottom the Matters of Learning which he has
in hand, to give his Readers a perfect knowledge thereof: No body ever writ
with more Skill, nor with more Wit, and never with less Justice and Truth. He
is a passionate man, who employed all his Art in hiding his Passion: He made a
jest in every thing, that he might not be thought to be angry; but he falls
into another Defect: He raileth too much, in a Subject so serious as his is;
for his Passion is seen in every thing he speaks. So that Historian, with his
great Genius, has the most Vicious Character that can be in the way of writing
History, where nothing is less pardonable than Enmity. An Historian is no
longer believed, when once he is thought too passionate; which gives occasion
of examining the Honesty which is necessary for him that pretends to write.

XXVII. The Historians Morality.
As every one ought to lay down to himself a Rule of Morality, according to his
Genius, the Historian's Mind is known by his Principles. You must first of all
take it for granted, that there are but few who have hearts noble enough,
neither to fear nor hope for any thing; and who will value Truth above
Interest, which is the most general Spring of all the wrong Judgments men make
in things they speak of. This is what you ought to think upon first, when you
take upon you to instruct the Public; and it is the chiefest Maxim an
Historian ought to propose to himself. That being well established, he ought to
think only to get Credit in People's good Opinion, and to give a Color of
Truth to all he says. It is that chiefly to which all his endeavors ought to
tend; which he will never effect, but by establishing his Reputation: And it is
not by Protestations of being sincere, that he shall demonstrate his Integrity:
It is by making appear in all his words, the uprightness of his heart, and the
honesty of his mind. Therefore nothing ought to come from him but what has the
stamp of Equity and Reason. The Love he ought to have for Truth, ought to be
the Rules of all his Expressions, and of all his Idea's. Ne qua suspicio
gratiae sit, ne qua simultatis, Cic. de Orat.
Let him always speak like an honest man; let him never speak any thing that
can injure Chastity or Integrity; let him keep close to the Sentiments which
the severest Honor can inspire; and let nothing ever appear in his words that
may raise a question of his Probity and Truth; let him speak so that People may
believe him to speak true as often as he speaks, through an assurance, that he
is not capable of imposing. No man can ever err with so good Principles. It is
by so pure a Method that Thucydides did set up the Reputation of his sincerity
through all following Ages, and that he has deserved the Credit of all People.
It is his Zeal for Religion, and Respect for the Gods, which appears in all
Xenophon's Books, that engages People not to question what he says, being
persuaded, that a man, who has the Love of Piety so deeply engraven in his
heart, cannot lie. Polybius takes more liberty: He relates, as Fables, the
Sentiments People had of the Gods, and of Hell; thinking, that way, to destroy
them. And it is rather by his Honesty that Livy persuades, than by his great
Capacity: through all the Intrigues, Interests, Passions, and other
Extravagancies of those men he speaks of, there appears a Probity, which shows
him as well honest as a good Historian, One may perceive in the most hidden
parts of the Hearts of those he describes, the bottom of his own; and amongst
the false lights he discovers in their Conduct, he never has any false aims; he
judges of all things rightly, his Judgment being as true as his Intentions are
just. Tacitus is not of that Character; he is a great shuffler, who hides a
very bad Mind under a very great Wit: he mistakes always true Merit, because he
hardly knows any other than that of Ability; and it is Policy more than Truth,
makes him speak, besides his want of Charity toward his Neighbor: When he
speaks of the Gods, he shows neither Piety nor Religion, as is seen in his
Discourse upon Fate against Providence, lib. 6. Annal. and imputes all things
to Fortune, and the Stars, concerning Trasullus, Astrologer to Tyberius, who
was become his Secretary at Capraea. So difficult it is for an ill man to be a
good Historian; for they are almost the same Principles of the one and of the
other. So when an Author takes his Pen, he takes upon himself the Character of
a Public Man; and he strips himself of that Honor, whenever he takes up the
Sentiments of a Private Person, to regard himself, and to revenge his own
quarrels; as Procopius, who being dissatisfied with the Emperor Justinian, and
the Empress Theodora, gives way to his own Passion, and corrupts Truth: Or, to
follow private prejudices, as Eusebius and Theodorite, which made use of their
Histories to establish their own Errors: Or, to flatter those whom you mean to
please, as Buchanan, who in his History of Scotland, blemishes the Honor of
Mary, to gratify Queen Elizabeth; and as Fra Paolo, who makes his History of
the Council of Trent a Satyr against the Church of Rome, and Religion; where he
shows a Chain of Invectives upon Invectives, to revenge himself upon the Pope,
because he had not made him a Cardinal, after the hopes he had given him of it.
Paulus Jovius was a man that pursued his Interests, Pensioner to Charles the
Fifth, unjust, malicious, a great Flatterer: The Pictures he made of the most
considerable Persons in his History, are Pieces which he picked up to compose
the Lives of Illustrious Men, on purpose to get Money; they are done according
as he was paid for them. Guichardin is angry with France; Sandoval makes
Charles the Fifth a most Catholic Prince, whilst that Monarch foments Heresy
in Germany: all this because Paulus the Third had vexed him. Cabrera praises
Philip the Second for his Piety, who favored Elizabeth against Mary of
Scotland, which he hindered from being Queen, because she favored the French;
and so overthrew the Catholic Religion in England. Herrera is a Fansaroon, and
is partial to his Nation. In fine, there are hardly any Historians, but have
their own Inclinations and A versions: It goes hard with them to alter their
Sentiments, and they make Elogiums by Directions, or Satyrs, as their own Minds
are disposed. Marcellin. in ejus Vita.
There are but few like Thucydides, who by a Principle of Right and Equity,
praises Pericles, as he deserves, tho he had used him very ill; and does always
Justice to the Athenians, who banished him to Thracia, where he died. It is a
man without Passions, who proposes to himself only the Judgment of Posterity,
for the Mark he aims at, and his Work, and who has no other desire than that of
Truth; wherein he is an honester man than all others; for he never renounces
his Probity. Livy favors Pompey more than Caesar, Dio favors Caesar more than
Pompey. Ammianus Marcellinus is an everlasting Worshipper of Julian the
Apostate, but cries out always against Valentinian, his Successor, because he
was a Christian. Eusebius never shows Constantine but on the right side;
Zozimus shows him always the other way. Procopius made his Idol of Bellizary,
Egynhart of Charles the Great, Sandoval of Charles the Fifth, Strada of
Alexander Farneze: In a word, each Historian makes himself an Hero after his
own palate, whom he looks upon as his Creature; and that he might make him
appear the better, he studies to make him more admirable. It is this which
renders most Histoaies suspicious, all Historians being passionate; and there
being hardly any sincere ones, because there are few disinterested. Those that
are above Interest, let themselves be blinded with the desire of pleasing; and
the care they have of their Reputation, leads them into other Extremes.
Josephus non tam studebat vera scribere, quam credibilia: hac causa fuit cur
praeterierit miracula, quod apud Infideles fidem non erant habitum, and
narravit fabulas, quas putavit iis magis probabiles futuras. Leo Cass. disp. de
transl. sacr. leg. c. 36.
Josephus in the History of the Jews, suppresses true Miracles, to manage the
Gentiles, who would not have believed them; and supposes things less true,
because he thought them fitter for the palates, and according to their
apprehension. An Historian ruins himself, if he thinks to be established that
way: you must say things as they are; woe to the unbelievers: For nothing is
worse in a man who professes to give an account of Truth to the Public, than
to profane it thus. In fine, let nothing slavish appear, nor of Cowardice, in
the Sentiments or Inclinations of the Historian; for nothing gives a worse
Opinion of his Probity. But tho I do not approve the Flatterers of Great men,
as Eusebius, who shows nothing in Constantine but what deserves praises, who
nevertheless had great failings; my Opinion is, that they ought to be forgiven
in some things: For tho one ought to speak nothing but what is true, yet he
ought not to say all the Truth. Quintus Curtius might have let alone the
Infamies he related of Alexander. There are some priviledg'd Heads which a body
ought to respect; let us speak of them handsomely, and not irreverently: We may
expose their Faults, but it must be in a way that does not scandalize their
Dignity, nor hurt the Respect due to their Grandeur. Tacitus says so many dirty
things of Tyberius, that Boccalinus cannot suffer him. That which Lampridius
tells of the Emperors Heliogabalus and Caracalla, makes his History
contemptible; and Platina shows but little judgment in his manner of treating
the Popes. All the World will not be of my side, but wise men will; and I am
persuaded, that what Merit soever there is in being sincere, a man would render
himself ridiculous to be so in all things. But, as an Author never praises
well, unless he does it nicely, so he that bestows his Commendation upon meaner
Actions, and not upon those which are essential, and which appear praiseworthy,
shall always find the Public out of humor, because it will never endure those
praises which it does not find justly bestowed: Therefore good Sense advises
never to praise, but by a sincere account of praisable Actions. Luc. de Conser.
Hist.
All the World knows the Adventure of Aristobulus, one of the Captains of
Alexander, who read to him the History of the Battle which that Prince fought
against Porus. Alexander, who was then in his Barge upon Hydaspus, enraged with
the Flatteries of that Historian, snatched the Book out of his hands, and threw
it into the River; adding, that he deserved to be served so too, for being so
impudent as to praise him so ill, by attributing to him false Conquests, as if
there had been want of true ones. This is very near the Morality I could wish
in an Historian; or, at least, it would be my Principle, in case I had the
Fancy to write History, and that I were of a Genius good enough for it. I
would, in fine, be so modest, that there might appear Honesty, and never Vanity
in my Sentiments; which makes me to have no patience with the Extravagancy of
that Historian Photius speaks of, who preparing himself to write the History of
Alexander, promises, that his Style shall not be worse than the Actions of his
Hero. After all is done, it makes a man lose almost the Fancy of writing, if
he has any Sense, when he sees the judgment Dionysius Halicarnassaeus made of
Thucydides's History; for there is no judicious Author, but that Critic will
make him tremble. These are the Notions I got to my self in reading Histories.
I am not so vain as to pretend to give them for Maxims: They are only thoughts,
and perhaps but ill digested, which may become good by the good use that may be
made of them. Here follow the Sentiments one may have upon the most
considerable Historians.

XXVIII. Judgment of Historians.
Herodotus is the first who has given a reasonable form to History; and his
merit is, to have led the way to others. His Style is pure and eloquent.
Dulcis, candidus, fusus Herodotus. Fab. l. 10. c. 1. Athen. 1. 3.
Athenaeus praises him for the Charms of his Discourse. His Subject is great
and vast; for it compasses Nations, Kingdoms, Empires; the Affairs of Europe
and Asia. He is not very exact in what he says, because he contains too much
matter; but I find in him a sincerity which is not very common, because he uses
Greeks and Barbarians, his own Countrymen and Strangers, without any show of
Partiality. Platarch. de malign. Herod.
I find Plutarch deals with him too rigorously, when he makes him to have an
ill meaning in most part of his Conjectures; but it is only Envy and Revenge
makes him use him so, because he used ill his Country of Boeotia, in his
History. Laudatur ab omnibus ut rerum explicator sincerus and gravis; hujus
nemo neque verborum, neque sententiarum gravitatem imitatur. Cic. de opt. Orar.
Thucydides is exact in his way of writing, faithful in things he relates,
sincere, and not swayed by Interest: he has Greatness, Nobleness, Majesty in
his Style; he is always strict, but his strictness has nothing but what is
great in it: The Truth is, that his Subject is lesser, and more limited than
that of Herodotus. It is only through a Spirit of Partiality, that Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus prefers Herodotus before Thucydides, the first being his
Countreyman: For my own part, I find him the most accomplished Historian among
the Greeks. Xenophon is pure in his Language, Natural, agreeable in his
Composition; his Mind is easy, rich, full of a deep knowledge, a clear
imagination, a just turn; but he is neither great nor elevated. Good Manners
are not always well observed in his History, where he makes ignorant and
brutish People speak like Philosophers. Cicero tells us, that Scipio could not
part with him, when once he had him in his hands: Longinus gives it as his
Character, That he conceived things happily. After all is done, he is a
well-accomplished Historian; and it was by the reading of his History, that
Scipio and Lucullus became so great Captains. Polybius discourses well; he is
provided with good and fine Materials, but he does not manage them so well as
the others I spoke of but now: He ought, for all that, to be praised for the
Idea Brutus had of him, who at the height of his Misfortunes, did pass whole
Nights in the reading and studying of them. His Design is not so much to write
an History, as an Instruction how to govern a Country, as he himself says at
the end of his First Book; and he leaves there, in a manner, the Character of
an Historian, which obliges him to make a kind of an Apology in the beginning
of the Ninth Book, about his way of writing History: his Style is much
neglected. Dionysius Halycarnassaeus shows, in his Book of Roman Antiquities, a
deep Sense, Learning and Conduct, which is not common; he is exact, diligent
and judicious, truer than Livy, and of great weight: But, to conclude, he is
very tedious in his Speeches. Diodorus Siculus is a man of great Character; but
he contains too many things, pretending to make an Abridgement of Philistus, of
Timaeus, of Callisthenes, of Theopompus, and others. Philo and Josephus are
Authors of an extraordinary Eloquence: They were both Jews, who had too great a
desire to please Pagans, by accommodating themselves like Slaves to their
Humor and Taste. Arrian does but Copy Xenophon, and is an affected Imitator of
his ways: he has made Seven Books of the Conquests of Alexander, as Xenophon
did of Cyrus's: Appianus dabbl'd in all the Greek Historians, and with that
hodge-podge has made to himself a Style which resembles no bodies. Scaliger
calls him the Thief of Histories; he took the best of his Book out of
Plutarch's: but, after all, there is in him a vast deal of matter. Dio Cassius
cracked his Credit with almost every body, because of the extraordinary things
which he writes without any distinction: for instead of cleaving strictly to
the Truth, he runs from the very appearance of it, in that place of the 66 th
Book of his History, where he says, That Vespasian cured a blind man by
spitting upon his Eyes. Procopius is exact in what he says, because he
accompanied Bellisarius in the Wars, and was an Eyewitness of his great
Actions: but he is too dry in his History of Persia, which looks more like a
Journal than History. He satisfied his own Fancy by writing that private
History; but his Modesty was great in his suppressing it: for the thing which
he took pains to hide during his Life, was made public after his Death;
wherein he is not altogether inexcusable. Most part of those who have written
the Histary of Byzantium, either took Copies one by another, as Agathias,
Cedrenus, John Curopalatus; or are not very exact; and they come nothing near
the Dignity, the Nobleness, the Distinguishing, and the Faithfulness of the
Ancient Greeks. Subtilissimus brevitatis artifex Salustius, proprietatum in
verbis retinentissimus. Gell.
Amongst the Latins, Salust looks great, exact, of an admirable Judgment. No
body ever expressed the sensible, exact, severe Style of Thucydides, better
than he. Salustius homo nequam, sed gravissimus alienae ^uxuriae objurgator.
Lact. l. 2. de falls. Rel.
He is stiff sometimes in his Expressions, but not insipid: his being so short,
makes him less clear: His Method is good, and he gives weight to every thing he
says: His Thoughts are always fine, tho his Manners be bad; declaring always in
Commendation of Virtue, and Detestation of Vice. I find him a little too
peevish with his Country, and ill affected to his Neighbor; but, for all
that, he is a very great man. Caesar had the finest way of expressing himself
that ever was. Pedants are in the right in admiring him, for the inimitable
purity of his Style; but I still admire him the more, for the exactness of his
Sense, no body having ever written better. He is almost the only Author that is
free from Impertinencies. He speaks of himself but as an indifferent body, and
nothing disagrees in the wise Character he has taken. It is true, that he is
not altogether an Historian, but it is true too, that he is a fine Model to
write History by. It is a great Honor for that incomparable Author, that Henry
the Fourth of France, and Lewis the Fourteenth have busied themselves in the
translating of his History of the Gauls. Livy is the most accomplished of all,
because he has all the great Parts of an Historian; the Imagination fine, the
Expression noble, an exact Sense, with an admirable Eloquence. None but great
Idea's come in his Mind; he fills the Imagination of his Readers with what he
says: that way he gains People's Hearts, and moves their Souls; and he has the
greatest Genius for History, and is one of the greatest Masters of Eloquence
that ever was. In Tito Livio putat inesse Pollio quandam Patavinitatem. Fab. l.
8. c. 1.
I do not apprehend Asinius Pollia's meaning, who attributes him a Country
Air, which smells of Lombardy. His great strength is, to make People taste what
he says, by drawing his Readers to his own Sentiments, by infusing into their
Minds his Fears and his Hopes, giving them all his Passion by the Art he has of
moving the most hidden Springs of Hearts. Tacitus describes things in a way
quite different from others; but he sticks too close to great things, to avoid
falling into small ones, which ought not to be neglected. His thoughts are
good, but he is not always happy enough to express himself neatly. He is too
much a Philosopher. He speaks highly of every thing: If means Destiny was in
his hands, he could not speak otherwise: and he moralizes always upon other
People's foolishness: and that he may spare no body, he detracts from all
Mankind. How many Spirits has he spoiled by the desire of studying Politics,
which he inspired so many People with, and which is the vainest of all Studies:
It Is that ruined so many Spaniards, as Antonio Perez, and so many Italians, as
Machiavel, Ammirato, and others. It is only by the fineness of his Style, that
this last pleases so much those of strong minds, and so little those that are
not so; for he gives distasts by the subtilty of his Discourses and
Reflections. He is so obscure in his Expressions, that a man must be extremely
versed in his Style, to know how to unwrap his Thoughts. Evenit nonnunquam and
aliquid granda inveniat, qui semper quaerit quod nimium est. Fab. l. 2. c. 13.
His manner of Criticizing is fine of it self; but his constant censuring of
all things makes it become course. He is elevated, because his thoughts are
always high mounted: It is only that way that he imposes; and it is not so much
to please, and to instruct, that he writes, as to make himself be admired: he
has something extraordinary, which causes People to excuse most part of his
failings. But there are so many things to be said of that Author, good and bad,
that there is no end in speaking of him. It is a kind of Wit, which is of use
only for a show; that does not fit the ordinary Commerce of men. Quintus
Curtius deserves praises for his being sincere: he says what is good and bad in
Alexander, and never suffers the Merits of his Heroes to prevent him. If there
be any thing to be found fault with in his History, it is, that it is too
nicely finished. But for all that, he did excel in the Descriptions of
Manners, which he has done with an Air agreeable and natural. That Character of
Perfections which is found in those great Men, was lost in the following Ages.
Justin, who became a Compiler, thinking to erect himself to an Historian, does
only touch things as he passes by. He knows a great deal; he says things
sensibly; and he collected many Actions, which otherwise might have been lost.
Most part of the Authors; Historiae Augustae, fixed their Minds to write Lives;
as Plutarch and Herodian amongst the Greeks, Suetonius and Cornelius Nepos
among the Latins; and so lost the Character of Historians. There came nothing
after that, but single Chroniclers, Copiers, Compilers, and such whose Names
were known by a course knowledge they gave of their Ages, to whom the Planet of
History was not very favorable, having nothing fine nor reasonable in them.
There was but little Truth found in the Modern Greeks, who became Visionaries,
and related extraordinary Adventures, to please their own Fancies. The Love of
Study, which flourished again in the late Ages, revived again a number of good
and sensible Historians, who by studying Ancient Authors, and ruling themselves
by them, gained more Reputation than their Predecessors Among those that
excelled then, that which is peculiar to Commines, is, that he wrote with good
sense and sincerity. Paulus Aemilius speaks purely, but is superficial: Paulus
Jovius follows only his Passion and his Interest: Machiavel is exact enough in
his History of Florence; his Wit carries it above his Judgment in the rest. He
does not do Justice entirely to Castruccio Castrucci, whom he treats as an
Enemy of his Country. Mariana, in his History of Spain, was outdone by no
Modern, neither for the Greatness of the Design, nor for the Nobleness of the
Style. Buchanan is a little too much like a Slave in his imitating of Livy. He
stole from the Ancients what he has that is good. He writes very sensibly, yet
has not his thoughts elevated. His long Quotations in the Third Book, do not
please every body, no more than the large account he gives in the Second Book
of the Notion of the Country he speaks of. The Germans have vast Projects
about their Histories, and nothing reduced into the Natural Order, which an
exact Design requires. One may find in most part of the Spaniards a Spirit of
Partiality for their Country, which renders them much suspected. The Italians
are rich in particular Histories of the several States which compose Italy; but
they have no complete Body of History. There begins to appear amongst us some
beams of hopes to have some accomplished Historian, by the approbation the
Public gives to those that write now.

FINIS.

