THOMAS RYMER. Author of the Foedera and other popular Works


Licensed,

July 17, 1677.

R. L'estrange.

THE Tragedies OF The last Age Considered and Examined BY THE Practice of the
Ancients, AND BY THE Common sense of all Ages.

IN A LETTER TO Fleetwood Shepherd, Esquire

By THOMAS RYMER, of Gray's Inn, Esquire.

-- Clament periisse pudorem.
Cuncti pene patres; ea quum reprehendere coner
Quae gravis AEsopus, quae doctus Roscius egit.
Hor. London, Printed for Richard Tonson at his Shop under Gray's Inn Gate, next
Gray's Inn Lane, 1678.

The Contents.
ACtion, the unity must be observed, or else the conduct will be all at random,
106. where the unity is observed, the Play cannot have two several Names, 106.
where observed, the Poet cannot easily transgress in the unities of time and
place, 24. Actors make the success of Plays, 6. 138. Aristotle on Poesy long
conn'd in Italy, e're heard of on this side of the Alps, 142. Argument, Plot or
Fable for a Tragedy ought to be taken from History, 17. 56. ought to be more
accurate and Philosophical then History, 14. 16. ought to represent persons
better then the life, 36. Antiochus's conduct when in love with his stepmother,
78. Antigone of Sophocles its Argument, 40. Athens and London the same for
Nature and Manners, 6. Athens and Malmsbury have the same Test for Tragedy, 99.
Athenians a fighting people, 27, 28. Authors of English Tragedy began not where
the Ancients left off, 11. How they would have Charactered Phedra, 92.
B.
BEn. Johnson preferred, 144. Bloodshed rarely on the Ancient Theaters, and
why, 27, 28.
C.
CAnace Parturiens. Nero the Emperor an actor in it, 70. Canace of Speroni
Sperone, its argument and preparation, 77. Crime, when extenuated by the
Ancients, 27. 78.
D.
DEcorum shockt, 37. 39. 42. 47. and throughout.
E.
EEmpericks in Poetry, 5. English Language proper for Tragedy, 10, 11. Episode
by whom introduced, 12. gave offense to the Priests, 12. Epic Poems and
Tragedys agree, 74. differ 120. Euripides blamed by the Ancients for making
Characters more wicked then they should be, 36. his Etheocles and Polynices,
30, 31, 32. and ult. his Phedra, 79, 80. Evil design to be represented in its
fall but not in its advances, 75, 76.
F.
FAble the soul of a Tragedy, 4. 19. Fanatics in Poetry, 8. Fancy not
straightened by rules, 9. Frailties, Comical and Heroic frailties, 45.
H.
Heart and Mohun the AEsopus and Roscius of the English stage. 138. Historical
and accidental truths will not do in Tragedy, 14, 15, 19, 47. Historical
impudence, 114.
I.
INstinct of good use in Poetry, 64.
K.
KIngs are all in Poetry presumptive Heroes, 61. ridiculously pictured, 60. not
to be swayed by evil Ministers, 46, 47. profaned in these Tragedies every
where, 107. 114. cannot be accessory to a crime, 115. one without a Name, 107.
M.
MAdness, what sort to be imitated in Poetry, 80. Man's life not to be taken
away without a just account, 23. Manners to be reformed by Poetry, 7. Mezentius
made an object of Pity, 120. Murders in these Tragedies every where absurd,
120.
P.
PAssion allows no long speeches, 44. no comparisons, 54. no parenthesis, 128.
Please, what naturally, 5. 14. and throughout. Pictures how they please, 15.
Poets not incomprehensible, 14. must take care that the Criminal sin not too
far, and are not to be trusted for an Hell behind the Scenes, 26. Not to take
Nature at the second hand, 140. what the end and design of Poetry, 13, 14. 15.
142. Poetical Justice, 23. 25, 26. 37. 128. poetical death, 42. Pity and
Terror, 25. 27. 28. and throughout. Preparation; what it ought to be for an
incestuous love, 79. What for two Brothers that kill each other, 29, 30, to 36.
What for making a King, 38, 39. Phedra in Euripides; her love not volnntary,
79, 80. Her secrecy, conflict and frenzy, 80. Her fortitude, 82, 90, 91. Her
ravings, 81. Her reveres, and good sense, 83. The Nurses importunity and
subtilty, 81. How ready to catch at the least hint, 82. Speech to debauch
Phedra, from 85 to 89. How she equivocates, and deceives Phedra: and speaks to
Hippolytus without her consent or privity, 91. 92. Phedra in Seneca, the whole
conduct unnatural, absurd, nor any way tending to move pity, or tertor, 93,
94, 95, 96.
R.
REason is to discipline fancy, 8, 109.
S.
SCene wrought up, if not skilfully, torments nature, 76, 113. Scene; which
only in these Plays proper to move pity, 132. But the occasion none of the
greatest, the Conduct coarse, the Turn faulty, the Counter-turn ridiculous,
133, 134, 135, 136. An instance of a Scene with all these in perfection, 137,
138. Socrates brought moral Philosophy in Vogue, assisted by Sophocles and
Euripides, 13. Seneca his Phedra, 93. His thoughts often from the purpose, 97.
Speech of Julia in Herodian, 49. Of Sophia in the Play, 50, 51. Compared
together, 52, 53. Speeches of more mettle, 54, 55. Speech of Cassius and
Arbaces compared, 103.
T.
TRagedy, its reputation in former days, 2. What Originally, 11. Requirrs what
is great in nature, 43, 65, 80, 85. Ours of the last age without design, 16.
Unpolitical, 29. Of Rollo, the Argument, 18. Condemned, 19, 41. How it ought to
have been contrived with the same catastrophe, 19, 20. And how the characters
of Rollo, Otto, Aubrey and Matilda ought to have been designed, 21, 22, 23.
Rollo and Otto compared with Etheocles and Polynices in Euripides, from 30 to
36. Characters, as we sind them, of Rollo, 37. Of Aubrey, 38. Of Sophia, 42. Of
Matilda, ib. Of Edith, 43, 44, 45. Of Latorch, 46. Several reasons why Edith
rather than Hamond should have killed the King, 47, 48. Reasons for the success
of this Tragedy, 55. A King and no King, the Title Comical, 57. The Plot, ib.
Nothing accurate or Philosophical in it, 57, 58, 59. How the Plot ought to have
been cast, 58. Improbabilities, and the characters unlikely, and all unproper,
59. Character of Arbaces, 61, 62, 63. What it should have been, 63. How wisely
he acquits himself when un-King'd, 65, 66, 67. Ought rather to have been knocked
o'th head, than to have married a Princess, 67. The Princess is made more silly
than any common Shepherdess, 68, 69. The Queen Mother a Patient Grissel, 70.
Reason of this Tragedy's success, 5. Maids Tragedy, its Argument, 104.
Unnatural, improbable, 106, 107, 113. How it might have been better, 126.
Action double, 106. The King a fool and madman, 109. Evadne a Monster, 111.
Melantius, 122. Callianax, 123. Aspatia, 123, 124. Amintor, 125.
W.
WHo and who may kill one another with decency, 117. Wilful murder not to be
suffered in Tragedy, 27. Wicked persons not to be brought on the Stage, 120.
Women judges, 4, 5, 95, 96. Modesty necessary and essential to their character,
113. Are not to suffer any cruelties from man, 70, 74. Virgil's infinite care
on that occasion, 71, 72. Yet corrected by Varus and Tucca, 73.
Advertisement.
There is also to be printed an Heroic Tragedy, called

EDGAR

By the same Hand.

The ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 12. r. fates. p. 12. l. y. 9. r. Episode. p. 44. l. ult. for the
first r. his. and r. complements. p. 54. l. 19. for matter r. mettle. p. 62. l.
18. for the r. thee. p. 48. l. 18. r. kuew. p. 100. l. 12. dele a. p. 109. l.
6. for she r. he. p. 100. l. ult. r. Evadne's. p. 112. l. 21. r. Lady's. p.
116. l. 15. for nisi r. si. p. 118. l. 13. r. (...), p. 124. l. 10. r. with.

TO Fleetwood Shepherd, Esquire
HAving several mornings, and early, traveled to St. James's, with the only
design of being with you; and missing you as often; I became so mortified with
the misfortune, that I resolved to come into the Town no more, till assured of
your return from Copt-Hall: but because I meant not altogether to kill my self,
for my entertainment I provided me some of those Master pieces of Wit, so
renowned everywhere, and so edifying to the Stage: I mean the choicest and
most applauded English Tragedies of this last age; as Rollo; A King and no
King; the Maids Tragedy by Beaumont and Fletcher: Othello, and Julius Caesar,
by Shakespeare; and Cataline by Worthy Ben.

These I perused with some attention, and some reflections I made; in which,
how far I mistake your sense, that is, how far I am mistaken, I desire to be
informed.

I had heard that the Theater was wont to be called the School of Virtue; and
Tragedy a Poem for Kings: That they who first brought Tragedy to perfection,
were made Viceroys and Governors of Islands; were honored everywhere with
Statues of Marble, and Statues of Brass; were styled the Wise Sophocles, the
Wise Euripides by God and Man, by Oracles and Philosophers. That for teaching
Morality, Crantor and Chrysippus were nobody to 'em. This latter transcribed
the whole Medea of Euripides into his works. That so refined a People, and so
frugal a Commonwealth as Athens did tax and assess themselves, and laid out
more of their public Exchequer upon the representation of these Plays, than
all their Wars stood them in, though sometimes both Seas and Land were covered
with Pagan Enemies that invaded them. And not Athens only, but (who hated
Athens) so austere and glum a generation as those of Sparta, by the care of
Lycurgus, agreed the same honor to these Atheman Poets.

These things coming into my mind, surely (thought I) men's brains lie not in
the same place as formerly; or else Poetry is not now the same thing it was in
those days of yore.

I therefore made enquiry what difference might be in our Philosophy and
Manners; I found that our Philosophers agreed well enough with theirs, in the
main; however, that our Poets have forced another way to the wood; a by-road,
that runs directly cross to that of Nature, Manners and Philosophy which gained
the Ancients so great veneration.

I would not examine the proportions, the unities and outward regularities, the
mechanical part of Tragedies: there is no talking of Beauties when there wants
Essentials; it is not necessary for a man to have a nose on his face, nor to
have two legs: he may be a true man, though awkward and unsightly, as the
Monster in the Tempest.

Nor have I much troubled their phrase and expression, I have not vexed their
language with the doubts, the remarks and eternal triflings of the French
Grammaticasters: much less have I cast about for Jests, and gone a
quibble-catching.

I have chiefly considered the Fable or Plot, which all conclude to be the Soul
of a Tragedy; which, with the Ancients, is always found to be a reasonable
Soul; but with us, for the most part, a brutish, and often worse than brutish.

And certainly there is not required much Learning, or that a man must be some
Aristotle, and Doctor of Subtilties, to form a right judgment in this
particular; common sense suffices; and rarely have I known the Women-judges
mistake in these points, when they have the patience to think, and (left to
their own heads) they decide with their own sense. But if people are
prepossest, if they will judge of Rollo by Othello, and one crooked line by
another, we can never have a certainty.

Amongst those who will be objecting against the doctrine I lay down, may
peradventure appear a sort of men who have remembered so and so; and value
themselves upon their experience. I may write by the Book (say they) what I
have a mind, but they know what will please. These are a kind of Stage-quacks
and Empericks in Poetry, who have got a Receipt to please: And no Collegiate
like 'em for purging the Passions.

These say (for instance) a King and no King, pleases. I say the Comical part
pleases.

I say that Mr. Heart pleases; most of the business falls to his share, and what
he delivers, every one takes upon content; their eyes are prepossest and
charmed by his action, before ought of the Poets can approach their ears; and
to the most wretched of Characters, he gives a luster and brillant which dazles
the sight, that the deformities in the Poetry cannot be perceived.

Therefore a distinction is to be made between what pleases naturally in it
self, and what pleases upon the account of Machines, Actors, Dances and
circumstances which are merely accidental to the Tragedy.

Aristotle observes, that in his time, some who (wanting the talent to write
what might please) made it their care that the Actors should help out, where
the Muses faild.

These objectors urge, that there is also another great accident, which is,
that Athens and London have not the same Meridian.

Certain it is, that Nature is the same, and Man is the same, he loves,
grieves, hates, envies, has the same affections and passions in both places,
and the same springs that give them motion. What moved pity there, will here
also produce the same effect.

This must be confessed, unless they will, in effect say, that we have not that
delicate taste of things; we are not so refined, nor so virtuous; that Athens
was more civilized by their Philosophers, than we with both our Philosophers
and twelve Apostles.

But were it to be supposed that Nature with us is a corrupt and depraved
Nature, that we are Barbarians, and humanity dwells not amongst us; shall our
Poet therefore pamper this corrupt nature, and indulge our barbarity? Shall he
not rather purge away the corruption, and reform our manners? Shall he not with
Orpheus rather choose to draw the Brutes after him, than be himself a follower
of the Herd? Was it thus that the ancient Poets (by the best Philosophers)
became styled the Fathers of Knowledge, and Interpreters of the Gods?

Lastly, (though Tragedy is a Poem chiefly for men of sense,) yet I cannot be
persuaded that the people are so very mad of Acorns, but that they could be
well content to eat the Bread of civil persons.

Say others, Poetry and Reason, how come these to be Cater-cousins? Poetry is
the Child of Fancy, and is never to be schooled and disciplined by Reason;
Poetry, say they, is blind inspiration, is pure enthusiasm, is rapture and rage
all over.

But Fancy, I think, in Poetry, is like Faith in Religion; it makes far
discoveries, and soars above reason, but never clashes, or runs against it.
Fancy leaps, and frisks, and away she is gone; whilst reason rattles the chains,
and follows after. Reason must consent and ratify whatever by fancy is
attempted in its absence; or else it is all null and void in law. However, in
the contrivance and economy of a Play, reason is always principally to be
consulted. Those who object against reason, are the Fanatics in Poetry, and
are never to be saved by their good works.

Others imagine that these rules and restraints on the Plot and Argument of
Tragedy, would hinder much good intrigue, would clog invention, and make all
Plays alike and uniform.

But certainly Nature affords plenty and variety enough of Beauties, that no
man need complain if the deformed are cloistered up, and shut from him. Such a
Painter has been, who could draw nothing but a Rose; yet other Painters can
design one and the same good face in a thousand several figures: it may be
remembered that there are but five vowels; or be considered, from seven
Planets, and their several positions, how many faces and fortunes the
Astrologer distributes to the people. And has not a Poet more virtues and vices
within his circle, cannot he observe them and their influences in their several
situations, in their oppositions and conjunctions, in their altitudes and
depressions: and he shall sooner find his ink, than the stores of Nature
exhausted.

Other objections may be answered as they fall in the way. I would only have
you before hand advertised, that you will find me tied to no certain style, nor
laying my reasons together in form and method. You will find me sometimes
reasoning, sometimes declaiming, sometimes citing authority for common sense;
sometimes uttering, as my own, what may be had at any Bookshop in the Nation:
sometimes doubting when I might be positive, and sometimes confident out of
season; sometimes turning Tragedy into what is light and comical, and sporting
when I should be serious. This variety made the travel more easy. And you know
I am not cut out for writing a Treatise, nor have a genius to pen any thing
exactly; so long as I am true to the main sense before me, you will pardon me
in the rest.

Nor will it, I hope, give offense that I handle these Tragedies with the same
liberty thar I formerly had taken in examining the Epick Poems of Spencer,
Cowley, and such names as will ever be sacred to me. Rapin tells us, for his
own Contrymen, that none of them had writ a good Tragedy, nor was ever like
to write one. And an O sia stata la loro poca fortuna, o l'imperferione della
nostra lingua nelle cose gravie A. Tass^ne.
eminent Italian confesses, that the best of theirs exceeded not a mediocrity;
and yet their Divine Tasso had then writ a Tragedy, and Torrismodo strutted it
in buskins.

But I have elsewhere declared my opinion, that the English want neither genius
nor language for so great a work. And, certainly, had our Authors began with
Tragedy, as Sophocles and Euripides left it; had they either built on the same
foundation, or after their model; we might e're this day have seen Poetry in
greater perfection, and boasted such Monuments of wit as Greece or Rome never
knew in all their glory.

ACcording to the best account I can gather from old Authors.

Tragedy was originally, with the Ancients, a piece of Religious worship, a
part of their Liturgy. The Priests sung an Anthem to their god Dionysus, whilst
the Goat Would therefore read in Horace, Vilem certavit ad hircum, as -- Rhetor
dicturus ad aras; not being satisfied in Antiquity with what the Commentators
devise, when they read, -- Vilem certavit ob hircum.
stood at his Altar to be sacrificed: And this was called the Goat-song or
Tragedy.

These Priests were called the Chorus, and now the whole Ceremony was performed
by them, till Thespis introduced the Episods, and brought an Actor on the Stage.

Which Episods the Priests at first mutim'd against as an Innovation, they
listened a long while, thought it ran off from the Text, and wondered how it
would be applied, till at last their patience could hold no longer, and they
roared out, (...).
Nothing to Dionisus, nothing to Dionysus, which gave beginning to the Proverb.

But the Poet gaining upon them by little and little, enlarged the Episod, till
it grew the main part; the part which only is by us called the Tragedy. And to
make amends to Dionysus, the Theaters were all consecrated to him, and the
Plays acted there, called Dionysus's Plays.

After much new-modelling, many changes and alterations, AEschylus came with a
second Actor on the Stage, and lessened the business of the Chorus
proportionably. But Sophocles adding a third Actor, and painted Scenes, gave
(in Aristotle's opinion,) the utmost perfection to Tragedy.

And now it was that (the men of sense grown weary with discoursing of Atoms
and empty Space, and the humor of Mechanical Philosophy near spent.) Socrates
set up for Morality, and all the buz in Athens was now about virtue and good
life.

Camerades with him, and Confederates in his worthy design, were our Sophocles
and Euripides: But these took a different method.

He instructed in a pleasant facetious manner, by witty questions, allusions
and parables.

These were for teaching by examples, in a graver way, yet extremely pleasant
and delightful. And, finding in Histoty, the same end happen to the righteous
and to the unjust, virtue often oppressed, and wickedness on the Throne: they saw
these particular yesterday-truths were imperfect and unproper to illustrate the
universal and eternal truths by them intended. Finding also that this unequal
distribution of rewards and punishments did perplex the wisest, and by the
Atheist was made a scandal to the Divine Providence. They concluded, that a
Poet must of necessity see justice exactly administered, if he intended to
please. For, said they, if the World can scarce be satisfied with God Almighty,
whose holy will and purposes are not to be comprehended; a Poet (in these
matters) shall never be pardoned, who (they are sure) is not incomprehensible;
whose ways and walks may, without impiety, be penetrated and examined. They
knew indeed, that many things naturally unpleasant to the World in themselves,
yet gave delight when well imitated. These they considered as the Aristotle,
Poet.
picture of some deformed old Woman, that might cause laughter, or some light,
superficial, and comical pleasure; but never to be endured on serious
occasions, where the attention of the mind, and where the heart was engaged.

We have pictures that yield another sort of pleasure, as the last Judgment, of
Mich. Angelo, the Massacre of the Innocents, the Baptist's head, etc.

It Is true; but if they yield any pleasure besides what proceeds from the art,
and what rests in eye. It Is by the History, to which the picture serves only as
an Index.

For till our memory goes back to the History, the head of the Baptist can say
no more to us, than the head of Goliath. But the Ancients in their Tragedies
rested not on History.

They found that History, grossly taken, was neither proper to instruct, nor apt
to please; and therefore they would not trust History for their examples, but
refined upon the History; and thence contrived something (...).
more philosophical, and more accurate than History. But whether our English
Authors of Tragedy lay their foundation so deep, whether they had any design in
their designs, and whether it was to prudence or to chance that they
sacrificed, is the business of this present enquiry.

We have in Herodian the horrid and bloody story of the two Brothers, Antoninus
and Geta, Emperors, all which (crude and undigested, as in the Original) we
find crammed into

The Tragedy of Rollo Duke of Normandy.
NO reason, I presume, can be given, why, having found an History, this Author
should change the names; of Antoninus and Geta into Rollo and Otto; Emperors of
Rome, into Dukes of Normandy. Nor why he altered the Scene to bring these
Cutthroats and Poisoners from the other side of the Alps. Aristotle tells it
as extraordinary, of a Tragedy made by Polemon; wherein both the names and
matter were of his own invention; and yet it had the fortune to please. He also
reminds us that a man is better pleased with the picture of an acquaintance,
than of a person of whom we had never heard. And we generally observe, when one
tells of an adventure, or but a jest, he will choose to father it on some one
that is known, thereby to get attention, and gain more credit to what he
relates. Besides, many things are probable of Antoninus, or of Alexander, and
particular men, because they are true, which cannot be generally probable: and
he that will be feigning persons, should confine his fancy to general
probability.

The Fable is this:

ROllo and Otto Brothers, and both equally (let me call them) Kings of one and
the same Kingdom, cannot agree about the matter. Rollo (by the means of his
favorite Latorch) attempts to poison his Brother; which failing, he kills Otto
in the arms of their Mother Sophia, with Sword drawn offers to kill his Mother
and Sister Mat. but is disarmed by Aubrey, yet sends out Lord Chancellor
Gisbert to be chopped in two, and thrown to the dogs; and his Tutor Baldwin also
to be beheaded. Hamond, Captain of the Guards, saw all this executed. Allan,
the Captain's Brother gives (his quondam-Master) the Chancellor, Christian
Burial: for which, he is sent to por. Edith, Baldwin's Daughter, beseeches the
King to spare her Father; prevails, but too late. Rollo is in love with her;
she resolves his death. Hamond, in revenge of his Brother Allan, stabs, and is
stabbed by Rollo, whose Sister Matilda, Aubrey takes to Wife, and Reigns in his
stead.

Now, if you call this a Fable; give me one of old AEsop's; where, for all the
coarse outside, there dwells a little reasonable Soul within, a little good
Sense at the bottom, which carries it through all Nations, and will commend it
to the end of the World.

For nothing certainly is designed in this of Rollo, either to move pity or
terror, either to delight or instruct:

It is indeed a History, and it may well be a History; for never man of common
sense could set himself to invent any thing so gross.

Poetry requires the ben trovato, something handsomely invented, and leaves the
truth to History; but never were the Muses profaned with a more foul,
unpleasant, and unwholesome truth, than this which makes the Argument of Rollo.

If the end of this Tragedy is the Marriage and Coronation of Aubrey, had one
of the ancient Poets been to cultivate this History; They would have laid the
right of the Crown in Aubrey. They would have given us to understand, that
Aubrey's Father, a good King, raised Rollo's Father from a mean condition to be
his favorite, and have the places of greatest trust and confidence with him.
This ungrateful Villain most treacherously murders the King his Master, settles
himself on his Throne, dies in Peace, leaves the Kingdom equally to his two
Sons. These Sons enter upon the Government, the people swear Allegiance to 'em,
Complement them with Addresses from all Countries; the Air rings with
Vivele-Roy's and Acclamations. The Sun shines as it was wont, the Grass grows,
Cows give white Milk, and no Egyptian Plague troubles the Land. Heaven has
forgot, and human means appear none, for either revenging the murdered King, or
restoring his Son Aubrey.

Now is the time for a Poet to show his cunning. Now he must bring a sudden and
terrible judgment to destroy the Rollian-Race, and set young Aubrey on the
Throne of his Ancestors.

To effect this, the two Brothers must be made to kill each other; and, as a
consequence of this disaster, their Mother is to kill her self for sorrow.

These Brothers, in their character, would have been harmless men, modest
enough, and loving each other tenderly: for had they been wicked, the judgment
upon them might be applied as due to their own crimes. Or however their Fathers
crime in it self would have appeared less, as not enough alone to deserve that
vengeance; and if the occasion was not clear, the punishment would be less
regarded; but their innocence makes the punishment more signal and
extraordinary, and more discovers the work of Heaven. And thus also they are
capable of moving pity, when only their Father's crime pursues them; and it
seems likely that, other wise, they might have lived happily together.

Their Sister Matilda must have been a virtuous sweet Lady, every way of
singular merit, sensible of her Father's crime, and of the wrong that Aubrey
suffers. By this character, all those who had pitied her Brothers, would have
been extremely satisfied to see their Sister so well preferred in the Marriage
with Aubrey; for Heaven, by this, would seem, in her, to make some amends for
the hard measure to the unfortunate Brothers.

Aubrey should in all his words and actions appear great, promising, and
Kingly, to deserve that care which Heaven manifests so wonderfully in his
Restoration.

And because this, of the two Brothers killing each other, is an action morally
unnatural; therefore, by way of preparation, the Tragedy would have begun with
Heaven and Earth in disorder, nature troubled, unheard of prodigies; something
(if I may so say) physically unnatural, and against the ordinary course of
nature. Perhaps the first Scene would have showed the Usurper's Ghost from
Hell, full of horror for his crime, cursing his Sons, and sending some infernal
fury amongst them.

And, by the way, he might relate all things fit to be known, which past out of
the Drama.

The nicety in writing upon this Fable, would have chiefly been in the
characters of the two Brothers, These are the persons killed, and, of all
things, a Poet must be tender of a man's life, and never sacrifice it to his
Maggot and Capriccio. Therefore, as (I said) the Brothers were not to be
wicked, so likewise they ought not to be absolutely innocent. For if they had
refused to succeed their Father, and when they might have sat on the Throne,
have humbled themselves at Aubrey's feet; then no Poetical Justice could have
touched them: guilty they were to be, in enjoying their Father's crime; but not
of committing any new. And this guilt of theirs was also either to be
palliated, or else to be past over in silence, lest, laid too open, the
compassion of the Audience might be abated. Neither would it suffice that these
Brothers kill each other by some chance; but it should appear, that agitated by
their Father's crime, like Machines, they unavoidably clash against each other;
whilst their proper inclination in vain strives against the violence.

If the English Theater requires more intrigue, an Author may multiply the
Incidents, may add Episods, and thicken the Plot, as he sees occasion; provided
that all the lines tend to the same center: more of a main Plot, Virgil
required not for his Epic Poem.

And peradventure, if the Poet design any certain sense by his Fable, that
sense will bind him to the unity of action; and the unity of action cannot well
exceed the rule for time. And these two unities will not permit that the Poet
can far transgress in the third. So that all the regularities seem in a manner
to be linked together: but begin with an absurdity, and nothing reasonable can
ever follow. If a Pilot puts to Sea without resolving for what Port, none can
wonder that he sails not by the Compass.

To return to this Tragedy of Rollo, if the stress of the design rests not on
Aubrey; but the sense of all terminates in Rollo. The sense must be this; He
that sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed. And if this be
all, where is the Wonder? Have we not every day cried in the Streets, instances
of God's revenge against murder, more extraordinary, and more poetical than all
this comes to? If this be Poetry, Tyburn is a better and more ingenious School
of Virtue, than the Theater.

In former times Poetry was another thing than History, or than the Law of the
Land. Poetry discovered crimes, the Law could never find out; and punished
those the Law had acquitted. The Areopagus cleared Orestes, but with what
Furies did the Poets haunt and torment him? and what a wretch made they of
Oedipus, when the Casuist excused his invincible ignorance?

The Poets considered, that naturally men were affected with pity, when they
saw others suffer more than their fault deserved; and vice, they thought, could
never be painted too ugly and frightful; therefore, whether they would move
pity, or make vice detested, it concerned them to be somewhat of the severest
in the punishments they inflicted. Now, because their hands were tied, that
they could not punish beyond such a degree; they were obliged to have a strict
eye on their Malefactor, that he transgrest not too far, that he committed not
two crimes, when but responsible for one: nor, indeed, be so far guilty, as by
the Law to deserve death. For though historical Justice might rest there; yet
poetical Justice could not be so content. It would require that the
satisfaction be complete and full, e're the Malefactor goes off the Stage, and
nothing left to God Almighty, and another World. Nor will it suffer that the
Spectators trust the Poet for a Hell behind the Scenes; the fire must roar in
the conscience of the Criminal, the fiends and furies be conjured up to their
faces, with a world of machine and horrid spectacles; and yet the Criminal
could never move pity. Therefore amongst the Ancients we find no Malefactors
of this kind; a wilful Murderer is with them as strange and unknown, as a
Paricide to the old Romans. Yet need we not fancy that they were squeamish, or
unacquainted with any of these great lumping crimes in that age; when we
remember their Oedipus, Orestes, or Medea. But they took care to wash the
Viper, to cleanse away the venom, and with such art to prepare the morsel: they
made it all Junket to the taste, and all Physic in the operation.

They so qualified, so allaid, and covered the crime with circumstances, that
little could appear on the Stage, but either the causes and provocations before
it, or the remorse and penitence, the despairs and horrors of conscience which
followed, to make the Criminal every way a fit object for pity. Nor can we
imagine their Stage so rarely endured any bloodshed, and that the sight was
displeasing, because the Spectators were some sort of effeminate, unfighting
fellows. When we remember the Battles of Marathon and Salamin; and with what
small number these very Spectators had routed Xerxes and the greatest Armies in
the World. For now it was that the arms of the Athenians (as well as their
arts) shined in their greatest glory.

The truth is, the Poets were to move pity; and this pity was to be moved for
the living, who remained; and not for the dead. And they found in nature, that
men could not so easily pardon a crime committed before their faces; and
consequently could not be so easily disposed to bestow that pity on the
Criminal which the Poets labored for. The Poets, I say, found that the sight
of the fact made so strong an impression, as no art of theirs could afterward
fully conquer.

But leave reasoning, and return to Rollo; it seems very odd to see the first
four Scenes pass as if nothing extraordinary were toward, without any
preparation; and immediately, without more ado, the two Brothers, two Kings,
are a fighting. The Ancients would have made the Earth tremble, and the Sun
start out of the Firmament at a sight so unnatural. Yet we make no more of
them, but turn them out, like two Cocks of the Game, for the diversion of the
Rabble.

Some have remarked, that Athens being a Democracy, the Poets, in favor of
their Government, exposed Kings, and made them unfortunate. But certainly,
examine the Kings of their Tragedies, they appear all Heroes, and ours but Dogs,
in comparison of them. So respectful they seem to Kings in their Democracy, and
so unthinking and unpolitick are our Poets under a Monarchy. Thebes was always
enemy to Athens, yet would not any National pique, nor other, provoke the Poets
to treat those Kings unhandsomly; because by their rules to have lessened the
Kings, would have made their Tragedies of no effect, in moving the pity
intended by them. They made the Kings unfortunate, we make them wicked: they
made them to be pitied, we make them to be cursed and abhorred.

That I may, in all hitherto laid down, be the better understood, let it be
observed what measures Euripides took in the Tragedy of Etheocles and Polynices.

This instance I choose, the condition of those Theban Kings being the nearest
to this of Rollo and Otto: for they also were equally Kings, could not agree,
killed each other. That we might not suspect that the dissension between them
rose from any malice of their own, we are let to know, that the Gods owe a
vengeance to Thebes, which is now ripe, and ready to fall upon them, for a
crime of their Founder Cadmus.

That their Grandfather Laius warned by the Oracle not to marry, his Marriage
had so incensed the Gods, that now they were punishing his disobedience on the
third generation.

That their Father Oedipus had cursed them, and praid they might dye by each
others hands.

These Brothers, to avoid their Father's curse, agree, not to live together,
but to Reign by the year alternately, and each to be King in his turn.
According to this agreement, the younger Brother goes into banishment, where he
marries, makes Allies of some hotheaded Princes, as Tydeus, Capaneus, and five
more, and brings a Consederate Army before Thebes. The Brothers have an
enterview; Polynices demands his turn; Etheocles answers to this effect.

Now, whilst I may continne a King, I cannot willingly yield to become a
Servant. Neither take you a right course, coming with force of Arms, and laying
the Country wast. Thebes would blush, should I resign my Scepter for fear of
the Mycenaean spears. In fine, Brother, if I am to transgress, for a Kingdom I
would transgress; in all the rest (...):
serve God.

This haughty speech of Etheocles turns all the current of pity to his
Brother's side. Now the Confederates fall on to storm the Town, are repulsed,
with great slaughter on both sides. Etheocles, notwithstanding he was the King
in possession, notwithstanding he knew (by Tyresias the Prophet) that the
Thebans would be victorious, and notwithstanding the danger of his Father's
curse; yet out of his generosity and humanity to save the effusion of innocent
blood; offers the single Combat with his Brother; which accepted, both are
killed, and dye friends. Etheocles could not speak, indeed, but his sighs were
all tenderness. The last breath of Polynices made these words;

(...).
My friend turned enemy, but still my friend.

But though Polynices seems ill treated, and his Brother is much too sharp upon
him. The reason given by the Poet, is, because he brings foreign Forces to
invade his Native Country: and perhaps the Poet on this occasion might
somewhat strain his Philosophy to gratify the Politician, but the Poet seems so
afraid that the Audience should forget that these dissentions are the effect of
their Ancestors crimes; and in no wise spring from their own ill mind and
election; that he is every where a hinting to us the curse entailed on the
Family by their Grandfathers Marriage; the violence of superior powers, of
Demons and Furies, which we want language to express, -- (...): or some
terrible goddess discord. -- (...). (...): -- Whether discord or your Father is
the cause, or some ill spirit. (...) suffer for the old pique against Cadmus,
(...) -- the land is sick, (...) -- breathed terrible curses against them,
(...) did curse most unhallowed curses to his Sons, (...). God is ready to
fulfill your curses, because in spite of the gods Laius made Children, (...),
handing the curses from Laius down to his posterity, -- (...) -- (...), -- I
was not born such a fool to pull out my own eyes, and curse my Sons, if some of
the Gods had not made me mad, says Oedipus, (...), -- because of your fiends.
(...), -- your fiend is the cause. (...) (...), some bane sent upon the land by
evil spirits, (...), the bane fixed to the Marriage of Laius, (...). not escape
their Fathers Furies, (...), the joy of the Furies, (...), because of the
Furies, (...), the Plague of the Furies, (...), sighing curses against his
Sons, (...), -- what comes from god, (...), haunted with evil spirits (...),
Polynices had his name from Contention.

By what I have noted one might think the Poet would have us believe that all
the Furies in Hell were broke loose and at work to make these two Brothers
miserable, and consequently would have us take their part, would engage our
affections, and carry our heart along with a sense of their sufferings: Heaven
and Earth conspire their ruin. Quid meus AEneas in te committere tantum?

What had they done to deserve this persecution? the curse of their Father lay
nearest them, and is most insisted on by the Poet, how had they vexed their
Father? their Father transported with the sense of his own horrible
misfortunes, tore out his own Eyes, and in that condition would have run about
the streets, but these two Sons of his kept him within doors by force, this
enraged him the more, and he threw his curses about him, which some evil
spirits (who haunted the house for some old accounts) gladly lay hold on, and
never rested till those curses had their effect.

By what has been observed any one may judge whether these Characters of
Etheocles and Polynices, or those of Rollo and Otto be the better contrived for
moving that pity which Tragedy requires. And I have been the more particular,
because not only Rollo, but most of the Characters in our Tragedies of the last
Age, may be examined by the same reason. And yet Eurypides has been blamed for
making his Characters more wicked then they ought to be in Tragedy: he was not
taxed by Aristophanes and Aristotle only, but by Sophocles, and the general
sense of Athens was against him. They said, in those days, that Comedy (whose
Province was humor and ridiculous matter only) was to represent things worse
then the truth. History to describe the truth, but Tragedy was to invent things
better then the truth. Like good Painters they must design their Images like
the Life, but yet better and more beautiful then the Life. The Malefactor of
Tragedy must be a better sort of Malefactor then those that live in the present
Age. For an obdurate impudent and impenitent Malefactor can neither move
compassion nor terror; nor be of any imaginable use in Tragedy.

See we then Rollo, fighting with his own Brother and King, equal to himself,
and attempting to poison him, without any remorse; killing him in their mothers
arms, without any provocation; calling the Queen their Mother Belldam, and with
drawn sword threatening to kill both her and his Sister, without any sense of
honor or piety; and must we not imagine a Legion of Devils in his belly. When
Rollo has murdered his Brother, he stands condemned by the Laws of Poetry; and
nothing remains but that the Poet see him executed, and the Poet is to answer
for all the mischief committed afterward. But Rollo we find has made his
escape, and woe be to the Chancellor, to the Schoolmaster, and the Chancellors
Man; for those are to be men of this world no longer. Here is like to be
Poetical Justice, so many lives taken away, and but the life of one guilty
person to answer for all, and is not this a strange method of killing? If the
Planets had contrived him for a Cock of thirteen, his first Victory should not
have been the most important, he should first have praictis'd on his subjects,
and have risen by degrees to the height of iniquity. His Brother Sovereign was
his top-murder; nothing remained after that, unless it were his Lady-Mother.

Neither is Otto here a much more taking Gentleman, nothing appears in his Cue
to move pity, or any way make the Audience of his party.

But of all the world who would ever have expected that Aubrey is to succeed in
the Kingship? It Is a good man, but the dullest good man that ever Poor advanced
to a Throne by such extraordinary means. Some Dreams or old Prophecy should
have begun an expectation in us; or some Lambent-fires incircling his head,
have drawn the peoples eyes upon him. Rollo and Otto must both make untimely
ends, to make way for Aubrey. So strange a Revolution never happens in Poetry,
but either Heaven or Earth gives some sorenotice of it.

However, something shining and extraordinary ought to have appeared in his
Character. Indeed he parts Rollo and Otto fighting, and Rollo was once disarmed
by him. But then for decencies sake and Rollo's credit, he should have been
looked on as something more then a mere Subject. In all the rest he appears an
humble endeavourer, speaks honestly to no purpose, is braved and abused by
Rascals. Whereas each step of his should have been attended with such awe and
Majesty, that the spectators, if not guess, might at least wish to see him
their Sovereign; and have the pleasure to see their wishes successful.

Gisbert and Baldwin, Chancellor and Tutor are Devota Capita, only come on the
Stage to make Rollo the greater sinner by their murder.

Further to show his rage against the Chancellor, says Rollo, Captain, besides
remember this in chief,
That being executed, you deny,
To all his Friends the rites of Funeral,
And cast his Carcass out to Dogs and Fowls.


No reason here is given for this inhumanity.

On the like occasion Sophocles contrived a Tragedy, the Plot is this. By the
death of Etheocles and Polynices, Creon King of Thebes made an Edict, that
none, upon pain of being buried alive, should presume to give burial to
Polynices, the reasons pretended are, That Polynices had brought Foreigners to
invade his Country, and Etheocles had dyed in his Countries defense, and
therefore it would be unjust to give to both the same honor of Funeral. He
further alleges a charge left by Etheocles to the same effect. Now the piety
of Antigone could not digest so hard a Law, but in the night she goes and
covers her Brother with earth, is taken by the Watch, and (Creon being deaf to
all intercession) is sent to punishment. When the Bishop Tyresias reproving
Creon strikes him with remorse, who thereupon runs himself to reprieve her,
hears from her Tomb the last groans of his only Son Haemon, who he finds had
stabbed himself and lay a dying at the feet of Antigone, his dead Mistress.
This disaster brought the same violent Fate on the Queen Eurydice, and with her
deprived Creon of all that could be dear to him in the world.

In this we have every thing just, every thing surprising, every thing
passionate to extremity.

Whereas in Rollo we meet with so much stuff lumberd together, that not the
least spring can work, nor the least passion stir, that is pleasant or
generous; nor the least proportion or beauty of Tragedy appear. Aristotle says
that an Image drawn with Chalk in the exact shape and symmetry, will please
more then a whole potful of the best Colors thrown upon a wall without any
figure or design.

But to proceed with the Characterrs. Sophia at the first appears a woman of
spirit, in opposing so vehemently the division of the Dukedom. But she ill
maintains this Character; when Rollo in her presence murders his Brother,
threatens both her and her Daughter, she very tamely exhorts the Daughter to a
vile compliance, says she Rise Daughter. serve his will in what we may,
Least what he may not, he enforce the rather.
Is this all you command us?


She ought surely in another sort of tone to have resented this outrage, or
before to have manifested a partiality for Rollo.

At his death History informs us she died of grief. It Is a wonder this Tragedy
spares her; hers would have been a more decent and Poetical death then any of
the rest. In this the History is the better Tragedy.

The Princess Matilda for the small part she bears, acquits her self bravely
enough. Yet, methinks, Aubrey and she should have exchanged some words; some
glances have been cast, or otherways some approaches have been begun. For here
there scarce go three words to the bargain. In the last lines of the Play he
comes to this Lady as abruptly as to the Dukedom, both drop into his mouth.

In Edith these waylings, clingings, and beseechings; these showers of tears
and words. -- as you are a god above us,
Be as a god then full of saving pity,
Mercy, O Mercy Sir, for his sake Mercy,
That when your stout heart weeps, shall give you pity.
Here I must grow.


This sort of importunity is nothing so proper in this place, it might much
better become Comedy, where Miss La Fool intercedes for little Dog or Moncky,
in peril for some misdemeanor; something more of stomach and courage had suited
her better. Tragedy requires not what is only Natural, but what is great in
Nature, and such thoughts as quality and Court-education might inspire. She
might indeed be surpised, and at the first let the mere Natural woman escape a
little, but one or two so harsh and barbarous repulses should have roused that
Tragical spirit so vilely prostituted, and made her reflect on the other bloody
scenes, so lately acted before her eyes, and caused her to despair before she
had troubled us with her endless impertinencies.

Nor indeed comes short of her for tongue and wind, the old Duchess, when in
all reason one might expect that so violent grief and passions would choke
them; they run chattering, as if the concern were no more then a gossiping:
theirs are not of the old cut, Curae leves loquuntur ingentes stupent.

Take her then resolved to kill this Holofernes, when she sets up for a
Heroine, and will revenge the blood of the murdered King Otto, of her Father,
and the rest. When that scene presents her full of dire design and bloody
purpose, we then indeed have her concise in word, and Laconick in the repartee.
To the first Complement she answers. Your grace is full of game.
Wilt please you sit Sir.
Of what Sir.
Has a strange cunning tongue,
Why do you sigh Sir.
My anger melts, O I shall lose my justice.
His tongue will tempt a Saint.
He will fool me.


Is it likely that a Lady in her circumstances could be sensible what a pretty
lisping way he had with him; or could listen to the soft things he spoke, or
answer him so lightly? is not this more like some Minx in an Alley, then any
Character for Tragedy? There are in Women comical frailties, and heroic
frailties: and several considerations might have made her resolution stagger;
but this of the tempting tongue is Comedy out of season.

I would also in this scene note this passage, says

Ham. Pray.

Roll. Pray.

Ham. Pray if thou can pray, I will kill thy soul else.


Pray suddenly.

This I think sounds not so well in Poetry, whatever it may do in Divinity. And
now that I am upon the short Dialogues, let me cite one that went before.

Ham. See Sir Gisberts head.

Roll. Good speed, was it with a Sword.

Ham. An Axe, my Lord.

Roll. An Axe,'it was vilely done.

But leaving Edith, let us examine what was there in this Latorch to give him
the ascendant over his Sovereign? Was it his Quality, his Valor, or some
Pestilent Wit, or what Fiddle had he to Charm this savage Master of his? Salust.
An Historian (who was never taxt for a prodigal of his words) could not
mention the D^me that led Cataline astray, without annexing the Inventory of
her Excellencies, as how well she Danced, how she handled the Lute, and how she
spoke Greek. Yet Rollo a Prince of as great importance to us, is led by the
Nose to do all the mischiefs under the Sun; and no body knows who it is does
manage him.

It Is possible that a Prince may abandon himself to be ruled by some busy
creature of no consideration. The Annals of Normandy may mention such Dukes.

History may have known the like. But Aristotle cries shame. Poetry will allow
of nothing so unbecoming, nor dares any Poet imagine that God Almighty would
trust his Anointed with such a Guardian Devil.

In the third Act enters Hamond, Captain of the Guard, and is a nimble
Executioner; and who would guess this the Man ordained to kill the Dragon. But
whether in Poetry this job more properly belonged to Edith, or to this Hamond,
may be a question.

In the first place it is resolved that to neither of them did it belong, but
that (of the two) Edith might rather have killed Rollo, the following reasons
may prove, viz.

1. To Edith the provocation was greater; a Father engaging our Piety more
strongly then a Brother.

2. Hamond holding a place of trust, had a stricter tie upon him: and Edith
lying under no such obligation; the fact in her would not have been subject to
so many aggravations.

3. She, as a woman, might be presumed not so well to understand Allegiance,
and to distinguish how far her Piety was to be restrained by it.

4. As in her sex reason is said to be more feeble, so the Passions are
supposed to be the more violent and precipitate.

5. The punishment had been more signal and more grievous to the Tyrant, dying
by the hand of a woman, and a woman to whom he was making love.

6. By a woman the fact would have been more surprising and extraordinary; and
greater would have been the wonder, which a Poet always endeavors for, when it
clashes not with probability.

7. Baldwin was of better quality then Allan. For though the Maid might be
content enough to be robbed of her revenge; yet what would her Fathers Ghost
say? And indeed what would the Chancellor's and Otto's Ghost say? was their
blood dumb? or was not the cry of their blood to be heard? must they be
murdered and no harm ensue? only to the Manes of the Chancellors Man must this
Monarch be sacrificed. Allan te hoc vulnere -- says Hamond. Allan, my Brother
Allon gives this stab.

Allon it seems is satisfied, whilst his betters must be fain to appeal, and
wait till Doomsday.

Hitherto the Plot and Caracters.

For the thoughts and good sense, compare the speech against dividing the
Dukedom, with that in Herodian (from whence our Author takes it) on that same
occasion. Upon the division it was agreed, the one Brother to have Europe, the
other to have Asia; which their Mother hearing, thus spoke,

The Sea and Land, my Sons, you have found how to divide; the Propontick, you
say, is a bound for either Continent, but how is it that you will divide your
Mother? how shall wretched I be cut in two and disposed on to each of you?
first, therefore, first slay me, and each of you take his moiety with him, and
bury it. So with the Sea and Land, I also shall be divided between you.

Says Sophia, Divide me first, and tear me limb by limb,
And let them find as many several graves,
As there are Vilages in Normandy,
And'tis less sin than so to weaken it.
To hear it mentioned, does already make me
Envy my dead Lord, and almost Blaspheme
Those powers which heard my prayers for fruitfulness.
And did not with my first birth close my womb.
To me alone my second blessing proves my first,
My first of misery, for if heaven
That gave me Rollo, there had stayed his bounty,
And Otto, my dear Otto never had been,
Or being had not been so worth my love;
The stream of my affection had run constant,
In one fair current all my hopes had been
Laid up in one, and fruitful Normandy
In this division had not lost her glories.
For as it is now, it is a fair Diamond
Which being preserved entire, exceeds all value
But cut in pieces (though these pieces are
Set in fine gold by the best workmans cunning)
Parts with all estimation. So this Kingdom
As it is yet whole, the neighboring Kings may covet
But cannot compass, which divided will
Become the spoil of every barbarous Foe
That will invade it.


The former speech seems to show a Woman of great spirit, laboring to contain
her passion till she may utter her mind: But this latter seems to present a
well-breathed and practiced Scold, who vents her passion and eases her mind by
talking, and can weep and talk everlastingly.

In that of Julia we find but one thought, yet that followed close and pressed
with all the vehemence that a strong passion might inspire; as may be easily
apprehended by any who understand in Virgil, It lachrymans, guttisque humectat
grandibus ora.

She is not content to say, divide me, but to lay the Image before their eyes,
and make the stronger impression. She will, like the Sea and Land be divided,
be cut in two, be shared out to them, to each his moiety, etc.

But what a pother makes the old Duchess? never French Author hash'd and
kickshaw'd a little sense into so many words that signify nothing. She manages
as if she were to hold forth by the glass: Had her passion after the first
three words burst out at her eyes, had she wept and torn her hair, her
Rhetoric had been more moving, and better understood, and she had acquitted
her self Heroickly: But she falls off immediately, as if she had bolted out
some rash thing at first, and was afraid of being taken at her word; her tongue
runs over her passion, and steals into matters that lean another way, and she
talks as if she would talk the impression of her first words quite out of the
hearers heads again. After the three first words she flies from the only
thought that was proper, high enough, and proportionable to her passion: she is
for being split in as many pieces as there are Villages in Normandy; which
expression scatters the thought, breaks the resemblance and carries all remote
from the occasion, and must in effect move but very indifferently. From thence
she plunges into such impertinent and inconsistent wild jargon as is obvious to
any man. That of the Diamond is a good thought in it self; but in this place
comes very cold from her mouth, it is no more than if she had said, Divide the
Dukedom, divide me first, nay divide a Diamond, etc. Naturally in a great
passion none have leisure to ramble for comparisons, much less to compute the
value of Diamonds whole or broken.

I question not the Grammar, nor how Poetical the style is, I rest in the
sense, nor had yet been so particular, but that I take all this Tragedy to be
of the same piece for the writing, unless that scene of the Astrologers; and
the Comical part, than which nothing can be more diverting.

Speeches of more matter I confess we have in the Play, and to Latorch we are
obliged for them. No friends, Sir, to your honor,
Friends to your fall, where is your understanding
The noble vessel that your full soul sailed in,
Ribb'd round with honors, where is that? it is ruined.
The tempest of a woman's sighs has sunk it.
Friendship, take heed, Sir, is a smiling Harlot,
That when she kisses, kisses a soder'd friendship,
Piec'd out with Promises; O painted Ruin!


This Latorch always Cants at this rate, and an extraordinary Muse attends
him. We may, I think, conclude the success of this Play due chiefly to the
Scenes for laughter, the merry jig under the Gallows, and where the Tragedy
tumbles into the Kitchen among the Skoundrels that never saw buskin in their
lives before. There the Pantler and Cook give it that relish which renders it
one of the most followed entertainments in the Town.

A King and no King.
WEll fares it with Tragedy (says an Antiphanes apud Athen.
old stager) the title is no sooner known, but the Spectators see into the
design, and agree what they are to expect. Name Oedipus, they know Laius was
his Father, Jocasta his Mother, and all the generation: so there needs no more
but hold up a finger, the Curtain's drawn, and to it they go.

But ill is our condition, we are fain to coin new words, explain what is past,
present, and to come, yet never can be understood enough, and without this ado
whether Phidon or whether Chremes enters, he is hist off the Stage; when as
Teucer, Oedipus, or Peleus might come with authority.

Our Authors we see, never make use of the advantage which that Comedian envied
so much in Tragedy. This Title gives no more light into the design, then had
they called it Hocus Pocus; and indeed the name seems rather to promise a
Comedy, and one might expect some sort of Mammamouchy King, or Cozen of Duke
Trinckelo's for the Hero of the Play.

The Plot is this:

The Queen of Iberia, Arane, had feigned her self with child, and made use of
Gobrias's Son to carry out the cheat. She afterward proves truly with child,
which came to be Panthea, durst not discover the first cheat, so that Arbaces
(Gobria's Son) became actually King, is made really so by marrying Panthea.

The rest is all Episode.

In this Fable appears some proportion, shape, and (at the first sight) an
outside fair enough, yet at the bottom we hardly find what is more choice, or
more exquisite and more perfect than History. By the turn of the Plot, if we
look on Arane, this Play might have been called The Deceiver Deceived, if we
look on Arbaces, the title might have been The Fortunate Impostor, The lucky
Sham, or something of that kind; which shows a want of that good sense in it
which Tragedy requires.

There might have been feigned some right to the Crown long contested between
the two Families; (as ours of York and Lancaster) and bloody civil war ready to
break out; when unexpectedly all grew hushed and ended in a marriage; which (by
a train long laid by Gobrias) took effect. This marriage should not have seemed
so advantageous to the false King, and his Father who brought it about; but by
manifest reasons of state appeared absolutely necessary for the good of the
Kingdom, and above all things, desired and labored for by the relations of
Panthea.

Whereas on the contrary, we find the Queen Mother attempting to poison this
usurper, and see no reason to blame her endeavors.

What sets this Fable below History, are many improbabilities, and those of the
worst sort; because they contribute nothing to the wonder. What more
improbable, than that the Mother whose business it was to contrive the death of
the Impostor, should never caution or inform her only Daughter, who had the
right to the Crown, that Arbaces was none of her Brother, but her vassal, and
so obstruct her love for him?

Nor is it likely that Gobrias should not have reserved some means to let his
Son know the secret, that his Sons conduct and addresses to gain the Princess,
might have been fashioned accordingly.

The Characters are all improbable and unproper in the highest degree, besides
that both these, their actions and all the lines of the Play run so wide from
the Plot, that scarce ought could be imagined more contrary.

We blunder along without the least streak of light, till in the last act we
stumble on the Plot, lying all in a lump together; neither any tolerable
direction to guide us thither; nor ought ingenious, just, or reasonable, that
carries us from thence.

What find we in the Son of Gobrias that he must have the Princess and the
Kingdom for her portion, save only that the Knave his Father will have it so?

Take his picture sent before him, and drawn by a friend. -- He is
vainglorious, and humble, and angry, and patient, and merry, and dull, and
joyful, and sorrowful, in extremity in an hour -- Should we find underwritten
This is a King, yet could not reason give way to our belief.

Kings of Tragedy are all Kings by the Poets Election, and if such as these
must be elected, certainly no Polish Diet would ever suffer Poet to have a
voice in choosing a King for them. Nor will it serve that Arbaces is not truly
a King, for he is actually such, and intended for a true and rightful King
before the Poet has done with him, what wants in Birth the Poet should make up
in his Merit, every one is to consent and wish him King, because the Poet
designs him for one, it is (besides) observed that Usurpers generally take care
to deserve by their conduct what is denied them by right.

We are to presume the greatest virtues, where we find the highest of rewards;
and though it is not necessary that all Heroes should be Kings, yet undoubtedly
all crowned heads by Poetical right are Heroes. This Character is a flower, a
prerogative, so certain, so inseparably annexed to the Crown, as by no Poet, no
Parliament of Poets, ever to be invaded.

Arbaces indeed is of a different mould, he no sooner comes on the Stage, but
lays about him with his tongue at so nauseous a rate, Captain Bessus is all
Modesty to him, to mend the matter his friend shaking an empty skull, says It Is
pity that valor should be thus drunk. Had he been content to brag only amongst
his own Vassals, the fault might be more sufferable, but the King of Armenia is
his prisoner, he must bear the load of all; he must be swagger'd at, insulted
over, and trampled on without any provocation. We have a Scene of his
sufferings in each Act of the Play: Bajazet in the Cage was never so carried
about, or felt half the barbarous indignities which are thrown on this
unfortunate Prince by our monster of a King.

If the Poet would teach that victory makes a man insolent; he must at the same
time make victory blush, and fly to the other side; as a just punishment for
him that had abused her favors.

To the Queen Mother his language is, Plagues rot the adulterous Witch! thou
worse than Woman damned -- strumpet -- whore! etc. to his Father Gobrias; Curses
incurable, and all the evils
Man's body or his spirit can receive,
Be with thee.


To the Princess Panthea his supposed Sister, after having cast her in Prison,
and a thousand outrages very coarsly.

Arb. I have beheld thee with a lustful eye.
My heart is set on wickedness, to act
Such sins with thee, as I have been afraid
To think of. If thou dare consent to this,
(Which I beseech thee do not) thou may gain
Thy liberty, and yield me a content:
If not, thy dwelling must be dark and close.

These speeches, drawing his Sword at the Queen Mother, and the other outrages,
make the sum of our Heroes virtues, and neither worse nor better find we
throughout his character. Arbaces should have been considered in a double
capacity; he should have been endu'd with all the greatness of mind, and
generosity of a King, and also with the modesty of a Subject. The want of
which, is a great aggravation of his fauls; for his carriage toward the Royal
Captive, toward the Queen Mother, toward the Princess, as he was a King, were
insupportable, as no King, it was all abominable. History sometimes takes
notice of a certain instinct which has strangely hindered many unnatural
actions. A Poet, I am sure, ought always to have that instinct, or some good
genius ready to serve his Hero upon occasion, to prevent these unpleasant
shocking indecencies, which otherwise might happen. This instinct should in
Arbaces have begot a respect to his Father Gobrias, and have humbl'd him in the
presence of such as were truly of the Blood Royal.

And far from decorum is it, that we find the King drolling and quibling with
Bessus and his Buffoons, and worse, that they should presume to break their
little jests upon him.

This too is natural, some will say. There are in nature many things which
Historians are ashamed to mention, as below the dignity of an History: Shall we
then suffer a Tom Coriat in Poetry? Shall we on the most important day of a
King's Reign, and at Court be content with such entertainment as is not above a
Cobler's shop? Might not a Poet as well describe to us how the King eats and
drinks, or goes to Stool; for these actions are also natural: but observe the
behavior of Arbaces, after that he is found to be no King. Now he will make
amends, and give satisfaction to all he had wronged. To the Gentlemen about him.

Arb. Why do you keep your hats off; Gentlemen?
Is it to me? I swear it must not be.
Nay, trust me, in good Faith it must not be.
I cannot now command you, but I pray you,
For the respect you bear me, when you took
Me for your King; each man clap On his hat
At my desire.

And surely the Captive King cannot but be content, when told that

Arb. He shall go so home, as never man went.

Mardon. Shall he go on's head?

Arb. He shall have Chariots easier than air,
That I will have invented; and never think
He shall pay any ransom: And thy self
That art the Messenger shall ride before him
On an Horse cut out of an entire Diamond,
That shall be made to go with golden Wheels.
I know not how, yet.

For the Captive King's Mistress;

Arb. She shall have some strange thing; we will have the Kingdom
Sold utterly, and put into a toy.
Which she shall wear about her carelessly
Somewhere or other.

Now, that he is no King, nor has ought to give, he is for selling all without
asking leave of the true Sovereign Panthea. To her his Compliment is,

Arb. Grant me one request.

Pant. Alas, what can I grant you? what I can, I will.

Arb. That you will please to marry me.
If I can prove it lawful.

Pant. Is that all?
More willingly than I would draw this air.

Should not rather the Spirit of Majesty have now roused up in the Princess,
and she have called to mind his late brutish insolence, and have called him
impudent Slave, and discharged a frown that should have struck him dead, or
commanded him to be nailed to the floor as false coin, and a counterfeit stamp
of Majesty. And certainly his character could deserve no better fate. But for
his comfort, this Princess was none of those. One might swear she had a knock
in the Cradle; so soft she is at all points, and so silly. No Linsey-woolsey
Shepherdess but must have more soul in her, and more sense of decency (not to
say) honor. To this Vassal of hers, on her knees for half an hour together,
she whines at this rate, viz.

Pan. I know I am unworthy, yet not ill
Armed, with which innocence I here will kneel
Till I am one with earth; but I will gain
Some words, and kind ones, from you.

Thus she continues, and by and by he kisses her thrice, then calls her Witch,
Poisoner, Traitor, sends her to Prison; she thanks him with all her heart. Nay,
it is well the King is pleased with it.

At the next meeting she will needs be closer and closer to him; he cannot keep
her off him, he tells her he would commit incest with her: She returns a
drawling, yawning, yielding answer; and proceeds to tell him, that she wishes
he were not her Brother, that she loves him so well, she can love no man else;
she shall weep her eyes out: and farther.

Pan. But is there nothing else
That we may do, but only walk? methinks
Brothers and Sisters lawfully may kiss.

Had Panthea been some Wastcoatteer of the Village, that had been formerly
Complaisant with him beyond discretion, more vile submissions she could not
devise: But as she is lawful Sovereign, nothing could be invented more opposite
to all honesty, honor, and decorum. If we consider them as Brother and Sister,
it is horribly wicked. If we look on her as Sovereign, and him as her Subject,
what can be more dishonorable? So that if instinct guided their love, as
lawful and warrantable; it may be answered, that the same iustinct should have
prevented that love, as insolent and presumptuous in Arbaces, base and
unbecoming in Panthea. For whether a Lady may better marry her Brother, or her
Groom, is a question more easily decided in Divinity, than in Poetry.

We are let to know that the Queen Mother was for removing the Usurper by
poison, and for bringing all into the right channel again. This we might expect
to be a Woman courageous, and truly Tragical: yet we find her the veriest
patient Grissel that ever had lain by a Monarch's side. She comes but thrice on
the Stage; the first time she is rebuked by Gobrias, with the same language
that the Vicar of Newgate might dispense to some sinner forlorn; then she is on
her mary-bones to the Impostor without reluctance. Lastly, when provoked with a
drawn Sword, and words more cutting, the proudest rant she could be raised to,
was: -- Fire consume me if ever I was a Whore.

If nothing else in the character of Arbaces, the drawing his Sword against a
Woman, was enough in Poetry to damn him. After that outrage, he could make no
pretensions to ought that is good or honorable.

On this occasion memorable is that passage in Virgil, where AEneas after
having related, how the Town on fire about his ears, -- on the sudden awaked
from his sleep, -- flung headlong by rage and despair, -- forsaken by his
reason, -- his friends slaughtered about him, -- the King Priam murdered before
his face: -- when he spies the cause of all this, Hellen, skulking in a corner
-- at the sight of her. Exarsere ignes animo, subit ira cadentem
Ulcisci patriam, and sceleratas sumere poenas, etc.


All which, with what follows, comes to no more, than had he said; -- In that
nick of time I even made a question within my self, whether I was not to take
revenge on her; to that degree of madness had my troubles wrought me. Talia
jactabam, and furiata mente ferebar.

Now here, this revenge goes no farther than his thoughts; these thoughts --
AEneas himself condemns, and calls them madness; and is also sharply reproved
for them by his Guardian Angel, Nate, quis indomitas tantus furor excitat iras?
Quid furis?


No man but Virgil could ever pen any thing with that infinite care and caution
as is this particular passage. One might think Virgil foresaw whatever could be
objected; and provided against all scruples.

Yet of such a nice taste were the Critics in that age of good sense; that
Varus and Tucca struck out all the 22 Verses which contain this passage. These
were employed by Augustus to inspect what (by the untimely death of Virgil)
might have been left imperfect, and they durst not suffer these 22 lines to
pass, though essential to the Poem; so tender they were, lest their Hero might
lie under a suspicion of transgressing in any punctilio of that nature.

We need not make a controversy whether Virgil or his Critics be in the right:
But if Virgil will not in a man allow the thought of striking a Woman in any
circumstances, unless he condemns himself for that thought. And if his Critics
will not permit a thought of that kind with any qualifications whatsoever; then
we may well conclude, that Poetry to be very gross, where the men both think,
and speak, and act their cruelties against Women, without any shame or
restraint.

But Arbaces, though mad, and flashed upon by never so great a hurrican of
provacations, was not to be allowed to think of striking; because the Woman's
quality was above his, and made her sacred. Neither in this point is there a
difference betwixt an Epick Poem and a Tragedy; when the conclusion of both is
prosperous.

As here, AEneas, a King, of great merit, by the assistance of Heaven, and his
friends, after much labor, marries Lavinia.

And Arbaces, no King, of no merit, without friends in Heaven, or on the Earth;
without any trouble weds his King's only Daughter, and the Kingdom of Iberia is
her portion.

I know with the Ancients, Orestes killed his Mother, Hercules his Wife and
Children, Agamemnon his Daughter. But the first was an act of Justice; the
second of Frenzy; the last of Religion. But these were all Tragedies unhappy in
the catastrophe. And the business so well prepared; that every one might see,
that these Worthies had rather have laid violent hands on themselves, had not
their will and choice been overruled. Every step they made, appeared so
contrary to their inclinations, as all the while showed them unhappy, and
rendered them the most deserving of pity in the World.

Another Canker in the heart of this Tragedy, is the incestuous love (for such
it appears) between Arbaces and Panthea, I mean, the conduct of it. When any
design on the Stage is in agitation, the Poet must take care that he engage the
affections, take along the heart, and secure the good will of the Audience. If
the design be wicked, as here the making approaches toward an incestuous
enjoyment; the Audience will naturally loath and detest it, rather than favor
or accompany it with their good wishes. It Is the sad effects and consequences
of an ill design which the Audience love to have represented: it is then that
the penitence, remorse and despairs move us: it is then that we grieve with the
sorrowful, and weep with those that weep.

Therefore were the Ancients to make an incestuous love their subject; they
would take it in the fall, as it rowls down headlong to desperation and misery.

Many in the World for their interest may comply and help forward the advances
toward an ill action; but on the Stage there is no kindred nor filthy lucre to
biass the Audience, or make them partial to the evil-doer. If the Poet observe
not these measures, the working up of a Scene, is plainly the tormenting of
nature, and holding our ears to the Grindstone.

For an incestuous love, famous amongst the Ancients, was the tale of Macareus
and Canace. In the list of those Tragedies wherein Nero delighted to be an
Actor, Suetonius reckons Canace parturiens. The title may satisfy us, that all
the soft things, all the amors, the flowers and fleurets were over, e're the
Offenders entered on the Stage.

In this last age a noble Speroni Sperone.
Italian composed a Tragedy of Canace after the model of the Ancients; for the
time of the action: he also chooses the day of Canaces labor. And then the
pangs of childbearing are the easiest that she suffers. For, to heighten the
disgrace, this Poet feigns Macareus and Canace to be Twins, and this day to
have been their birth day, which the King, their Father, is about to solemnize
with a Festival. Immediately we find the two Offenders (under their apprehension
of being discovered) in the greatest confusion and despair imaginable. But that
we might more justly pity them, he informs us, that their crime proceeded not
from any folly or miscarriage in themselves which they might have avoided; but
that a Non malattia mortale, Ma fa celeste forza Non propria elettione, Ma un
impeto fatal. --
resistless power above, and Celestial force had overruled them: that indeed
Venus had an old reckoning with their Father AEolus, for persecuting her
AEneas, and thus she discharged it with a vengeance.

By the rule of the Ancients no colors, no sophistry or ribaldry's, were used
to lessen a crime before it was committed: for then their Rhetoric could have
no good effect, but must have grated on the hearers patience. But after the
fact, when its punishment came heavy upon it, then all their art and invention
was at work, to find out circumstances to extenuate the guilt, that the persons
guilty might be capable of pity.

Arbaces in the dishonest love to his Sister, should have followed the example
of that Antiochus in the History, who in love with his Stepmother, discovered
not his passion by any words or gallantries; but pined away, and gave himself
over to dye; and had died, if the dexterity of his Physician had not by feeling
his Pulse learnt the cause of his distemper.

The better to clear this matter, I will trace the manners and conduct of
Phedra in Euripides, where we are told that Hippolytus having too rudely
slighted the Altars of Venus, she is offended, and will have the whole Family
feel the effects of her resentment. To bring this about, she strikes Phedra
with a poisoned dart, and makes her in love with this Hippolytus, her Son in
Law. Phedra conceals her love, strives to overcome it, not prevailing, resolves
to (...).
kill her self by fasting. And now for three days had she neither eat nor
slept, when she first appears on the Stage. No wonder then if she talks very
madly, she is in an hundred minds all at once, she tries all places and all
postures, and is always uneasy in the present. Now her dress is a pain to her,
and now she will be carried to her Closet and shut up close, instantly again,
she calls to have her locks tied back, and nothing but the garb of an Amazon
will please her, then she would sleep in some grott, and drink the waters from
a mossie fountain. Now she cries for the open air, for ranging the hills, for
driving the woods, for whooping the dogs, for chasing the Stag, and brandishing
a Iavelin: and ah that the horses were ready to mount. Now she complains of her
distraction, and blames some (...).
Divine power; and now her face is loaded with shame; confusion and tears. Hide
me (she cries) ah hide me from the world, it pains her (she says) to return to
her right senses.

Here is a Scene of Madness, but not of Bedlam-madness; here is Nature, but not
the obscenities, not the blindsides of Nature, which are represented when
Arbaces and Panthea go loose together, and whether of the two Madnesses is the
more apt to move pity, need not certainly be a question.

Hitherto cannot the Governess, Confident, or Nurse of Phedra, understand where
Phedra is pincht. She sifts, importunes and conjures her, yet after all is no
wiser till accidentally amongst other arguments whereby she would persuade
Phedra to live, Live, says she, otherwise you betray your Children to be Lorded
over by that other woman's Bastard, this Amazon' s Son, I mean Hippolytus, woes
me, says Phedra, you have undone me! name him no more. The Nurse proceeds to
torture her with questions, and Phedra returns as many perplexed answers, till
at the last says Phedra,

Phed. What is it that men call to be in love?
Nurse. It is of all things the sweetest, and also the most bitter.

Phed. I have sufficiently experienced both.

Nurse. What says my Child, do you love any Man?

Phed. Who is that same, that of the Amazon?

Nurse. Say you Hippolytus?

Phed. This from your self you hear, but not from me.

Alas! undone! intolerable, cries the Nurse, and she will not live one moment
longer. And concludes that all, (even modest women too against their will)
would be naught, and that Love is the veryest god almighty; there is not the
fellow of him in all the heavenly gang.

I have only cited the conclusion of this Scene, to note the utmost advances of
Phedra toward a confession, the only crime of which she was guilty; and to
show that this Nurse (so long kept in ignorance) was no fool, but subtle and
nimble enough to catch and run away with the least hint that could be offered.

In the former Scene all the conflict was between love and modesty; this
presents love and an active friendship joined, both at once laboring to subdue
this modesty, so far only as to extort a confession. The Nurse with wrung hands
lies at Phedra's feet, embraces her knees, begs her to live, for her Childrens
sake to live, and tell her pain. Phedra strives, would be from the Nurses
hands, complains of the violence, promises to tell, yet raves and rambles,
speaks short and ambiguous, all is darkness; whilst every where tenderness,
passion and modesty reign, and appear to admiration.

This Scene having wrought off the Remains of Phedra's frenzy, in the next she
seems more calm, her mind more at ease, and now will move pity from a new
Topic, for now this unfortunate Lady is found to be a woman of great sense and
understanding. She reasons (to the Chorus) and wonders how humane life becomes
so corrupt, for certainly (says she) it cannot be natural to do amiss, when we
understand what is right. Yet thus it happens, we have before our eyes, and
know what is good, but we practice otherwise. Some out of floath, and others
preferring a kind of pleasure before honesty; there be many pleasures of life,
as conversation, ease a sweet evil, and modesty. Now there are two sorts of
pleasure, one good, this other the bane of Families: but would this appear
always in its true colors, 'twould no longer be counted pleasure. These things
when I considered, I thought no Philter could ever seduce me to act against my
knowledge.

But to open my mind to you, after love had wounded me, I cast with my self how
I might bear my illness the most decently, and from that time made it my care
to hide my distemper and keep it to my self. Secondly, I resolved to get my
right senses again, and with chastity to overcome my frenzy. In the third place,
if the attempt to cure my distemper proved vain, I then thought my best course
would be to dye.

For I know the disease to be infamous, and especially in me a woman, odious to
all people.

Then she curses those who first polluted the Marriage Bed. And hates the
baggag^s that can talk so smoothly, and yet will do naughty things in a corner.
(...).
Blessed Lady, says she, how can they look their husbands in the face? how can
they but tremble at their -- (...).
confederate darkness? and be afraid that the very -- (...).
walls and doors should open and cry whore at 'um.

She concludes, Therefore dear friends, this same shall kill me, that I may
never be taken to disgrace my Husband, and the Children I have brought forth.

The Nurse perceiving her Mistress thus resolute, sets her tongue a running to
this purpose. Lady (quoth she) I was lately in a twittering fear for you,
But now I confess my self hen-hearted.
It has been said, that second thoughts are the wisest.
And now (believe me) there is nothing singular,
Nothing unreasonable in your case.
The truth is, the goddess is terrible angry at you.
Well, you love? that is no marvel.
And you would kill your self for love.
That would be a pleasant pranck, if all that are,
And that are to be in love must presently take that course.
There is no striving,
No dodging with love, when it comes in earnest.
It Is easy to those that are yielding.
But if you will be goodly, and think high of your self,
If you will resist and be stubborn,
Why, then there is no whoo with it,
It shakes and breaks, and thunders you to Atoms immediately.
Love is King of the air,
Whizz goes his power through the blew seas.
And we are all of us his offspring.
They who have read the Chronicles,
Or are skilled in ancient Ballades,
Can tell us stories of Jupiter, Semele, Cephalus.
Of such love, and such wild lovers as you would think strange at.
Yet these Lovers (many of them) were (...).
preferred in heaven,
And now are waiting at gods ellbow.
The gods melted with their sufferings, could not be angry.
And now you will be in a fit.
You cannot be content with the same Laws,
With the same Nature, with flesh and blood, like other folks.
You should have been hatchd' in Jupiter's brain,
And so been framed some blessed Angel.
How many men who are right in their senses,
See their bed tumbled yet walk on,
And lets it trouble their heads no farther.
It Is nine points of wisdom to keep that secret,
Which would be no credit, when divulged.
Perfection is an aerie notion, never to be found in practice.
Then surely they are well hoped up,
Who set themselves to live (...).
exactly.
As this world goes, if our good deeds out-tell the bad,
We shall make an handsome reckoning.
Then, dear Child, be no longer in an ill mind,
For the goddess has an heavy pique against you.
And trust not that she will be check-mated by you.
Nor think you to be higher than the highest of all:
For such, in effect, is your last resolution.
And, to tell you plainly, it is an affront to 'em.
Then pluck up a good heart,
And love on; since -- (...).
God will have it so.
You have a wound, cure your wound.
There are Spells, and Charms, and -- (...).
healing words,
Some remedy shall be found out for you.
And truly, if we Women cannot advise you,
The wit of man will come too late.


The Nurse here delivers all the good sense that could be proper for the
occasion, as may be discerned, notwithstanding the ill dress, in which I have
disguised it. A less considering Poet would have displaid all this
dialogue-wise, and made it a Scene of mighty sputter. But Euripides would not
suffer his Phedra so far to countenance or listen to these lewd reasons, as
once to think they deserved any particular answer. To dispute in a matter of
this kind, would have been the next door to the being convinced; and to
contend, was to put her self in the way of being overcome. She therefore at
once makes this return.

Ph. It Is thus that Towns and Kingdoms are destroyed,
By a fair tongue and flattering speech decoyed:
We should not file our words to please the ear;
But strike the mind, and kindle glory there.

To make short, the Nurse tells her that wise sentences will not do the
business: that, for her part, she would not be the minister of any ones
pleasure: but in this extremity, where life is at stake, she might without
blame for a violent disease, provide an extraordinary Cure.

Phedra calls these horrible, filthy speeches; and commands her to (...)
lock up her mouth.

The Nurse urges that her words, if they are not clean, they are wholesome; and
the preservation of life was of more importance than any proud name she would
boast on in her death.

But she (finding that this sort of discourse did the more exasperate and
provoke her Mistress) recants. But (says she) now that it comes in my mind, I
have at home (...).
healing Philters that will work your Cure without touching upon your modesty.

Phedra is in fear, makes scruples, asks questions; which the Nurse evades, and
tells her, she wanted not to be instructed, but to be assisted.

In the next Scene Phedra is on the Stage, and over-hears the Nurse within,
exchanging some words with Hippolytus: whereupon she cries out, says, she is
betrayed, curses the Nurse, and resolves to kill her self. And now the
apprehensions that Hippolytus would accuse her to his Father, made her write a
Letter, laying all the blame on Hippolytus, as the best expedient (that amidit
her distractions, she could on the sudden devise) to secure her honor, and to
prevent the disgrace of her Family, and of her Children: and with this Letter
in her hand, she hangs her self.

Had some Author of the last age given us the character of Phedra, they (to
thicken the Plot) would have brought her in burning of Churches, poisoning her
Parents, prostituting her self to the Grooms, soliciting her Son face to face,
with all the importunity and impudence they could imagine; and never have left
dawbing so long as there might remain the least cranny for either pity or
probability. They would never have left her, till she had swelled to such a
Toad, as nothing but an audience of brass could fit the sight of her.

But (for our credit) Seneea, before us, in this blind way of designing made no
inconsiderable progress. We find his Phedra at the first dash justifying her
incestuous love: and her Nurse is the Woman of sentences; who labors with all
the wholesome advise, the sense and nonsense she could scrape together, to maul
this monstrous lust that raged in her Nursling, Phedra. And whilst she goes on
without any signs of success, Phedra surprises her, (on the sudden) resolving
to dye with a good name. Whereupon the Nurse bids her be patient, and promises
to try what she can do with the young man.

Without more words, the next Scene presents us Phedra, (as if the late
resolution had never been made) all upon the gallantry, she is tricking her
self up in Masquerade; and thus she hopes to win the Salvage Hippolytus, and
the Nurse and she make their supplications to the Goddess of Chastity to help
on their design. And now it is that the Nurse attacks him: but how? she
expounds to him at large, that a City-life and Women are a comfortable
importance; he answers in another harangue, that nothing is like to the ranging
in the Country: and truly (for Women) he hates them all mortally. During this
conference, Phedra reels in amongst them, falls in a swoun; and well is it for
her that she is taken up in the arms of her beloved Son: therefore she takes
heart, and puts it to him courageously. But words proving vain, she will needs
Etiam in amplexus ruit? Stringatur ensis.
ravish the poor stripling. Hereupon, to cut her neck off, he draws out the
brown Faulcheon, Contactus ensis deserat castum latus.
on which she laying her sweaty palms, he cries foh! flings it from him, and
runs away. And now the Nurse puts in her word, and says, marry, it is the best
way to be beforehand with him, and to cry Whore first. Accordingly they fly to
Theseus, Phedra tells him that Hippolytus not only purposed, but had Vim tamen
corpus tulit.
effected his filthy purpose upon her body, do she what she could: and ecce
signum shows the Sword to witness for her truth. Hereupon Theseus dispatches
his Son Hippolytus into another World. And now (with a canker to her) comes
Phedra, confesses the truth indeed, and kills her self.

Now in this Phedra of Seneca, what one occasion of pity have we? what ground
for terror? and, above all, what manners have we? ask the generality of Women
if they are moved and concerned, if their hearts and good will go along and
attend the thoughts and motions of this Phedra? will they not answer that they
know no such Woman, that she is no way a kin to them, nor has any resemblance
with their nature? She must be some brat of a Succubus, or an evil Spirit, (say
they) that personates a Woman; or some Devil in a Machine, that comes to render
the Sex odious. Nor can they allow her more compassion than to a Bitch, or
Polecat, and what has no relation to human shape.

Nor can this be a cause of terror: for few Women would be apt to fancy that
they could (in any circumstances) be so wicked as this Phedra, Each will say,
were it my fate, or should I be cursed to love where I ought not, I would
certainly conceal my love, and strive with it, my thoughts, words, and actions,
and all, my condition might be every way the same, or very like to that of
Phedra in Euripides. But I could never speak or act at this impudent abominable
rate, could never be transformed to such a monster as this Phedra of Seneca.
And since my conduct would not be the same, my case can never be the same; and
consequently this example cannot move or concern, or have any operation to stir
either pity or terror in me.

I have been the more large on this matter, because it may serve as a certain
and general test, whereby may be discovered what is naturally apt to move pity
or terror. And this is founded on a Philosophy never contraverted, but alike
current at Malmsbury as at Athens.

Every one have noted Seneca for his unnatural way of writing. Yet, besides
what is already observed in his characters, I cannot leave him, without
reminding you, that though he takes all his thoughts from Sophocles and
Euripides, yet he rarely affords us any of their good sense. He crumbles every
thought into all the little points that ever he can strain it to; and all these
points (for, or against him, it matters not) must one way or other be applied.

Whenever he finds a Diamond, he forces, and breaks it into an hundred
pieces; never letting it rest so long as any of it will sparkle. I desire your
patience but for one instance of this kind.

In the Scene where the Nurse presses to know what it is that pains her
Mistress; amongst her other ravings; says Phedra in Euripides. (...)
What sort of love lov'dst thou; ah wretched Mother?
And thou, unhappy Sister, Wife of Bacchus?
The third unhappy, I.


The Poet made Phedra say this, not only, as a proper and natural reflection,
that these extravagant loves run in the blood; but as a hint of her disease,
and withal so qualified, as might also show her modesty: for she puts less in
the conclusion than was in the premises. She concludes to the unhappiness
only, and does not (as she might) say. And now the third unhappy Lover, I.

We find Seneca baiting this thought six several times in one Scene, and we
have at least, 40 lines in the Tragedy all mere descant upon it.

Ph. Fatale (a) miserae matris agnosco malum,
Peccare noster novit in sylvis amor, etc.

Ph. Aut quis juvare (b) daedalus flammas queat, etc.

Not. -- (c) Quid domum infamem gravas
Superasque matrem?

Not. (e) Memorque matris metue concubitus novos.

Nu. Cur monstra cessant? aula cur fratris vacat?
Prodigia toties orbis insueta audiet,
Natura toties legibus cedat suis,
Quoties Amabit Cressa?

Nu. Patris memento:

Ph. (d) Meminimus matris simul.

Nu. Adoritque genitor.

Ph. Mitis (f) Ariadnae pater.

Hipp. O majus ausa matre monstrifera malum,
Genetrice peior! illa se tantum stupro
Contaminavit, and tamen tacitum diu
Crimen biformi partus exhibuit nota;
Scelusque matris arguit vultu truci
Ambiguus infans; ille te venture tulit.

Ph. -- Aut quis Cressius
(e) Daedalea vasto Claustra mugitu replens
Taurus biformis, ore Cornigero ferox
Divulsit?

The thought in Euripides was good and just enough; but here we have it hall'd,
and pulled, and tossed, and tumbled about, in all postures and figures, and in
all colors but the right. Observe but how a a propos the Heroine first starts
it. No wonder (says she) if my love goes to the (a) wood, seeing my Mother was
gallanted by a Bull; this brings her the ready way to (b) Daedalus and the
labyrinth, where both she and the Poet are lost together. One might think, it
would well enough serve from the Nurses mouth for an (c) use of reproof: till
shortly after we find it a (d) turn-coat, and mustered up by Phedra in the way
of an excuse. The rest are all wide from sense and sobriety, as (e) the huge
bellowings that filled the Dedalian Cloisters.

This may suffice for Seneca, and Phedra, with whom I had not so long
digress'd, but that I had Panthea in mine eye all the while. Nor should I have
judged Panthea worth all this ado, but that she has many proper Cousins on the
Stage. And these vile characters have so long prosper'd, that they bear high,
and are fairly on to pass for excellencies.

But I grow weary of this Tragedy: In the former I took Latorch by his mouth,
and ranting air for a copy of Cassius in Shakespeare: and that you may see
Arbaces here, is not without his Cassian strokes.

Thus Cassius in Shakespeare.

Cass. -- Brutus and Caesar! what should there be in that Caesar!
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together, yours is as fair a name:
Sound them; it does become the mouth as well:
Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with them, man:
Brutus will start a Spirit as well as Caesar.
Now, in the name of all the Gods at once,
Upon what meat does this our Caesar feed,
That he is grown so great? --

Thus Arbaces.

Arb. I have lived
To conquer men, and now am overthrown
Only by words, Brother and Sister: where
Have those words dwelling? I will find'em out,
And utterly destroy 'em: but they are
Not to be grasped: let 'em be men or beasts,
I will cut 'em from the earth; or Towns,
And I will raze 'em, and then blow 'em up:
Let 'em be Seas, and I will drink 'em off,
And yet have unquench'd fire within my breast:
Let 'em be any thing but merely voice.

Would not these raptures have put Sir Will. Petty in mind of the Irish
Inscription?

FOR FIERCENESS AND FOR FURIOUSNESS, --

MEN CALL ME THE QUEENS MORTER-PIECE.

The business of the Maids Tragedy is this;
AMintor contracted to Aspatia (Callianax' s Daughter) by the King's command,
marries Evadne, Sister to Melanthius; and expects to lie with her; but the
Bride (mincing nothing) flatly tells him that he is but taken for a Cloak; that
She, indeed, is a Bedfellow only for the King. The good man is persuaded to
dissemble all, till his friend Melanthius extorts from him the secret: and
thereupon hectors his Sister Evadne into repentance, and makes her promise to
murder the King. Which she effects: in the mean time, by vexing Callianax,
Melanthius prevails with him to deliver up the Fort, (wherein consisted the
strength of the Kingdom,) and so provides for his own security. Lysimachus,
Brother to the murdered King, succeeds on the Throne, and pardons all. Evadne
would now go to bed with her Husband, he refuses, she kills her self. Aspatia
in man's habit kicks her Sweetheart Amintor, duels him, and is killed; and now
Amintor kills himself to follow her: at which sight, his friend Melanthius
would also take the same course, but is prevented.

Here we find Amintor false to his Mistress; and this fault is the source of
all the revolutions in this Tragedy.

Amintor therefore should have named the Tragedy, and some additional title
should have hinted the Poet's design.

But seeing the Maid comes in at the latter end, only, to be killed for
company; and seeing the King is the person of greatest importance, is the
greatest loser and concerned in the action of the Play more than enough. And
seeing that the new King Lysimachus in the close of the Tragedy makes this
sober conclusion, says he; May this a fair example be to me,
To rule with temper: for on lustful Kings
Unlookt-for sudden deaths from heaven are sent.
But cursed is he that is their instrument.


From these considerations we might gather that the Poets intent was to show
the dismal consequences of fornication. And if so, then the Title of the
Tragedy should have related to the King.

Whilst thus we are uncertain what ought to be the title, we may suspect that
the Action of the Tragedy is double, where there seem two centers, neither can
be right; and the lines leading toward them must all be false and confused;
the preparation I mean, and conduct must be all at random, since not directed
to any one certain end.

But what ever the Poet designed; nothing in History was ever so unnatural,
nothing in Nature was ever so improbable, as we find the whole conduct of this
Tragedy, so far are we from any thing accurate, and Philosophical as Poetry
requires.

This will appear as we examine the particular actions and Characters apart.

Our Poet here gives to the great Comical Booby Callianax, the honor of a long
name with a King at the end on it, yet lets the King himself go without. But
since he must be nameless we may treat him with the greater freedom, and to
tell my mind, certainly God never made a King with so little wit, nor the devil
with so little grace, as is this King Anonymus.

A King of History might marry his Concubine to another man for a Maid; might
hinder that man from the enjoyment. But would not then turn them into the
bedchamber to be all night together; nor would come in the morning to
interrogate and question him, and torture the soul of him, as we find in this
Tragedy, nor would impose it on a husband thus affronted, whom he calls honest
and valiant, to be the pimp to his bride. To have taken Amintors head off had
been clemency in comparison of these outrages without any cause or color. And
how wise the King was in all this, may be judged from his own mouth, finding
the husband contented and all quiet, the King (jealous that Evadne had not
observed covenants) thus taxes her. Do not I know the uncontrolled thoughts
That youth brings with him, when his blood is high
With expectation and desire of that
He long had waited for? is not his spirit
Though he be temperate of a valiant strain,
As this our age has known? what could he do,
If such a sudden speech had met his blood,
But ruin thee for ever? if he had not killed thee,
He could not bear it thus; he is as we.
Or any other wronged man.


As if she had said, you have Evadne, you have broken Articles with me; it
cannot be otherwise; for had you kept them, flesh and blood could not endure
the affront, and he is such a man as would have cut us all to pieces in
revenge. The danger being so clear and certain, and a thousand safe courses
before his nose, why should he stumble on this? never was a King of History so
errant a fool and madman.

In framing a Character for Tragedy, a Poet is not to leave his reason, and
blindly abandon himself to follow fancy; for then his fancy might be monstrous,
might be singular and please no body's maggot but his own, but reason is to be
his guide, reason is common to all people, and can never carry him from what is
Natural.

Many are apt to mistake use for nature, but a Poet is not to be an
Historiographer, but a Philosopher, he is not to take Nature at the second
hand, soyl'd and deformed as it passes in the customs of the unthinking vulgar.

The (...).
Phedra in Euripides told us truly that it is not Natural to do evil when we
know good. Therefore vice can never please unless it be painted and dressed up
in the colors and disguise of virtue, and should any man knowingly and with
open eyes prefer what is evil, he must be reckoned the -- majus est monstro
nefas Nam monstra fato, moribus seelera imputes. Sen.
greatest of Monsters, and in no wise be looked on as any image of what is
Natural, or what is suitable with humane kind.

What is there of the Hero, of Man, or of Nature in these Kings of our Poets
framing? And for Evadners part, did Hell ever give reception to such a Monster?
or Cerberus ever wag his tail at an impudence so sacred?

On the Wedding night the Bridegroom is cajoled by her in no better terms than.

Evad. A mayden-head, Amintor, at my years?
Alas, Amintor, think thou I forbear
To sleep with thee, because I have put on
A Maiden strictness; look upon these cheeks
And thou shall find the hot and rising blood
Unapt for such a vow; no, in this heart
There dwells as much desire, and as much will
To put that wished act in practice, as ever yet
Was known to woman, and they have been shown
Both; but it was the folly of thy youth,
To think this beauty (to what land so e're
It shall be called) shall stoop to any second*
I do enjoy the best, and in that height
Have sworn to stand or dye.
Soon after she tells him.
Alas I must have one
To Father Children, and to bear the name
Of husband to me, that my sin may be
More honorable.

Hitherto she is bashful, after this the Scene is to be wrought up, and the
next Scene presents her impudence triumphant; but I shall trace her duty
toward her husband no farther.

Had Evadne been the injured bodies sister, and had married Amintor out of
revenge, or had their been any foundation from circumstances for this sort of
carriage, the Character then might have been contrived plausible enough; but
both the Kings behavior and hers, uncircumstanc'd as we have them, are every
way so harsh and against Nature, that every thing said by them strikes like a
dagger to the souls of any reasonable audience.

Whatever persons enter upon the Stage the Poetry would be gross enough if the
audience could not by the manners distinguish in what Country the Scene lay;
whether in England, Italy, or Turkey: more gross would it be if the manners
would not discover which were men and which the women.

Now Nature knows nothing in the manners which so properly and particularly
distinguishes woman as does her modesty, consonant therefore to our principles
and Poetical, is what some writers of Natural History have reported; that women
when drowned swim with their faces downwards, though men on the contrary.

Tragedy cannot represent a woman without modesty as natural and essential to
her.

If a woman has got any accidental historical impudence, if documented in the
School of Nanna or Heloisa, she is furnished with some stock of acquired
impudence, she is no longer to stalk in Tragedy on her high shoes; but must rub
off and pack down with the Carriers into the Provence of Comedy, there to be
kicked about and exposed to laughter.

There are degrees of modesty. Evadne and every person feigned ought to be
represented with more modesty then Phedra or Semiramis, because the History
makes it credible that these had less of modesty then Naturally is inherent to
the Sex, yet ought these also to show more of modesty then is ordinarily seen
in men, that the Characters might still be distinguished.

But (of all) the Kings murder is attended with those circumstances, with such
a knot of absurdity and injustice, that I don't well know where to begin to
unravel it.

This King indeed is born a Monster, a Monster of great hopes, and what might
we not have expected from him? yet certainly the Poet cuts him off, e're ripe
for punishment.

And by such unproper means, that to remove one guilty person he makes an
hundred; and commits the deadly sins to punish a venial one.

If Amintors falsehood and its fatal consequences are to be noted, what occasion
have we for a King in this Tragedy? cannot Corydon deceive his Amarillis (for
such is Aspatia) but the King must know of it, the King must be murdered for it?

To vex this false man, a Groom might have done the job, and have been the
Poets Cuckold-maker to all intents and purposes every jot as well.

If it be said that the King was accessory to the falsehood, I question whether
in Poetry a King can be an accessory to a crime, if the King commanded Amintor;
Amintor should have begged the Kings pardon; should have suffered all the racks
and tortures a Tyrant could inflict; and from Perillus's Bull should have still
bellowed out that eternal truth, that his Promise was to be kept, that he is
true to Apatia, that he dies for his Mistress, then would his memory have been
precious and sweet to after-ages; and the Midsummer-Maydens would have offered
their Garlands all at his grave.

And thus the King might kill Amintor, but Amintor could not pretend that the
King or Fortune had made him false. -- nec nisi miserum fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget.


Therefore, I say, the King was not to blame; or however not so far, as in any
wise to render his life obnoxious.

But if the Poet intended to make an example of this King, and that the King
right or wrong must be killed. Amintor only felt the highest provocations, and
he alone should have been drawn out for the wicked instrument, for Melantius
had no reason to be angry at any but at his Sister Evadne; nor could she have
any pretense to exercise her hands, unless it were against her self.

If I mistake not, in Poetry no woman is to kill a man, except her quality
gives her the advantage above him, nor is a Servant to kill the Master, nor a
Private Man, much less a Subject to kill a King, nor on the contrary.

Poetical decency will not suffer death to be dealt to each other by such
persons, whom the Laws of Duel allow not to enter the lifts together.

There may be circumstances that alter the case, as when there is a sufficient
ground of partiality in an Audience, either upon the account of Religion (as
Rinaldo, or Riccardo in Tisso might kill Soliman, or any other Turkish King or
great Sultan) or else in favor of our Country for then a private English Hero
might overcome a King of some Rival Nation.

But grant that Evadne lies under none of all these impediments; suppose her
duly qualified, and let the King wave his privileges. Is there in History any
president of a Magdalen sinner, that merely from a fit of repentance fell foul
on her Gallant at this horrid rate. Indeed, amongst 'em, they call him lustful
Thief, Devil-King, shameless Villain, etc. the Athenian Servants were better
bred. Euripides.
(...). Ah fool; if we may term our Masters so. (...). Death take him! no, he
is my Master.

But I say, what reason is there for all this outcry? What can she lay to the
King's charge? Thou kept'st me brave at Court, and Whor'd me;
Thou married me to a young noble Gentleman,
And whor'd me still.


The noble Gentleman indeed is wronged: but, good Madam, what reason is there
for you to complain? did any force or philter overcome you? was not you as
forward? did not you freely and heartily consent? do not we remember your hot
rising blood, -- Your much desire, and as much will
To put that wished act in practice, as ever yet
Was known to Woman?


Has the King cast you off? or broken articles? no: but you repent? then repent
at home; you may make bold with your own body, and there let fly your rage and
violence. For to kill your Lover, is no effect or operation of repentance, nor
has any ground in nature or reason: it is worse than brutish.

But indeed most of our Murderers hitherto have been no better; they are the
Poets Ban-dogs let loose to worry those the Poet had marked out for slaughter;
and never show more reason or consideration: and consequently can in no wise
occasion either pity or terror to cause that delight expected from Tragedy.

In Epick Poetry enemies are killed; and Mezeutius must be a wicked Tyrant; the
better to set off AEneas's piety. In Tragedy, all the clashing is amongst
friends, no panegyric is designed, nor ought intended but pity and terror:
and consequently no shadow of sense can be pretended for bringing any wicked
persons on the Stage. And yet in that Mezentius of Virgil, we find more virtue
than in all the characters I have yet examind; and greater occasion for pity.
We forget all his cruelties, when we see that trouble and infinite passion for
his Son Lausus, (who was slain in his defense, and whom he would not survive,)
which is so admirably expressed. -- AEstuat ingens
Imo in cord pudor, mistoque insania luctu,
Et furiis agitatus amor, and conscia virtus, etc.


Which lines, Tasso (who translates the whole passage under the names of
Solimano and Amiralto into his Gerusalemme) thus renders in more words, but not
with more advantage. Ferue in mezzo del cor lo sdegno e l'onta,
E co'l lutto la rabbia e mista infieme,
E da le fury l'agitato amore,
E noto a se medesmo l'empio valor.


But to return, what yet makes this fact of Evadne more unlikely, is, that she
should be hectored into a repentance so pernicious, by her Brother Melantius:
who is said to be noble and brave; but from his own mouth we may judge him a
Hero, like those we met with formerly; all his words are brags; no
Dangerfield, nor Captain Thundergun could sit near him. And for his manners,
after one King was murdered by his contrivance, he stands on his guard, and
takes up the next King thus roundly.

Mel. The short is this,
It Is no ambition to lift up my self,
Urges me thus: I do desire again
To be a Subject, so I may be freed;
If not, I know my strength, and will unbuild
This goodly Town; be speedy and be wise
In a reply.

And now this new King, Brother to the former, as heroickly throws him a blank,
and bids him make his own terms. His words are these:

Lis. Melanthius, write in that thy choice;
My Seal is at it.

And more to the purpose we find not (in the Tragedy) of this second King; save
only when he concludes the Play, and tells us, that he (for his part) will take
warning how ever he meddles with a Woman; as before has been cited.

Callianax is an old humorous Lord, neither wise nor valiant, as himself
confesses; and yet is entrusted with the strength and keys of the Kingdom:
whereas, in Comedy, he would scarce pass, for a good Yeoman of the Cellar.

His Daughter, Aspatia, that gives name to this Tragedy, makes also here a very
simple figure. Never did Amyntas or Pastor fido know any thing so tender; nor
were the Arcadian Hills ever watered with the tears of a creature so innocent.
Pretty Lamb! how mournfully it bleats! it needs no articulate voice to move our
compassion: it seeks no shades but under the dismal Yew; and browses only on
Willow-garlands: yet it can speak for a kiss or so.

Asp. I Will trouble you no more, yet I will take
A parting kiss, and will not be denied.
You Will come, my Lord, and for the Virgins weep
When I am laid in earth; though you your self
Can know no pity. Thus I wind my self
Into this Willow garland, etc.

At this rate of tattle she runs on, and never knows when she has said enough.

This Aspatia is a Lord's Daughter, and bred at Court; yet is in the presence,
and in the Bedchamber of the Lady that supplants her, and amongst the
Bride-maids, where she acts her part; and fawns upon the perjured man that
forsakes her. And now cannot I be persuaded that there is ought of nature or
probability in all this. Much less would I think this a Woman to handle a
Sword, and kick Amintor, as we see her do soon after. Nor can I conceive
wherein consists that blessing, as she calls it; which she proposed to her
self, in being killed by his hands. This may be Romance, but not Nature.

And certainly, of all the characters, this of Amintor is the most
unreasonable. No reason appears why he was contracted to Aspatia, and less why
he forsook her for Evadne; and least of all for his dissembling, and bearing so
patiently the greatest of provocations that could possibly be given. Certainly
no spectacle can be more displeasing, than to see a man tied to a post, and
another buffetting him with an immoderate tongue. Certainly nothing can please
a generous mind better, than that of Virgil. Parcere subjectis, and debellare
superbos.

Poetry will allow no provocation or injury, where it allows no revenge. And
what pleasure can there be in seeing a King threaten and hector without cause;
when none may be suffered to make a return? Poetry will not permit an affront,
where there can be no reparation. But well was it for us all, that Amintor was
by the Poet his maker, endu'd with a restraining grace, and had his hands tied.

The King should first have killed his own Mother to have made him mad enough,
and fitted him for such a monstrous provocation. And Amintor too should have
been guilty of some enormous crime, (as he is indeed) that drew this curse upon
him, and prepared him to receive so horrid an outrage. Both should have been
ripe for punishment, which this occasion pulls down upon them, by making them
kill each other. Then Poetical Justice might have had its course, though no way
could pity be due to either of them.

But surely this character of Amintor is -- Servetur ad imum Qualis ab incepto
processeret, and sibi constet:
inconsistent, and is contradiction all over. He is a man of Honor, yet breaks
his Faith with his Mistress, bears the greatest of affronts from his Wife that
ever was given, and dissembles it. It Is true; once or twice he is for singing a
Catch, for the Fiddle and Dancing; but his countenance is not always set after
that copy; he does not always dissemble scurvily: for sometimes we have him
looking so pleased, that Comedy would almost be ashamed of such a Cuckold.

He is also honest, and of unshaken loyalty; yet sometimes has such devilish
throws, as would afright any true liege people from sitting at a Coffee-house
near him.

And all the passions in him work so aukwardly, as if he had sucked a Sow. Thus
he threatens.

Am. -- Come to my bed, or by those hairs,
(Which, if thou had a Soul like to thy locks.
Were threads for Kings to wear about their arms:

Evad. Why so perhaps they are.)

Am. Tl drag thee to my bed. --

Should not he rather have kicked her out of doors? And did ever man huff with
such a parenthesis?

As the Scene and provocations work higher; what Aspatia might have said to
him, he whines to Evadne.

Am. What a strange thing am I?

Evad. A miserable one, one that my self am sorry for.

Am. Why show it then in this,
If thou have pity, though thy love is none:
Kill me, and all true Lovers that shall live
In after-ages, crossed in their desires,
Shall bless thy memory, and call thee good,
Because such mercy in thy heart was found
To rid a lingering Wretch.

Amintor loved Aspatia, and married Evadne, only because the King commanded
him. We heard nothing of his love to Evadne till now, that he is turned the
amorous Owf, when he ought to be all rage and indignation.

When he should be silenced, he falls a preaching.

Am. Oh thou have named a word that wipes away
All thoughts revengeful; in that sacred name
The King, there lies a terror; what frail man
Dares lift his hand against it; let the gods
Speak to him when they please; till then let us suffer and wait.

This is loyal breath; but presently comes a puff that drives us back to the
North of Scotland.

Am. -- And it is some ease
To me in these extremes, that I knew this
Before I touched thee; else had all the sins
Of mankind stood betwixt me and the King,
I had gone through'em to his heart and thine.

Oh, says he, it is well its no worse, for had I lain with thee, I should have
been all fire and fury; I would not have valued twenty Kings, but have killed
'em all. Well Amintor, de gustibus non est disputandum, there is difference
betwixt men and men; some one, peradventure, of a grosser sense, might have
been as cool and well content, if he had been permitted the honor to touch for
once where his Majesty had touched before. But now the storm is over, and he
proceeds,

Am. -- Give me thy hand,
Be careful of thy credit, and sin close,
It Is all I wish; upon my Chamberfloor
I Will rest to night, that morning visiters
May think we did as married people use,
And prithee smile upon me when they come,
And seem to toy, as if thou had been pleased
With what we did.

Evad. Fear not, I will do this.

Am. Come let us practice, and as wantonly
As ever loving Bride and Bridegroom met,
Let Us laugh and enter here.

Evad. I am content.

Am. Down all the swellings of my troubled heart.
When we walk thus entwined, let all eyes see,
If ever Lovers better did agree.

See how he concludes too, to the eternal disgrace of Rhyme. One might think
that a man in his predicament should scarce be in a mood to be so very
particular, and enlarge thus upon the subject, unless he were well pleased with
the occasion. Besides, we find here, Lovers, enticed, laugh, Bridegroom, Bride,
loving, wantonly, pleased, toy, prithee, did as married people use; so many
pleasant words and pretty, got together, Longinus would swear that no man could
be angry at heart with all these in his mouth; they ought none of them to be
named on the same day with Evadne, and the transactions in this Tragedy. What I
have cited, is only from the first Scene, wherein Amintor has business; nor
would I follow him farther, but that in the third Act, betwixt him and
Melantius we find the first occasion for a Tragical passion that yet (I think)
these Plays have afforded us; which arises from the conduct of an Husband who
discovers the secret of his Wives dishonor to his Friend her Brother.
Melantius importunes Amintor to tell the cause of his trouble. When the matter
comes to be broken, they proceed thus:

Mel. -- What is it?

Am. Why it is this, -- it is too big
To get out, let my tears make way awhile.

Here I suppose, Amintor might better have wept, without telling it to
Melantius.

Mel. Punish me strangely Heaven, if he escape
Of life or fame, that brought this Youth to this.

Am. Your Sister.

Mel. Well said.

Am. You Will wished unknown, when you have heard it.

Mel. No.

Amint. Is much to blame,
And to the King has given her Honor up --

This line at the full length, is surely enough, his care is, so to mince that
matter as not to offend the Brother. Some broken speeches, as your Sister, the
King, her honor, or the like, with now and then a sprinkling of his tears,
might have sufficed, and the Brother should have been left to guess and
paraphrase the broad meaning. But Amintor harps upon the same string out of
time himself. What follows, is plainly to upbraid and affront his Friend by
words, though he intended nothing less; for he goes on:

Am. And lives in whoredom with him.

And what yet is more silly, in the next he adds.

Am. She Is wanton, I am loath to say a whore,
Though it be true.

This provokes Melantius to draw his Sword, and he is for fighting Amintor; yet
I am apt to be of Amintors mind, which he thus expresses:

Am. -- It was base in you,
To urge a weighty secret from your Friend,
And then rage at it.

Yet Melantius persists, till Amintor is provoked to draw his Sword, and then
Melantius puts up. Harlequin and Scaramouttio might do these things. Tragedy
suffers 'em not, here is no place for Cowards, nor for giddy fellows, and
Bullies with their squabbles. When a Sword is once drawn in Tragedy, the
Scabbard may be thrown away; there is no leaving what is once designed, till it
be thoroughly effected. Iphigenia Taurica went to sacrifice Orestes, and she
desisted, why? she discovered him to be her Brother. None here are such Fools
as by words to begin a quarrel; nor of so little resolution, to be talked again
from it, without some new emergent cause that diverts them. No Arist.
simple alteration of mind ought to produce or hinder any action in a Tragedy.

Yet far more faulty is what follows; the counter-turn has no shadow of sense
or sobriety. Melantius has swaggered away his fury, and now Amintor is all agog
to be afighting; for what; but to get his secret back again.

Am. -- Give it me again,
Or I will find it wheresoever it lies
Hid in the mortall'st part, invent a way to get it back.

Thou art mad Amintor, Bedlam is the only place for thee; if thou come here
with thy madness, Tragedy expects Terence:
ut cum ratione insanias.

Hercules was mad, and killed his Wife and Children, yet there was reason in
his madness; a mist was cast before his eyes, he mistook them for their
enemies, and believed he was revenging their quarrel whilst he heat their
brains out. That was a madness might move pity; but this of Amintor is merely
brutish, and can move nothing but our aversion. Here is a bluster begun
without provocation, and ended without any thing of satisfaction.

But that I may never find a fault without showing something better. For a
quarrel betwixt two friends, with the turn and counter-turn: let me commend
that Scene in the Iphigenia in Aulide. Where Agamemnon having consented that
his Daughter should be sacrificed, and (that her Mother might let her come the
more willingly) sent for her with a pretense that she was to be married to
Achilles; yet in a fit of Fatherly tenderness he privately dispatches Letters
to hinder her coming. Menelaus meets the Messenger going from Agamemnon,
suspects the business, takes the Letters from him before Agamemnon's face, and
read them; and now arose the contest: Menelaus was zealous for the public
good, the more, because it agreed so much with his own interest: and Agamemnon
had cause enough to stand up for his Daughter; but yet, at length, with weeping
eyes, and shame for his weakness and partiality, he yielded up the cause. But
Menelaus now seeing the conflict of Agamemnon, the tears rolling down his
cheeks, and his repentance, this sight melted the heart of him, and now he
turns Advocate for Iphigenia: He will have Hellen and the concerns of Greece
left to the mercy of Heaven, rather than that his Brother Agamemnon should do
so much violence to himself; and that so virtuous a young Princess be trapan'd
to lose her life.

Here all the motions arise from occasions great and just; and this is matter
for a Scene truly passionate and Tragical.

We may remember (how-ever we find this Scene of Melanthius and Amintor written
in the Book) that at the Theater we have a good Scene Acted, there is work cut
out, and both our AEsopus and Roscius are on the Stage together: Whatever
defect may be in Amintor and Melanthius; Mr. Heart and Mr. Mohun are wanting in
nothing. To these we owe for what is pleasing in the Scene; and to this Scene
we may impute the success of the Maids Tragedy.

The Drolls in this Play make not so much noise as in the two former; but are
less excusable here. In the former they keep some distance, and make a sort of
interlude: but here they thrust into the principal places; when we should give
our full attention to what is Tragedy. When we would listen to a Lute, our ears
are rapt with the tintamar and twang of the Tongs and Iewstrumps. A man may be
free to make a jest of his own misfortunes: but surely it is unnatural and
barbarous to laugh when we see another on the Scaffold. Some would laugh to
find me mentioning Sacrifices, Oracles, and Goddesses: old Superstitions, say
they, not practicable, but more than ridiculous on our Stage. These have not
observed with what Art Virgil has managed the Gods of Homer, nor with what
judgment Tasso and Cowley employ the heavenly powers in a Christian Poem. The
like hints from Sophocles and Euripides might also be improved by modern
Tragedians; and something thence devised suitable to our Faith and Customs.
It Is the general reason I contend for: Nor would I more have Oracles or
Goddesses on the Stage, then hear the persons speak Greek, they are Apes and
not men that imitate with so little discretion.

Some would blame me for insisting and examining only what is apt to please,
without a word of what might profit.

1. I believe the end of all Poetry is to please.

2. Some sorts of Poetry please without profiting.

3. I am confident whoever writes a Tragedy cannot please but must also profit;
it is the Physic of the mind that he makes palatable.

And besides the purging of the passions; something must stick by observing
that constant order, that harmony and beauty of Providence, that necessary
relation and chain, whereby the causes and the effects, the virtues and
rewards, the vices and their punishments are proportioned and linked together;
how deep and dark soever are laid the Springs, and however intricate and
involved are their operations.

But these enquiries I leave to men of more phlegm and consideration.

Othello comes next to hand, but laying my Papers together without more
scribbling, I find a volumn, and a greater burden then I dare well obtrude upon
you.

If I blindly wander in erroneous paths, it is more then time Mr. Shepherd that
you set me right, and if I am not so much out of the way; then most of the main
faults in these other Tragedies cannot be far from our view, if we tread not on
their skirts already.

I will wait your direction e're I advance farther, and be sure of your pardon
for what is past. Many seeming contradictions I rather chose to slip over, then
to be ever casting in your way some parenthesis or some distinction.

Many other slips and mistakes too you meet withal, but the fortune of Greece
depends not on them.

Nor I know could you (that read Hebrew without the pricks) be at a loss for
the sense, where you found not a period truly pointed.

If the Characters I have examined are the same I take them for, I send you
Monsters enough for one Bartholmew-fair: but what would vex a Christian, these
are shown us for our own likenesses, these are the Duch Pictures of humane kind.

I have thought our Poetry of the last Age as rude as our Architecture, one
cause thereof might be, that Aristotle's treatise of Poetry has been so little
studied amongst us, it was perhaps Commented upon by all the great men in
Italy, before we well know (on this side of the Alps) that there was such a
Book in being. And though Horace comprizes all in that small Epistle of his;
yet few will think long enough together to be Masters, and to understand the
reason of what is delivered so in short.

With the remaining Tragedies I shall also send you some reflections on that
Paradise lost of Miltons, which some are pleased to call a Poem, and assert
Rhyme against the slender Sophistry wherewith he attacques it: and also a
Narrative of Petrarch's Coronation in the Capitol, with all the Pontificalibus
on that occasion, which seems wanting in Seldom, where he treats on that
subject. Let me only anticipate a little in behalf of the Cataline, and now
tell my thoughts, that though the contrivance and economy is faulty enough,
yet we there find (besides what is borrowed from others) more of Poetry and of
good thought, more of Nature and of Tragedy, then peradventure can be scrap't
together from all those other Plays.

Nor can I be displeased with honest Ben, when he rather chooses to borrow a
Melon of his Neighbor, than to treat us with a Pumpion of his own growth.

But all is submitted to you Men of better sense, by

SIR, Your most obliged humble Servant T. Rymer.

THE Life of Sir Walter Raliegh, with his Trial and Arraignment at Winchester,
in octavo, price bound 2 s.

Antony and Cleopatra, a Tragedy, as it is Acted at the Dukes Theater, written
by the Honorable Sir Charles Sedley, Baronet, price 1 s.

Circe, a Tragedy, as it is Acted at the Dukes Theater, written by Charles
D'avenant, L. L. D. price 1 s.

Don Carlos, Prince of Spain, a Tragedy, as it is Acted at the Dukes Theater,
written by Tho. Otway, price 1 s.

The Art of making Love, or Rules for the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amors, price bound 1 s.

Are sold by R. Tonson, at Gray's Inn Gate next Gray's Inn Lane.


