Rejoice, o Zebulu^ (...) thy going out --

Deuteronomy: chap: 33: verse 18: 19. And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun,
in thy going out, and Isachar, in thy tents. They shall call the people unto
the mountain, there ye shall offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall
suck of the abundance of the seas; and of the treasures hid in the sand.

A PLAT for MARINERS; OR, THE SEAMAN'S PREACHER.

Delivered in several Sermons upon Jonah 's Voyage.

By John Ryther Preacher of Gods Word in Wapping near London.

Rejoice O Zebulon in thy Going out, for they shall suck of the Abundance of
the Seas, and of Treasures hid in the same, Deuteronomy. 33. 18, 19. They that go down
to the Sea in Ships, that do business in great Waters, these see the Works of
the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep, Psalm. 107. 23, 24. LONDON, Printed by A
M. for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms next Grocers-Alley in the Poultry, 1672.

To all Commanders and Masters of Ships; Grace and Peace be multiplied upon
you, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
THE Wise and Supreme Governor, and Orderer of all Affairs here below, has
put you into a large capacity of Serviceableness and Usefulness in your present
day and Generation, Isa. 26. 1.
(as Nationally considered) not only in a way of Commerce and Trade, but in a
way of Defense and Safeguard: God has not only bulwarkt England with his
Salvations, Salvation has God appointed for walls and Isa. 26. 1.
bulwarks; but also with Seas and Sea-Commanders: You have many times in your
Capacities stood in the breach to keep out an Enemy that would have flowed in
upon us like a flood, if God had not by spiriting of you, lifted up a Standard
against him; and what message these following Papers have to you, is to call
you, and excite you to further measures of use and service, that such as have
been honored in doing service for their Nation, may be honored in being
useful to precious and immortal Souls under their Charge and Command; which you
may be by the Blessing of God, in holy, exemplary, conscientious walking in and
out before your Companies: To which end, consider but these few following
Motives:

1. Your Command is great; and where God gives much, does he not require much?
Can you say to your Companies as the Centurion did to his Servants, Go, and he
goes? and do they not readily obey you? and have you a word of command to do
your business, and not one word of command for God, and their own Souls? It was
said by a great person once in high command; upon some Complaint; Well, (says
he) if Soldiers, private Soldiers, miscarry, I will make Commanders pay for it.
I wish in the issue it prove not so in this case: You should rule for God in
your places.

2. Your dangers are great; and will you, can you neglect your duty in time of
danger? in a time of danger you will look out if there be fears of an Enemy, of
a Rock, of a Sand: Soldiers neglect not their duty when besieged with danger:
You at Sea are besieged with dangers, yea with deaths; as it was said of Paul,
he was in perils often by Sea; therefore you had need with all your Companies,
attend your duty toward God, toward one another Souls; this is the way to
come off when beset with dangers. Prayer has brought many a Vessel off, and
Ships company off, when all hope of being saved has been taken away.

3. Your time looks as if it were short; have not you of all men cause to
reckon so? Can you ensure your lives, though you may your Vessels, and your
Ventures? has God told you, you shall not miscarry this Voyage? who can tell
what is in the womb of Tomorrow? then can any tell what is in the womb of a
twelve months, or a twenty months Voyage? Can you promise your selves a return
home from an East-Indie, or from a Guiny Voyage? If you be secured from storms
at Sea, can you secure your selves from the Diseases of the places and
countries where you go? Oh then do good in your day, (which is like for any
thing you know to be short).

4. Your Reward will be great; your Reward will be great here, and hereafter.
Your reward will be great here, Great peace have they which love thy Law: In
keeping thy Commandments there is great reward. And when you come to die,
either at Land, or Sea, you will be able to say with good Hezekiah, Lord,
Remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart: And
hereafter, Oh what a Crown will it be if one Soul be converted under your
charge, by your gracious carriage, and going in and out before them!

5. Your advantages and helps are great: you are advantaged with most excellent
seasons to do good to their Souls under your charge: Oh when Conscience has
been working in your companies, in their storms and dangers! what may not a
word spoken at such a time do upon their souls! when it may be the sense of
their eternal states is fresh upon them, when it may be, Eternity is before
them; when it may be their hearts are tender with the sense of deliverance from
some terrible Tempest: Oh what good may your praying, your speaking to them do
at such times? Do not you see the Wonders of the Lord in the deep, to affect
your hearts? may not you say your eyes affect your hearts?

6. Your Obligations to God are great: Are any persons under Heaven under such
Obligations as you are? When you go into the utmost parts of the Sea, does not
Gods hand lead you there? Do not you sail under Gods especial Protection? Is
not his Banner over you love, from Voyage to Voyage? Is not he much out of
Purse (as I may say) upon you? Has not he brought you out of the Jaws of
Hell, and Death, many a time? Has not he commanded many a storm into a calm
for your sakes? Has not he many a time said to the raging Waves and Seas,
Peace and be still? Thus far, and no further? And will you thus requite the
Lord, with evil for so much good? Is this your kindness to your friend? such a
friend as he has been in a day of adversity, to know your Souls in your
distresses? Why should your Souls show themselves so unkind?

7. Your Promises to God have been great: Oh the Vows that your lips have
uttered to God in the day of your distress! what Protestations have come from
you, when in signal and eminent dangers? Are any men in so much debt to God as
Seamen? are not promises debts? when you pay your Vows, do not you pay your
Debts? and is not the God of your Salvations, the God to whom the Vows ought to
be performed? Oh then go on Sirs in your several capacities, to promote the
Honor of that God who is the God of all your Deliverances. And do good to all
under your command and charge, as opportunities present to you, that you may
have the mercies of all that sail with you to be given unto you, and never come
under the judgment of having them that sail with you to come in as witnesses
against you in the day of the Lord.

If any thing in these following Papers may be useful and serviceable to this
end, it will cause the Author to say, (It is enough) nay it is all that was in
design, in sending out these weak endeavors into your hands. That you, and
your Ships-companies, Souls and Bodies, Vessels and Ventures, may be ensured in
the great Ensurance-office above, is the prayer of

Your Cordial Soul-friend in the things that concern your Internal, External,
and Eternal Peace: J. R.

To all Mariners, and others that use the Seas.
Brethren,
I Cannot but with all the opportunities that I can, promote the honor of my
dear Master, and the interest of precious Souls. I would by prayers, tears,
entreaties, preaching, writing; be doing what I can possible to pluck poor
Creatures out of the snares of Satan; and of all sorts of men, poor Seamen have
not the least share in my affections: I can I hope though in too low a degree
yet speak these words of Paul to you, Brethren my hearts desire and prayer to
God for your Souls is, that they may be saved. I know the redemption of the
Soul is precious, and cease for ever, and shortly you will be out of the
reach of my entreaties, and I expect e're long to put off this Tabernacle; the
shortness of my breath, and the weakness of my body, cry aloud to me, What thou
do do quickly, for shortly thou must be silent. I am not ignorant of the
dangers that you grapple with every moment; methinks when I hear the wind begin
to rustle, my heart begins to ache; fain would I do all that I can to secure you
from an everlasting wrack. I am not insensible how many temptations you meet
with, and how much you are exposed in those hot Climates you trade in, and of
what prevalency bad examples may be with some; I know also that the want of
quickening Ordinances, and powerful preaching, when you are abroad, does not a
little hazard the cooling of your affections to Spiritual things. I cannot also
but observe that a strange hardness, stupidness, and unconcernedness has
possessed most of your tribe. And who can choose but bewail the condition of men
that live within sight of death and eternity every hour, and yet carry it as if
there were no other life beyond this; or as if their business here were to
secure misery and damnation hereafter. Oh what does sin make men! what sots,
mad men, and fools are most? and who worse than some Seamen? who of all men
living should be most serious. They which carry their lives in their hands had
need carry grace in their hearts.

Oh what a sad sound it is to hear any of them swearing and cursing, and
damning, who one would think should be almost always praying, or praising of
God! when I lay all these things together, and consider how loud God himself
has spoke within these few years to poor Seamen, I could not but strike in
with Providence: It may be some may hear, and in this their day understand the
things of their peace before they be hid.

It was not long since the dismal thundering of Cannons did alarm poor sleepy
Seamen; it is not long since the groans of the dying spoke aloud to you to get
an Ark; it is not long since the wounds of your Brethren opened their mouths and
bid you look quickly for the Balm of Gilead; it is not long since the decks of
your Ships were slippery with the brains and blood of your friends: and what
does all this teach you, but that your lives and souls are in unspeakable
hazard; and whosoever neglects the minding of Christ and his Soul, it should
not be a Seaman. Especia^ that fa^ storm t^ thousands of Souls, September last,
which occasioned the Autho^ preaching several of the ensuing Sermons,
^specially upon the Text, The Lot fell upon Jonah. And also it occasioned their
committing to public view, that they may be prepared against succ^ding stroms
and tempests.


I will say nothing of the later storms, and dismal tempests, although I
believe they are not easily to be paralleled in some hundreds of years: I pass
by the miserable captivity of others; and what storms the tribe of Mariners may
still meet with, I will not now say. When I consider what leisure you have to
read, when you cannot hear, and how heart-affecting a warm discourse may be to
you when you have time to read and think, and read and see, and hear what is
writ, and read and pray too; I cannot but commend to your serious perusal this
judicious practical and affectionate piece of my reverend Brother.

And now I have an opportunity give me leave to add a word or two more to
quicken you to seriousness, and let me leave these following lines as a witness
of my hearty affections to you, which I beg of you to think of, when I am dead
and gone. Again, I beseech you as you love your Souls think of these ensuing
Considerations.

1. Consider what a sorry Vessel you have under you, how brittle is that Bark
that you are sailing in; a little blast oversets it, a leak sinks it, if it
strike upon the ground it is soon broken; I mean your bodies are poor frail
things, and are soon shaken; you dwell in tabernacles of clay, whose foundation
is in the dust; and is it not worth the while to think seriously what shall I
do to live for ever?

2. Consider what precious Wares this Vessel is laden with. Your Vessel is your
Body, the lading your Soul, and what do you think a Soul is worth? as little as
most mind it, if you will believe him that bought them, he says, That they are
worth more than a world; and shall the preciousest commodities be least valued?
or was Christ mistaken, and gave too much for them? or are you wiser than
Christ? is gold and silver worth more than a soul? are dying men, or are damned
men that have lost their souls, of this mind? Oh Sirs, you can never be too
careful about the saving of your Souls.

3. Consider whither you are bound; it is for eternity, either everlasting
glory, or everlasting misery. Death will shortly land you in endless happiness
or sorrow, and if you would never so fain you cannot then alter your state; you
may repent your bargain, but not mend it; prayers, tears, and wishes will e're
long be in vain. Oh therefore seeing it is for eternity, do your work to
purpose, that it may not need repenting of: Man your voyage is great, lay in
provisions accordingly.

4. Consider how few make a saving Voyage; many that think they are getting,
when they come to cast up their accounts, find that they were hugely out; men
carry great ventures with them, and expect to be made by it, and when all comes
to all they are worth less than nothing, and undone for ever; no grace, no
peace, no Christ, no glory; and is it worth the while to venture ones life and
soul for that which is worth nothing, and will do one no good in another world.

5. Consider what dangers you are in every moment: I need not tell you that you
are sailing within a few inches of death; sometimes storms, sometimes sands,
sometimes rocks, sometimes pirates, sometimes a calm, and provisions fail;
sometimes the Vessel proves leaky, and men are fain to pump for their lives;
you know your dangers better than I, I wish you did also know how to secure
your selves: what have you to hold up your hearts in the greatest of
difficulties? can you say Christ is my Ark in this storm, his bosom will be my
harbor if this should prove a wrack. What do thou say man? if you cannot, I
wish you could. Awake oh sleeper, what meanest thou?

6. Consider how good a Voyage some make, they go out fraught with tears and
groans, and pass through many a storm, devouring seas of difficulties, and
sometimes almost lost, so that they scarce know whether they be in the Sea or
out; their Masts are spent, their Rigging spoiled, their Anchors and Cables
broke; and yet after all there has been a calm, their Rigging recruited, and
all recovered, and they come home richly laden with grace, peace, glory, and
the pearl of great price, and they come top and top-gallant into the harbor of
rest, and have an abundant entrance administered into the everlasting
inheritance: and would not you be one of those? Blessed are the people that are
in such a case; yea, blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. Oh what a
triumphant welcome will such have to Glory! and would not you be glad to be of
this number? but Sir, what shall I do to make such a Voyage? If I should give
you advice will you take it? Oh but will you indeed? if you will not, lay down
this book and read no farther: But methinks I hear some saying, Oh that we did
but know what we shall do to be saved, what we shall do to secure this pearl of
great price? Oh a Christ, a pardon and heaven, upon any terms in the world.
Well then, if you take this following advice, my soul for yours if you miscarry.

Direction 1. Venture not out but in a Directions.
sound fight, and good bottom, let your groundwork be well laid, in deep
humility and solid knowledge, labor to know your selves, your corrupt natures;
your absolute need of Christ his excellency, secure for yours, and all is well.
Labor to see sin the greatest evil in the world, and to loath your selves, and
justify God under a sense of your own unworthiness; beg that you may not be
deceived with an hypocritical profession, but that your hearts may be right in
Gods statutes; he that is sincere is safe.

2. Have not too many Owners, let God be your owner, and you are safe enough;
none of his Vessels miscarry. Yield your selves to the Lord; make over all you
have to him, never more your own, than when most his.

3. Let all your tackling be of the best: let your Judgment be well convinced
and established, that is your Mast; let your affections be divine, they are your
Sails; let your hope cast Anchor upon Christ, and the Scripture-promises; let
your Vessel be well ballasted with humility; lay in good provisions, such as
are strengthening, wholesome, lasting, get in the whole armor of God, and resist
your adversary therewith, and he will fly from you.

4. Let your lading and fraught be such Commodities as will go off well in that
other Country. Oh how many that are bound for another world, that are loaded
with rags, dung, dross; faith, love, meekness, patience, zeal,
heavenly-mindedness; these, are the wares that can never want a good market.

5. Make up your accounts exactly when you go out; and go to the great office,
and insure all whatever it cost you; it is that may be done, you may run a sad
riskow if you don't; the comfort and peace that you will have in it will
abundantly recompense your pains and charge in this business: How joyfully then
^ay you look dangers in the face? though the Sea run mountains high, though the
waves thereof roar, though every billow look as if it brought death with it; yet
how comfortably may such a one look, he knows that if the vessel break, and his
body be drowned, yet Christ lives, and he shall immediately be cast upon a happy
shore, where in amoment all wants shall be supplied, all losses shall be made
up in the glorious, perfect, and eternal fruition of God. And he that gets
Heaven, Christ, and Glory by his losses, has no great reason to be afraid of
them.

6. Labor to make the best advantage of opportunity; don't lose your markets
when the wind presents, hoise sail and away: The opportunities that God gives
you at Land in his Ordinances must not be slighted; the Lords day is your great
market day, wherein you may buy the richest peniworths; and when affections are
striving, and the spirit of God is moving upon your spirits, and striving with
your fouls, and pleading with you, then have a care of loosing such an
opportunity; that is a brave gale, and the wind sits fair, and if you be then
ready, such a wind may send you amain to your port; or else you may lie
becalmed, or windbound, and eat out your comforts, and lose more than you are
aware of.

7. Take heed of the great rocks, Presumption and Despair: take heed of the
great Pyrat the Devil; take heed of running a ground: the love of the world
ruins thousands, and if you strike here it is dangerous, but if you stick here
you are broken, Ship-wracked, lost; take heed of all the sins that poor Seamen
are too subject to; Swearing, cursing, raging, damning, jeering at godliness
neglect of prayer, hardness of heart, atheism; may I not add drunkenness,
uncleanness, etc.

8. Look often to your Compass, the Word of God, and then you cannot steer amiss;
read and meditate upon the Scriptures, the Bible is an excellent companion.

9. Get a good Convoy, Pilot, Factor, Christ is all; count all as dung and
dross in comparison of him: let your eye be still to him, your heart upon him,
and know this, you cannot overvalue him whom never yet any did sufficiently
prize; let your hearts be much above, let not sea and land make you forget
heaven, think you never make agood port till you are safe in the arms of Christ.

10. Keep an exact Journal, observe what way you make, by this God may have
glory; you may have past experiences to feed your faith, and hope upon for the
future. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

11. Let losses make you more diligent to get and secure that which cannot be
lost.

12. In a word take heed of a sleepy indifferent careless spirit; take heed of
having a Jonah aboard, of carrying any sin unrepented out with you; and be much
earnest and constant in prayer.

But in this and many other things, I refer you to this seasonable and
excellent Discourse which is calculated for the tribe of Zebulon chiefly.
Again, I say, read and think, and read and practice, read and pray; and this
will be the joy of one that dearly loves you, and daily prays for you,

James Janeway.
March 1. 1672.
To all Seamen whose day of Grace is yet not hid from them, and whose hearts
are not hardened, and ears deafned to the voice behind them; saying, This is the
way, walk you in it.
Dear Friends,
YOur state and calling is set forth by the Spirit of God, to be the most
dangerous of all Means; You mount up to Heaven, and go down again to the
depths, and is not this a desperate case? Their soul is melted because of
trouble, (can any more Psalm. 107. 26, 27.
be said in a word, to declare their forlorn and deplorable condition?) They
reel to and fro like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. They know not
what to do, but then their eyes are up to God: And that when you are plunged
into this sad estate, you may have some good Anchor-hold for eternity, is the
design of these Papers, sent now into your hands. 1. Love to your Souls studied
them; love to your Souls preached them, and now love to your Souls,
(notwithstanding the many imperfections they are clothed withal,) prints them;
and indeed they were hastened to the Press, rather by the voice of God than man:
Thoughts of presenting them to public view were taken up, and laid down again
some Months, but that dreadful alarm from Heaven, in that fatal storm, both at
Sea and Land, when so many Ships and Lives miscarryed; viz. September the 11.
and 12, 1671. did occasion the reassuming fresh thoughts, that through the
blessing of God, they might be useful to the good of poor Seamen; and so the
Author was prevailed with to trust God with them; especially so few Treatises
being in print, for the sakes of poor Seamen, that live constantly lives of
death and danger, and their Relations, that lives Lives of sorrow and fear:
That you may be serious in the reading, and practicing what now is put into
your hand; Let me tell you,

1. Your Souls, your Families, your Estates, your Lives; nay, your All is here
concerned: The design of these Papers is the Ensurance of your immortal
precious Souls, this is the Jewel if safe, all is safe, if this be lost, all is
lost, Ships lost, you may get others; nay, the loss of Relations may be made
up, but the loss of a Soul is an irreparable loss; as it is unvaluable, so it
is irreparable, it can neither be made up, nor sum'd up. O poor Seamen what a
precious commodity do you carry to Sea with you! what an unvaluable Jewel! and
yet run the venture, take no care to ensure this, that is infinitely worth more
than all you carry to Sea with you besides?

2. Your snares and temptations are greater than other men's: May it not be said
of you, as of them, Fear, the Pit, and the snare are upon you: It is to be
hoped you are not all fearless and graceless. Snares of Companies at land, at
sea, at home, and abroad; snares of foreign Countries, and snares of your
callings: Oh what a wonder it is that poor Seamen that walk upon snares, are no
more sensible of them! that they are not like him that dreamed he saw the world
full of snares, and heard a voice say, Quis pertranseat ista?) Who shall pass
through these? and afterward he heard a voice say by way of reply, Humilitas
pertransit, Humility shall pass through. So say I, Oh poor Seamen, a watchful
heart shall pass through all your snares, you have need of as many eyes as the
Poets feign Argus to have. Who have so many snares as you have! How true is
that of many Seamen that Job has of the wicked, For he is cast into a net by
his own feet, Job 18. 8.
and he walks upon a snare.

3. Your opportunities and seasons for your Souls are fewer than other men's.
Good Books must be your Sermons, and if you will not read when you cannot hear,
you live in a daily neglect of your duty to God, and to your own precious
souls; Oh how sad would it be, and will it be for you one day, if you slight
and despise the Ministry of Reconciliation, when you are at home! where you may
enjoy it as in no place of the world whither you go; and when you are at Sea
neglect those advantages, which you may have in reading of the word; Seamens
Ordinances are and ought to be Gods Providence; and their Ministry, and
Preachers, Seas and Winds, if you slight the Ministry of your Barnabasses
ashore, viz. the Sons of Consolation, you shall meet with the Ministry of
Boarnergesses at Sea, a Ministry of Thunder: Does not God often thunder upon
you in storms, Hurricanes, and mighty Tempests? does not the Lord make that
word good upon many poor Seamen? Upon the wicked he rains fire, Psa. 11.
snares, and brimstone, and an horrible Tempest: This shall be the portion of
their cup.

4. Your Accounts are great: No men have greater accounts to give to God than
Seamen have; therefore they had need look well to the stating of them; poor
Seamen, though you put it off, yet the great Auditday is coming; the Lord will
call you to a reckoning, what though it should be (as you think) long first it
is said of the slothful servant, that after a long time the Master of that
servant reckoned with him: God will make you know that long forbearance is no
forgiveness. As Solomon says to the young man, so I say to the Seamen, Rejoice
O poor profane Seaman in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes;
But know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. 1. O
that Seamen would consider that the Lord will call them to an account for their
vows, that their lips have uttered in the day of their distress: The day will
come that they shall say, Thy vows are (...). 56. 12.
upon us, O God: Can you answer the question, when God and Conscience shall ask
you, what is become of your vows, of your promises, and protestations? Can you
make vows, and break them with the same breach? 2. Oh that Seamen would
consider God will call them to an account for the Convictions they have had in
their storms and distresses: Oh does not God and Conscience often board them
(as I may say) and come to close fight with them, and tell them, poor sinners,
these are your sins, your crying sins, that you must leave and lay aside, if
ever you expect to find mercy from me, and these are your duties that you must
conscientiously take up, as ever you think to have my comfortable presence with
you. Oh now how ordinary is it for poor Seamen to wear off and loose such
Convictions? but though you forget them, God remembers them, and will call you
to an account for them. 3. God will call you to an account for your Salvations
and Preservations; are there any men in the world men of so many deliverances
and mercies as Seamen are? Oh what deaths and dangers do they pass through
every Voyage! how may it be said to many of them, as Jonathan did to David? As
I live there is but a step betwixt thee and death: What few steps, inches, are
betwixt Seamen and death, nay, and damnation, if they miscarry before an
interest gotten in the Lord Jesus Christ? and can you think, nay dare you think
that God gives you such mercies and preservations to spend them upon your
lusts; to gratify your flesh withal? may not you hear God sometimes saying to
you as in that case, Are you delivered to do all these Jer. 1.
abominations? Oh will not God say to you, Did not I give thee thy life poor
sinner, when many others miscarryed? did not I bring thee off in a most
miraculous manner, when others were swallowed up? and what use did thou make
of such a preservation?

4. God will call Seamen to an account for all their Provocations: Oh poor
Souls, you no sooner commit them, but you forget them; Oh but God has a book
of Remembrance in which they are all recorded, and out of which you shall be
judged; the secret of all hearts in that day shall be manifest; all the hidden
things of darkness shall be brought to light, all secret guilt at home or
abroad in the foreign parts of the Earth; all your secret sins are set in the
light of Gods countenance. 5. God will call Seamen to an account, for their
Afflictions: Many of them they meet with great trials, one while breaches upon
their Estates comes upon them, as the breaches of the Sea; one Voyage it may be
rich, and the next impoverished, or if not so, it may be taken by the Turks, or
some cruel Enemies, and then under great slavery and misery, and after all
redeemed; Oh will not God call to an account for this. What better were you for
your slavery? did it make you sensible of your spiritual captivity? did it
bring you out of Soul-bondage? did it occasion you to consider this slavery of
your bodies to the Turks, is nothing to the slavery of your souls to sin and
Satan? As it is said by God, I sent you into the Land of Chaldea for your good;
so will God say, I sent you into Sally, I sent you into Argier, but was it for
your good? Oh what a pity it is to see bodies of poor Seamen redeemed, and
their souls Captives still! to see them Drunkards, Swearers, unclean, and what
not, after they have been slaves. Oh what pity it is to hear them talk of their
slavery, and see their souls lie still in irons and fetters; Captives to the
Prince of darkness, which is worse bondage than that you talk on, when men are
sent up into the Country to the King of Fess? 6. God will call Seamen for an
account for their time; they have abundance of time, many of them, and God will
account with them for it, what improvement they made of it, what use they put
it to? It is a talent, the improvement of it is accountable.

5. Poor Seamen to move you to read and practice, what you here meet with;
consider your day goes away; your glass runs apace, you are sailing for
Eternity; you being under sail for another world, why should not your eyes and
hearts be much upon that Country, to which you are bound? Do thou know
whether thou shall make this Voyage that thou art going on? Can thou assure
thy self of a safe arrival, or a safe return? Can thou say as Abraham did,
when he went to offer up his Son, I, and the lad will go yonder to worship, and
we will return? Can you promise your dear Relations a meeting again in this
world, when you part with them? and should not you then be serious in reading,
in practicing, in improving any thing that concerns the peace of your precious
souls?

6. That poor Seamen may read and practice: Oh that they would consider how
lost time will sting their poor souls another day! have not many of you much
time for reading, prayer, heart-examination? though it is true, such are your
circumstances sometimes, that your time will not give you leave for such
serious employments; yet again at other times, you have abundance of leisure,
is not this a great sin among Seamen, idly to game their time away, or to talk
it away, or sinfully to sport it away? but when you come into a storm at Sea,
or upon a deathbed at land, what will your souls say to it then? Oh that I had
redeemed my time! Oh that I had been more diligent to make my calling and
election sure! Oh that I had spent more time in reading, prayer,
heart-examination, than I have done! and less in sinful pleasures in sinful
company, in sinful conference. It was a sad saying of a distressed soul, when
going to die, Ten pounds for an hour: Ten pounds for an hour. Oh poor soul what
would thou not give for a day, or two, reprieve from hell and death, if there
might be hope of a pardon.

7. That poor Seamen may read and practice, Oh that they would consider, they
have as great need for grace, as any men under heaven have. Oh what need have
Seamen, and their poor Relations of grace; as in that case is said by the
Apostle, You have need of Patience. So I may say in this, Oh poor Seamen, you
have need of patience to bear your storms quietly; and Oh how many that do not
possess their Souls in patience, in tempests and storms; but are in as great a
storm as the Sea it self, whose hearts are like the troubled Sea, that cast
forth nothing but mire and dirt, who belch out their Oaths and Blasphemies
against God; and like that King Ahaz, sin more and more in the time of their
distress; who are like a Bull, a wild Bull in the net, full of the fury of the
Lord. If the winds blow they swear. What need have you of faith for your Souls,
for your Bodies, for your Relations? Is not faith a storm-grace, and may not
Jesus Christ say to many why are you fearful? Oh you of little faith; nay, why
are you so bold and presumptuous, Oh you of no faith!

8. That poor Seamen may read and practice: Oh that they would consider, their
account will be aggravated by what they meet with here if they practice it not;
as Christ said to those Jews, so may I say in this case, If I had not comne,
and spoken unto you, you had not had sin, but now your sin remains: viz. Your
sins had not been so circumstantiated so highly aggravated. Will It not be said
another day, were you not warned of such a danger? of such a sin? charged by
the Lord in the Ministry of the Word, to submit and subject your souls to such
a duty; and will not all this be matter of evidence against you in the great
day? But that your poor Souls may be pulled as brands out of the burning, and
come in this your day to hearken to the voice of the Lord, and not harden your
hearts as in the day of Provocation; but know the things that concerns the
peace of your precious Soul, before they be hid from your eyes; is the earnest
prayer of him who is one that desires nothing more than to be directed to let
down the Net at the right side of the Ship, that your poor Souls may be brought
into Christ by it.

J. R.

JONAH 1. 5, 6. Then the Mariners were afraid, and every one cried unto his
God, and cast forth the Wares that were in the Ship, into the Sea, to lighten
it of them; but Jonah was gone down into the sides of the Ship, and was fast
asleep.

So the Ship-Master came to him, and said unto him, what meanest thou O
sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God: If so be that God will think upon us, that
we perish not.


THe Prophet Jonah, the 1 Kings 14. 25. of Gath-Hepher, a City in the T^ibe of
Zebulun which was the Tribe of Mariners.
Penman of this Book, Prophesied in an evil day; they to whom he Prophesied, we
find were the people of Israel. He was a Prophet in Israel: -- The time he
Prophesied in, was the Reign of Jeroboam, the Son of Joash: now having little
success in his work in Israel, among the Jews, his own Country men, he is sent
to Nineveh, a City of the Gentiles; Jonah refuses to Act according to his new
Commission, and God follows him to humble him for it, which is the whole scope
of this Chapter, and also the scope of a great part of the Prophecy.

In this chapter we have, 1. Jonahs disobedience to Gods Call, (from the first
Verse to the fourth:) 2ly. The Lords punishing Jonahs disobedience, (from the
fourth verse to the 17th.) 3ly. Jonahs mavelous preservation in his
punishment, being swallowed up by a Whale in the last verse of the Chapter. The
Text falls in the second part of the Chapter (viz.) the Lords displeasure
against Jonah for his disobedience.

First, we have his Commission in the first Verse, To go and cry against the
great City; Arise, go to Nineveh, that great City, and cry against it, for
their wickedness is come up before me. This City was the Metropolis of Assyria,
and had its name from Ninus, some think Genesis 10. 11.
built at first by Nimrod; from that place, and out of that land went forth
Assure, and builded Nineveh, (which some expositors read) out of this land he,
namely Nimrod, went forth to Assyria, and built Nineveh, which was the
Metropolis Some Authors tell us, that Nineveh was in circuit 48 miles, and that
it had about its Walls fifteen hundred Towers.
of Assyria.

Observe, The greatness of Cities, cannot privilege them from the blows of
Divine Wrath. What though it be a great City? God is a great God, and the great
God sends Summons to the great City, and sends by Jonah as his Herald at
Arms, to prepare to meet the Lord.

Secondly observe, Great Cities have their great Sins. For their wickedness is
come up before me: What the sin of Nineveh was, is not yet expressed; some think
Sodomy, some Sorcery, an ordinary sin in those parts. But Nahum more clearly
tells us what it was, it is called the bloody City, full of Lies and Roberies,
and the prey departed not. Nahum Prophesied of their destruction. After they
were spared, they Returning to their Vomit again, then came forth great wrath
from Nahum 3.
God, and by his Prophecy, their sin was Oppression.

Thirdly observe, Great sins bring great Judgments, great was the displeasure
of God against Nineveh, that he sends the Prophet Jonah, to denounce his Wrath
against them. God in it, is thought, had a design to forewarn the Jews of their
Rejection, by this sending of Jonah to the Gentiles, but this Providence was
not regarded. Thus much for his Commission.

2ly. We have in the third verse his disobedience, He arose to fly to Tarshish:
here a question does arise, What should be the reason of Jonahs disobedience to
the Lord?

Various thoughts Expositors have about it: 1. Some think fear of cruel usage,
the Ninevites being a savage barbarous people. 2ly. He might despair that
Nineveh should obey his Message, when Israel had not, amongst whom he had
Prophesied with little success; he might say to God, as Moses did: Lord, if
Israel Exodus 6. 12.
will not hear me, how should Pharaoh hear me? So if Israel will not hear me,
how should Nineveh? 3ly. Others put it upon his love to his own Country, for
in the sending to Nineveh, he might probably foresee the Conversion of the
Gentiles, might be the Rejection of the Jews; and upon this might fall under a
Temptation. Fourthly, Others put it upon that disgust, his own Countrymen
would take at it, who had such an emulation against the Gentiles. 5ly. Others
(and I humbly conceive with very good reasons) put it upon his pride of spirit,
fearing lest he should not have his embassy answered, by God, and chap 4. 2.
so he fall under the blot of a false Prophet; this seems to be intimated by
himself; Was not this my saying in my own Country? therefore I fled before unto
Tarshish, for I knew thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to Anger, and
of great Kindness, and repentest of the evil. O such proud Spirits have we,
that we cannon ^ea^ the want of success, in prophesying, or preaching the wrath
of God against poor Sinners!

But in this temptation whither will Jonah Ezekiel. 38. 18.
go* To Tarshish, some think it is in Asia, some in Africa, some a City, some a
2 Chro. 20 36.
Country; it seems to be spoken of, as a Psalm 48. 7.
place of great Merchandise, and a place of a mighty Sea Trade; some think the
Acts 21. 39.
different apprehensions about it, has tisen upon this occasion: the Hebrews
call the main Sea, Tharsis, because they usually traffiqued, but by the Tharsan
Sea: but most probably Tarsus, that gave birth to Genesis 10. 4.
Paul, was this City, and has its name of Mr, Ainswo^th in lo^um.
Tarshish, the Son of Javan (as is observed by a learned Expositor) a City of
Cilicia, that had a convenient Haven, and in order to his slight, he goes to
Joppa: This was the Port of Jerusalem, distant from thence, some Thirty Miles
in the Tribe of Dan. Sometimes success is laid 2 Chronicles. 2. 16.
in the way of a temptation, to see how far a poor sinner will go: thus was it
with Jonah.

3. In the 4 Verse we have Gods displeasure in Jonah's Punishment, but the Lord
sent a great wind into the Sea. Observe, the Lord is sole Commander at Sea, the
winds do not rise accidentally, but they have their Commission from God; though
Jonah would not obey Gods Commission, yet the winds do. Here the Lord sends a
Pursevant in a storm, after a rebellious Prophet, the Winds and the Sea are
God's servants. O let Seamen tremble at this! God can cause these his servants
to execute his will upon them when he pleases; it is greatly the sin of such
Persons, that they look not higher then natural causes; but alas, every storm
should read a Lecture to you of God, when you are at Sea.

We may further observe, guilt cannot flee from God; God sends after guilt;
guilt carried to Sea, will have a storm sent after it: O tremble poor Seamen,
when you go out to carry unpardoned guilt abroad with you.

Again observe, Persons employed, and especially commissioned by God, may in
their Temptations go cross to their Commissions: thus did Jonah here, thus did
1 Kings 13.
the young Prophet, who bare that brave Testimony against the Altar at Bethel,
yet he failed afterward, and went cross to his Commission.

Now the Text it self contains in it a discovery of the effects, and
consequences, of this storm God sends after Jonah.

1. Here is a description of the Persons under these Effects. 2. The Effects
themselves.
1. The Persons. Then the Mariners were afraid. They are the most undaunted of
Men, the hardiest of Men, being so frequently in these deaths and dangers: they
little regard them, and yet these persons are afraid; not the Passengers were
afraid, but the Mariners, that used to encourage the poor trembling
Passengers.

2. We have the Effects themselves, In fear. They were afraid, though they had
been probably in many storms before, yet here being some things extraordinary
in the Case to be discovered, this fear fell upon them. Now their courage and
magnanimity were daunted, this storm made them lower their Topsails of courage
and confidence. 2. Effect of this storm was, every one cried to his God; which
argues the greatness of their fears; it puts them upon seriousness; storms
will change Mariners notes, turn their Swearing into Praying; it may be
Swearing by their Gods was their practice before, but now Praying is their
practice. They cried, which notes the earnestness Acts 27. 38.
of their Spirits; as Persons in distress cry to the true God, so they cried to
their false God. 3. Effect, and cast out the Wares to lighten it, which still
spoke their fears; this is one of the last things you do at Sea, to save your
lives; Paul did so with the Ship he was in, cast the Wheat overboard: here are
all endeavors used to prevent Shipwreck.

3. Thing in the Text, is a description of the guilty Person. 1. Jonah was in
the sides of the Ship: Jonah, whom the Mariners least suspected, for they cast
lotts, we see, to know who it was; the unsuspected Person is often the guilty
Person.

2. We have an account of his posture, he was gone into the sides of the Ship,
and was fast asleep. Was he praying? no, though that would have been more
proper, more comely work a great deal for a guilty Person. What a strange sight
is here in the Ship? Pagans and Gentiles praying? And a Prophet, yea a guilty
Prophet, sleeping? nay, observe the word, fast asleep. O what a Potion had he
taken, that he could be sleeping, and the Vessel sinking; neither the Winds
roaring, nor the Ships beating, nor the Mariners praying, nor the Ships
lightning; none of these awakens Jonah. O what a sound sleep was he in!

The first Observation is this, that storms of danger, causes storms of fear;
the Mariners were afraid.

I will begin to handle this, as being that part of my work, intended for the
awakening of the Souls of poor Seamen.

These Mariners, were poor blind Heathens, as you see by praying to their
Gods; and they were afraid: now if the glimmering of the light of Nature did
make them afraid, O then well may poor sinners be afraid, that have the light
of the Gospel shineing into their hearts, by conviction, when they come into
storms; if Heathens who had no light, nor sight of a future state, of their
immortal Souls, only as Death was terrible to them, (as it does untie the
Marriage knot between the Soul and Body) were afraid, then how may Sinners,
that know, if they suffer Shipwreck in a storm, uninterrested in Christ, they
perish Body and Soul to all Eternity; (well I say may such Souls be afraid in
storms.) You see what those Mariners say, if peradventure that we perish not.
They only meant of the perishing of the out-ward man, what then may such Souls
say, that know they are not interested in Christ, and yet must inevitably
perish in their storms? To be sinking at Sea, and have no bottom, for thy poor
Soul to build its hopes upon, when thou shall lanch out into that vast Ocean of
Eternity, it will daunt and amaze the stoutest Mariner, and sinner in the
world; the Disciples, we read of them sometimes in their storms, and in their
fears, they sometimes cry out, why carest thou not that we perish? well then
may Profane Sinners cry out in their storms and dangers.

1. Because Death is before men in storms, therefore they are in fears; thus
it was with those in my Text, they see nothing but death before them. O when
poor Seamen get a sight of the King of terrors in storms, O how does their
countenances fall! how are their notes changed? If many poor Souls be afraid of
death, are kept in bondage through the fear of death, all their life long, and
yet Christ came to deliver them from death; well may poor Sinners then be
afraid of death; O what sad cries have many Souls uttered under the Fears and
Horror of Death; one cries, O that I might live Heb. ^. ^5.
a little longer, though but as a Toad; another cries out, Ten Pounds for an
hour, Ten Pounds for an hour. Another, (I think it was one of the Kings of
France) I charge you, name not Death in my hearing, upon pain of Death.
Another, I cannot dye, yet I must dye: then I say to thee O poor Christ-less
Soul, how can thou think of facing this grim Sergeant Death, when he comes to
break up a Writ of Eternal wrath upon thee, whether by Sea or Land?

2. Reason, why in storms, and dangers, men are full of fears, because then
Conscience stings them; fear arises out of guilt, a guilty Conscience is a
thousand Witnesses; and will not this, O you poor guilty Seamen, dread you?
can you deny that Evidence, that cries out of your own Bosoms; and this when
you are in dangers? Jonah's guilty Conscience, when awakened, did fly in his
face; I know for my sake this great Tempest is upon us: it is said of our first
Parents, they were afraid, when they saw they were naked; guilt will cause fear
to stir in the heart; you poor Seamen, that carry unpardoned guilt upon the
backs of your Consciences, every Voyage, how should you but be afraid of every
storm that does arise? you carry the Jonah in the Vessel every Voyage, it is a
wonder you ever return, you go to Sea unpardoned, and you return home
unpardoned; go to Sea Christless, and return Christless. Well! long goes the
Pitcher to the Water, but at last it comes broken home. Remember Mariners, the
sinking storm will come, the stroke of Death will come, and then what fears
will haunt you? you will never be free from fears, until you get your
Consciences cleansed by the blood of Christ; cleansed Consciences from guilt,
are the best Commodities you can carry to Sea with you: you will clean your
Ships, and will you not clean your Consciences?

3. Because in storms of danger, Eternity is before them. Therefore they are
afraid: if the poor Heathens in the Ship, had any notions of Eternity, how
confused and dark were they? indeed, some of them have had some dark
glimmerings from the light of Nature, of an Eternal state, but could not tell
where to place it. As the Philosophers, which had so many various Notions about
their Summum Bonum. O but now in times of danger, not only Death is before men,
but Eternity. We read of one riding upon the pale Rev. 6. ^.
Horse, whose name was Death. O but sinners, who followed him? what Train had
he? and Hell followed with him. Are you not convinced, poor Seamen, that after
Death, comes Judgment? and what, can you play with the thoughts of Hell and
Judgment? O what a meditation might this be to you, when upon the great deeps!
what is this vast Ocean to Eternity? but as the drop to the Buckets, compared
to Eternity. This Ocean is not the Main, Eternity is the Main: Eternity is the
Main Sea. You that sail upon the Seas should have such meditations as these:
your Lives are your Voyages, your Souls are your Vessels and Ventures; the
World is your Sea, the Winds are your gales of Prosperity or Adversity; but
Eternity is your Port: If you get in well, you make a rich voyage of it, thy
Soul is made for ever. O how will Mariners be afraid when they strike in going
in! but Men that are not sensible of Eternity, have none of these fears.

4. Reason, because storms of danger occasion poor sinners to look into their
states and hearts, Conscience makes quick reflections, and recoyles in times of
danger, and affliction; when David was Psalm. 77. 6.
under much affliction, then he reflects upon The vulgar lattin reads it,
Scopabam: I swept my heart.
himself or Heman, whoever it was that writ that Psalm, I communed with my own
heart, and made diligent search. O thus says the Soul in time of danger and
distress, O my Soul, how is it with thee? what hopes haste thou if thou should
dye in this storm at Sea, or of this sickness at Land, what is thy state for
Eternity? art thou a pardoned Soul or no? art thou an interested Soul in Christ
or no? well may many poor profane Seamen be afraid, when they thus sink down
into the consideration of their eternal states.

5. Because usually storms makes men serious, dangers usually bring men into
serious frames of spirit; when judgments are abroad, then sinners grow
serious: was it not thus with you in the time of the Plague; when every day you
looked that the destroying Angel would fetch a blow at your Souls? you see
here, dangers make the very Heathens serious, for they now fly to their
devotions, such as they are, every one cried to his God. Will not a Prisoner be
serious when he is to appear before a Judge? so a poor Soul in a storm at Sea,
when he thinks he is going to appear before the Judge of the quick and dead. O
how shall I stand before that Tribunal? how shall I lift up my face to him? can
such a wicked Wretch as I stand before so holy a Throne? well may it be said,
when Gods Judgments are abroad, The Sinners in Zion are afraid, and
fearfulness surprizeth the Hypocrite: because dangers use to make men serious,
we have that Land-Proverb, If you will teach a man to pray, send him to Sea.

Application.
Is it so, that dangers at Sea, usually bring fears with them; hence note our
natural security and stupidity: that until dangers come we are not afraid:
they were secure till the storm came, as the old World was until the flood
came: many poor sinners, and poor Seamen, are not afraid of Death, or Hell,
until they be at the door; they put the evil day far from them, they say
they have made an agreement with Hell and Death; The overflowing scourge shall
not come nigh them. Thus many never think what will become of their Souls,
until they be ready to sink at Sea, or until they lie upon a deathbed; and is
not this dreadful stupidity, to neglect doing that which must be done, or their
Souls are undone for ever?

2. If dangers usually be attended with fear, then it informs us, what a happy
condition the People of God are in, who are reconciled to God, to whom God has
said, As for you, it shall go well with you: say Esaias 3. 10.
unto the righteous, it shall go well with them.

And this made David say once, at what time I am afraid, I will trust in God.
And at another time, I will not be afraid of evil tidings, my heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord. The hearts of Believers are not like Nabal's, whose heart
dyed in him like a stone, when the Destroyer was to come upon him. O what
dangers was David in? and what says he? the Lord is my Light Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3.
and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of
whom shall I be afraid.

3. It informs us of the misery of poor Souls out of Christ, especially in
their times of danger: O how are the poor souls grinded with fears! all fear
has torment in it. How does the fears of Death and Hell walk in their
Consciences, in their storms; and torment, and enbondage them! If Beleivers
may be kept in bondage, through the fears of Death, Heb. 2. 15.
what bondage then are poor Christ-less Souls in, when awakened by dangers? In
dangers, such Souls have no God to go to, in their storms they have no refuge,
in the overflowing scourge, they have no hiding place, in a scattering day,
they have no resting place, to retire their poor Souls unto; they are in
dangers without hope yea without heart; their hearts sink in them, like Lead in
the mighty waters: alas poor Seamen, if your Souls be out of Christ, your
Souls will be sunk before your Vessels, when storms are upon you. Alexander
used to say of any great danger, Here is a danger fit for the mind of an
Alexander to grapple withal, but a poor Christ-less Soul is fit to grapple
with no danger.

4. It inform's us then, It is not men's own spirits and courage that keeps
their Souls above fear in times of danger. The Mariners in my Text were
afraid; had it been the Passengers, it had not been so much to be wondered at;
but the Mariners that Naturally have such bold spirits, that they are even
hardened, because sentence is not speedily executed; who are so accustomed to
storms, that they regard them not: yet these are afraid. O now the storm was
gotten within them, and its the storm gotten within the Man, that sinks him,
which made David cry Psalm 63. 1, 2.
out, Save me, O God, the waters enter into my soul: I sink in deep mire, where
there is no standing, I am come into deep waters where the floods overflow me.
O Sirs! Hell and Death, set before the Soul, will Terrour-strike the stoutest
Sinner, the stoutest Mariner in the World; it is not a Man's Roman Heroic
Spirit will keep him up, if God make him a Magor-missabib, a Terror to
himself: Now (...) 2^. 3. (...) 22. 18.
the Lord is contending with thee, thou stout-hearted Sinner, and can thine
heart endure, or thy hands be made strong in that day the Lord shall deal with
thee? O poor Souls, what will ye do in the day of your vexation? whither will
you flee for help? and where will you leave your glory? It is not your Glory,
nor your Pomp, nor your States, nor your Spirits, can bear you up in the day of
your distress, when the Lord shall come Esaias 10. 3.
to deal with you.

2. Use: Is it so, that dangers are attended with fears? then it is a word of
exhortation to Mariners. O then labor to live so at Land, as you may be above
fears, when in dangers at Sea! It was said of Paul, he was in Perils by Sea;
now, would you be above fears, when in dangers? Indeed, this is the great
interest of your Souls, that you may say, From the ends of the Earth will I cry
unto Psalm 61. 2.
thee. When you are in the remote ends of the Earth, O then to cry to the Lord
is a great Privilege. Thus David did, when my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to
the Rock that is higher than I: a Metaphor taken from Ship-wrack't Men, (say
some Expositers) or those that are ready to be sunk: when they see some Creek
or Rocks to put into, they get upon the Rock, and are set above the Storm. O
poor Seamen, you may be above both Dangers and Storms. If your seet be upon
this Rock, you may here rest like the Ark when the Deluge was abroad. The Text
tells, it rested upon Mount Ararat, (which one observes, signifies)
Take-away-fear. O! Jesus Christ is the Mount Ararat, for poor Souls to rest on
in all Storms and Dangers. O it is sad to be a Magor-missabib at Land! a
Terror to ones self, and to all round about you; O what a sad thing is it to
be so at Sea!

Take a few Directions. If you would be above fears in times of danger at Sea;
then carry Christ in the Vessel, (I mean) be you interested in Christ; nothing
will put a Soul above fear, so much as a sight, and discovery of Interest. When
David was in danger at Land, and the People spoke of stoning him, what 1 Samuel
30. 6.
course took he to be above fears? he encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
We read of a storm at Sea, and yet Christ was aboard, but the cries of the
perishing Disciples awakened him, and he said to the storm, Peace, and be
still. Caesar when once going a Voyage by Sea in a storm, the Mariners being
afraid, he cries out to them, fear not, you carry Caesar: but it may be said, A
greater than Caesar is here, fear not, you carry Christ; O for such a sight in
Sea-dangers, as Paul had in his Voyage to Rome, when the Angel of the Lord
cried unto him, Fear not, Paul, God Acts 27. 24.
has given thee all them that sail with thee.

2. If you would be above fears in storms, then commit the Helm to Christ as
Pilot, viz. Commit all to him by prayer, every Man here in the Text, cried unto
the Lord his God: Let him in all dangers steer your Course for you, commit your
way to the Lord. The story is famous of a Duke of Saxony, and a good Bishop in
Germany, who were at enmity; and the Duke sent to see what preparations the
Bishop made; the Messengers returned and gave the Duke this account: He made no
preparations, but what says he then? he replies, say the Messengers, he would
preach the Gospel, he would visit the Sick, and be found in his Duty. And as
for the War, he would, (Totius Belli molem Deo committere) for the bulk of the
War, he would commit it to God. O then says the Duke, if he be of that mind,
let the Devil wage War against him, if he will: for I will not. So, if you
commit the Helm of all your affairs and businesses to Jesus Christ, by Faith
and Prayer, this would help you to be above fears.

3. Would ye be above storms and fears at Sea? O then carry not Jonah in the
Vessel, (viz.) guilt with you, guilt will raise a storm, sooner or later: you
see here that the Sea was never quiet, until Jonah was cast overboard, then it
calmed. O let your guilt be thrown into the Sea of Christ's blood, then all will
be calm and quiet within; we see in the Text it was not lightning the Ship of
the goods, that did still the storm, while Jonah was there, who was the guilty
Person: unpardoned guilt is the black water, you must pump out by Repentance;
one Achan spoils a whole Camp, and here one Jonah brought a storm upon the
whole Ships Company; it was a Notable saying of one of the Wisemen of Greece,
being aboard in a Vessel, who heard some wicked Mariners upon a time praying
to their Gods, he called to them to be silent, for if their Gods knew they were
there, they would drown them all for their sakes. The Moral of it is easy,
Guilt and guilty Persons may endanger others.

4. Would you be above fears in Sea-dangers? look then that your Anchor be
rightly cast. Hope is the Anchor of the Soul, Heb. 6. 19, 20.
(as the Aposte says,) both sure and steadfast, cast within the Vail: an
Allusion to the Temple, there was the outer Court, which was the Peoples Court,
all might come into this Court; but there was the Sanctum Sanctorum, viz. The
Holy of Holies, and here the High Priest was only to come, and this expression,
within the Vail, notes Heaven, where Christ is entered already, as our
Forerunner. O then, poor Souls, get out of the outer Court, cast not your
Anchor there: For the outer Court is to be trodden down by the Rev. 11. 2.
Gentiles forty two Months. But cast your Anchor upon the Rock Christ, it will
else come home again: if you carry not Hope in God and Christ, through the
Promise, to Sea with you; you go without your best Anchor, this is your
Sheet-Anchor: you talk of the Cape of good Hope, you will near touch here all
the Voyage, until you get into Christ, it is Faith and Hope that must keep out
fear, why are you afraid, O ye of little Hope.

5. Would you be above Fears in Sea-dangers? then carry no Leaks with you to
Sea, (viz.) Known sins; These will prove Leaks at Sea, you know it is as much
as your lives are worth at Sea to have a Leak break upon you in a storm; and
yet how many of you carry Spiritual Leaks in your Souls? Jonah had a leak
sprung (...) Sea, a known Sin, and it had like to have cost them all their
lives: you search your Vessels narrowly, to see if you can spy any Leaks; O
that you would do so with your Souls! a little hole in a Ship endangers all,
and a little hole in a Sea-bank, is of great danger. O then let no poor Sinner,
no poor Seaman, say, It is but a little one, and my Soul shall live; see to
every hole in the heart.

6. Would you be above fears in Sea-dangers? O then go to Sea well Ballasted;
there is danger you know, if you be not well ballasted in a storm. The
Spiritual Ballast, (I mean) is, the truth of Grace: Be not carried about with
every Wind of strange Heb. 13 ^.
Doctrine, for it is a good thing that the Heart be established with Grace. An
Allusion to a Ship unballasted, that by the storms is tossed and in danger of
sinking. O it is good to carry Souls fraughted with grace: Is not this better
then to have Ships fraughted with goods. When goods may be thrown out, as here,
then Grace will be establishing of your Hearts against all fears.

7. Would you be above fears in Sea-dangers? then keep the Pump going, (viz.)
of godly sorrow for sin; keep in a melting frame of heart. Godly sorrow is the
Pump: now if any thing get into the Pump, it is you know dangerous; O then live
in the daily exercise of Repentance. Here now, in this Case of Jonah's, there
was a stoppage in the Pump, Repentance was laid aside, and guilty Jonah was
secure Jonah.

The second Observation from the effects of this storm, is this, Eminent
dangers by the light of Nature, will put men upon Prayer; They were afraid, and
what followed? and cried to their Gods.

Their fear, was the first effect of this storm, and their Devotion was the
second. Those poor Mariners were Idolaters, yet they thought in this danger,
their Gods could help them: therefore they cry to them. Here is something for
Christians, to learn from Pagans: here is a Pagan preaching, a rowzing Sermon
to the Prophet, Arise, Sleeper, and pray to thy God. And here is also a Company
of poor distressed Seamen* praying in danger to their Heathenish Gods, to teach
us to pray in time of distress to the true God; the very light of Nature is not
so dim, but it can look through danger to duty, for self-preservation.

Let us inquire what is meant by the light of Nature?

For the understanding of which, we must conceive, Man at his Creation, was
created in the Image of God, which consisted in Knowledge Ephesians. 4. 24
and true Holiness; now the beams of light, that shone round about him, and
upon his Tabernacle, (as Job's Phrase is) these were eclipsed, and darkened, by
his fall; but not so totally extinguished, as to be clean put out; the eye of
Natural light was not altogether put out, some glimmerings and remains are
still, in lost man, though not so strong as to lead him to Christ, (which some
vainly contend for;) yet so strong, as many times, it is at work upon Natural
Conscience, to accuse or excuse; So we read of the Gentiles, though they were
without a Law promulged, as the Jews had, yet not without a Law Romans 2. 14, 15,
engrafted in their Consciences: whereby they had common Dictates, about Good
and Evil; which light was a Law to them in many things. So that the light of
Nature, is the strength and Law of Natural Conscience; stirring in a poor
Creature that is ignorant of God in Christ: It is called the Candle of the Prove.
20. 27.
Lord, Searching the dark places of the Belly, and Paul I conceive, meant of
this, when he 1 Cor. 11. 14.
said, Does not even Nature teach thee? (viz.) the light of Nature.

This light of Nature in times of danger, Ezekiel. 6. 5.
did teach the very Heathens to look up to their Gods: we read in the Prophet,
that God threatened to cast down their slain before their Idols, they used in
times of danger, to stand before their Idols, to enquire of them; O now says
God, they who have stood before them, to worship them, shall be cast down
before them. I find one, upon this Text [They cried unto their Gods, every one
to his God.] He gives a Reason, the uncertainty that attends Idolatry,
distrusting their Gods, to be the true God, and so called on Jonah to pray to
his God; therefore they used to close their superstitious Devotions with that
General. (Dii, Deaeque omnes.) Going to enquire of Oracles, Heathenish History
is full of; they would not attempt any great design, but first inquired of
their Idolatrous Oracles, which is very teaching to Christians.

1. Natural Conscience acknowledges a God in times of Danger. For though the
Heathens knew not God; yet they acknowledged, by their false Gods, their many
Deities, that there was a God, though some worshipped 2 Kings ^3. v. 13.
more Noble Deities than others, as the Babylonians, who Worshipped the Sun. I
find one giving that, as the reason of the Sun-dial of Ahaz, going backward ten
degrees; that the Babylonish Ambassadors that worshipped the Sun, might be
convinced, that the God of Hezekiah was the true God; the God of Israel, that
had power over the Sun, which they worshipped as a Deity, was ver. 11.
the true God. We read of the Horses of the Sun, which some understand were
Horses, upon which men rode early in the morning to worship the Sun, upon its
rising: others think, they were only Pictures of Horses of the Sun: Acts 17. 23.
but all is to this purpose, They worshipped the Or to that purpose in their own
language, calling upon that which they worship, for a G^d.
Sun. Also we read of the Inscription of the Men of Athens, To the unknown God.
Therefore it is said, when any Persons in what Countries soever, are surprised
with danger; in their Native Dialect they use this Expression, which we do in
England, O God! Well, this is acknowleeged by these Heathens, in a storm. They
cried unto their Gods.

2. The Natural Conscience does acknowledge, that this God is able to deliver in
time of danger, or else why do they cry to him? Therefore the Heathens offered
Sacrifices, to appease their Gods, when they conceived they were Angry; and had
stately Temples built for this very end. That was a sharp return of God's, Go
to the gods which you have served, and see if they can deliver you; Idolaters
had in such Cases high apprehensions, and high expectations from their gods:
some think the Reason of that Inscription at Athens, To the unknown God, was to
conceal the Name of the Tutelary God, unto whose protection they had committed
themselves; for they conceived, if their god's Name was known, the Enemies of
the City might Thus the Tyrians, and Lacedaemonians.
charm him away: therefore they settered their Gods, and chained them.

3. Natural Conscience acknowledges, that, God in order to deliverance, is to
be sought unto; they cried: in the Text, unto their Gods, they do not neglect
the use of means, and hope for deliverance without endeavors; this is
irrational; Natural light teaches another Lesson, they do not only lighten the
Ship, but they also cry to their Gods.

4. Natural Conscience acknowledges this also, that this God must be under
Profession and Adoration, Every man cried to his God, the God he worshipped and
served; and so that word in the Prophet, Every one walking in Micah 4. 5.
the Name of his God. Is it not said of the poor Indians, that they offer
Sacrifice to the Devil; and say There is a good God; and he will not hurt them:
therefore they need not serve him: but, there is a bad God, meaning the Devil,
and he will torment them, if he be not sacrificed unto; the very light of
Nature, teaches a kind of worship in time of danger.

1. Reason, Why the light of Nature puts upon Prayer in times of danger; is,
because it looks at self-preservation, all Natural motions, are for
self-preservation; therefore suggestions to self-murder are unnatural, and more
immediately from Satan, the destroyer of Mankind; every Creature will avoid
its own Death and Dissolution: and, Shall we do this by the light of Nature for
our Bodies? and do nothing for our Souls? shall Creatures that have not Reason
avoid Death? and shall not poor Sinners that have the light of the Gospel
shining round about them, avoid Eternal Death and Damnation?

2. Because, in times of danger the light of Nature carries convictions along
with it, of a Deity, and a Deity used to be looked up unto in time of danger;
therefore in judgments upon Nations, they used to sacrifice to their Gods.
These Heathen Seamen in the Text, now have convictions of some Supreme Being,
that could quiet their storms, whether they worshipped the Sun, Moon or Stars,
which is probable they did, being proper for their own calling. These probably
might be the Mariners Gods; having such an influence upon the Sea. We read of
the Moon called the Queen of Heaven, Jer. 44. 19.
and the Hosts Moon and Stars, these being considerable in Navigation; the
poor Heathen might easily be drawn in to acknowledge them for Deities, and so in
their dangers, might look up to them for relief. All holds out a conviction of
a Deity in time of danger: it is not what men thinks in such an Atheistical Age
as this, when they swim in all manner of Earthly delights, when they drown
their very Reason in the Sea of their sinful pleasures; but when they come into
dangers, when death is set before them, when they came into affliction, what
says Conscience to them then? Is there not a God then? have they not immortal
Souls then? is there not an Eternity then?

3. Because Conscience-storms are quieted by this means. A storm of Conscience,
and a storm at Sea when they meet, will make terrible work. So that some thing
must be done to quiet Conscience: so that duties at Sea and Land, are but made
a sleepy Sop to allay the rage of an awakened barking Concience.

4. Because the light of Nature is a reflecting light, it can look back to sin
and guilt, and Persons are never so much upon prayer, as when they are upon
reflex Acts; and Persons are never so much upon reflex Acts, as when brought
into dangers. This Reflection, we read of it to be the distinguishing Character
of men, to distinguish betwixt Them and Brutes, Bring it again to mind, and
Esaias 46. 8.
know that you are men, O you Transgressors. Now Natural Conscience reflecting
upon its own actings, finding guilt upon search; then it puts upon Prayer.

APPLICATION.
First then, It is a word of Reproof. If the light of Nature in times of danger
will put men upon Prayer; then it reproves Persons Cursing and Swearing in
times of danger, a sin too ordinary among Seamen. O poor Mariners, these
Heathens will rise up in judgment against you another day! that you that have
known so much of the true God, heard so much of him, and yet you act so much
below them: Are not you at such times more like Heathens, and they more like
Christians.

1. You sin against greater light, you sin under Sun light, they sin but under
Starlight: it may be said in this Case, as was said by Christ, to the
Pharisees, If I had not come, and spoken unto you, you had not had sin, but now
your sin remains; and the more light you sin against, the more is your sin
aggravated.

2. You are to be Reproved: you sin in time of Danger, and this is to sin
daringly, in a presumptuous way; to sin when God is threatening to strike; this
is impudent sinning, for the child to sin while the Father has the Rod in his
hand; this highly aggravates the Offense.

3. Such are to be Reproved; for this is to sin, by being deaf to a voice of
the Lord; it is sinning against a Call of God's. God now calls for Prayer, They
cried to him in their distress, is any man afflicted, let him pray, now is a
time for Prayer. O how sad is this, when you should be calling on the Name of
God, then to be blaspheming of the Name of God!

4. Are not such to be reproved, who sin in the face of Death? it may be,
Swearing and Sinking? is it not better to sink Praying than Swearing? O sad to
dye with Oaths and Blasphemy in your Mouths! sin in your Lives, and sin in your
Deaths too; Can you look the King of Terror in the face, with cursed Oaths
against God in your mouths? O let not that Proverb be turned! its used to be
said, If you will teach a man to pray, send him to Sea. O let it not be turned,
if you would teach a man to Swear, send him to Sea; if you would teach a man to
Curse, to be Profane, send him to Sea.

5. Are not such to be reproved, who have had so many Salvations, and
Deliverances, and sin after all these? as Ezra said, so should Esra 9. 13.
poor Seamen say, What after such deliverance as this, shall we break again thy
Commandments? all your Deliverances will one day add to your Condemnation, your
Salvations at Sea from sinking, will but sink you; so much the deeper in Hell,
if the Lord be not merciful to you.

2. Use: Is it so, that the light of Nature puts upon Prayer in time of danger.
Then it is an Use of Exhortation, to all Masters of Ships especially, to set up
Prayer: the Master of the Ship, came unto the Prophet, and said, arise sleeper,
and pray to thy God, etc. Why was Jonah a Servant? how was the Master concerned
with Jonah? he was a Passenger; yet he now sees in time of danger, that all
aboard were upon their duty; you will have your times of Watch kept up, and why
not times of Prayer? Here is a Pattern for yea Sea-Commanders, to call upon
your sleepy Companies to pray.

1. You are in deaths often, and should not such be in duty often? what not in
prayers often. Men will never pray, if not in danger: may not you hear the
Winds and the Seas, saying often to you, as Jonathan to David, As I live, there
is but a step betwixt thee, and death.

2. You are under more Temptations, than many others. What in the midst of
Temptations and not pray? Little does your Relations know (it may be) what
Temptations you meet with, in the remote parts of the Earth; O but God and your
Consciences know, The Temptations of Countries, are sad Temptations: especially
when they meet with suitable matter in constitutions, when a
Country-temptation, and a man's Constitution meet together; O how sad is this!
It is said of Israel, they mingled with the Heathen, Psalm 106. 3^.
and they soon learned their works. They learned to sin with them; and, if the
truth were known, so I doubt do many of you.

3. You are under more vows than other Psalm. 56. 13.
men. We see here, These poor Heathens vowed a vow; Have not you don so, many a
time? Of all men in the World, The vows of God are upon Seamen; and will not
you pay the vows, your Souls have uttered to the Lord in the days of your
distress? Is it not better, Eccles. 5^ 5.
not to vow, than to vow and not pay? For God takes no pleasure in the
Sacrifice of Fools. Have not you vowed to be more holy? to be more close
walking? to set up the worship of God in your Vessels? But, how have you come
off with God? Have you not come off, as those Heathen-Mariners did, who in a
storm promised, If their Gods would deliver them, they would offer up Candles
in sacrifice to them, as big as the Masts of the Ships; but when they got to
Land, they made one of Twelve in the pound serve.

4. You are under more Advantages, to exert and draw-out Prayer; They that go
down into the Sea, they see the wonders of the Lord: and these should both
excite to Prayer and Praise.

5. You must give an account to your Families your Ship's Companies, are your
Families, and you must give an account of them: you would not wrong them in
their Wages, or in their Bodies, and why then will you wrong their Souls? you
have a charge of Souls. But more of this herafter.

6. If you never pray out of danger, how can you expect to be heard in danger?
will not God say as in that Case, You fasted not at Zach 7. 5.
all unto Me, was it not to your selves?

3. Use. Then it is a word of Information: 1. It informs us of the sin of those
that never pray, neither Calm nor Storm; that are possessed with a dumb Devil: O
that God would cast him out! O the light of Nature condemn this! Heathens and
Pagans condemn this. What, never pray? and yet called Christians? O how strange
is this! are not many of your Houses, and many of your Vessels, haunted with a
dumb Devil?

1. You do not give the true God, so much Honor, as these Heathens gave to
their false gods, They cried to their gods.

2. The wrath of God hangs over the head of such, as call not upon the Name of
Jer. 10. 29.
the Lord: He threatens to pour his wratb upon the Families of such.

3. This is the Character of wicked Men, Psalm. 14. 4.
They eat up my People like bread, and call not upon the Name of the Lord.

4. Such are under no Promise, They that Joel. 2 32.
call upon the Lord shall be saved.

5. Such as call not upon the Lord, are from under Gods protection: And is it
not sad to go to Sea, from under the protection of God?

4. Use. Have any of you prayed in your Dangers at Sea, and God has answered?
It is a word to such.

1. Read often your Answers, to Sea-Prayers over, as a Person does that
receives a Letter from her Husband at Sea, or in some remote Country; she reads
it over and over, again and again; or, as a Man that has an answer from a
Friend, he cannot understand it at first, until he has read it over and over.
Has the Lord sent you Answers? read them often over, and you will see more of
God in your mercies.

2. Has the Lord answered your Prayers? O then, walk up to your Answers! After
such deliverance as this, shall we again break His Commandments? Walk as the
Redeemed of the Lord, from Death and Psalm. 56. 13.
Danger; say with David, Thou have delivered my Soul from Death, and will thou
not deliver my Feet from falling? that I may walk before the Lord, in the Land
of the Living? This should be the Language of Seamen, after their Deliverances.

3. Has the Lord answered any of your Prayers? O then pay your vows. May not
you all say, Thy vows are upon me, O God! In Psalm. 56. 12.
times of danger, they used of old to make vows: A Vow is a promise made with
Prayer, Numb: 21. 2. 3.
and paid with Thanksgiving. The law of vows to the Lord was unalterable. What
Lev. 27. 10.
was vowed, must be offered.

4. Has the Lord answered your Prayers, in times of Danger at Sea? O then keep
a Memorial of them: be not as Israel was of old, and they soon forgot his
works, or posted, made haste to forget his works, (as the word testifies.)
Register them, remember the years of the Lords right hand. We see, how God
would have the appearances of his mercy Genesis 32. latter end.
remembered; that Manifestation of God at Peniel, when the Angel wrestled with
Jacob, must have its Memorial kept up, and therefore many years after a City is
built, that bears its Name, the City of Penuel: Judge. 8. 8.
and also that famous appearance of Gods, for Jacob at Mahanaim; a City bore
its Name, to keep up the Memorial of it: which was a Jesh 21. 38.
City of Refuge.

5. You that have received mercyes, in answer to Prayer at Sea, That duty you
were most convinced of, be sure you take up; and that sin you were most
convinced of, be sure you lay down; These usually are true Convictions, that
smite us in times of distress, and danger: there is a more than ordinary voice
in such Convictions, and they are in an especial manner to be hearkened unto.

The last Use is of Trial. If the light of Nature put upon Prayer in time of
Danger, O how shall I do to know, says a poor Soul, whether I pray from a
better Principle? from a higher Principle? If all my performances flow from
only a Principle of Natural Conscience; what a sad case am I in? Take a few
Trials.

1. Are thy Duties forced and extorted from thee? O then, I doubt, it is not
only Natural Conscience that thou acts from. Thus Pharaoh's confession of sin.
Thus Judas's confession. Thus Readiness These were all extorted from them, by the
judgments of God upon them. This is like Seamen, throwing goods overboard in
a Storm, which they wish for again in a Calm. But now the Spirit of God brings
a Soul freely off in duties; it Psalm. 51: 12.
is called a free Spirit. Alas, under an affliction, to have a Confession
forced from a poor Sinner, this is only to Pump, while in danger of drowning.

2. If only Natural Conscience acts you in duties, then it does not act you
constantly; it acts by fits: but now, the Spirit of the Lord acts the Soul more
constantly; Natural Conscience may bend the Bow, but does not keep it bent.

3. Natural Conscience acts the Soul with no Complacency, or delight in God;
now, Delight in God, is the Spring of duty. Now, Natural Conscience cannot
delight in conversing with Spiritual Objects; Examine your hearts, then, What
delight have you in God? in communion with Christ? Can you say, with the
Spouse, I sat down under Cant. 2. 3.
his shadow with great delight: O this is above the reach of Natural
Conscience.

4. Natural Conscience has Peace, if the duty be done, whether Christ or no be
enjoyed; Divine presence is not desirable to Natural Conscience: if it pay its
vows with the Harlot, and perform its task, then it is Prove. 7 14.
quieted, and wipes its Mouth.

5. Natural Conscience looks not at the manner of duty, contends it self in
slubbering over the Lords work; but now, a Principle of Grace cannot thus
content it self, but looks to the manner of performances.

6. Natural Conscience gets no power against corruption, attending its duties;
but pray's and sins, and sins and pray's: whereas Duties, acted by the Spirit
of Christ, have power attending them sooner or later.

7. Natural Conscience, in all its duties, is a stranger to the Actings of
Faith: It cannot convince of Unbeleif; it can rise no higher than the light of
Nature: but, What actings of Faith, are mingled with your duties, etc?

8. Natural Conscience, so it gets its Ends, it never mind's its Returns: like
the Leapers that were cleansed; but did not return to give thanks. Natural
Conscience is not good at Thanksgiving. When it has gotten the Mercy, it does
not study to return Praises: By these things, you may come to know whether your
duties are acted by a higher Principle, than the light of Natural Conscience.

Jonah 1. 5th. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the Ship, and lay, and
was fast asleep:
We come now to the Second Part of the Text, (viz) The deportment of the guilty
Person. (1) Here is his Person: Jonah, But Jonah etc. (2) Here is his Place,
whither he went down. He went down into the sides of the Ship. Guilty Persons
are for holes and corners. (3) We have his Posture, or what he was doing. Was
he praying? wrestling with his God, as they were with theirs? O no, he lay fast
a sleep: he lay fast asleep: 1. The word seems to note unto us, his
Composedness and Deliberateness in his sleep, as a man that does not
accidentally take a Napp as he sits, but he lies down. O what a sound sleep was
Jonah's Conscience in! 2. Fast-a-sleep, not easily awakened, therefore the
Master calls unto him. We say of a Man that is in a sound sleep; he is fast. So
Jonah here was fast. 4. We have the Aggravation of his sin, he slept in the
storm. When others were sinking, he was sleeping: here is a black But written
upon Jonah's back. But, Jonah was fast a sleep.

1. His sin is aggravated by the Profession he had upon him. But Jonah, the
Israelitish Prophet. It was the Preacher Jonah, that was the sleeper Jonah.

2. His sin is aggravated from the Guilt; It was guilty Jonah, that was sleepy
Jonah. for sinning Jonah, to be sleeping Jonah, is a great aggravation.

3. Aggravation is from the Mariners-Practice: who were Heathens, and they
praying; and he a Prophet of Israel, and he sleeping.

4. Aggravation from the Time: it was in a storm, a Terrible storm. He slept,
when eminent danger was upon them all. In these things, lay the Aggravation of
his Guilt.

The Observation then is this.
That the Guilty Person may be the secure Person. Jonah lay fast asleep; says
the Text.

1. Let us inquire, what this Guilt was: 2. Let us inquire, what this Sleep
was:
1. Let us inquire into his Guilt. We see the account of it given in this; His
disobedience ^^ a Call of God's, to go to preach at Nineveh. This was his guilt
in the General: but it is worth a more particular looking into.

1. His Call and Commission, were not Verse. 1.
ordinary. Now the word of the Dord came unto Jonah. Here are his Letters
Patents from Heaven: here is his Authority. If a Commission from Man should not
be obeyed, it must be accounted for: men must Act according to their
Commission. But here is Jonah acting contrary to his Commission.

2. His guilt lies in flat Rebellion, and disobedience: he does not excuse
himself, from Exodus 4. 10.
any conceited weakness, as Moses did, Lord I am slow of speech, and of a slow
tongue. This excuse was modest: I am not sufficient, some read it. I am not
Eloquent, a very modest come off. I am of a heavy tongue, (so the Septuagint.)
Now by the Hebrew-Canons, M. Ainsworth.
(as one well observes) no Priest was to bless the People, that was of a
stammering Tongue, nor was this a considerable Plea: But the Prophet Jonah, he
makes no Plea for himself; but, without any more ado, he draws up a conclusion
to flee for it: he arose and fled to Tarshish, and thus proclaims his guilt.
The Judge asks of the Prisoner, this question; Did he flee from it? O then he is
guilty by Law! O sad! here is a Prophet turns Fugitive from the presence of the
Lord. Jonah, the name signifies a Dove. O how like one is he, in this respect?
that he is upon the Wing, to be flying from the presence of God.

3. His guilt lies in the deliberation of his Flight from God. It was no sudden
business, he went down to Joppa, Thirty Miles from Jerusalem. It was
Jerusalem's Sea-Port-Town. Now, Was not this very deliberately done? The more
deliberation there is in an Act of sin, the more there is of the will in that
sin; and so it becomes more sinful. A poor Creature may be forced, and haled on
a sudden, by the violence of a temptation, into some sinful act; but this is
not so sad. Therefore we read of that good Law; If she was forced, she was not
guilty. God has great compassion for these Spiritual Forces: But here was
Jonah's sin, that he was so deliberate in his flight.

4. His guilt lay also here, That he had been a Prophet in Israel, and there
had seen the Lords great works done among that People. One would think he might
have been armed and fortifyed, with so many experiences, as he had been under
of the power of God, and faithfulness of God; and now to turn his back of the
Lord's work, because of some difficulty, that it seems to be attended withal:
This goes to the making up of his guilt.

5. His guilt lay in the pride of his Spirit, lest he should be reproached, to
be a false Prophet. And this he seems to hint himself. Was not this my saying,
when I was in my own Country? Therefore I fled before thee Jonah 4. 1.
to Tarshish, for I knew that thou art a gracious God and merciful, and slow to
Anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. O what Pride
lurked in the Prophet's heart? O how often is this the Preacher's sin: If he
want success, then their proud Spirits rise. Was it not strange? The Prophet
would rather have all Nineveh perish, than his Name perish, or be stained.

6. Another piece of guilt lay in this: God did give him his Commission, that
he might foresee the Rejection of the Jews, his Countrymen. Now this he
takes no Notice of. Ut, quia Israel audire contempsit, totus Gentium mundus
exaudiat. says one upon it.

7. His guilt lay, in the progress, he makes in his disobedience. He does not
say, as Balaam, My ways are perverse before the Lord; and if this thing
displease thee, I will get me back again. O no; when he goes down to Joppa,
there he finds a Ship; he comes not now to a stand with himself, whether he
should go, or no; but pays the fare of the Ship: he continues still in his
course. Well the storm comes after him; and his Conscience does still sleep: nay
all of them pray, but Jonah. O sad sight! the Vessel sinking; the Heathen
Mariners praying; but Jonah sleeping.

The second Thing we are to inquire, is, into Jonah's sleeping.

1. It notes a sleep of security, as Persons when they think they are secure,
they can sleep soundly. Thus Sisera, thinking himself secure, fell a sleep.
Sampson, thinking himself secure, fell a sleep, in the lap of Dalilah. So many
Persons fall a sleep, in the lap of Creature Comforts and Contentments.

2. His sleep notes his Senselesness and stupidity, as sleed is the binding up
of the Senses: Here, no sense seems to be upon sleepy Jonah! The man is in a
Lethargy; he must be cut, before he be cured, We read of a charge, that such as
sin openly, should be rebuked sharply. But the word is, rebuke them
(cuttingly): some tell us, that it is an Allusion unto a man, that is in his
sleepy-disease, and must be cut for it. Nay it is well, if cuting will recover
him. O what sense, now, had the Prophet of the Lords displeasure, which he had
stirred up against him? and should have made him Tremble? The displeasure of
God put the Sea into a rage; yea the Heathen Mariners thought their Gods were
angry, and yet Jonah thought not his God angry.

2. What sense was here, of his sin, and provocation against God? his
Conscience at the presence seemed to be Seared. A Metaphor taken from the
Surgion, that seares a Member and makes it insensible.

3. What Sense was here, of God's dishonor? What? sensible of neither Gods
displeasure! nor Gods dishonor! Was it not dishonorable for the Prophet of
Israel, to flee from the God of Israel? He could be more sensible of the
dishonor to his own Name, than of dishonor to Gods Name.

4. What Sense was there here, of his danger? The Mariners they were sensible
of danger, and so they were afraid; but Jonah is no more sensible of danger,
then a man in his Cabin in a storm. He is now, like Solomon's drunkard, asleep
in the top of the Mast. Nay, many are sensible of danger, that are not sensible
of sin: But Jonah in this fit of the sleepy disease, seems to be sensible of
neither.

5. What Sense was here, of the danger of those poor Seamen with him? Nature
and Ingenuity might have taught him to have been sensible of other poor men's
dangers, especially he having been the procuring Cause of it. We see, he was so
when awakened, For my sake is this storm come upon you, etc. Then put all these
together, and it is evident, that, Jonah's sleep sets out Jonah's stupidity.

Thirdly, This sleep, notes his Indulgence of himself under his Guilt. Whereas
he should have been sentencing himself, and judging himself; he was with the
Spouse, indulging himself. He lay, and was fast asleep, crying with Solomon's
sluggard; A little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little more folding of
the hands together! O when poor Souls fall into sin, it is hard to get out of
sins sleep! We are very prone to indulge our Selves therein.

1. Reason why the Guilty Person is often the Secure Person, is, Because Guilt
causes God to withdraw, and when God with-draws from the Soul, it is no wonder
if the Soul fall asleep, fall into a fit of Security. Jonah, says the Text, Was
fleeing from the presence of God, that keeps a Soul waking and watchful.

1. The presence of God keeps the Soul awake, as it is an enlightening presence.
Light will keep from sleep. The Soul walks in the light of his Countenance, and
therefore cannot sleep. They that sleep, sleep in the night. Darkness brings on
sleep. Jonah now was in the dark; he had sinned the light of Gods comfortable
presence from him, and so fell a sleep.

2. The Quickening presence of God, keeps Souls awake. When the Spouse had lost
Christ's quickening presence, O what a Fit of Security fell she into! When our
graces lose their activity, and turn into dull habits, then we presently fall
asleep: When men sit still, they are soon asleep. Thus Jonah had sinned away
Gods quickening presence, and so fell asleep.

3. The presence of God keeps men awake. As it keeps Believers upon their guard
against the snares and comforts of this present life. These are the great
Lullabyes of the Soul. These are the Dalilahs in whose laps we fall asleep,
until we lose our strength, and become as other Men.

2. Reason. Why the guilty person is the secure person, is, Guilt contracts
hardness upon Cant. 5. 3, 4.
the Conscience. While tenderness is preserved, the Soul is kept in a lively
frame from sleeping. Thus it was with the Spouse until she sinned-off her
tenderness. When David had sinned, how was he hardened in that sound sleep, for
three quarters of a Year together? O what a hard heart had he under his guilt,
at that time? We read of the City of Rabbah, what cruelty he did exercise 2 Samuel 12. ult.
toward poor Creatures there, and he brought forth the People, and put them
under Saws and Harrows of Iron, and under Axes, and made them pass through the
Brick-kiln etc. We never read the like of David. O what difference was there
between David at this time! and when his heart smote him for the cutting of the
lap of Saul's garment. Some do judge at this time he took in Rabbah, he was
under his guilt with Bathsheba. It was then the spawn of his guilt that had
thus hardened his heart. So in this case, O what a hardness of heart had seized
upon Jonah! that he could be so fast asleep, in such eminent danger.

3. Reason, Because The Lord often suffers guilt to meet with success. Now,
Success usually is the Mother of Security. Jonah here meets with Success in
fleeing from the presence of God. He goes down to Joppa, and there he finds a
Ship, at that time bound where he was resolved to go: now all this was for the
trial of Jonah. Many poor Souls when under guilt, if any thing favor them,
(called a Providence,) they then think, Sure I am not running from God. Alas,
Succesful Providence in a way of sin, are part of the punishment of that sin;
and, through the deceitfulness of our hearts, they are mighty hardening. You
think, Go to Sea, you may be under Success, and sin too. Rubs in the way are a
great mercy, to be checked in our pursuits of sin. Disappointments in a way of
sin have been blessed to the turning of many Souls to God. Thus the Prodigal's
disappointments brought him home. And that of the Lord to the Church, I will
hedge up thy Hos. 7. 7.
way with thorns. And, O what a mercy it proved! Now I will return to my first
Husband, for it was better with me than, then it is now.

4. The guilty Person is often the Secure Person, Because, Guilt dare not bring
Conscience to the Reckoning. Guilt is attended with Fear. Now the Soul is as
our first Parents were, when they had sinned: They were afraid, and ran among
the Trees of the Garden. So Jonah gets into the sides of the Ship. As an
indebted Person, cares not for reckoning his estate, nor looking into his Book;
so, poor guilty Souls care not for looking into the Book of Conscience; they
run upon the score still. So did Jonah here, until God sent after him.

5. The guilty Person is often the Secure Person, because, Guilt deafens the
Soul to the Calls of God. The Lord calls upon poor deafned Sinners, yea upon
Believers; Alas, they hear not! that it may be said of them, as Moses did, If
Israel will not hear me; Lord, how should Pharaoh hear me? Guilt gotten into
the Conscience makes it both dumb and deaf: and O, what an uncomfortable thing
it is, to speak to the deaf? to preach to the deaf?

1. Guilty Persons are secure as they are deaf to the voice of the Word. Guilt
Esaias 6. 10.
has made their ears heavy, they cannot hear: they have sinned themselves
deaf, and they must now be preached deaf, make their ears heavy.

2. Guilty Persons are deaf to the voice of the Rod, and so they are secure.
Man preaches to the deaf, and God preaches to the deaf too. Hear the voice of
the Rod, and Micah 6. 9.
who has appointed. Sinners have Rod-Sermons, and Word-Sermons, but nothing
makes them hear.

3. Guilt makes sinners deaf to the Cries of Christ, in the Conscience! O what
cries does Christ give many times in the Consciences of sinners! as he said to
Jonah, Do thou well to be angry, Jonah? so says Christ, Do thou well to do
thus? do thou well to neglect thy precious Soul? do thou well to provoke
the Almighty to displeasure against thee? to sin against so much mercy, so much
pity, so much compassion?

APPLICATION.
Is it so, that the guilty Person is the secure Person? then it is, (1) a word
of Information: And it informs of the misery of the Guilt and Security, when
they meet together, as they did here in Jonah: When a Soul lies and cries to
God, under the sense of guilt, as David did, Lord heal my Soul for I have
sinned against thee. O this is a rich mercy! But, when a Soul is secure under
his guilt, this speaks the Soul in a sad condition. 1. Guilt and Security
meeting together, speaks the Soul to be benumbed, and Conscience benumbed com's
hardly to its self. Jonah's Conscience by this guilt, was benumbed. O, benumbed
Consciences are sad Commodities to carry to Sea with you! Thus David in the
time of his guilt, had his Conscience benumbed. 2. Guilt and Security met
together, speaks the Spirit of God, absent from the Soul. Thus it was with
Jonah. Thus with David, Take not thy holy Spirit from me. And that was a Prayer
he put up to God, when he was under guilt, he prays as if he was afraid of a
Total withdrawment. 3. Guilt and Security, met together, speaks Gods
displeasure upon the Soul. God was displeased with Jonah, and sent this storm
after him. It was a storm of God's Anger, and Who can stand before Gods Anger?
according to his Fear, so is his Wrath. O how sad is it to go to Sea under the
Anger Psalm. 90. ver. 11.
of God! He is angry with the Wicked every Psalm. 7. 11.
day. You would not leave Relations in Anger, when you go to Sea, when it may
be you shall never see them more. But alas how many of you go to Sea, with the
Anger of God upon the backs of your Souls! 4. Guilt and Security met together,
does not only speak the Soul asleep, but fast asleep. But Jonah was fast
asleep, and fast asleep in a storm, O how dangerous is this?

Second Use: Is it so, that the guilty Person is often the secure Person? then
is it a word to Seafaring Men; to Counsel them not to go to Sea under guilt
and security, O what a mercy would it be to have guilt taken off your
Consciences; when you leave your Relations, and never (may be) see them more. O
that you may not carry the accursed thing aboard with you! O that you would not
hide it among the stuff! Guilt is a prohibited Commodity, Joshua 7. 11, 12.
you know the accursed thing did hinder Gods presence from going up with
Israel: and so it will hinder the Lord's comfortable presence from going along
with you. And can that Ship make a good Voyage, that carries not God in the
Company?

1. Carry not guilt with you, for your guilt will raise inward storms. Then the
Mariners were afraid, and alas, they knew nothing of the matter! Then how would
Jonah have been afraid, if he had not been asleep? It is the Character of the
Wicked, They are as Esaias 57. last.
the troubled Sea, that easts forth mire and dirt, and cannot rest. Guilt, poor
Mariners, will be to you, as the Winds are to the Sea. It was said of Caligula
the persecuting Emperor, that when it thundered and lightened, he got under his
Bed. A poor shelter! So, when guilt is upon the Soul, then there is a storm
raised in the Conscience: This is the Serpent Am^s 9. 5.
in the bottom of the Sea, that God commands to bite them. Now you are
Magor-missabibs, Terrors to your selves, and to all that are about you. Now
your Hearts will be made to meditate Terror. What a Case was Cain in by reason
of the bloody guilt of his own Conscience, when he cried out, Every G^n. 4. 14
one that meets me will slay me. He speaks as if the World were full of men,
and we read but of very few Persons then in the World. But this was his guilt.

2. Guilt will raise storms without. Jonah's guilt did so; his guilt of
Rebellion, and disobedience to the Lords Commission, did cause this great
Temptest to be sent after him. We read of Jehosaphat, a godly Prince, that he
joined himself with Ahaziah, who did wickedly, and they would send out a Fleet
together. What became of this Naval Expedition of theirs? the Text tells us,
The Lord broke their works, and their Ships, so 2 Chronicles. 20. 31.
that they were not able to go to Tarshish: 1 Kings 9 26.
this was a Seaport Town in the Land of Edom, upon the Red Sea. They never
reached the Port, Jehosaphats guilt raised the breaking storms. O what sad
thoughts will arise in your hearts, at such times, when you are in storms! O,
will your guilty Consciences say; This is come upon us for our sakes, for our
Land-sins. Land-sins many times brings Sea-dangers, You know, the Heathens drew
up that conclusion, He has escaped Acts 28 4.
at Sea, and Vengeance follows him at Land. That guilt will be followed, and
Revenged, that they concluded.

3. Guilt will keep your Souls under the hidings of Gods face at Sea. It was a
sad Voyage, that Paul was in, when neither Moon nor Stars appeared for many
days; but Acts 27.
it is far sadder, when the light of Gods Countenance does lie in; when it
does not appear: But at that time, the Angel came to him, and bid him Be of
good cheer. But now, to be in such terrible storms, and no Angel of Gods
presence with you; O how sad will this be! O what would a smile of Christ's
reconciled face be worth, when sinking, when splitting? It was sweetly said of
that Sea-Captain, when his Ship was on fire at Sea, and they thought they
should all be blown up immediately. Now, says he, Jesus Christ is worth ten
thousand Worlds.

4. Guilt will sting your Souls at Sea, with fears of death. If poor Souls for
whom Christ dyed, may be in fears of death, yea, all their lives; well then may
guilty Souls at Sea be afraid of that King of Terrors. How sad will it be for
you, poor Mariners, to dye? to have none of your Relations about you, to be of
use to you. To dye without sickness! To dye such a sudden death! To dye out of
your own Land! Will not all these things come in, to help on the trouble of
your spirits; But now, if guilt be taken away, Death is unstung. You may say
then when sinking, O Death were is now thy sting! And say, as that old Puritan
Minister did in a storm coming from New England, when Mr. Saxton of Leeds in
Yorkshire.
they all were expecting the Vessel to sink, O, who is now for Heaven, who is
bound for Heaven.

5. Guilt at Sea will be more dreadful to you, than at Land: because, you are
there deprived of those helps, which you have here at Land. You have not there,
those helps to unload your Consciences, when they are burdened with the sense
of sin. You may sooner unload the Ship, then unload your Soul; there you have
not any to be the Lord's Barnabas's, Sons of Consolation unto you: There you
have not those precious Ordinances to be Breasts of Consolation to you, when
under the Sense of guilt. O what would not your Souls give, if you should fall
under the Load and Burden of your sins, for a poor Minister, that might tell
but you of any glad tidings? Would not their feet be beautiful then, though
their Persons and Ministry be now despised, and slighted by you.

3. Use: Is it so that the guilty Person, is usually the secure Person? then it
is a word of Caution, both to Land-men, and Sea-faring-men, all of us, one and
other of us; take heed then of being Secure, under guilt, O this is most
dangerous! Sense of guilt may bring a Soul nearer God, b^t stupidity under
guilt is very dangerous.

1. Take heed of Security under guilt, if once asleep, it will be hard for you
to be awakened, you see it was thus with Jonah. The Lord sends a Tempest after
him, and the Ship is like to be broken by it. The Mariners they were afraid,
they cry to their Gods, they lighten the Ship; yet all this while guilty Jonah
was sleepy Jonah, until the Master of the Ship calls unto him, and preaches a
rouzing Sermon unto him, saying, Arise, sleeper, and pray unto thy God. Is Esaias
29. 10.
not a Spirit of deep sleep and slumber fallen up-you? Nay, O that poor
Ministers had not cause to say, The Lord has judicially poured it upon you!
And if so, is it not hard to awaken such? If one should come to the Grave-side,
and Preach, and Pray, and Weep; would not you wonder? And what do poor
Ministers do every day? is not this their work, to preach to the dead? to pray
over the dead secure Souls in their graves? Who, for all this, stirrs hand or
foot after the Lord Jesus? Was it not sad in the time of the Plague, to hear
that doleful Cry in the night, Bring out your dead, bring out your dead? and
must that be the cry, yea all the cry of poor Ministers; Throw out your dead,
Throw out dead Souls, from your Congregations; through out dead Souls from your
Families.

Take heed of security under guilt, for security has always been a forerunner
of some great Calamity, upon both Nations and Persons: the security of Jonah,
was the forerunner of this great storm; the security of the Old World, was a
forerunner of the Flood, the security of the Jews, was a forerunner of their
Captivity.

3. Security under guilt, is a sin that has a woe written upon the Head of it.
Woe to Amos 6. 1.
those that are at ease in Zion. To be at Ease, and to be Secure, is all one in
the Scripture-Dialect. Jonah was too much at ease, now, when all the Company
was in danger, and so are there many that sail in the same Bottom with him.

4. Take heed of security, under guilt; for, the Lords judgments come upon such
in a way of surprise. Such Nations, or Persons are not prepared to meet the
Lord, in the way of his judgments: they are taken all on a sudden, as the
Foolish Virgins were, by the coming, and appearing of the Bridegroom. Now, it
is very sad, to have any judgment come upon us, by way of surprise. Sudden
things bring much astonishment along with them; such poor guilty Souls, as are
secure, will say, I never thought of this, never thought of my death, this
Voyage, never thought of sinking! O, what a Fool am I, that should no more
think of my latter end.

5. Security under guilt grieves the Spirit of God. Jonah had now grieved the
Spirit of God, and it let him sleep: for it is the Spirit of God, that is the
great keeper of the Soul awake. Nay, we keep awake no longer than the Spirit
does keep jogging of us, one way or other. The Spirit of the Lord came upon
Sampson, and what then? did he sit still? O no! He arose and shook himself.
But, when Mat. 26. 45.
the Spirit of God is grieved, it says to the Soul, as sometimes Christ did to
his Disciples, Now, sleep on. And how sad is it, for the Spirit to let a poor
Soul alone, to say, Sin on, sleep on, He that is filthy, let him be so still,
and he that is unclean, let him be so still.

But now, methinks, by this time, I here some poo souls say, I am the afraid
Mariner: now, I see my danger; my danger, not of drowning only, but of damning;
the fears of my sinking, is turned now to fears of sinking into Hell, of going
down into the bottom of Hell. Now, I feel a storm in my own bosom. And what are
outward storms, to inward storms? and O now, says the Soul, What shall such a
guilty Soul as I do! that has such a load of unpardoned guilt upon the back of
my Soul? what shall I do under sense of guilt!

1. Direction to the guilty sinner, or Mariner. Cry to the Lord, under sense of
thy guilt. O what shall I cry, says the Soul! If peradventure that thou perish
not, as these in Text did. What poor Soul, if thou have but a Peradventure to
cry upon? to go upon, to the Lord? A divine it may be, may keep thy Soul from
sinking: Many a poor Soul have by the help of an it may be, gone to the Lord
Jesus. O guilty Souls, cry after Christ: what said the Disciples in that storm
they were in, Lord carest thou not that we perish? What did Saint Peter in the
storm, when sinking? Master save me, or else I perish. So, poor guilty Soul,
cry hard after Christ, Carest thou not, Lord, that a poor Soul should perish?
have thou not said that thou came into the World, that Whosoever believes in
him, might not perish, but have everlasting life?

2. Art thou sensible of guilt? Then own the punishment of thine Iniquity. Thus
did Jonah: For my sake is this storm come upon you. O what an ingenuous
confession was here, after God had awakened his Conscience! Conscience will be
ingenuous, when God works kindly upon it. We read a promise made to the
Accepting the punishment of Lev. 26. 41.
our Iniquity. If they with a good will acknowledge it (so the Italians reads
it); If they accept it as a Love-token from the hand of a Friend. Jonah
accepted his punishment under the sense of guilt two ways.

1. By Confession. 2. By Submission.
Take me up, and cast me into the Sea. O thus, own your guilt, though it be
before others; Lord if thou cast me into Hell, says the guilty sinner, Thou
art righteous.

3. Though you be not heard at first, cry again. Thus did Jonah, I will look
again toward thy holy Temple. O poor guilty sinner, what may a look out of the
Belly of Hell toward the Lord Jesus Christ do? what though you see not mercy
coming to you at first, yet look again, it may be the next look it will bring
it; it is an excellent frame of Heart, to turn Faith's eye often Christ-ward
under Sense of guilt: this was the way that healing came to the stung
Israelites. The sting was the guilt of sin; The Brazen Serpent, typed out the
Lord Jesus Christ; Their looking was believing; Their healing was
justification, by pardoning grace.

4. Art thou under the Sense of guilt; take heed of drawing black Conclusions
against thy own Soul. This was the infirmity of Jonah, I said, I am cast out of
thy sight: Jonah 2. 4.
If Satan can but drive a poor guilty Soul upon the Rock of despair, he then
hopes to split it for ever, this was the Rock that guilty Judas was split upon;
this is the Devils fiery dart, with which he does not only think to wound the
Soul, but to strike it (as I may say) through the Liver, to all Eternity.

5. Art thou under Sense of guilt? O now thou will highly prize Christ. The
whole need not the Physician, but the sick. O now thou will cry with David,
Heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee.

Lastly, Art thou under Sense of guilt? then know that there is a fullness of
grace in the heart of Christ, therefore we read of sheading grace abundantly
upon Souls: what Tit. 3. 6.
though there be abundance of guilt in thy heart; yet there is abundance of
grace in Christ's heart; a spring of grace in his heart, and it runs freely upon
guilty Souls: He abundantly Pardons, or, multiplyes Pardons. Esaias 55. 5.


Jonah 1. 6th. So the Ship-Master came unto him, and said unto him, what
meanest thou O sleeper! Arise and call upon thy God, if so be, that God will
think upon us, that we perish not.
In the verse before, you had a discovery of the deportment of a Ship-Company
that were in distress: In this verse, we have a discovery of further means,
they use for their preservation: some means you have had an Account of. Did
they swear in their distress? did they profane the Name of their Gods? did
these Heathen Mariners do, as many who profess themselves Christians, do? (viz.)
Take the Name of God in vain? and so as that wicked King, who sinned more and
more, in the time of his distress: O no, They cried to their Gods.

In this Verse, here you have further means used, for preservation of their
whole Ships-Company, in this great storm.

1. Reprehension of guilt. So the Ship-Master came unto him, and said unto him,
What meanest thou, O sleeper?

2. Here is exhortation to a duty. The duty is, To arise and call upon God.

3. Here is the Motive, or Encouragement, the means are to be used upon. If so
be that God will think upon us, that we perish not, Here is no certainty; alas
Idolaters can speak at no Certainty. O, say they, though there be not a
Certainty, yet there is a Probability of it; That our Prayer will be heard, and
our Persons preserved.

1. Thing in the Text is the Reprehension. 1. We have the Person Reproving, The
Ship-Master. Is not this a wonder, that a Heathen should have more Sense of the
displeasure of his false Gods, than a Christian of the displeasure of the true
GOD? nay, a Ship-Master. Had it been some Christian Passenger, fear might have
put him upon it: But the Ship-Master, who had been used to storms, he is
afraid; and reproves a runaway Prophet. Here (says one upon the place) see
Order in a Heathens Veslel: not any of the Mariners come to reprove him, but
the Ship-master. The charge being his, he is careful to preserve it; and, Rule
being his, he is careful to maintain it.

2. Here is the Person Reproved, (viz.) Jonah; The fugitive Prophet, from the
presence of the Lord. The best of men, may fall under a desert to be reproved
from the worst of men. It had been far more proper for Jonah, to have been
playing the Chaplain, and to have been praying, with the perishing
Ships-company, than sleeping in the sides of the Ship. Here is a strange sight,
a Prophet sleeping, and a Heathen preaching; and he preaches very awakening
Doctrine. Hrise sleeper, and call upon thy God.

3. Here is the manner of the Reproof, [What meanest thou O sleeper!] what
aileth thee, thou profound sleeper? (so some read it) How art thou taken with a
profound sleep thus 1. He speaks by way of Admiration, that ever he should be
of such a profound sleep, in such eminent danger, and so fast asleep. 2. By way
of Excitation, what meanest thou? provoking him to arise, to stir up himself,
to use what means he could for the preservation of the whole. 3. By way of
Recrimination, what, asleep? and we all in this danger? what a shame is this?
that thou should be sleeping, and we all sinking? It is a verk sharp
Sarcasm. What asleep, and we all going down into the bottom. 4. By way of
vehement affection: Here was very much earnestness of Spirit; what meanest
thou, O sleeper? he has great affection for the preservation of the whole.

4. Here is the sin reproved, (viz.) for sleeping in a storm of danger, neglect
of the use of lawful means for self-preservation: A sin against the whole
community, and Ships-company!

2. Part of the Text is, The Exhortation. [Arise and call upon thy God.] We
must shake our selves from our sloth, before we can call upon God in an
acceptable manner; sleepy prayers are not acceptable prayers. Inward and
out-ward man ought to be engaged in calling upon God: and call upon thy God:
not knowing what Jonah was, until afterward, yet he had some expectation, that
prayer might be heard; An excellent duty, at all times, but especially in times
of great distress, and danger; which was their Case at present; Calling upon
their Gods in all Nations, being practiced in times of common Calamity and
Danger.

3. Part of the Text is, The ground, or encouragement, to the duty. If so be
God will Remember us, (so some read it.) If he will be so friendly and kind to
us, (others read it). An [it may be] will put men upon serious endeavors for
preservation both for Soul and Body: an it may be of prevailing, will put Men
upon Prayer.

Here are Two Observations.
1. That such as have Charges under their hands, ought faithfully to manage
them.

2. Calling upon God is an excellent means to preserve from Sea-storms and
dangers.

1. Observation, Such as have Charges, under their hands, must faithfully
manage them. Is not here an admirable Lesson for Sea-Commanders, from this
Ship-Master? see here! he concerned himself, not with one more immediately his
charge; not a Mariner, but a Passenger; And all for the preservation of the
whole. You little think, what charges you carry to Sea. I need not tell you
what Ventures you stand charged with, what Goods, what Bills; your Ships, your
Lives, your Goods, other men's Estates; your Credits. All this, you are
sensible enough of, and concerned in: and it is your duty to be so. Honesty is
Honorable, both with God, and man: yet you must give me leave to mind you of
other Ventures and Charges, that you carry to Sea with you; and must be
accountable for.

1. You stand charged with your own Souls; and is not this a great charge? Is
not this Venture infinitely above all your other Ventures? all you carry, is
but Lumber to your lives, and your very lives are but Lumber to your Souls. If
you that go to Sea, were but sensible of the worth of your Souls, it would
surely awaken you? You send up many bills in this Congregation, to pray for
such a Relation gone a dangerous Voyage, but do you observe what dangerous
Voyages such Relations go, for their Souls? What shall a man give in exchange
for his Soul? Souls are the most precious Commodities in the world. Now the
more precious your lading, and Cargo is; the more care you have of your Charge.
The Souls you have aboard, are of far more worth, than all your Bills of Lading.

1. Is not thy Soul a great charge? If thou miscarry of thy Ship, thou may
get another; if thou miscarry as to thy Soul, it is for Eternity. If thou
suffer Shipwreck, thou may recruit again; Friends and Acquaintances may
supply thee again: But, if thou make Shipwreck of a Soul, thou never can
Recruit nor Recover that loss. If thou be taken Captive by the Turk, thou
may be Redeemed, but the Redemption of the Soul cease for ever. Psalm. 49.
9.


2. Is not thy Soul a great Charge? It is of more value than all the Ships and
Lading too. You say of a Ship, she is richly Laden; but truly, the richest
Commodities you can have Aboard, are your Precious Souls; these Immortal Souls
are the Plate-Fleet that Satan, that arch-Pirate lays wait for; What will it
profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? We may guess at
the worth of Souls, by the price was 1 Pet. 1. 19.
paid for them; They are Redeemed not with Silver nor Gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ.

3. Is not that a great Charge that you came into the world on purpose to
provide for? You had not rational immortal Souls, given, for sensual
employments; your errand into the world, was not to look after earthly
comforts; but to provide for your future, and eternal Estates. Seamen are not
created, as is said of the Leviathan, To play in the mighty waters; There goes
the Ships, there is the mighty Leviathan Ps. 104. 26.
that thou have made to play therein. As a good Minister said once at Sea with
his Family, Lord, what an Advantage have thou of me now: So may I say in this
case, Will you neglect your Souls? To provide for them now, when you are every
day in such dangers, when God has such advantages of you? What though you go
your Voyages, and compass Sea and Land, and come richly and prosperously home?
yet if you forget your Souls, alas all this while you mind not your main
business; Other businesses are but by-businesses to your Souls.

4. Is not that a great Charge? that a man must give an account of, in every
punctilio? What men must give an account of, they stand charged with: but
things of little moment, men are indifferent about them. O but, men must give
an exact account to every punctilio in reference to their Souls! You must give
an account what purposes of soul you once had, when in storms, and ready to
Shipwreck. O then have you resolved, If God brought you off with your lives, to
return to the Lord! you must give an account what Vows you made. If God would
deliver you from such a tempest, what new men you would become, what lives you
would lead: O, all these will be charged upon you another day.

5. Is not that a great charge, which is an immortal Being? And such a thing is
the Soul of man. It must live after this life, either in eternal felicity, or
in eternal misery: O, do you think you carry immortal Souls to Sea with you!
When you are to go a long Voyage, you lay in for it. And what? will you lay in
nothing for Eternity? What, nothing for your immortal Souls? When news came to
the Philosopher that his Children were dead, I knew, says he, when I begot
them, I begot Mortals. So should you say, You know when you go to Sea, you
carry immortal Souls with you every Voyage; And, Go provided for them, because
you must give an account for them.

2. You have another Charge: You carry the Souls of others with you, which is a
great charge. The Master here concerned himself with all in the Vessel. While
he Reproved Jonah, and stirred him up to pray, he looked at the common good and
safety of the whole Ships-Company. You have not only the charge of your men's
bodies, but the charge of your men's Souls: When you are to give an Account to
Owners, you will prepare all before hand, that you have no flawes in them.
There is an Owner I am afraid you Sea-Commanders little think on, and you must
give an account to Him; and this Owner is the LORD, the Owner of all the Souls
in the Ship: and God expects you should be faithful to the Souls you have under
your Charge.

1. You have the charge of Instructing them. You are to acquaint them with
those things that nearly Concern their precious Souls. Many Parents trust their
dear Children with you, and expect you should both be faithful to their bodies
and Souls: We read of Abraham, who had a noble Family; and it is said he armed
his trained Servants in the business of Lot's Rescue; his Instructed Servants
(so the word signifies) not instructed only in Martial Discipline, but in the
Concernments of their Souls; (some read it) his Catechized Genesis 14. 14
Servants; the word properly notes As the Dutch Anno a t^^ns observe.
Trained-up in Religion, as well as in Military Concernments; others read it,
his Apprentices. See how he concerns himself with their Souls! It was not below
him, though a Prince; and though he had a numerous Family. O what a door has
the neglect of this duty in Families, opened to Profaneness and Atheism in this
age?

2. You have the charge of praying with Mat. 8. 5.
them, and for them. We read of the Centurion that went to Christ for the body
of his Servant, My servant, Lord, lies sick, yea grievous sick of the Palsy,
and what think you is this Instance for, but to teach Masters to go to Christ,
in the behalf of their Servants? O when do you go, and say, Lord, my Servant is
sick of such a sin, and such a sin, Lord Heal him. We read of Joshua, how
resolute he was for Family Worship, I and my House will serve the Lord. You
Commanders, your Ship-Companies are your Families, are your Households,
therefore you have a charge of praying with them.

APPLICATION.
1. Use is of Information. If such as have Charges, ought to be faithful in the
management of them, then it Informs us; 1. It lets us see what God requires of
all men, according to their Degrees of places of Trust, whatsoever it be, that
they discharge them faithfully.

2. It informs us what need we have to get the knowledge of those duties, that
our places call for. We should know what God calls for, from our hands, in
every condition, and Relation, as we are men, as we are Christians, as we are
Relations; Christians are no more Really, than they are Relatively. Every
Relation is matter of Trust, which can never be managed faithfully, without
knowledge of the duty, of such a Relation.

3. It informs us of the Cause of men's miscarriages, in their several
Relations, (viz.) because they do not look upon themselves under Conscientious
obligations, to their Trust; they live not in the Consideration of their
accountableness to God; This, set upon their Spirits, would excite them to
duty; and to say as he did, If I should do thus, how should I look my Brother
Jacob in the face? So, If I should neglect my duty toward any under my Charge,
how then should I look my Lord Jesus in the Face? What will make poor Ministers
study, and pray, and preach faithfully, but the consideration of their
accountableness to God, As they that must give an account for your Souls, H^b.
13. 17.
as the Apostle says. And thus it is in other Cases.

2. Use is, a Reproof to Sea-Commanders, that are unfaithful to their Charge,
and Trusts, unfaithful to their own Souls, unfaithful to the Souls of the Ships
Companies, Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? Is this thy faithfulness to thy
own Soul? to neglect the worship of God, to neglect Calling upon the name of
God? O how sad and sinful is this, that instead of Prayers aboard, you abound
in Oaths; and instead of calling upon the name of God, you do Blaspheme it!

1. This is very sinful in you, because you neglect Duty in the face of Danger.
Danger does aggravate, both Omission and Commission, the sins of both; That
dangers, which should always put upon duties, should lie attended with sin.
These Heathens cried to their Gods, in their dangers: and what! you sin in
times of danger, that have lived under the light of the Gospel? It was said of
Paul, he was in Perils often, so it may be said of you poor Mariners, both by
Sea, and Land, ye are in dangers often, nay in deaths often, and what? in
prayer, never? in seeking God, never?

2. You are to be reproved because you neglect duty, when it is in proper
season Call upon me in the day of trouble. Is it not a day of trouble with you
in your storms? It is said of Seamen in their storms, their Souls are melted
because of Trouble, for all they are so Psalm. 107: 26.
courageous at other times. Well now, calling Psalm. 130: 1.
upon the Lord is in season, is his Command: what says David in this case, Out
of the depths have I cried unto thee. An Allusion to Shipwrackt Mariners, that
send their shreeks and cries to Heaven, when sinking.

3. This is very sinful in you, to neglect calling upon God; because, you
cannot expect a blessing upon your endeavors, without it: you may go out, and
come in, but yet all this while little blessed: these things may be common
Providence to you, you may make good and prosperous Voyages, all things come
alike to all. But what is this if you be not blessed, with the favor of God? and
the love of God in what you enjoy? A little that the righteous man has, is
better than much riches of the Wicked: God may let you have success in his
wrath, and it may be designed for a Curse, and a Snare unto you: though it may
lie in your comforts invisibly, (now the more invisible and insensible a Curse
is, the sadder it is.) We read of God's Cursing their Malac. 2 2.
Blessings. Every one thinks it a Curse to be poor, to be in want. But how few
think of a Curse to lie under their Comforts? under their Riches? Well, now can
you expect a blessing without asking? It is worth little, if it be not worth
seeking. Moses when he Deuteronomy. 33. 18.
comes to bless the Tribes, before his death, he blesses the Tribe of Zebulun,
in their going Genesis 47. 13.
out. Rejoice Zebulun in thy going out. God so bless thee in thy goings out, as
thou may rejoice.
This Zebulun, was the Tribe of Mariners, Zebulun shall dwell at the Haven of
the Sea, and his Haven shall be for ships. Now Moses blesses the Tribe of
Mariners at their going out. O think of this, and go not out, without the Lords
blessing. It is said that our English-Sea-men, in times of Heathenism, and,
since then, in times of Popery, offered their Oblations at their going to Sea,
that they might have good success, and will not you in these times of the
Gospel, look up to the Lord for it?

4. Your not calling upon the Lord, is the cause of all that Profaneness, and
Atheism that abounds among you. There is a holy Majesty in the worship of God,
that if solemnly performed, would have an awe upon men's Spirits. Will men
believe there is a God? when they never see you call upon him: do not your
Ships-Company, say in their hearts, There is no God? if there be a God, why is
not he called upon? why is he not worshipped? why is he not prayed unto? may
not many of you Commanders say; Lord, forgive me, my other-mens sins? O when
your Company's sins shall be laid at your doors, how sad will this be? What a
sad reckoning will there be to answer for their swearing, and drinking, and
blaspheming God? When God will ask you, What did you to prevent it? did you
warn them of it? did you pray against it? endeavor against it? instruct
against it?

5. You Masters, What do you know, but your calling upon God, and being
faithful to your charge, ^^ this Sense, may be a means for the Conversion of
them that are under your charge, what do you know but you might win them to
God? Many a child's Soul has been given in as a return of Prayer, and many a
Servants Soul. The Puritans loved the Souls of their Families, better than we
do in these days; and so God honored them with converting grace, breaking in
upon them, O what pains did they take in instructing them? in Catechizing them?
in examining them after Ordinances? what they had Hos. 14. 8
heard? O what a mercy would this be to carry it so under your charges, as they
that live Jam. 5. ult.
under the shadow of your wing might Return! Will not this be to save Souls
from death? He that converteth a Soul from the error of his way, saves a Soul
from Death. He speaks of it, as a very great matter, as a worthy business.
What! to keep a Soul, out of Hell? If you could keep your Ships-Company from
sinking, you would do it. O do what in you lies, to keep them from sinking into
Hell! What? Were the Souls of poor Sinners worth Christ's Prayers, Tears, nay
Blood? and not worth your cries? and your Prayers and your Tears? O what a low
rate do you set upon your Souls, that do so little for either your own, or
others.

6. Is not this sinful in you, Not calling upon God? for he has sovereign
power over the Winds, and the Seas. The Wind and the Seas obey him. The Wind^
blow by his Commission. The Poets Neptune is but a Fiction; but this is a
truth, that Jesus Christ is great Lord Admiral at Sea. What a proud attempt was
that in that Prince, to check the waves with his Scepter? Alas, this belongs to
no Scepter but Christ's. O then why should any go to the Divil for a Wind, if
it belongs to the Sovereignty of God, to command them. I tell you Masters, that
when out of your own Countries, you buy winds, they will be dear commodities to
you. You may buy a Wind with the loss of your Souls.

7. Your not calling upon God, has much ingratitude in it, your poor Wives
they put up Bills, and your Relations they get you prayed for; but O what
ingratitude it is, Not to do it your selves! Should not you think, What? shall
I be sinning at Sea against God, and it may be at this very moment and instant
prayed for at Land, by my dear Relations? I have heard of a godly Minister,
being acquainted with a godly Woman, whose Husband was opposite to the ways of
God, and upon a time, the Husband discharged the Minister his house, being very
angry against him, even that he entered into a temptation to kill the Minister,
to which end one day, he goes to the Wood, where the Minister in his
Retirements used to walk, and there resolved to fall upon him, but hearing a
voice, he stands (the Minister being at prayer); and presently, he heard him
praying particularly for him, which so melted him, that he threw down his
Weapons, and cast himself at his feet, and confessed all, and so became an
excellent Christian afterward. So, did but many Sea-Commanders, and other
Mariners, hear what prayers are put up for them, by their Relations, by their
Ministers; O how would these melt their hearts? And what? for all this; never
pray your selves?

3. Use, is of Caution, If it be duty in Masters to manage their charge, and
trust faithfully; O then take heed of neglecting those under your charge and
custody. None of you will neglect your Ships, your Goods, your Time, your
Gales; and, Why should any of you neglect your Souls, your precious Souls?

1. Take heed you neglect not the Souls under your charge. You shall one day
stand before the Lord, to be accountable for the Souls under your charge, as is
said of the Watchman, If he warn not the People, their blood was to be required
at his hand: so, may I Ezekiel 34. 4.
say; if Masters of Families, and Parents of Children, do not warn those under
their trust, to turn from sin; and give them not holy examples; God will
require their blood at their hands: And, What a dreadful thing will this be, to
have the blood of so many miscarrying Souls to all Eternity, to answer for!

2. Take heed of neglecting your charge: This will lie heavy upon you in your
distresses and dangers. When men shall Reckon with Consciences, what charges
will Conscience bring in against then? what Indictment will it bring in against
you upon this Account? what? did you pray with your Companies, when you had
opportunities? Did you walk before them, as giving an example of the fear of
the Lord to them? Did you what you could, for the good of their precious Souls?
Will it not be terrible in your storms, when you are Sinking to have not only
your own guilt to lie heavy upon you, but other men's guilt too? have not many
upon their deathbeds complained sadly of the neglect of Family Duties; of the
neglecting Souls under their Charges?

3. Take heed of neglecting your Charge, for those you have neglected, will one
day witness against you; and O how sad will this be, to have poor wronged Souls
witness against you? crying out, If we had seen better examples given us, we
should have more dreaded sin, we should have stood in more awe of offending
God? But O, how were we hardened by your means?

Lastly. Take heed of neglecting your Charge. This will cause the Anger of the
Lord to hang over your heads. What more displeasing to God, than neglect of his
Worship? than undervaluing precious Souls? will not this grieve the Lord? and
will it not be sad to sail under a black Cloud of Gods displeasure? What
course can you stear at Sea, and be safe while God is Angry with you? you at
Sea observe Clouds, and say, There is wind in such a Cloud, and rain in such a
Cloud: But is there not a Cloud over your heads, which you observe not? and out
of this Cloud, one day, will come the sinking storm, even the Cloud of Gods
wrath, if you look not to it. You would not leave your Relations when you go to
Sea, Angry: and will you go to Sea with the Anger of God upon you? If the Anger
of God send a storm, who can stand before it?

The next Observation, and the last is this.
Calling upon God, is an excellent means for preservation from Sea-Dangers.

We see these poor Heathens made it their practice now in danger, every one to
call upon his God; they had their Temples, their Altars, their Asylums to fly
to, in time of distress; but alas these were poor shifts, Refuges of lies to
them, lying Vanities, as all Idols are called. O but now, calling upon the true
God, this is the only means of safety! God is our only Refuge from the Storm.

But let us inquire a little, what Prayers these are, that are such excellent
means for preservation at Sea in times of danger. For it is not every calling
upon God that God will hear.

1. Earnest and fervent Prayers, these are the preserving prayers usually in
times of danger. Dangers usually put men upon earnest Prayers. Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee: an Allusion to the cries of shipwrackt men (as
has been formerly hinted) going to be swallowed up of the deeps. O, what
doleful and earnest cries do they give! The Lord takes notice of Mariners cries,
Ps. 107: 28.
Then they cry to him in their troubles, and he brings them out of their
Distress: Their Crying speaks the earnestness of their Spirits in calling upon
God. We read of effectual Jam^. 5. 17.
fervent Prayers, working-prayers (so the Greek read it.) Are You, working for
life and death? and the Seas working? and the Vessel working? and shall not
your Prayers be working? 1. Should not your prayers be fervent, now life lies
at stake for it: men will pray hard for their lives; a poor Prisoner, O how
will he plead for his life! Let me continue a Prisoner, my Lord; Let me be
Banished; any thing, if my life may be but spared. O what will not a man do, or
give for his life; And this is the case: it is upon your lives, and will not
you pray fervently now? 2. Your Souls lie at stake, though this is not so much
taken notice of, yet this is the great danger. What if thou dye this storm, and
be found without an interest in Christ? O, if you would but think when you go
out to Sea, O Lord, What will become of my Soul, if I never return this Voyage?
would there not be some hopes of you? poor Sinner, has not the Lord said,
Without Holiness no man shall see him; has not the Lord said, What will it
profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? has he not
said, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God! O now, what
will become of your Souls, if you should be cast away before you could witness
any thing of this nature wrought in you? then know, your Souls are concerned.
3. Your Wives, and Children, lie at stake, they are also concerned; will not
this move you? think, How many of your Wives follows you with prayers both in
private and public? and would not this be both ingratitude and unfaithfulness
for you not to pray when in danger? 4. What, not pray fervently in time of
danger? Heathens do so. How did the worshippers of Baal 1 King. 18. 28.
call upon him? and do not you wear the name of Christians upon you? and what?
let poor Heathens outstrip you? 5. What not pray earnestly in times of danger!
now, is a time for fears to get about the heart, and fear usually sends out
prayer, the Mariners now were afraid. We do not read of the calling upon
their Gods, until we read of their fears. O now, terrors and fears of death
take hold on them! and the sorrows of death, Psa. 107. 26, 27.
as David Phrases it, compasses them about. Now they are at their wits end,
(or their wisdom is swallowed up, as it is read,) and their Soul is melted
because of trouble. And should not this be a time of fervent Prayer?

2. The Prayers that are such excellent means for preservation, are the Prayers
of James 5. 16.
the Righteous, The Prayer of the Righteous avails much. O poor sinners, look
that you get out of your Natural estates. If you would have your Prayers heard
with God: The Sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: What
avails the Prayers of poor Drunkards, and Swearers? may not God say to such in
their dangers, when they cry unto him, as he did to them? Go to the Gods whom
you have served, and let them deliver you: O poor Souls, Do not you with the
same mouth send forth blessing and cursing, and do you think the Prayers of
such will be heard? And do not many of you with the same breath, send forth
Prayers and Oaths? alas, such Prayers never reach Gods ears.

3. The Prayers that are such excellent means for preservation at Sea, are
Prayers sent up in Faith. As hearing without believing, James 1. 5.
profits not: so praying without believing profits not. There are many Sea-mens
Prayers that are like the waves of the Sea, it is a Scripture-Similitude, Let
him ask in Faith without wavering, for he that wavereth, is like a wave of the
Sea driven with the Wind and is tossed; for let not that man think, he shall
receive any thing of the Lord. The word wavering it signifies when a man is at
no certainty with himself, but at variance; sometimes being of one mind,
sometimes of another: we should in our distress pray believingly: therefore our
Lord Jesus did chide his Disciples for not acting faith in that storm we read
of: Why are you afraid, O 2. Pet. 2. 9.
ye of little faith? 1. We at such times are to act faith upon the power of
God. He knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation: when neither Angels
nor Men know what way a mercy shall come in, a deliverance shall be sent; yet
the Lord knows, he is never at a loss for ways and means, a piece of the
Ship-wrack't Vessel, a Mast, a piece of a broken Plank, any thing shall do it;
if God command it. Nothing sets off so much the Power of God, in a
preservation, as the utter unlikelihood, and improbability that was in it, when
all hope of being Saved was taken Acts 17
away, then came the Angel to Paul. Here was the power of God! How much of the
power of God did appear in saving the Vessel where the Disciples were, when it
was filled with Waves? O how much of the power Ma^k. 4. 34.
of God did appear in the preservation of Jonah, that Salvation should come to
him out Jonah. 2. 2.
of the belly of Hell.

2. Our faith in times of danger must have respect to the promise of God. Faith
will not venture to God without a promise. The great encouragement to prayer,
is the Promise, Call upon me in the day of trouble. Here is the precept, but
where is the promise? and I will deliver thee. 1. Faith eyes Ps. ^0. 15.
the saithfulness of the promise in time of danger. The more Believers plead
this in there daingers, the better they are usually fetched off. God loves to
have his faithfulness leaned on, in distress. 2. Faith in Prayer He^. 6. 13.
eyes the immutability of the promise. Hope in the promise as to its
unchangeableness, in your storms is your best Anchor. This is the Anchor that
will never come home again. This made Luther say, he had rather be in the
bottom of the Sea with a promise, than in Paradise without a promise.

4. Those prayers, that are such excellent means for preservation from
Sea-dangers, are to be presented to God, by the hands of Christ: no prayers are
prevailing prayers, either at Land, or Sea, but such. Christ is the great
Friend of poor Creatures in all their dangers. We read of Christ praying when
the Disciples were sinking; Why were Ma^k. 6. 46.
they not lost and cast away? O Christ was praying for them! The Angel that
stood by Paul, when all the Ships-company were so nigh being cast away, was
Christ. Christ carries the prayers of poor Creatures unto his Father, when they
are in dangers, and distress; and brings answers suddenly from Heaven, and so
the storm is quiet, and becomes a Calm. And you little, it may be, know how it
comes. O Christ many times, prays for it! no question Paul had been praying
for the preservation of the Vessel, when the Angel brought him that good news.
All that sail with thee, are given thee. He had been begging their lives, and
Jesus Christ gives in the answer.

5. Those Prayers, that are such excellent means for preservation, are
unfeigned Prayers. Seamen often do with their Prayers, and Consciences, as
they do with their goods in a storm: they cast them overboard, but in a Calm
they wish for them again. So, many of them pray in their storms, but these
prayers are but forced prayers, God never hears from them but in danger. Alas,
God looks upon such praying to be only flattering, and lying, and so he calls
Hypocritical praying. They flattered me with their lips, and lied unto Psalm.
^8. 34.
me with their tongues. Why, they were praying. O but their hearts were all
this while a deceitful Bow, they were Hypocritical in all this. And we read of
some, though the Lord Hos. ^. 13.
redeemed them, yet they spoke lies against him. O, how often have you done so?

6. The prayers that are such excellent means for preservation, are prayers
flowing from a broken and a contrite heart. He is Psalm. 34. 18.
nigh them that are of a contrite heart. Nigh them? how? nigh them to save
them; so says the next word, (some read it) he preserves the dismayed in
Spirit, or bruised. Are you dismayed in dangers, under the sense of your sins?
fear not, God is nigh such. But alas, what are the Prayers of a Company of poor
wretches unbroken either for their sins, or from their sins? who it may be,
before the storm, were Swearing and Blaspheming God: the Prayers of such is no
more then to cut off a Dog's neck.

1. Reason why Prayer is such an excellent means for preservation, because, In
this duty God's honor is highly concerned, this is Gods great Name, and Title,
a God hearing prayer, in which he much glories. All his Attributes are much
honored, in calling upon him, especially in times of dangers and distresses.
1. When you call upon God at Sea, you honor his Sovereignty, his Sovereignty
over the Winds and Seas: is acknowledged by calling on him. God says to these
proud waves, So far and no further! So, the storm and hail, they fulfill his
will, and when he pleases he commands a Calm. 2. Prayer in time of danger
honors God's Wisdom, when we see no way open, for mercies and deliverance to
come in at, then to look up to him; believing, he knows how to deliver out of
Temptation. O, how much of the wisdom of God appears in preservations in time
of danger? and is it not a good token of mercy coming in, when Persons pray,
though all visible ways are block't up? this honors God's Wisdom, which we
acknowledge is never at a loss, as to ways of bringing in mercy and
deliverance. 3. The Faithfulness of God is much honored in times of danger,
when he is called upon, the faithfulness of a Friend does most appear in a
strait: now, if you can rely upon his Promise, Gods faithfulness is the best
line, men sinking at Sea can lay hold on. So I might add, Calling upon God,
honors all his other Attributes.

2. Reason, because the promise of preservation runs to Prayer. Call upon me in
the day of trouble, here is the Precept; Is not a day of trouble, a time of
danger? Is it Psalm. 50. 14.
not a day of trouble, when, it may be, but a few steps are betwixt you and
death; nay betwixt you, and Hell? Is not it a day of trouble when your sins
encompass you about? when the fears of death take bold on you? when you must
never see Wives and Children, Friends, and Relations more? well, what should
you do then? O then, call upon God, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Thou for any thing I know, may have thy mercy for a while,
unasked; but, I tell thee from the Lord, Thy preservations and deliverances may
be Curses to thee. When men are delivered from Sea, and fall into their
Wickednesses again, they are a Curse to them; when they say, They are delivered
Jer. 7. 10.
to do all these abominations. You have your deliverances, but you have not
them in a way of promise, you have them not in a way of prayer; these
unsought-for mercies, are usually Curses to the Receivers.

3. Because, Prayers in times of danger usually are accompanied with the
Exercise of grace: now the greatest deliverances come in away of the exercise
of grace. Grace lies dormant until it be awakened by danger: they are not
sleepy habits, that usually deliverance comes in upon, but when grace is
exserted. When came that Preservation to the Disciples at Sea, in that dreadful
storm, but when the Ship was covered with waves? Mark 4. 37.
Jesus Christ was there then, though asleep.

1. There is in Prayers, in time of danger, faith exercised. Now to go to God
in faith, in time of trouble, O, what a great mercy is this? Of all men in the
World, Who have more need of faith, then Seamen! Can you go through your
dangers and difficulties, without? Is it not this the Ariadne's clew (that the
Poets feigned) would lead and extricate through all Labyrinths? You Say, such a
Vessel is gone to the Straits; you will go to the Straits every Voyage you
make, without faith: this is your Anchor, and the promise is your Cable, that
in all storms and dangers, you must make use of; 2. In Prayer in time of
danger, there is Patience exercised. Then men's Patience is tried; God loves to
see us lie quietly submitting to his will, and then comes deliverance: the
cries of impatience do but clip the Wings of Mercy that it cannot fly, so
swiftly toward us, as it would. To how many thousand Seamen, may the Lord
say, as once to those Disciples? Why are ye so fearful, O ye of little faith! O
ye of little Patience! Is repining and murmuring the way to deliver, think you?
3ly. In Prayer in time of danger, there is exercised Repentance; and Confession
of sin; Thus Jonah, when God and his Conscience arrests him; then the
Malefactor, and grand Delinquent confesses. This is the going of the Pump, when
Repentance is in exercise. Now Deliverances usually comes in upon this
exercise: Whosoever knows the Plague of his 1 Kings 8. 38.
own heart, and shall pray to me: then (says God) I will hear. In time of
danger, your hands must be upon the particular Plague Sore, if God hear and
help. 4th. In time of danger, three is exercised Justifying of Nehe. 9. 33.
God: Thou art Righteous, but we are Wicked; Thou have punished us less than
our Iniquities Ezra 9. 13.
have deserved (say they), Lord, this storm, is justly come upon us, we were
lately sinning Ezra 9. 13.
against thee, we have sinned again after such Deliverances, that now thou
may be Righteous, if there should be no escaping. And usually when the Lord
has brought poor Souls, to this; then comes in the mercy of Jer. 29. 11.
Deliverance. 5. Truth of Grace is exercised in such a time; then we shall seek
the Lord with our whole heart.

4. Prayer is an excellent means to preserve in Sea-dangers; because now
Persons answer God's expectations; The Lord is so great a lover of Prayer, from
such poor worms as we are, That he sends dangers on purpose upon us to draw
Prayer from us: What a sweet word is that? My Dove! that art in Cant. 2. 14.
the clefts of the Rock, and the secret places of the Stairs; let me see thy
Countenance, let me hear thy Voice, for it is sweet, and thy Countenance is
comely. When poor Souls are in dangers, [so the Church at this time, hunted by
Enemies, and so in secret places of the stairs.] The words are a Metaphor
taken from Doves in danger, pursued into the holes of the Rocks, by Birds of
prey: yet then, Thy voice is sweet: The old Proverb is, If you will learn a man
to pray, send him to Sea. If so, then it is a pity they should learn to swear
there. Now Deliverances do not come in, until Persons answer the Lord's
expectations. Hos. 6. ult.


In their affliction (says God) they will seek me early: he expects this from
you. They Esaias 26. 16.
poured out a Prayer to thee, while thy chastisement was upon them. In Trouble
they visited thee.

5. Prayer is an excellent means to preservation, in Sea dangers; Because God
will now make praying Souls, know, Their Extremities are Gods opportunities,
They shall now have a Testimony in their Souls from Heaven, that God is a
present help, in time of trouble; and that then, when they go through the
waters, he will be with them. We read of some calling upon God in the Esaias 43.
2.
Fires. O but, what answers do they get? Esaias 24. 15.
He shall say, I am your God. God loves to Zach. 13. 9.
deliver in nicks of time: When all hope was taken away, then he sent his Angel
to Paul; Acts 27 20.
when Peter began to sink, then the Lord immediately Math. 14. 30.
put forth his hand and caught him. O, God loves to enchance the price of all
his mercies and Deliverances, therefore he gives them out, when the case is
desperate.

APPLICATION.
Is it so, that prayer is an excellent means for preservation at Sea, in time
of Danger; First it is a word of Counsel. 1. To Persons whose prayers God has
answered, and whose persons God has delivered, in great, and eminent dangers.
Of all persons, they should look to it, that they sin not against the Lord, who
has done such great things for them.

First word of Counsel is, Live answerably to your Preservations. How uncomely!
nay how sinful is it, daily to live upon mercy, and daily to live below mercy?
After such Deliverances as this, shall we break again his Commandments? May
not a Nonesuch be written upon the head of this Deliverance, and Preservation?
yea, and may not a Nonesuch be writ on the head of this sin, and Provocation?
Check your selves in your sins, by the Remembrance of your mercies. Was I
delivered to do all these abominations? Was I delivered from Sea, and saved
from Hell, at such a time, To live in such a sin? To be Drunk? To Swear? To
abuse my Relations? To Scoff and Mock at Godliness? O, May thou not hear God
saying to thy Soul? Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? will thou thus requite
the Lord, foolish and unwise man, with Evil for so much Good? David was
delivered, and see what use he made of it, To walk before the Lord in the Land
of the living, (viz.) To walk as under his eye, It was writ upon a City-Walls
in England now demolished, This City saved by the Lord, being eminently
delivered; So may be writ on many of your backs, This man saved by the Lord,
Delivered by the Lord: then what should be written of such men's Conversation,
but Holiness to the Lord? should not the line of mercy, that draws them so
often out of the water, make Moses's of them? should not that line bind them
fast to the Lord Jesus? should not the mercies of God prevail with poor Souls,
I beseech you, by the mercies of God, says Paul.

Second word of Counsel; O, Labor to keep the sense of them fresh upon your
spirits! when we lose the sense of the mercy, then we are easily drawn into
sin, against the God of mercy; O, while mercies are new, they affect us! as
every Condition at first, is taking, but afterward it is not so. It is with
mercies, as with the Children of Israel, they sang and gave praise. But yet we
find all off again, Psalm 106. 12. They made have to forget, they ridd post (as
it is in the Heb.) to forget. 1. Keep the sense of danger upon your hearts.
When we lose the sense of our dangers, we lose the sense of our duties. O what
a danger was I in, at such a time? what distress, and said with good
Jehosophat, I know not what to do? It is good to reflect on, past dangers; so
David, there came a Lion, and a Bear, etc. 2. Keep the sense of the Deliverance
on you; if it wear off, the beauty of the mercy is blasted; it will then look
like an old withered mercy. God would have his mercies fresh to us, to look
with a fresh Complexion. 3. Keep the sense of your Vows, upon you, the Vows
that your Souls uttered in the time of your distress. 4. Keep the sense of your
present frames of Heart, you had upon you, when you were in danger; whether
your sins compassed you about in that day or no; Consider, whether you were
under the smiles of his reconciled face, or no, in dangers, O what would you
not then have given for the Pardon of your sins! 5. Keep the sense of your sins
upon you, that stared your Consciences in the face, in your dangers. Is that
sin mortified, yet? Is that sin forsaken? These things we should keep fresh
upon our Souls, after our Deliverances.

Third word of Counsel; O, then let your Preservations from past dangers, be
obligations upon you to trust God in future straits, The Lord delivered me
(says David) out of the Paw of the Lion, and the Paw of the Bear, and what
then? and he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistin. This was the
great sin of Israel, that they did not trust God, when they came into present
Straits. How long (says God) will this people provoke Numb. 14. 11.
me by their unbelief? for all my Signs and Wonders? Thus the Lord Jesus
reproved his Disciples, for not considering the Loaves. So poor Souls should by
former Experiences be encouraged in present Exigences.

Fourth word of Counsel, O beg of God, your Deliverances, and Preservations,
may be all sent sanctified unto you! There are many Souls have unsanctified
mercies, unsanctified enjoyments, Deliverances, and Salvations; alas these will
harden poor Souls, because Sentence is not speedily Executed, therefore are the
hearts of sinners hardened: They escape this danger, and the other, and Eccles.
8. 11.
so they think they shall always escape.

It will here be demanded, When a Deliverance is sanctified?

1. When it is joined with Holiness: We read of Deliverance and Holiness upon
Obad. 17.
Mount Zion, when Deliverances shine in the Holiness of men's Conversation. To
be delivered, and follow your sins more greedily, that is no sign, Deliverance
is sanctified.

2dly. When they abide upon the Heart, they are sanctified; when they remain,
with a Soul. Many, many, have Preservations from danger, and as soon as they
are delivered, all is past, and gone with them, as a tale that is told. It may
be they never think of them, till they come into another danger, or another
strait.

3dly. When deliverances are sanctified, they are admired. After such
Deliverance as this! O how their Hearts admired, the mercy! You lose the beauty
of a mercy, for want of admiring-frames of Heart; In this Deliverance, says
the Soul, here was the appearance, of the several attributes of God; here in
this circumstance, was the wisdom of God, and the Power of God!

4thly. When Deliverances do kindly humble, and break the Soul, then they are
sanctified! what, save such a worm? put forth his power to save, at such a
time, from Death, and Hell, such a poor, vile wretch? that deserved to have
been lodged in that Pit, where there is no Redemption many years ago.

5thly. When Deliverances are sanctified, they endear the Soul exceedingly in
love with God; Thus David, I will love thee, O Psalm. 18. ^
Lord my strength, why? The Lord is my rock, my fortress and my Deliverer; ask
your Hearts, now you that have been eminently delivered, at Sea, or Land, if
your Preservations be thus sanctified.

Fifth word of Counsel: Register your Preservations, and Deliverances, you will
find much, yea very much benefit in such a Course; Thus all the Saints did. Did
not Heman remember the years of the right hand Psalm. 77.
of the Lord: There are these Remarkable Jer. 2. 2.
days, you should, in an especial manner remember; 1. The day of the first
love, in drawing you into Christ; this God remembers, I remember the love of
thine Espousals. 2. The day of your Deaths, that you Jer. 2. 2.
should remember, O that my people were wise Lam: 1. 9.
to consider their latter end; Jerusalem came down wonderfully, because they
considered not their latter end. 3. The days and times of your Del^verances;
Thus did the Lords Saints; or else we should have been bereaved of many
precious Scriptures; As that excellent place, when David changed his Behavior
before Abimelech, O what an admirable Psalm, was penned upon that occasion!
Psalm. 34.
and also the 40th. Psalm, He brought me up also out of the miry-pits, etc.

1. O, do you remember them, they will be a strengthening of your Faith for time
to come; A man will not lose a Receipt, or an Acquittance lest it be called in
Question; and, Will you lose your Experiences of Gods goodness, to you?
Experiences, are poor Souls Receipts, (as I may say) now you may be called into
Question, as to your Estates: O these, then, will be Comfortable for you to
read over. 2. They will be strengthening to others: You will not believe, what
Sermons, some of your Deliverances are to Relations, to Acquaintances. Another
man's experience may strengthen my Faith. And he has (said David) put a Psalm.
40. 3, 4.
new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God. What then? many shall see it,
and fear, and trust in God? 3. God will lose his glory by you. How can you
glorify him, if you do not remember the Lords mercies toward you? and thou
shall glorify me; what? Shall you gain by them, and God be loser by them? that
gave you them? You would not have your Owners losers, and will you have God a
loser? O how much of the glory of God has been lost by losing the Remembrance
of your Deliverances! 4. Remember them: for they are written down in Gods book
of Remembrance; If you forget them, God will remember them, When the Lord
brings forth this Book of Memento's, against your Souls, O how sad will it be!
Soul, do thou not remember, thou was in such a danger at Sea! such a time?
such a dark Night! so nigh sinking, so nigh splitting? and never thought to
come off with thy life? and I appeared for thee, and was seen in that strait;
but thou was worse, and worse, after thy Deliverances. Alas the Soul has quite
forgot, these things. You will not, you poor Sea men, you will not be able, to
stand before the Lords Memento's in that day; 5. O Remember them, or else you
will have great guilt upon you: your forgetfulness, is the grave of Gods
mercies. Will you deal thus with the mercies of God? Was it not sad, think you,
when they threw the dead by 20, and 40, and whole Cartloades, into a hole at
once, in the time of the Plague? and is not this sad for God to bestow upon you
whole Cart-loads of Deliverances, and mercies, and you bury all in
forgetfulness? It was charged upon Israel, They soon forgot his works.

The second Word, is a word of terror, to such persons as God has delivered,
without their prayers from great, and eminent dangers, and yet have lost the
sense of such Preservations, and mercies. This is a terrible Condition, to have
Preservations lost upon you; to have all your deliverances, as water spilt,
upon the ground.

1. Such Preservations are but Reservations, to greater wrath; do not you say,
The bitterness of Death, is past, because you are safe returned from your
Voyage, another woe is to come, yea a greater woe; Though one is past, there is
still wrath to come. We read of some that shall fly, but yet shall not escape;
and shall not be delivered: why what was the matter? though they dig into Hell,
thither the Lord would follow them, mine hand shall take them; O whither can
Sinners go out of the reach of Gods arm? It may be they will climb up to
Heaven; Thence (says the Lord) I will bring them Amos 9. 4, 5, 6.
down, yea, though they hide themselves, in the Top of Carmel, I will search,
and take them out thence. O but it may be, they will take another Course, and
go to Sea, to hide themselves from God; Thence will I command the Serpent, and
he shall bite them: Thus the displeasure of the Lord followed them.

2ly. Such Preservations, will be great Aggravations, 1. of your sin, and
guilt. 2. Of your Condemnation and punishment: 1. Of your sin and guilt. Shall
we break his Commandments again, after such a deliverance as this? what, sin
against so gracious a God? Thus requite the Lord? O what unkindness is this?
Suppose a person, in mere Compassion, had redeemed another from the slavery of
the Turks, where else he might have lived, and died; and this person redeemed,
should, after this, not only forget all; but affront and abuse the person that
redeemed him; Would not this be monstrous ingratitude among men? Yet the sin
runs higher, in this Case, What, will you thus requite the Lord? is this your
Kindness to your Friend? to your God? that delivered you, when none could? that
was your Arm, and your Salvation in a needful time of trouble? This will
aggravate sin. If I had not come, and spoken unto you, you had not had sin
(viz.) your sin had not been so circumstantiated; So, if the Lord had not
delivered you, so often, so eminently; you would not had such sin: 1. This is
to sin against mercy, and is not this a great aggravation? What, to sin against
the best Friend, you ever had in the world? O, who can tell what mercy has
done for them! was not thy Creation from mercy? and were not all thy
Preservations from mercy? 2dly. This is to sin against Resolutions, and Vows.
And will not this aggravate sin? O, is not this terrible, To sin against
Resolution, from time to time? how often has thy poor Soul resolved, after
such a deliverance, and such a Preservation, to leave this wickedness and
profaneness? and yet never wast so good as thy word: How often have many of
your Souls said, as the Prodigal, did, I will arise, and go to my Father? but
yet have sitten still in your sins, to this day! and all the purposes of your
Heart have fallen asunder. 3dly. This is to sin against Convictions and light.
No Sins, are so aggravated, as they-against-light: Have not your Consciences
reproved you, and convinced you, many a time? 4thly. This is to sin against
Experience, as well as Conscience, which was the great aggravation of the sin
of Israel; For all Gods signs and wonders, to distrust God. O, what experience
have you had of the faithfulness, power, wisdom of God, in delivering of you?
what? and you sin? 5thly. There is high ingratitude in it. O, what
unthankfulness, is it? after so many deliverances to sin against the God of
them?

2dly. Such Preservations, are Aggravations of punishment, and Condemnation.
How will you answer to have the book of Gods Remembrances opened unto you? and
all your deliverances, read out of it* Such as you have forgotten, and buried
many years ago. Did not I preserve thee, in such a storm, at Sea? in such a
danger at Land? gave thee thy life at such a time? when but a step betwixt thee
and Death? O, How will this sting your Consciences?

3dly. Such Preservations are the greatest Ec^l^s 8. 11.
Hardners in Sin: If they do not Soften, they Harden: These Providence are
like Ordinances, either great softners, or else great hardners; Because
sentence is not speedily executed, therefore the Hearts of Sinners are hardened.
O, what a terrible thing it is to be hardened, and set in sins? Such Persons
under their preservations they put the evil day far from them, and so are
hardened; they think, because God forbears them, and spares them at present, he
will never pass sentence upon them; because they are Reproved, they think the
Sentence will never be executed. We read of some that put the evil day far from
them. What, though God has leaden feet, he has iron-hands (says one); Though
he be slow in his motions, yet he is sure in his executions. 2. Poor Souls,
that are preserved, and make no spiritual use of their Preservations, they are
ready to think, God loves them, because he preserves them; and so they go on in
their sins, and provocations. We must not argue from common Providence, to
special affection. There are no evidences in these things, no no more than in
sparing the wicked in the Plague-time, while many truly-godly were carried into
Heaven, and glory by it. 3. Poor Souls that are under such Perfecutions, are
hardened.

4. Preservations that are not answered in Conversation, nothing speaks more
sadly a Souls-Rejection, by God, than this: O, what a sad argument it is of
Rejection, for a poor Soul never to be brought nearer God, by all its
preservations? but worse, after deliverances. This says, as much as, God has
let it alone.

Third Use, is a word of Examination to Godly Seamen. If it be so, that Prayer
is such an excellent means for preservation, O then examine, whether your
Preservations have been fruits of prayer, answers unto prayer: O, it is a sweet
thing to read answers of prayer in preservation! to say, Lord, thou, have heard
my Cry, and delivered me.

1. A Preservation that is a fruit of prayer, is a Perservation that always
endears the Soul unto God. I will love thee, O Lord my strength. O what a warm
frame of Heart was Ps. 18. 1, 2.
he in at that time? O, the Lord had delivered and preserved him! Has your
Preservations indeared God to you? or no? What, not love him, that appeared for
you, when none else could come into your Relief?

2dly. A Preservation that is a fruit of Prayer, always raises the Souls of
the Receivers in praise. That which we win by Prayer, we wear by praise: What
is the reason, men are so ungrateful, and unthankful for these Preservations?
They are not answers of prayer.

3dly. A Preservation, that is a fruit of Prayer, will cause the Soul to
believe in the next strait, it is brought into. It binds the Soul over to
believe for the future: Answers of prayer always bind over the Soul to believe,
He has delivered me, and he will deliver, etc.

4thly. Preservations that are answers to prayer, they fill the Soul with
admiration. such Souls go round about their preservations, and look steadfastly
upon every circumstance, and so see the beauty of its preservations. The mercy
came in when I had given over all hope; when near sinking, then the storm
ceased. Here did the power of God appear, there the wisdom of God, there the
love of God.

5. Preservations that are Answers to Prayer, they are always lived up to.
Conversations, are suited to their Preservations. 1. Such walk Humbly under
their Preservations; they do not puff them up. 2. They walk Holily after
Preservations. 3. They walk Thankfully.

Jonah 1. 7. And they said every one to his Fellow, Come let us cast Lots, that
we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us. So they cast Lotts, and
the Lot fell upon Jonah.
We have already had an account, how serious these poor distressed Mariners
were in their danger; as to their use of means: 1. Rational means, They lighted
the Ship. 2. Religious means, They every one cry to their God. And here, in the
Text, they are upon the use of the most extraordinary, and best and last means,
(viz) To find out the guilty Malefactor, who raised the storm, that now
threatened them with Shipwreck. For whose cause this evil was come upon them.
Now, was their grand Inquiry.

1. In the Text, we have a serious consultation of a poor distressed
Ship-company, in eminent danger. Dangers will make men serious in their
Consultations. And they said every one to his Fellow, Come let us cast Lots.
The storm growing upon them, though they had used rational and religious means.
(Jonah having not confessed his sin); they begin to think that the storm came
upon some extraordinary errand, and might be some extraordinary Messenger or
Pursevant, to Arrest some great Malefactor. And therefore, they fall upon a
Consultation to use extraordinary means, in order to a discovery of the guilty
Person. And this is the casting of Lots. The use of the Lot being in difficult
cases, to leave it to the judgment of God to decide the Controversy. The Lot
was used in Scripture in these cases. 1. To decide inheritances. They were
divided by Lot. The Inheritance was also from hence called a Lot. And Simeon
said unto his Brother, come up with me into my Lot, that Numb. 26. 53.
we may fight against the Canaanites. 2. The use of Lots, was in order to the
executing of Sacred and Holy matters, Aaron was to cast Judge. 1. 3.
Lotts upon the Goats; One for the Lord, another Lev. 15. 8.
for the Scape-Goats. So Matthias was chosen to his Office by Lot. 4. The use
of Acts 1. 26.
the Lot was for deciding of Controversies: The Lot causes contention to
cease, and parts Pro. 18. 18.
between the mighty. It unites them, and reconciles them. The disposing of the
Lot is 1 Samuel 14. 41.
called God's Judgment. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the disposing thereof
is of the Prove. 16. 33.
Lord. [But the word signifies Judgment]? the Judgment is of the Lord, He
decides the controversy. (And some read it) The whole, Judgment of it, is of
the Lord. Thus Achan was discovered by Lot; He was taken Josh. 7. 14, 15.
(but some read it) he was hit, the Lot fell upon him, as here, upon Jonah. A
Lot (says Dr. Ames) is a requesting a divine testimony to decide Mat. 27. 35:
They cast Lotts upon his Vesture,
some controversy, by the determining of an event to be manifested, in a mere
Contingency. Now the case of these poor Heathen Mariners, was this: They
attributed some thing of this Nature to Lotts, that they were, in their use,
and eye, of a deciding discovering Nature. So they consult to cast Lotts.

2. We have their agreement in their consultation. So they cast Lotts: they
were not divided in this case, as many Ships-companies are, in storms. Some
will stay by the Vessel, and some will take them to their Boat: and both the
divided Parties many times lost. Dividing, in time of common danger and
distress, is frequently of sad Consequence. But we see here they all resolve
upon one course, which should teach Christian Seamen to be united in their
course and Resolution, in time of distress.

3. We have the main scope, and end of this serious Consultation. That we may
know for whose cause this Evil is come upon us. They had strong apprehensions,
that the Case was extraordinary; and gladly would they find it out. They do not
every one reflect upon one, and say, Is it I? Is it I? O no, but they put it
off from one another; and yet all are in good earnest for a discovery of the
cause. But Jonah is silent, all this while, says nothing, They had this Notion,
that some extraordinary guilt raised this Storm. There was some Malefactor
aboard, and, as they said, when Paul came a shore, and the Viper came upon his
Acts 28. 4.
hand, No doubt this man is a Murderer, whom though he escaped the Sea, yet
vengeance suffers not to live. So these poor Pagans conclude, Some great
Malefactor was aboard, this storm pursued to take Vengeance of. 2. Here is this
in it also, that they gave up the discovery to the determination of the Lot;
That we may know for whose cause this Evil is come upon us: We will be decided
by the Lot; whom the Lot will fall upon. They attributed such a Divinity to
Lots, that they were willing the Controversy should be ended by them.

4. We have the controversy divided, and the Malefactor discovered. And the
Lot fell upon Jonah. Before he was reproved, and might have been vehemently
suspected, being asleep, in such a storm. But here he is plainly and openly
discovered, and discovered in an extraordinary way too. His Conscience is not
startled, at the Mariners reproof; though he be awake, his Conscience is asleep
still; he does not cry out, I am the man, for whose cause this Evil is come
upon You. I am the Malefactor sent after, by this storm. O no, so hard it is to
acknowledge our guilt, and take shame to our selves. We go on, and let God go
onuntil we be discovered, that there is no denial of it.

1. Observation is this.
Extraordinary Storms and Tempests are not sent out without a Cause. This
Doctrine these poor Pagans owned.

2. In all Distresses and Afflictions it is our duty to be inquiring into the
Cause. This Doctrine the poor Heathen Seamen own. For whose Cause this Evil is
come upon us.

3. God will find out the Jonah, that has raised the storm [And the Lot fell
upon Jonah.] The hand of an especial determining Providence, disposing, and so
ordering it, that it fell upon Jonah.

1. Observation; Extraordinary storms and tempests, are not sent out without a
Cause, [That we may know for whose cause this Evil is come upon us, is the
consent of the whole Ships-company.]

1. We are to understand that, these poor Heathens had, in their dangers,
apprehensions above Chance and Fortune. They thought that there was some cause
given to their Gods, by provoking them, why these things should come upon them:
As they had, why the Viper should come upon Paul's hand, They thought, there
was some great cause; that he was a Murderer, and vengeance was pursuing him.
They thought their Gods were angry, and so, They cried unto 1 Samuel 6* 9.
their Gods. We read of the Philistines, when they had taken the Ark Prisoner,
and had been Plagued for it, with one Judgment after another: to decide the
Controversy, whether these Judgments were from God, or a chance that happened to
them; they would put it upon this issue. They would send it home, and if it
went by the way of the Coast of Bethshemesh, then they concluded, It was God's
hand that smote them. So here, If the Lot fall upon Jonah, then the
Controversy is decided, that he is the guilty Malefactor, that has caused
this great storm.

2. We are to understand that those poor Heathens had apprehensions of the
Justice of their Gods, while they say, For whose cause is this come upon us?
They looked upon it as a punishment, and that it was come, as some righteous
Sentence upon some great Malefactor. So they (in the Acts) when they saw the
Viper come upon Paul's hand, presently conclude him a Malefactor, of the
highest rank, and that Vengeance would follow him, at land, if he escaped it
at Sea. They could not but believe, there was some Cause given by some in the
Vessel: O that this may teach poor Seamen, every storm to say! For whose cause
is this storm come upon us? shall Heathens outstrip Christians, when they are
in storms and dangers?

3. We are to understand, that these poor Heathen Seamen, did think that there
was a Supreme Power ordering, and guiding this storm or tempest. What needed
they else cry to their Gods? what needed they have cast Lotts? But that they
attributed a kind of Divinity to them, to decide the Controversy, and that the
Winds had a Commission from their Gods to blow; or else, why should they say,
What should we do unto thee, that the Sea may be calm, etc. They thought, If a
righteous sentence was executed upon the now discovered Malefactor, that the
storm would cease.

4. We are to understand, That these poor Heathen Seamen thought, that the
Malefactor would be discovered: Therefore they said every one to his Fellows,
Let us cast Lotts that we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us:
Lots were not used but in doubtful and difficult Cases. Therefore they by joint
consent, put it upon this issue, that he whom the Lot fell upon, was the Person.

5. It is further observable, They were all willing to find out the guilty
Person; And every one said to his fellows, Come, let us cast Lots. This seems
to argue their innocence, all this while; they were so willing, to come to
trial. Guilty Persons use to fear the sentence of the Judge. Their willingness
to cast Lots was, to come under the judgment, and sentence of the Lord. Though
they might not think absolutely of the sentence of God in the Lots, but, it may
be, used them superstitiously, and unwarrantably.

Before we come to the Reasons of it, let us a little enquire into this storm,
What kind of storm it was, that they thought there must be some especial Cause
or Provocation to procure it.

1. It is said to be sent out, It is a Messenger or Pursevant, after a
Mallefactor. The Ver. 4.
Lord sent out a great Wind into the Sea. Winds are the Servants of God: He
says, Go, and they go; blow and they blow. 2. It was a wind of The Lords
sending out. [The Lord sent out a great Wind.] They blow as God gives them a
Commission. God's Sovereignty over the Winds is an useful doctrine to Seamen
to take notice of. It is said, God Psalm. 78. 26.
caused an East Wind to blow in the Heaven, and by his Power he brought in the
South wind: He is said to bring them out of his Ps. 135. 7.
Treasuries. They are shut up, and let out, at his command. The way of the Lord
was in this Tempest. 3. It seems to be a sudden storm, The Lord sent out a Wind
into the Sea. [Cast out a wind upon the Sea, some read it] noting the suddeness
of it. And this made the Mariners conclude, there was something extraordinary
in it, beyond the course of Nature. 4. It was su^^ a storm as threatened the
breaking of the Vessel. 5. It was such a storm as was not calmed, though the
Malefactor was discoverd, until he was executed, They rowed hard to save his
life, but the Sea wrought and was Tempestuous against them, ^er 15.
justice must be done upon the Offender, and then it calmed: [So they took up
Jonah, and cast him into the Sea, and it ceased from Raging.]

1. God does not send such storms without a cause, because he is righteous in
all his proceedings, judicial proceedings. Though sometimes he be severe, yet he
is always righteous. The righteous Judge does not pass sentence without
notorious evidence of the fact. This was the Case of Jonah: he had fled from
the presence of the Lord, his flight evidences his guilt. And so God sends this
Terrible Hue and Cry after him. The storm Psa. 148. 8.
and hail, fire and vapor, and snow, are all said to fulfill his word viz, his
word of Command, and his word of Threatening, which is a righteous Sentence upon
guilty Sinners! Here consider poor Seamen, Is it not a righteous thing with
God, that you who have sinned in many storms, by raging impatience of your
Spirits, by being in as great a storm of discontent, and murmuring, as the Sea
it self; You that have been delivered so many a time in storms, and sinned
after such deliverances; you that have made so many vows to God in your storms,
and distresses at Sea, and have broken and forgotten them all at Land, (is it
not, I say, a righteous thing with God, that you should at one time or other
perish by such storms)? Is it not a righteous thing, that when the guilty
Malefactor has fled, and the Hue and Cry sent out after him, takes him; that
he should be tried, condemned, and executed? Alas, poor Seamen, you are the
Malefactors, God is the Judge, and your extraordinary Storms, are the Hue and
Cry sent out to Sea after you. May not you say in this case, as David in that?
Whither shall I go from thy presence? If I take the Psalm. 139. 8. 10.
wings of the morning, and dwell in the utmost parts of the Sea, even there
shall thy hand lead me, thy right hand shall hold me (viz.) lay hold on me,
apprehend me; as a Malefactor is apprehended by Hue and Cry? Have not you given
God cause thus to send after you, when you carry guilt to Sea with you, every
Voyage? old guilt, new guilt; old Vows undischarged, new debts unpaid: You have
cause to say, and your Relations have cause to say, God is Righteous in all
that is come upon you. He is the Judge of all the earth, and he will do right;
he is Judge at Land, and he will do right there; and he is Judge of the Court of
Admiralty, and he will do right there.

2 Extraordinary storms are not sent out, without Cause. Because God will stop
the mouth of every poor guilty sinner, in the day that he deals with them.
Jonah here pleads guilty; for I know, that for my sake is this v^^. 12.
great Tempest upon you. Now he Confesses all. The Law of God is so Righteous,
that it stops every mouth. Now, we know, Romans 3. ^^ 19.
what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law, that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. As
when guilty persons have the fact proved plainly before them, that they have
nothing to say for themselves, as the Judge says when he passes Judgment, What
have thou to say for thy self, that the Sentence should not now be pronounced
upon thee? The poor wretch has now nothing to say for himself, stands as the
man that had not on the Wedding Garment, Speechless! Now in these extraordinary
storms (poor Seamen) God is dealing with you. It may be, at home Ministers
were dealing with you, and God's Ordinances dealing with you, and Relations
dealing with you, that you would look about you, for your immortal Souls. But
all was rejected; But now God is dealing with you, and Conscience is dealing
with you, and now your mouths will be stopped. All your objections then will be
silent. If you say any thing in this day; It will be, Lord thou art Righteous!
If thou pass Sentence upon me now, if thou sink me, if thou damn me, if I never
see Relations more, Wife and Children more; O, poor Seamen, how will you be
then condemned in your own Consciences, when God is passing Sentence upon you,
then Iniquity will stop its mouth.

Third Reason: Extraordinary storms, are not sent out, without a Cause: Because
they bring Souls into great distresses. Now, God does not Afflict or distress
the Children of men, willingly. Alas, it is with great regret he does it. As a
Father Corrects his Child. He fears he will be spoiled else, not that he has
any delight in whipping-work. It is said of poor Seamen in their storms, Their
Psalm. 107. 25 26, 27 28.
Souls are melted because of Trouble, they are at their wits end. Then they cry
unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their distresses:
Their Soul is melted: their courage fails because of Anxiety (so some read
it). Now God does not without a cause bring poor creatures into distresses. 1.
Now poor Seamen in their storms, are distressed with their sins, compassing
them about. Now Psalm. 40. 12.
their iniquities takes hold upon them, that they cannot look up, therefore
their Heart fails them: (as David says), Take hold upon them, as the Hue and
Cry takes hold on the guilty Malefactor, as has been hinted already. O, is not
this a great distress, when death and unpardoned guilt looks a poor Sinner in
the face, at the same time? To have all your sins before you, now when Death,
that King of Terrors comes forth against you; this is to be in great distress.
2. In storms, fears make distress. And God would not bring Sinners into fears
without Cause. The Mariners now were afraid, as has been noted before. Fear
is such a distress, that we read a promise to be delivered from the fear of
Evil; not only from the Evil, but the Fear of it. Fears of death, are as
terrible to some, as Death it self. 3. In storms, Job. 9. 13.
they are distressed under the sense of Gods displeasure. O, this is a storm in
his Anger! and, if God withdraw not his Anger, all the proud helpers stoop
under him; all the helpers of pride (as the Dutch Annotators observe), They
that arrogantly presume, they can help themselves out of the distress. Alas,
the Stout-hearted Mariners, the most courageous Seamen in the world will stoop
under Him. God is not Angry without a Cause. Is not this distress, To be under
the sense of divine displeasure? Ask David, and he will tell you; he had no
rest in his bones because of Gods Anger.

4. In storms, they are distressed under Terrors of Spirit about their Eternal
Conditions. No such distresses, as Soul-distresses. If it come to this once, O
what will become of my immortal Soul? If I die and sink in this storm, do not I
go to Hell? now, I think, the Soul is in distress enough! It is no wonder, if
the Soul be in distress, when it is to die, and knows not whither it shall go,
but bespeaks it self, as he did, O poor wandering Soul, whither art thou going?
thou must never sport it more. 5. In storms they are distressed with thoughts
of their dear Relations, and one-while they think of their precious Souls, and
those thoughts cut them to the Heart? Another-while, they think of their dear
pieces of themselves, their Wives and Children, and these thoughts, as daggers,
go to their Souls* And thus are they hurried and distressed in their Spirits.
Now God would not bring such distresses upon Sinners without a Cause.

4. Because extraordinary storms are the sad effects of Gods displeasure
against poor Sinners. Was the Lord displeased against the Rivers? Was thine
Anger against the Hab. 3. 8.
Rivers? Was thy wrath against the Sea? So, may not we say of this like
terrible Tempest, Was not the Lords Anger against the Seamen, against their
Relations, against the whole Land? God was Angry with Jonah, when he sent this
storm after him. And had he not good cause? 1. Did not he contradict his
Commission? and, will a King bear it, To have his Royal Commands contradicted
by his Subjects? nay, especially Can he bear it by those that he had preferred
to places of Eminency? Jonah was a Prophet; a person, God had honored to be
sent out; a Prophet in Israel. It is no wonder, if God was Angry. As God is
most angry when his own people sin against him; so he is most angry when his
Prophets do sin against him, which made God complain of old, He had seen folly
in the Prophets of Samaria, Ver. ^^. 13, 14.
and I have seen in the Prophets of Jerusalem, an horrible thing. They commit
Adul^ery and walk in Li^s; etc. O, this raised Gods anger against them. Now,
for a Prophet to walk thus contradictory to God, This must needs cause God to
be angry. 2. God had good cause to be angry with Jonah? he is secure under his
guilt; and this is a great Provocation unto the Lord. If a poor Soul fall into
sin, and quickly be sensible of it; O then, God is ready to forgive. But, when
a poor Soul sleeps on, and sins on, (which was Jonah's case,) this is a great
Provocation unto the Lord. He was asleep. 3. God had good cause to be angry, in
continuing as well as sending the storm, for Jonah is exceeding disingenuous
with God and his Conscience. What Calls had he, to awake? The Master Reproves
him; one would have thought that might have set his Conscience on work. The
poor Heathen Mariner's cry, Every one calling upon his God (one would have
thought) might have brought him to consider, how he had offended his God. The
very casting out their wares, might have occasioned him to think what guilt he
was under to endanger all the poor innocent men's lives. But (you see) he puts
all off to the last. Until he is discovered by Lot; nay when he is discovered,
he is not yet ingenuous; but stands their Examination before he confess that it
was for his sake, that this storm came upon them; Must not this needs be a
great Provocation to the Lord? 4. For Jonah, God had good cause to be angry
with him, that he being sent upon an Embassy for Souls, should refuse it. This
was Jonah's Calling: O, how forward should he have been, to prove an instrument
of bringing so many thousands of Souls to Repentance, that lived in such a
City! O, how he should have rejoiced in such an employment! to have saved Souls
from death! What an occasion was this for God, to be angry? to be a Preacher to
Souls, and not a lover of Souls? 5. God had good Cause to be angry with Jonah,
because he mattered his own name more than God's. This was his Temptation as
has been hinted before. What? for an Ambassador to a King, to stand more upon
his own name than his Master's, that gave him his Commission? What a
Provocation is this! What, a Preacher? and have so little Regard to the Glory
of God, and the good of Souls? To regard our Reputation more, than the honor
of him that sent us, and the Salvation of precious Souls, must not this cause
God to be angry? This is the case, poor Seamen, in extraordinary storms; You
should say, Now the Lord is Angry, and God is displeased with us, and is he
ever angry without a cause? now in such storms, he is saying to you as the Lord
to them, Thy way, and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, This is
Jer. 4. 18
thy wickedness; because it is bitter, it reaches to the He art. O, that you
would look into your Hearts, and into your Lives, and into your Houses, and
into your Shops, and into the Trades you drive! and tell then your own
Consciences, whether God has not good cause to be angry? Take a view of your
Land-sins at home, of your beyond-Seasins abroad, of your Sea-sins; and then
ask your hearts the Question, Has not God cause to be Angry?

APPLICATION.
Is it so, that extraordinary Storms, are not sent out without Cause? Then it
informs us, that Punishments, follow Provocations, sooner, or later. Though
Sentence be not speedily Executed, why should the Hearts of Sinners and Seamen
be hardened, to conclude that it will never be Executed? No, Sinners? Long
forbearance is no forgiveness. There will come a storm, a stroke that will pay
for all. God will not let sin go unpunished. If punishments escape you at Land,
they shall meet you at Sea; and, if they escape you at Sea, they shall meet you
at Land. These poor Heathens had this Notion: Some notorious guilt was among
them, that this storm came to punish. And they had this Notion, When the Viper
came upon Paul's hand, They said Vengeance followed him and would not suffer him
to live. Acts 28. 4.
The Avengers of blood follow persons to Sea. If Jonah be there, the storm will
follow him. It was said to those that took up their Habitation beyond Jordan,
that, if they worshipped not the God of their Fathers, their Sins would find
them out; An Allusion to Bloodhounds, that find out the Thief, and fasten upon
him.

2. It informs us, that the Lord is Sovereign at Sea. He it is, that commands
the winds, that sends them forth of his Treasury. He it is, can say to the
storm, Be calm; that can say to the Raging Sea, Peace, and be Psalm. 147. 18.
still; That sets a bound to the proud waves, and says, So far, and no
farther. He it is that says to his Servants, the Winds, Go, and they go. He
causes His Winds to blow, and the Waters to flow. When waters drown Countries,
and Inundations break in upon us, these are ordered by God: When poor Seamen
lie wind-bound, it may be months together, how should they consider, they are
God's Prisoners, and God only can set them at liberty; and, instead of
murmuring against God, How should they look up to God for a wind?

3. It informs us that God is Righteous in his Terrible dispensations at Sea.
O, how Righteous was God in this grievous Tempest! O, may not Seamen, and
Land-men, and all sorts say, as the poor Church did? Thou have Ps. 65. 5:
punished us less than our Iniquities deserved. How righteous is God; and does
answer us with Terrible things in Rightcousness? And observe what follows? O
God of our Salvation, who art the confidence of all the ends of At old Lynn the
11 and 12 of September, 16^1.
the Earth, and of them that are far off upon the Sea. When God arises
terribly to shake the Earth, or terribly to shake the Sea, it is always in
Righteousness. Was not the late great Tempest a shaking of both? when the Sea
overflowed its banks, broke all before it. Alas sin has broke all bounds and
banks, and it is a Righteous thing that the Sea should do so. Great floods of
sin, righteously bring great Floods of wrath.

4. It informs us, That the Cause of Gods Judgments may be hid from us. These
poor Seamen understood not the Cause; therefore they take this extraordinary
course to find it out, They cast Lots to this end, that they may know it. There
was a guilty Malefactor gotten aboard, and they knew it not. There was an Achan
in the Camp, and Joshua knew it not, Who had gotten the accursed thing, and hid
it among the stuff, and upon this account, God refuses to go up with Israel. O,
it is good for us all to say in our distresses both at Sea, and at Land,
Wherefore do thou contend with me? Lord, for whose sakes are these terrible
Dispensations come upon us?

5ly. It informs us, what a great evil Sin and Guilt is. Guilt is that which
causes the storm. This, this is that which, will find you out wheresoever you
go: This Number. 32. 23.
will be the Avenger of blood, if at land, if at Sea, this will cause storms
against you. If you think to flee from the presence of God, it will follow you:
this is that will make you meditate Terror, wherever you are. O poor Seamen,
what a terrible thing is it to have storms threaten you with Shipwreck every
moment, and at that time all your unpardoned Guilt looking you in the face! The
iniquities of your heels compassing you about, the sorrows of Hell and Death to
take hold of you, at the same time.

2. Use. If extraordinary storms, be not sent forth without cause, it is then a
word of Counsel and Exhortation to Seamen, in a more special manner. O then,
give not the Lord cause, to enter into a controversy with you! You, your
Wives, and Relations! give not the Lord cause to bring forth his extraordinary
storms upon you, and then do not provoke him, do not stir up his wrath: If his
wrath be kindled but a little, happy are they that put their trust in him. You
cannot say, when he brings Tempests upon you, that he breaks you with
tempest, and multiplieth Job. 9. 17. Ezekiel. 14. ult.
your wounds, either in your Relations or Estates, without a cause: it was said
of Jerusalem, They should know what God had done, he had not done it without a
cause.

1. O give God no cause to take up a controversy with you! if he once come
forth against you, there is no standing before him. It is said of God, He
casts forth his Ice like Ps. 147* 17.
morsels, and who can stand before his cold? But it may be said in this case,
Who can stand before his storm? his Tempests of Fury, and Displeasure? Who will
provoke one that is his Superior: that can crush him? Did ever any contend
with the Lord, and prosper? Is not this, to kick against the Pricks? Can your
hearts endure, or your hands be made strong in that day, that God shall deal
with you? O then, why should you be so foolhardy, to put the Lord to it! Are
not you, while sinning against him, setting only Briars and Thorns before him
in Battle?

2. O, give not God cause to take up a controversy against you, poor Seamen,
and your Relations! While you are under Gods controversy, your own Consciences
will condemn you, and O how sad will this be! God against you, and Conscience
against you! Jonah's own Conscience at this time (you see) did fly in his face,
for my sake is this storm come upon you. We say, Conscience is a thousand
witnesses. Now it will be a storm within; and this is sad, while a strom is
within, to have another without.

3. O, give not God cause, to take up a controversy against you! No means will
prove significant or available to the end they are used, if a storm upon you,
in God's controversy be against you. You see, it was here so, they used all
means, they lightened the Ship, as Paul's Vessel was. For, says the Text, they
cast the Tackling overboard, and the Acts 17. 19. 38.
Wheat. All the means were used that could be here, with these poor Mariners in
Jonah's Vessel, [and they cry to their Gods] but all will not calm the storm,
because it came for a controversy against Jonah: nay when the guilty Person
was discovered, they were so ingenuous to seek by all means to save his life,
who had brought this storm upon them, but all was to no purpose. For the Sea
wrought still, and was tempestuous: O it is no ver. 15.
wonder now, if, in such cases, Seamen be at their wits end, when they see all
means they can use, insignificant to their intended purpose! O, now their
hearts fail them: O now, they begin to think, This is the Lords controversy
against us, and our families, and therefore no means used are blessed. As it is
with sick Persons, when no means, no Physic is blessed to them; they are given
over for dead: So, it is in this case.

4. O give God no cause to take up a controversy against you! for if he have a
controversy with you, you cannot any where be safe from his presence. Jonah
here would flee to Tarshish, but God (you see) sends after him with a Witness.
God has his bloud-hounds to find out wherever you go. This was that, Moses
told them that took up their Inheritance on the other side Jordan, that, Number.
32. 23.
Surely their Sin should find them out: Surely, the punishment of your sins
shall hitt you (so some read it) as Jonah was hitt by lot, being an expression
taken from finding out by lots, and as Achan was hitt by lot: wherever you go
God will send after you. Some say, it is an allusion to bloodhounds, that by
Scent find out the Thief. David says, Where shall I fly from thy presence?
etc. Psalm. 39. 7, 8.
God has Pursevants at command, to send after guilty Sinners where ever they
are. That very Voyage, that you think, poor Seamen, shall be the safest; that
very Voyage shall be the most dangerous, if God have a controversy with you:
Nay, when you come home in your own Channel, which is a great aggravation of
your Affliction, there you shall miscarry. Nay, Here in the River, as some have
done of late, if God have a controversy with you.

5ly. O, give not God cause to take up a Controversy against you for then you
will have nothing to plead for your selves, when God in his Providence is
pleading against you. O then, poor Seamen, you will be Speechless, you will
have nothing to say for your selves. Thus it was with Jonah, He justifies God
in his righteous Judgment, and condemns himself: For my sake is this storm come
upon you. Then you will, in your Souls conclude; the Lord is righteous, but you
are wicked, and this storm is now the fruit of your wickedness. Have thou a
word to say poor drunken Seaman, poor profane Seaman, why thou should not
perish this storm, why thou should not sink to the bottom, this storm?

6ly. O, give not God cause to take up a Controversy against you! The
Controversy will be against your Souls, if you do. Now, this is the sadest
Controversy in the world, a Controversy against a Ship is not so sad; a
Controversy against Estates, nay, Lives, is not so sad: But for a Controversy
to lie against precious Souls, this is sadest of all. This night thy Soul shall
be taken away. The Controversy lay against his Soul. O, for God to say to a
poor Seaman in a stormy night, Thou fool, this night will thy Soul be taken
away; this is a sad story, thy soul is now to be cast away. Few pity castaway
Souls.

Alas, the body is but the Cabbinet, the Soul is the Jewel. And though the
Cabbinet should be cast away, if thou knew that thy Soul were safe, the
breaking or drowning of the Cabbinet, would not be so Terrible to thee.

Second word of Counsel. If extraordinary storms be not sent from God without a
cause, then be counseled, poor Seamen, and your Relations, to make your peace
with God. O, venture not to Sea, until this work be done. Do thou know what
a venture thou runnest every voyage that thou make, and thy Soul unreconciled
to God? O then, you of the Tribe of Zebulun, might Rejoice in going out! then
you might leave your dear Relations with comfort, if not to see them again in
this world, yet to see them in a better, where you shall be ever with the Lord.
O, the Advantages of Seamen and their Relations, being at peace with God, if
they were seriously considered, would stir you all up with might and main to
this work.

1. If you were at peace with God, then you might lift up your face with
confidence to God in all your dangers and distresses. What is it that daunts
and strikes Terror to the hearts of Seamen in their distresses, but this, They
have not made their peace with God, when Conscience asks the Question, Is all
Peace! do not P^a^ 40. 12.
they answer, as he did, What peace? seeing the Witchcrafts and Whoredoms of
Jezabel are so many? now, your iniquities take hold upon you that you cannot
look up, and what then? O then David's heart failed him! But now, poor Souls
that are reconciled to God, they know all things shall go well with the
Righteous, and this makes them look comfortably up to God in their distresses.

2ly. If you were at peace with God, then you might expect all your
disappointments and losses, would be sanctified to you. Many of you go to Sea,
and meet with Shipwracks (though it is a great mercy to have your lives spared)
yet many of you, have breaches made upon you, as the Breaches of the Sea,
breaches upon your Estates; it may be, God gives an estate for one 7 years, and
takes it away the next; and after that he has lifted you up, he casts you
down: Now, O what a mercy would this be, if your Souls and your Relations might
prove gainers by these losses! and peace made with God would bring on this
mercy, All things shall work together for the good of such, all his
dispensations are measured out in love to such. No storm is in wrath to such;
O, says God to such, Fury is not in me.

3ly. If you were at peace with God; then you might expect to carry the
especial blessing of Gods protection out with you. This was the blessing that
Moses blessed the Tribe of Zebulun with, Rejoice, O Zebulun, in they going out:
whether it was to war, or to trade, (as Interpreters hold, it may be both); it
was a great blessing to go cut Rejoicing, under their hopes of the protection
of God. O then his Banner over you would be love, every Voyage; and this the
best Ancient or Ensign that your Ship can carry forth with you. This is your
best colors, to put forth in case you meet with an Enemy. This Banner can
cover your heads in the day of Battle. This especial Protection of God, is the
Best Pilot to steer you. You may talk of a Protection from Man, but this is the
only Protection, that will do you good.

4. If you were at peace with God, you might then expect his comfortable
Soul-reviving presence, in all your storms and dangers: And, Is not his
presence brave Company in distress? O, what a cordial was that word to their
fainting Spirits? when the Disciples were in that terrible storm at Sea! Be of
Mark 6. 50.
good cheer, It is I, be not afraid; they cry, Lord save us, and then Christ
appears to them and calls to them. O, what a comfortable night had Paul, though
in that storm, when the Angel stood by him and said, Paul, be of good cheer;
all that sail with thee are given to thee. For God to give you the comfort of
that promise, When thou go through the water, I will be with thee. This
raises wonderfully the heart of a poor Believer.

If you were at Peace with God, then you would in some comfortable measure be
lifted up above fears: and can there be fear, but there is torment in it? O
what a mercy would it be, when in the Valley of the shadow of Death, then, to
fear no evil, but to have your heart fixed, trusting in the Lord. But this has
been hinted before.

6. If you were at Peace with God; then Death would not have that dread in it.
This would unsting Death; Then your hearts would not so sadly meditate Terror,
when Death the King of Terrors shall look you in the Face. Might not you then
say, O death where is thy sting! O Grave or Sea, where is thy Victory? while
others tremble at the thoughts of it, you might triumph in your comfortable
expectations of it, holding out your Hands, and Arms, saying, Now Lord let thy
Servant depart in Peace; Then you may make ready to swim to the bosom of the
Lord Jesus; it is but thy Body, thy Cabinet that is lost, that is cast away.
The Jewel and Treasure is taken up by Christ; that comes safe to shore, through
all the storms and tempests that can blow.

7. If you were at peace with God, then you are ready for whatsoever
dispensations of God shall come upon you, you go out poor Seamen, and you
cannot tell what attends you: a thousand dangers wait upon you: and O, how sad
is it to be surprised by any affliction at Sea! If a Ship be not lost by water
and wind, it may be by fire: or, thou may spring a leak in a calm, if not
miscarry in a storm; or, thou may be taken by Pirates; or, thou may dye of
the Country Diseases whither thou go, etc. And, O now, what a mercy would it
be, to be ready for any danger that may befall thee? O, what care is taken in
getting all things ready, when you are to go to Sea; but what little care is
taken to be thus ready, not knowing what you may meet with? It is a sad thing
to be surprised. Fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrite.

Second Word of Comfort to Seamen: Let them justify God, in extraordinary
storms. How impatient many times are your Spirits? are you not, as the Prophet
said of them, Full of the fury of the Lord? like a wild Bull in a Net. Are not
you in a greater storm, then the Sea, are not your Spirits like the troubled
Sea, that casts forth nothing but mire and dirt? should not you say rather,
Lord, thou art righteous, and we are wicked? should not you accept the
punishment of your Iniquity? as Jonah did, Cast me into the Sea, and it will be
calm unto you. For I know that for my sake this great Evil is come upon you.

Third Word of Counsel, to Seamen O then learn to fear God! when he sends
forth extraordinary storms; then learn to fear God. He does it not without a
cause: You see, it is said of these poor Heathens; Then they feared the Lord
exceedingly, and sacrificed and made Vows. The terrible dispensation of God,
either at Land or Sea, should be improved to the begetting the fear of God in
us. So it was, when the Lord sent Thunder and Rain, in Samuels time, in
Harvest, and, says the Text, The People feared the Lord: yea, 1 Samuel 1^. 18.
greatly feared the Lord, and Samuel. What not fear him who made both Sea, and
Land, and can shake both with a word of his mouth, and vex them in his sere
displeasure? 1. Of all men you should fear the Lord, that see the wonders of
the Lord. Should not the sight of his wondrous works strike you with the fear
of God? as the Old Man that was asked by the Philosopher, how he came to know
so much of God, and could not read: says he, I have only one book, and this
book has three leaves, and I get my Learning here. This book is the Creation,
(says the Old Man) the three leaves are the Earth, the Heavens, and the Sea;
and all Creatures in these are as so many words, out of which I learn that of
God I know. And are not you turning over two of these leaves constantly? The
Heavens in your Observations, and the Sea in your Navigation, and can your Art
of Navigation be learned without looking up to the Heavens? O then why do not
you of all men, learn to fear the Lord? 2. Of all men, you should learn to fear
the Lord, because you see so much of the wickedness and ignorance and darkness
of the world in other places: the sight of other men's wickedness, should make
you more holy. You go to the dark places of the Earth (as the Psalmist says)
where their habitations are full of Cruelty; where Turks and Moors do exercise
their Cruelty over poor Christians, that are their slaves. Where Parents will
sell their own Children to be slaves, where Satan has his seat, where he has
to this day, in some places of India, his sacrifices. O, how should these
things promote the fear of the Lord in you; That God has been so good to you,
that you should have your Birth in a Goshen, while others had theirs under
Egyptian darkness, look upon it as a mercy, to draw you on to fear the Lord:
That you were born ENGLISHMEN. 3. Of all men, you should fear the Lord,
because you go through more visible dangers then others. It is true, we are all
at Land exposed to dangers, but not so visibly as you at Sea; so we are the
less sensible of them. What? live amongst and converse with dangers daily, and
not learn to fear God. You give Bills, and your Relations give up Bills for
you, such an one going a dangerous Voyage; and indeed, it is true. But, do you
by these dangers learn to fear the Lord?

4. Of all men you should fear the Lord: you see so many perish by the
Judgments of the Lord, and should not you be afraid of his righteous
Judgments? (as David says:) how many ships do you see Cast away? how many
lives do you see lost? and all these should be Sermons, to teach you the fear
of the Lord. O, How many wracks did Since the great Storm, 11, 12, of Sep 1671.
you see lately at Sea, to preach the fear of the Lord to you? when you see so
many guilty Jonahs miscarry, how should you fear, lest the Lord deal so with
you? God's Judgment upon Tire, which was a City of a vast Sea-Trade; it is
said, God smote her power in the Sea. [He will smite her Power in the Sea, and
devour her with Fire.] Here is Judgment by Land and Sea: and what then?
Ashkelon shall see it, and fear. Some Interpreters Zach 9. 5.
understands by their Forts and strong holds, their Navies; but God's Judgments
As Historians telis us. Ca^^ius, and others.
came upon their Navies abroad, and Fire consumed them at home. For, Alexander
burnt their Cities, and accomplished this threatening of God upon them. O now,
such as see God's Judgments so often before them should fear the Lord. They
should fear, and do no more presumptiously. 5. Of all men, Seamen should fear
the Lord, and their Relations; Because they are persons of so many temptations.
Need I tell you the Temptations you lie open to abroad? your Temptations, they
are exposed to, that stay at home? has not every Country its Temptations? have
not hot Countries their temptations to one sin, and cold Countries their
temptations to another? may not you soon fall into uncleanness in the one? and
into Drunkenness in the other? Has not long absence from Relations its
temptation in it? have not the sight of so much sin, as you see committed
Aboard, and abroad, a temptation in it? Has not your Trading and Commerce with
men of secret sorts and ranks, Heathens, Papists? and others, Turks, Jews? are
there no temptations here I say? your Relations and Wives are exercised with
great temptations by their fears, by your long stays, by sometimes Reports. And
they had need be armed with the fear of God against these things at home, as
well as you abroad. 6. Of all men, and women, Seamen, and their Relations,
should fear the Lord, for you know not how short your time may be together. A
poor Seaman knows not, but the next Voyage he may be cut off; and his Wife
knows not, but she may the next Voyage be a Widow. How many are so? O then,
what cause have you to fear the Lord? when you part, no body can tell you of a
certainty, whether you will ever meet again, or no. Nay sure, the Lord would
have Seamen think, Their time is short. Therefore the word, the Spirit of 1
Cor 7. 29. (...)
God uses, is in the Sea-mens dialect, that it may be, he might take the more
notice of it. The time is short; A Metaphor taken from Ship-Sayles, that when
they are furl'd-up, lie in a little room. 7. Of all men, Seamen, and their
Relations had need fear the Lord: They have so many mercies, and deliverances,
and all these (poor Seamen) will be put upon account. What? so many Salvations
from storms? so many preservations from Rocks and Sands? so many deliverances
from Pirates? will not this be sad, when they shall come in Witness against you,
and aggravate your Condemnation? What? neither fear God for his greatness, nor
for his goodness; neither for his Judgments, nor mercies; how sad is this? O,
that this Scripture might be fulfilled upon poor Seamen and their Wives, They
shall fear the H^s. 3. last.
Lord and his goodness in the latter days; O what abundance of the goodness of
God do you see at Sea, to raise your Hearts to fear him? does not his goodness
pass before you every day, every Voyage? for every Port? You at home, O, how
much of Gods goodness do you see to Relations abroad; to you, and yours at
home? 8. Of all men, Seamen should fear the Lord, because the Lord is at the
charge of a Decree, for their sakes. This is the Prophet's argument. Fear you
not me Jer. 5. 22.
(says God); Will you not tremble at my presence? who have placed the Sands
for the Pro. 8. 29.
bound of the Sea, by a perpetual Decree that they cannot pass it; and though
the Waves thereof toss them over, yet they prevail not; though they roar, yet
they cannot pass over it.

4. If God do not send forth extraordinary storms without Cause, then let poor
Seamen be humbled, for all the causes both they and their Relations give the
Lord to contend with them. God does not contend without a cause. God contends
here with Jonah, but Jonah had given him cause. O, what cause have you to say
as he did, Show me Job 10. 2.
wherefore thou contends with me? Be humbled, that you provoke the Lord to send
such terrible Messengers and Pursevants after you. 1. O be humbled; for, you
begin the Controversy! It begins not on God's side first. You give the
Provocation; which should be a great motive to Humiliation. There is something
in the House, or something in the Ship, or something in the Heart, or something in
the Life, either of thee, or thine, out of which this Controversy arises: O
search for the Accursed thing! for the Jonah, for the cause of the
Controversy. 2. O be humbled for the cause you give God, to come forth against
you! for He is slow to Wrath. Had God been as quick in smiting, as you have
been in sinning, what would have been become of your Souls, long ere now? He is
not easily provoked; easy to be entreated, but not easy to be provoked. Now,
to give a man a cause to be angry, that is hardly provoked, will grieve
afterward an ingenious disposition. Alas, poor Seamen, God is not a word and
a blow. Heb 10: 31.
Who have such experience of the Patience of God as you, and your Relations
have? And will you give this God cause to be angry, and not be humbled for it?
3. O be humbled for the cause you give God to come forth against you! For, it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, (viz.) To take
Vengeance on poor Sinners for their guilt: you think it is a fearful thing to
fall into hands of Pirates, into the hands of Turks, (and indeed so it is); but,
what then is it to fall into the hands of an impartial Sin-Revenging God! O
terrible thing, now for God to send his Avengers of blood after you at Sea! for
God to reckon with guilty Sinners for all their aggravated Provocations against
him! To have the Lord laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your fear comes;
Pro. 1. 27, 28.
when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you. 4. O be humbled for the
cause you give God, to come forth against you! God is willing the Controversy
should be taken up. O, how willing is the Lord to accept you to terms of grace
and mercy upon your submission and humiliation! Does not he call upon you to
lay down your weapons, to this end? does not he send out his Ambassadors of
Peace, to this end? to entreat, woe, and beseech you to be Reconciled to him?
We are Ambassadors in Christ's stead, beseeching you (as the Apostle says) to
be reconciled unto God; does he not complain of your obstinacy, of your
obduracy under all the precious means you have to bring you upon your knees,
that you may lie at the mercy of God? does not he tell you, His arms are open,
yea wide open, ready to embrace all poor guilty Souls that fly thither for
mercy? 5. O be humbled for the cause you and your Relations give unto God, to
come forth against you. If it be not taken up, when ever you shipwreck at Sea,
or die at Land, you perish; yea, you perish for ever. Alas, what is the
perishing of a ship? or the perishing of a State to the perishing of a Soul? It
may be said in this case, as in that, Were they greater sinners that were cast
away in the late storm, than you? no, but Except you Repent, you shall all
likewise perish: O, How had you need to cry, as to your Souls, as they did, as
to their bodies, Carest thou not that we perish? Is the perishing of thy mortal
Soul become so light a matter with thee, that thou art so little concerned
whether thou sink or swim when thou launches into the vast Ocean of Eternity?
Has not the very thoughts of it made many a poor Soul to tremble? and is it so
small a thing in thy eye, as not worth falling upon thy knees, and with cries
and strong tears, beseeching that there may not be any Controversy betwixt God
and thy poor Soul, either at Sea or Land.

5. If God do not send forth extraordinary storms without a cause, then O that
poor Seamen might not go on in a course of Provoking, and giving God cause to
come forth against them and their Relations? This was Jonah's aggravation, he
goes on in a course running from God, he does not come to a stand with himself,
nor consider the way he was in, until the Lord sent a Pursevant to Arrest him,
until he is in an extraordinary manner discovered. O poor Souls, did you never
read that terrible word of the Lord? God will wound the heads of his Enemies,
and the hairy scalp of such an one as goes still on Psalm. 68. 21.
in his Trespasses. The word for hairy scalp signifies an High-way-man, an
highway Robber, and is the same with that in Job, and the Robber shall prevail
against him, As the J^b 18. ^
Dutch-Ambassadors observe, Their hair makes them terrible to the Traveller.
Well, but God will wound such, if they walk in their guilts, (so it is to be
read). O, how good is it, poor Seamen, to stop your Course? 1. The longer you
continue to provoke God to come out against you, the harder will it be to take
up: The longer that a disease runs, or hangs upon a man, the harder it is to
cure. The longer thou sleep in thy sin, and security, the harder will it be
to awaken thee. Thus it was with Jonah. He goes on in his guilt and security,
and then a whole storm at Sea awakens him not, and you see he is glad to be
called on; Nay, as it were haled out of his hole, and all little enough. Such a
sound sleep does guilt cast the Soul in. The longer, poor sinners, you wear
your Chains, and Fetters, the stronger will they be upon you. The nearer you
are to the bottom of the hill, the harder you will be to stop. O therefore, in
time consider your ways, and turn your feet unto the Lords Testimonies, 2. The
longer you continue to give God cause to come forth against you; the greater
will the account and reckoning be. And, if you cannot Answer for one of a
thousand, how should you Answer for ten thousands? nay, ten thousand times ten
thousand that is put upon your score^ (as that word in Job is.) ^f God will
contend with him, he cannot Answer him, one of a Thousand; (some read it) he
shall be found guilty a thousand times over; and, O what a Terrible Reckoning
will this be? here is now double interest, nay interest upon interest! O, it is
dangerous running upon the score with God. 3. The longer that you continue in
giving God Cause, to come forth against you; the more dreadful will the blow
be, when it comes upon you; O, how heavy will that stroke be, that is so long a
fetching! The longer that any Judgment of God is coming, the more terrible it
is when it comes. I have a long time holden Esa. 42. 14.
my Peace, and lain still, and refrained my self; now, will I cry like a
Traveling woman, I will destroy and devour at once, or swallow up (as the
words is) altogether. Long deferred Judgments are swallowing-up Judgments, when
they come. 4. The longer you continue to give God cause to come forth against
you; the dearer it will cost your Souls, when you come to be made sensible of
it. O, how will you cry out of your selves, that you should stand out against
so many Calls! that you should stout it out so many years against that God that
exercised such infinite Patience and long-suffering toward you! that he, that
was armed with so much Power, should exercise so much Patience toward such
Rebels? Then you will say, with cries and tears to God for mercy, The time past
of your 1 Pet. 4. 3.
lives may suffice you, To have wrought the wills of the Gentiles, etc. O how
will it grieve your Souls, that you kept up arms against that God, who held out
his golden Scepter to you, to offer you terms of Peace, and Reconciliation! 5.
The longer you continue to give God cause to come forth against you, the more
danger you run of being hardened in your course. O, poor Seamen, is not that
Text a word that looks sadly upon you? Because Eccles. 8. 11.
Sentence is not speedily Executed, therefore the hearts of Sinners are
hardened. The words are very considerable, Because Sentence against an evil work
is not executed speedily, (viz.) The righteous Judgment of God upon sin is
delayed for the present, therefore the hearts of the Sons of men, is fully set
in them to do evil: O what an abuse is here of Gods Patience! Their heart is
full to do evil, so the Hebrew reads it). What if God, (poor Souls) should let
you alone? strive no more with you; but give you up to the hardness of your
hearts? and say, sleep on, and sin on, until my Judgments meet you, and my
wrath arrest you, and you reap of the fruit of your own evil ways. Would not
this be sad? O therefore, poor Seamen, no longer stand out against God, but
upon your knees, and beg for mercy, that the Controversy may no longer
continue betwixt God and your poor Souls. Thus, we have done with this first
Observation, That God does not send forth extraordinary storms without a Cause.

Jonah 1. 7. And every one said to his fellow; Come, let us cast Lots, That we
may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us, etc.
WE are now to discourse the end, and aim, that these poor Mariners had, in
casting Lots in this distress and danger which is here expressed, That we may
know for whose cause this evil is come upon us. This evil of Punishment; some
cause there was; that they concluded: and that the guilty person would be
discovered by casting Lots; that they also concluded. And you see, they were
unanimous, and earnest in finding out the cause.

The Observation is, In all distresses and afflictions, it is our duty to be
inquiring into the cause. [That we may know for whose cause this evil is come
upon us.]
There is a twofold inquiry into the cause of distresses and afflictions. 1.
There is an Inquiry of discontented expostulation, and reasoning the case with
God, in a way of un belief: Thus Gideon, when the Lord had told him, that he
was with him: If the Lord be with us, O my Lord, why then is all this befallen
Judge. 6, 13.
us: and where be all his miracles which our Fathers told us of, saying, Did
not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? But now, the Lord has forsaken us, and
delivered us into the hands of the Midianites: Here is an inquiry, but it was
with an unbelieving Reasoning against God: And we read of eminent Saints,
falling into this Temptation; why does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore
Jer 12. 1.
are they happy that deal treacherously? (says Jeremy).

2. There is an inquiry of submission and humiliation; when poor Souls would
know wherefore the Lord does contend with them. ^^b 10 ^.
that they may be humbled for giving God cause to come forth against them. And
this is the Inquiry ye are discoursing about. That God does not contend without
a cause, that we have heard already: And, That we are to inquire into the
cause, now we are to prove.

When Israel was smitten at At, the Lord refused to go with the Camp, What was
the matter; There was a secret cause, an hidden cause, Joshua he complains to
God, and sadly bewails the want of Gods presence; and the Lord upon his Inquiry
tells him, There is a cause, and the cause was this, The Accursed thing was
among them. And this was the 13, 21.
cause, O Israel; thou cannot stand before thine Enemies until thou take away
the accursed thing from among you. Here are three things observable. 1. The
accursed thing was the hidden thing hid among the stuff; The Babylonish
garments was hid, and the Silver under it. O the accursed thing lies hid, the
cause is hid, but it must be inquired into; hid in your ships, it may be in
your shops; hid in your Trade or Converse with men, where ever the cause, or
accursed thing lies, it must be inquired into. 2. Achan was of the Tribe of
Judah, which was the Tribe so honorable, that Christ came of it; and yet one
of this Tribe was the cause of the Lords thus withdrawing his presence; after
this the Tribe that kept close to the true worship of God. Judah yet rules
with God, and is faithful with the Saints, yet one of the Tribe of Judah taken
as the guilty person. 3. Achan was discovered, taken by Lot: Joshua 6. verse
for this discovery, fell down on his face before the Arc. The Ark was to
inquire in dark and doubtful cases, all; and now he was inquiring of the Lord
the cause of this disappointment, and God answered him, in Judge. 20. 27.
telling him, what course to take for a discovery.

Hence it is, that when Gods People are brought into straits, and distresses,
he usually points all their sins, and provocations, as being the cause of his
so dealing with them; and tells them as he did, by the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
4. 18.
your ways and doings, have procured these things unto your Souls, etc. Alas,
says God, you put me upon it! it was your own doings, and this is but to eat
of the bitter fruit of your own evil ways, This is your Esaias 50. 1.
wickedness, you see now what misery your sins have brought upon your heads:
thus in that great stroke of the Captivity, God clears himself. Behold, for
your Iniquities have you sold your selves; and for your Transgressions, is your
Mother put away, (viz.) It was your own Act and Deed: And indeed thus inquiring
into our selves for the cause of these evils, when they are upon us, is a sweet
frame of heart; then, the Soul says, as the Church did, wherefore should a
living man complain, for the punishment of his sins, why should we be
complaining? does not God say to the complaining Soul, as to Joshua; Arise, get
thee Josh 7. 9.
up, wherefore lie thou upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and taken the
accursed thing. So, poor Soul, thou have sinned (says God.) The accursed thing
is found in thy skirts, in thy Tent, in thy House, in thy Heart; Thy work is to
be inquiring, and Searching, now after the cause; therefore it follows, Let us
search La^. 3. 39, 40
and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

1. Reason, why in a day of Distress, and Affliction, it is our duty to inquire
into the cause, not because that the cause of Gods controversy, often is hid;
from us, it lies hid, and we cannot find it out, without a diligent inquiry, it
was so here in the Text, They knew not what was the matter; and to search ^^
out, they were resolved. And so they cast ^o^s to decide the case, and to
discover the guilty Person. The cause of Gods not going up with Israel, was hid
from Joshua: there was a guilty Achan there, as well as a guilty Jonah here,
and both taken by Lots. The accursed thing, was the hidden thing, we read of
Heman, under his affliction what course he took, I communed with mine own
heart, and my Spirit made diligent search: he Psa. ^7. 7.
supposed, There might be some hidden guilt, that might occasion it to be thus
with him; therefore, he would fall to searching. (The Septuagint reads it) I
dug my own heart. The vulgar Latin, I swept my own heart. Both senses import
that there might be some undiscerned guilt, which God was angry with him for.
O, how good is it in storms, for Seamen to say, Lord, is not the accursed
thing among us? is not the wedg of Gold aboard? and the Babylonish garment? and
now has not our sins found us out? nay* our secret sins, which the Lord sets
in the light of his countenance? sin may be hid a long time, but, as is
commonly said of Murder, it will out: so, it may be said of other sins, They
will out, Jonah's running away from God, you see came out.

2. Reason, why we should be inquiring into the cause, when under Distresses
and Afflictions; Because, this frame of heart vindicates and honors the
justice and righteousness of God. Thus Jonah was brought to this at last, For
my sake is this storm come Ps. 9. 13.
upon us. O now, God sends his Agents, his Pursevants, to artest Delinquents!
we read therefore of God making Inquisition for blood; then, says the Text, he
remembers them, he will seek out blood, (so it is read.) Now whether
remembering refers to Bloods, to Murders, God is searching out; or, Remembering
relates to the afflicted ones, as (a learned Expositer observes the Caldee to
read it) he that requires blood of the innocent, remembers his just ones:
however this is true, God remembers sin. Now, when he makes 2 Ch^^n. 2^. 22.
Inquisition for it, to punish it, requiring, and punishing the same, therefore
we read of the Lord looking upon Blood, and requiring it, (viz.) to punish and
avenge it; and so Joseph's Brethren say, Behold his blood is required. O now,
the Lords searchers are abroad; Genesis 42. 22.
it is good to be inquiring our selves, and so justify God. You Seamen have
the Kings Searchers come abroad, and they wait upon you. O my friends, God has
his searchers, and his waiters too, such as you cannot deceive, O then inquire
into the cause, Lord thou art righteous in all thy proceedings against sinners
at Sea, and Land: and there is some great cause, that thou does thus contend
with us. That which we know Job 31. 32.
not, teach thou us; and, if we have done iniquity, we will do so no more.

3. We should be inquiring into the cause: because God will certainly discover
it. God will fetch it out, let it lie never so latent, and hid. The Lord sees
where the accursed thing lies, he knew the Babylonish garment was hid, and the
Silver under it, Gods eye looks under the Babilonish garment, you, it may be,
think your sins are secret from the knowledge of Relations, and so you are safe
enough; and, upon the account of the secrecy of sin, go on and are hardened: but
alas for you, poor Seamen, God will bring all out. O, what a place is that,
Thou have Ps. 90. 8.
set our secret sins, in the light of thy countenance: that word you have had
again and again, your sin will find you out: shall God make a discovery, and we
make no inquiry? O, never think that you can hide the accursed thing out of
God's sight. That is an observable place, He will search Jerusalem with Zeph.
1. 12.
Candles, and punish the men that are settled upon their leese; that say in
their hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil: some carries
it, To search with Lant-horns, exactly and narrowly, and take it, that the
Caldeans shall be their searchers, to seek out their wealth and treasures: But
others, that God would make a diligent narrow search after their sins, and his
search should reach so deep, as to a discovery of men's very hearts. That say in
their hearts, etc. Begin to draw up Atheistical conclusions against God, that
he never regards the government of the world. The arguing of too many poor
Seamens hearts, (I am afraid) God will discover the very thoughts of your
hearts, and if the cause lie hid there, either in heart, or house, he will find
it out. Therefore we should be upon inquiry: But this will fall in under the
next Doctrine. And the Lot fell upon Jonah.

4. We should be inquiring into the cause, Because until this be discovered,
the judgment is not removed; as Physicians say, The cause of a disease known,
the disease is half cured. So in this case: this storm, do what they could,
never calmes, until Jonah was discovered. Though they used all the means
possible for men to use, when at last they were so ingenious, that they thought
to save the life of the Delinquent; yet the Sea wrought and was tempestuous;
and they could ver. 15.
not do it, until the righteous sentence of God was executed upon him, that
they cast him overboard. And then (says the Text) the Sea ceased from her
raging: we read that ^^v. ^6. 42, 43, 44, 45.
such a time should come that God would Remember the Land of Israel, when they
were under sad trials and distresses, and God would Remember his Covenant: now,
it is observable what time that was, The Text tells, When their uncircumcised
hearts are humbled, and they accept the punishment of their iniquities:
because, even because, they despised my Judgments, and their Souls abhorred my
Statutes. You see now, here is the cause of all, discovered: well, they accept
of the punishment of their iniquity, here the cause of the Judgment is
acknowledged, and now it shall be remembered* And yet, for all that, When they
be in the Land of their Enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I
destroy them utterly, nor abhor them, nor break my Covenant with them, For I am
the Lord their God. See here, now is the controversy taken up, betwixt God and
Them.

5. Reason. We must inquire into the cause, when under Distresses and
Afflictions, this speaks us truly humbled under the hand of God: When we are
digging into the cause of God's Judgments, that lie upon us, many poor sinners
may be sensible of the sad effects, of God's displeasure, in taking away
Relations from them by violent tempests, in breaking their Estates, in the loss
of Ships, but this is but to cry, and complain of the smart of God's
dispensations, but what is this to the cause of them? there your work lies.
Lord, wherefore do thou contend with us? have you found out the Achan? the
Jonah all this while? therefore you must in your Humiliations be more punctual,
and particular, when under the hand of God, than at other times. When Israel
was under the hand of the Philistines, and lamented after the Lord, Samuel, in
his exhortation to them, upon a solemn Fast Day, a Humiliation-day, he leads
them by the hand to the cause of their distress. If you return to the Lord,
with all your heart, and put away the strange Gods from among you, and
Ashtaroth, then he will deliver you out of the hands of the Philistines. 1 Samuel
^^ ^, 4.
This Idol was the grand provocation to the Lord, Nay, this argued them deeply
humbled, that they would put the Idol away, and so in the days of Ezra, they
came to this, ^o find out the particular provocation, (viz.) (the marrying
strange wives, against the express mind of God,) they resolve to put them away,
and (says the Text) They sat trembling, Ez^^ ^0* 9.
because of this matter. O, it is a hopeful case to be inquiring into the
matter, and cause of the Lords controversy, When poor Seamen and their
Relations are saying to God, under their distresses, and trials, Lord what is
the matter? what is the sin, whereby Lord, we have caused thee to send such
terrible Messengers of thy displeasure after us? When you say, Is this sin it,
or that sin it? Lord is it our drunkenness? is it our neglect, nay, profanation
of Sabbaths? Is it our neglecting the worship of God aboard our Ships, when at
Sea; or neglecting family prayer when at home? Is it our carnal confidence in
our successes? Is it our unrighteous dealings in the way of our Trade betwixt
man and man? Lord, what sin is it? find it out. O the Lot will fall upon Jonah!
the Person and the crime too, will be found out by God.

APPLICATION.
Is it so, that it is our duty to inquire into the cause, when under trials and
distresses. 1. It is a word of Counsel and Exhortation, to poor Seamen, and
their Relations to set upon the work, when under such dispensations of God. The
work that the doctrine calls for. To say to the Lord, show us wherefore thou
contendest with us? why are these sad blows come upon us? why are we broken in
our Comforts, in our Estates, in our Relations? Lord, why are we thus? Is it to
try grace? Is it to discover guilt? Is it to wean from the uncertain comforts
of this present life? Is it to let us see where more durable Treasures are to
be had, then those perishing Treasures that come by the Sea? nay, what if God
should give all the Families of the Tribe of Zebulun, the performance of the
word. Thou shall seek of the abundance of the Deuteronomy. 33. 19.
Sea, and of Treasures hid in the Land. What would these things signify, if
you have no Title to the other treasures of God above. Heaven is the only
treasure-house, Lay up your treasures in Heaven: these treasures never can
suffer Shipwreck.

1. Motive, to enquire into the cause, this is the only way to have the
controversy taken up, betwixt God and You. And O, what a mercy would this be?
How comfortably then might you go to Sea? and look dangers and difficulties in
the face? How courageously might you look Turks and Pirates in the face? when
you have the controversy taken up betwixt You and God, you need not then fear
man's controversy. If there should be War betwixt Nation and Nation, what brave
Seamen will they be that have made their peace with God? then they may Rejoice
in going out to War; so some take that Jud. ^. 18.
Text of Zebulun, for Zebulun is commended for jeoparding there lives unto the
death: they disdained their Souls to death, (as the Dutch Annotators observe
upon it) they fought so bravely for Isreal's deliverance, that they seem to
condemn their very lives: no man will fight so bravely with an Enemy, as he
that is reconciled unto God, Are not they fittest to fight, that are fittest to
dye.

2. Motive to inquire into the cause of all Evils coming upon you, this speaks
you sensible of the hand of God. There are some that, whatsoever they meet with
at Sea, or at Land, all their lives; they never say, for whose cause is this
come upon us? they are obdurate and hardened, they are like Solomon's drunk ard,
Thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst Prove 23. 34, 35.
of the Sea, or as he that lies upon the top of the Mast; they have stricken
me, shall thou say, and I was not sick; They have beat en me, and I felt it
not, when shall I awake* I will take it yet again. Are there not many such poor
drunken Seamen? and O, what danger are they in, as one that lies asleep in
the top of the Mast, and is stricken, and yet feels nothing, is even hardened in
his sin. O, these poor Souls never inquires into the cause of the evil, and
dangers they meet with all. As God said of a People, why should you be smitten
any more, you Revolt more and more.

3. Motive, to inquire into the cause of all evils you meet with, this-will
help you much to the knowledge of your hearts, and lives, and O, how necessary
are these to know? both for Seamen, and Land-men. You love to know how such a
Rock lies, and such a Sand, such a Port, and such a Coast, such a (...) or
Cape? O, it is as necessary to know your hearts, to know where such a Rock of
temptation lies, and such a Sand of a temptation lies; to know these, that your
precious Souls may never be split upon any of them. O, many of these Rocks of
temptations lie hid in your hearts, and you may be run upon them, before you
ever are aware; if you do not know, how they lie. O, how many a precious Soul
has perished for want of knowing, how the temptations of their own hearts lay?
they have thought they have run upon a bold Coast, as you say; and has
ventured upon temptations with their own carnal confidence, and so have
miscarried for ever: did you know you had such proud hearts, you were almost
split upon the Rock of Pride? did you know, you had such worldly hearts, until
you were almost split upon the Rock of Covetuousness? well, now by inquiring
into the cause of your evils, you come to the knowledge of your hearts. For
sometimes the cause lies there; and your lives, it sometimes lies there; O that
poor Seamen would see into their lives, and see if the accursed thing be not
there. Is it not your looseness* your profaneness? your swearing? your violation
of the Sabbath? your mocking at prayer? your despiseing of ordinances, your
cruelty to the Souls of the men under your charge, some of you? Are not those
things the causes of the Lords controversy with you? It may be you go on and
sin, and never inquire into these matters, until the fatal storm and dismal
stroke over-take you, and then perish you must, when you have scarce time to
say, Lord for whose sake is this evil come upon us.

4. Motive, to inquire into the cause of the evils, you meet withal. This will
argue, you look higher, then second causes in storms, and distresses, that none
of these afflictions arise out of the dust: the winds are his winds, his
servants; the Seas his servants, and you must look over from the servant to the
Lord. These poor Mariners, you see, did look higher; therefore they pray unto
their Gods: this is a Christian spirit, this storm fulfills the will of God,
the word of God; and good is the word of the Lord.

5. Motive, to inquire into the cause of the evils, you meet with, This argues
sincerity and integrity of soul, that they all were so willing to cast lots,
and find out the Malefactor, argued their uprightness and innocence, as to that
extraordinary guilt, that they thought this storm came for. When a poor Seaman
can say, with holy David, Lord, search me and try me, and know my heart, and
know my thoughts, and see, if there be any wicked way in me: does not this
argue sincerity and uprightness? can any Ps. 139. 23, 24.
but a sound heart abide searching, especially Gods searching; Can any but
upright hearts desire to know the plague of their own hearts, to desire to know
the worst by themselves, to say, is it I Lord? is it I, that have caused this
storm? am I the Jonah in the Vessel? am I the guilty Person, this storm is sent
after? if Lord I yield to thy most righteous sentence; do what thou will with
me, so that this storm may become a calm.

2. Use. Is it so, that inquiry into the cause is our duty, when in distress?
then it is a word of direction: O, but says poor Souls, now we shall inquire
into the cause of God's controversy with us.

1. By Prayer: This is the great inquiry; show me wherefore thou contendest
with me: this is the only way to find out the controversy. Thus David did, as
you have heard, Search me O God, try me, etc. Joshua's prayer found out the
Achan, for God, upon it: bid him arise and search out the cursed thing. He knew
not of the accursed thing, until he had been inquiring of God, and then all
comes out. O, Prayer brings all out: As sometimes God says by Preaching, Thou
art the man, as he did by Nathan unto David: so he says sometimes by Prayer,
thou art the man; and this is the sin; the cause of such an evil, and of such a
trial.

2. Direction: Would you find out the cause? then you must look into your
selves, as well as look up to God, looking inward, is as necessary as looking
upward, you must make a diligent search; you must commune with your own hearts.
You must find this, if ever you find it, upon search. O it is not an easy
thing to find out the cause of Gods contending with us. And therefore we must
be exact in the scrutiny. 1. It is, it may be, some hidden thing; the accursed
thing was the hidden thing; it was not in the open field, no, it was in Achans
Tent, yea, and it was hid there, therefore we must ransack every corner of our
hearts: they have many dark corners, and we must, if we will find out the
cause, go from corner to corner, with the light of the Word. You Seamen,
search your Ships, for the accursed thing: you Land-men, search your Shops for
it, and every one, search your hearts for it. It is not many times visible,
there is, it is true, a visible cursed thing many times carried to Sea with you
(viz) your drunkenness, your neglect of the worship of God, your swearing, your
Sabbath-breaking. But is there not, where these are not, accursed
covetuousness, the accursed wedg of gold, accursed defrauding and cheating in a
more hidden way, and accursed uncleanness in a more secret way? that, it may
be, few know of it. 2. You must search your hearts for the cause of your evils.
For, few know their own hearts, who knows them? it is a very hard thing to know
them aright: we may think we know them, and be very ignorant of them; if they
that search them sometimes, be ignorant of them, how ignorant are they then of
them, that never look into them; Ps 19. 12,
which made David say, who can understand his error? cleanse thou me from
secret faults. 3. You must be diligent in the searching out the causes of your
evils; for you may very easily overlook them: you may easily overlook in the
search, the wedg of gold; it may lie in a little room; and the Babylonish
garment, may lie in a little room. 4. You must be diligent in the searches;
for, our Hearts are very prone to be partial. We have a Peter within that often
calls to us, Master spare thy self. We say of a beloved sin, that usually is
the cause of Gods contending with us, as David did of his beloved Son, deal
gently with my Son Absalom, for my sake. We are very indulgent to our right
hands, and to our right eyes. 5. You must be diligent in your Search; for,
while you are upon it, if it be possible, Satan will blow out your Candle, (I
mean your Conviction) in the light of which you Search. It may be, God
convinces you of your duty, and you fall upon search; but, before you have made
any thing of it, you will have Satan blow your light out, and so you will give
over; as the woman sought her lost groat, lighted her Candle, and swept her
house; so, had you need to do, in this inquiry after the cause of your
distresses, and Afflictions.

3. If you would find out the cause of your Afflictions, and trials, then make
Inquiery by the word. Then, is the only Rule to find out the Jonah. This way
would these poor Heathen Mariners have taken; but that they were ignorant of
any such Rule: therefore, they cast Lots, There can be no search made to any
purpose, without the word. It is, upon this account, called a Lamp, a Lanthorn.
If a sin, we seek for evade discovery, and run into the dark corners of our
Hearts; we are to follow the search still in the light of the word: And, if
guilty Jonah had but been kept awake, to have asked his Soul the Question, O my
Soul, Is this according to the word of the Lord, that came to thee? was thy
Commission to go to Tarshish? or to Ninevie? Is it according to Rule, for thee
to go one way, when God bids thee go another? he had then soon come to a
discovery of the cause of this storm upon easy Inquiry. We should in such a
case say, as Paul did in that controversy. But what says the Scripture? 1.
Make your Inquiry by reading the word. O, that Seamen would Sail by this
Compass! and when you meet with a sin (set out in the word, and marked by the
Lord) that you would say, Here is a Sea-marke for thee to avoid, here is a Rock
that thou must be careful thou split not upon, a Sand thou must be careful thou
fall not foul upon. Here is a Gulf thou must be careful thou be not swallowed
up in. You talk of the Gulf of Venice, and the Gulf of Lions: but the Word
tells you of the Gulf of Drunkenness, and of the Gulf of uncleanness, and of
the Gulf of swearing, and Sabbath-breaking. And O, how many are swallowed up,
precious Souls of poor Seamen cast away in these Gulphs? Do you in reading the
word observe what marks God has given such, and such sins; and how they have
caused his displeasure? As soon as ever the sin of drunkenness came into the
world, God set a brand upon it. It came in by a sad hand indeed, even ^en. 19.
^6, 37, ^8.
by Lot: But O, what a punishment God set upon it, suffering it to be fellowed
with another sin, the great sin of Uncleanness, nay the highest, even Incest.
O, what sin came in at this door? what Murders, Quarrellings, Passions,
Adulteries, even the door of Drunkenness? but see a further mark set upon it,
as the sad effects of it? The first Daughter bare a Son, and Judge 11 4 2^.
called his name Moab; the other bare a Son, and called his name Ben-ammi, the
Father of the Children of Ammon unto this day. Now, this Posterity apostatized
to Idolatry, and became both of them as dwelling near Canaan, great Enemies to
poor Israel. Some read (Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4.) and was not this a black mark upon
that sin, that such a Father should have such a Posterity, begot in the sin,
that should in after Generations, be inveterate Enemies to Gods people? Take
but another Instance (because this is one of the sins of Seamen, that is often
a cause of the Lords controversy with you in storms at Sea) Esa 23. 1, 2, 3.
Woe to the crown of Pride, and the Drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty
is as a fading flower, etc. Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong one,
which is a Tempest of hail, and a Destroying storm, as a flood of mighty
waters overflowing, shall cast down to the Earth with his hand; The Drunkards
of Ephraim shall be trodden under feet. This is a Prophecy of the wrath of God
upon the Ten Tribes; for, their drunkenness did much abound, and this mighty
strong one as a destroying storm to come upon them, which was made good in
Salmaneser the King of Assyria's coming, to beseige Samaria, and carry them
Captive, when the Turks carry so many English Seamen Captive into Sally, into
Argiers; is it not good inquiring, Is not our Drunkenness the cause of this
Evil coming upon us; mark well, then consult the word what it says of
Drunkenness. 2. Consult the word in your reading of it, and observe what a mark
God has put upon uncleanness, which I doubt is another Rock that many a poor
Sea-mans Soul is split upon; Says Solomon, I discerned among the simple ones,
among the youths, a youngman void of understanding. Here is a brand upon him!
What was he? one that fell in with the strange Woman; what became of him? Pr^.
7. ^, 26. 27.
He was led of her, till a dart struck through his Liver, as a bird hasteneth
to the snare, and knows not it is for his life; her house is the way to Hell,
going down to the Chambers of death. He is a man, a dead man, and a damned man,
if not rescued from this snare. O, that poor Seamen would read that Chapter
often over? she tells him, She had decked her bed, etc. O, but yet, it was the
Chamber of Death. Though the bed was perfumed, and all in bravery, yet it was
the way to Hell; well, but after a while, he is struck through the Liver, being
the seat of Lust (says one) therefore the foul-disease, as you call it, is
called (Morbus Hepatarius.) The disease of the Liver; Splen ridere facit, cogit
amare jecur. Is it not good to say, Is not this the cause of the Lords
controversy many a time at Sea? O, how many Sea-mens Souls have been swallowed
up of this Guloh?

3. Consult to find out the cause, the Word Preached. A searching Ministry may
be a great blessing to Seamen upon that account. The word Preached to you, is
to be your Spiritual Pilots, to show you where such a Rock lies, such a Sand
lies, where such a Shelve lies; we are to tell you from our Lord and Master,
that if you steer a course of sin, you will run a course of Ruin. It was the
Lords Commission to his Prophets, Lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, cry aloud
and spare not: Show unto my people their sins, and the House of Jacob their
Transgressions. We are to show your sins, as the causes of Gods controversy
with you. We show you your danger of such a Rock, such a sin; but, do you bear
off? do you stand off from it? if you do not, at your peril; if you miscarry,
your blood be upon your own heads. O, methinks, of all men, Seamen should
love a searching Ministry, you enjoy so little of it, go many months, and hear
not a Sermon; you that run so many hazards and dangers, you love Carpenters for
the safety of the ship, and Chirurgions for the health of your bodies, and why
should not you love Ministers for the good of your Souls? Must ships, must
bodies be preferred before precious Souls?

4. Would you find out the cause, Be then often reading over your lives and
Conversations. You keep your Journals, and is it not as necessary to keep
Diaries? The book of your lives, you may read every day, when you cannot have
time to read other books; nay, it may be some of you cannot read at all. O but
this book you may read! and may not you often read, O Lord, my wickedness now
does correct me? does pursue me; does, as an Avenger of blood, follow me? This
is thy Iniquity that testifies against thee, this is thy sin that now has
found thee out; this is thy drunkenness, thy abominable uncleanness, thy
blaspheamous Oaths; thy mocking at Prayer; thy prophaining of Sabbaths! May not
you read all this in your lives? men at Land, that would know how it is with
them, as to their Estates, will cast up their books; and men at Sea, that would
know where they are, and what course they run, will keep their observations and
watches. So, should you be often casting up your Books, your Accounts, your
Observations, if you would know where abouts you are, for your Eternal
Conditions. It may be, the Jonah is in thy Conversation, that brings the storm,
then thou must look to Reform that.

5. Would you find out the Cause? Then, you must set before you the danger of
miscarrying. Now they were in danger, they cry out, For whose cause is this
evil come upon us? Truly we are seldom either at Sea, or Land, led into our
duty, until danger drive us to it. In your storms you are, it may be, saying to
your selves, What if the ship should miscarry? but, do you ever say to your
Souls, what if your Souls miscarry? what if the ship be lost, you say? but, if
you said, What if your Souls be lost? this would help you in the inquiry after
the cause of the Lords Controversy with you. Set thy danger before thee, poor
Seaman, that thou may find out the cause. 1. If thy Soul miscarry, it is an
eternal miscarriage; thou art fixed in that miscarryed estate to all Eternity,
never to come out of it. It is to go to the Pit, from whence there is no
Redemption. There may be Redemption from Sally, from Algier, nay from Fez,
where poor Seamen, when they are taken by the Turks, are so afraid of being
sent. O, but poor Seamen, from Hell, there is no Redemption. The King of this
Country never gives up his Slaves. 2. If thy Soul miscarry (poor Seaman), it
will aggravate thy sin, and misery, that thou had so many warnings, but
refused them. O, what a fair way wast thou once in? when convinced of such a
sin, would be thy Ruin, if thou did not Repent of it? such a Rock would
split thy Soul for ever, if thou came foul upon it; and yet what a bold course
did thou steer, notwithstanding all these warnings. Ministers called to
thee, Relations called to thee, Conscience called to thee, Godly. Friends and
Acquaintance, that loved thy Soul, called to thee; O, stand off the Rock of
sinful Company! O, take heed of such a sin! and such a Lust! but alas all these
signified nothing to thee. O, these refused-warnings, will be as oil to make
Hells flames burn more vehemently. 3. If thou miscarry (poor Seaman) thou many
times miscarryest on a sudden. They go down in a moment to the grave. O what
little time have they to prepare for Death? that little time they have, is to
provide for their lives, that they seldom entertain a thought what will become
of their Souls? The Sea-mans destruction comes upon them, as a whirlwind;
suddenly, and often inevitably; suddenly destroyed, and that without Remedy (as
that word you read): and, Are not all sudden things sad, and full of
astonishment? Is it not a comfortable thing to have time to prepare for your
change? now, The sense of your danger, every Voyage you go, should make you
find out the cause of Gods Controversy with you.

The last Use is of Trial. How may we conclude what is the cause of Gods
Controversy with us? what sin is the Jonah? We may pass a false Judgment, then
how may we find out the sin and Provocation, to say, This is the cause, why God
contends with me, as David, when Nathan said to him. Thou art the man; so, we
may say, Thou art the sin: and so single out the particular Provocation to God.

1. That sin usually, that lies uppermost on the Conscience, is the cause of
Gods Controversy with us, when we are in any distress, or under any
Affliction. When Jonah's Conscience was gotten cured of his Lethargy, it was
thus with him, his guilt of fleeing from the presence of the Lord, was
uppermost; why have thou done this, say the Ships Company to him. For, the men
knew that he had fled from the presence Gen 4^: 21.
of the Lord; for, he had told them. Thus it was with Joseph's Brethren. And
they said one to another in this wise, Saw we not the anguish of his Soul, when
he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore, is this distress come upon
us; you see, This sin laid uppermost upon his Conscience. Now, observe it well,
what that sin is; you may write upon the head of it, Thou art the Jonah, this
is the cause of this Controversy; when the Conscience is humbled, there is a
Controversy betwixt God and the Soul. Now sin is very prone to walk in the
Conscience, in a day of distress and affliction.

2. That sin that is thy darling sin, usually is the cause. This usually, of
all sins, is the Jonah. This complexion-sin, as that Country-sins, where you,
Seamen, go. So you must remember, there are constitutional sins, which you
carry; and now to carry your constitutional sins, to meet with
other-country-sins, is sad. If you run into them here in England, what will you
do when you come into climates, that shall be like sparks to gunpowder. You
carry the gunpowder with you; but there you meet with Sparks, viz* occasions
exciting your corruptions. And, may it not be said then of many a poor Seaman,
as of the wild Ass, In her occasion, who can turn her away? Gods Controversy
frequently either at Land or Sea, arises upon the account of our right hand, or
right-eyes, viz. our dearest and nearest corruptions. Some men's complexion sin,
is Lust; others, Drunkenesse; others, Passion; and these are often breaking out
to provoke the Lord. And O, how good it is to know them! For, there is an
especial providence made to such, as Know the Plague of their own Hearts.

3ly. That sin that we design most to hide, that is the cause of the
Controversy, betwixt God and us. The accursed thing you have heard, was the
hidden thing. We have it naturally from our first Parents, to hide our Sin.
This is like the children of Adam, though the Lord has expressly told us, that
He that hides his Sin shall not prosper. Man is a proud creature, Pro. 28. 13
and cannot endure to leave his own shame; therefore he finds out covers for
his sins, although they be but Fig Leaves, which will blow away with the least
breath of a powerful conviction: and then the Sinner will see the shame of his
nakedness, and cry out of his Guilt both before the Lord and others. O poor
Sinners consider, Had not you better be ashamed here, than damned hereafter?
Had not you better bear your shame now? say as she did, when you are to die,
And I am one of the fools in Israel, and whither shall I carry my shame? It
will be sad to carry it to Hell with you, and have it upon you to all Eternity.

4. That sin, that we are most prone to plead for our excuse, that usually is
the cause of the Controversy betwixt God and us. And, as we are Adams children
in hiding our Sin; so we are his children in being prone to excuse our Sin. The
woman thou gave me, gave me Genesis 3. 11, 12
and I did eat: He puts it off, and the woman, she says, The Serpent beguiled
me and I did eat* and she puts it off. And thus do we for our beloved sins
especially, It is a little one and my Soul shall live; a little Pride, a little
Passion, a little worldliness, a little drunkenness; sometimes overseen in
drink, but yet no drunkard. O Sirs, it is a dangerous thing to cover your Sins
with excuses: Your woe is written upon the head of it. We to them that cover,
but not with a covering of my Spirit.

5. That Sin is the controversy betwixt God and us, which is the Sin we cannot
endure should be sharply Reproved. We expect that this Sin should be favored;
therefore when the power of the Word in an Ordinance comes, then the hearts of
Sinners swell. As Herod, when John-Baptist comes to his particular sin, to his
Herodias, O then John's head must go for it. O, poor sinners cannot bear
particular home-preaching, as a profane Gentleman said of a godly Preacher
where he lived: He divides his Text like a Scholar; and follow his doctrine
like a Logician: but the Devil cannot stand before his Application: O, sinners
cannot bear plain dealing, for their Souls can say, spare this sin, deal gently
with this sin, for my sake; as David said of his son Absalom.

6ly. That is the sin that is the controversy betwixt God and us, which we are
so loath to part with: O, it goes to the heart to part with some sins! a sin of
custom, or a sin of Interest, or a sin of inclination; O, what struggling and
combatting is there in the Soul, before they can give up such sins: other
evils, when they see no other way, they can be more contented to part Genesis 42.
36.
with; but what? them I say, that has caused them to laugh, and sport
themselves so often? What, their Benjamins? O what a parting was there betwixt
the old Patriarch and his son Benjamin: Genesis 43. 11.
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and you will take Benjamin away: All these
things are against me: and at last he came to, If it must be so now. Such a
parting there is betwixt these beloved sins, and poor Souls. Pharaoh will not
let Israel go, until he see no other way: So it is in this case. Thus I have
dispatched the second observation of the Text. That it is our duty to make
inquiry into the Cause, when any evil is upon us, either at Land or Sea.

Jonah 3. 7. And the Lot fell upon Jonah.
WE have already heard of a Controversy, and of the means that was used to
decide that Controversy, viz. by casting Lots; now we are come to the decision
of the Controversy, viz. The discovery of the guilty person who had caused
this storm; And the Lot fell upon Jonah.

The Observation is this, God will certainly find out the Jonah that causes
the storm.
This Lot that found out Jonah, was the determination of God, the finger of
God; The disposing of the Lot is of the Lord, says the Wiseman; The guilty
person shall not always go undiscovered; though he was gone down into the sides
of the Ship, and was fast asleep, yet he is found out.

But it is necessary we should premise something before we come to follow the
Observation, that all stumbling blocks may be taken out of the way.

1. Persons under guilt may go a long time undiscovered: Jonah for a time we
see continues so; yea, though the storm was upon the Vessel where he was, yet
he is not discovered. It may be said of many a poor sinner, as is said of the
wicked man, He flatters himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity Psalm. 36. 3.
be found to be hateful. He goes on for the present, and thinks, all is well;
but God discovers him sooner or later, and makes his iniquity hateful. Some
men's hidden works of darkness are sooner brought to light than others. Judas
goes a long time among the Disciples, before he be discovered; Herod hears
John, and for a time goes on smoothly before he be discovered; Demas goes hand
in hand with Paul, a long time before he was discovered to be such a worldling
as he proved; whether he did return again or not (as some think he did) yet his
guilt by Act. 19. 33.
his fall was discovered. Alexander as some think, that stood by Paul in that
uproar at 1 Timothy 1. 20.
Ephesus, yet afterward apostatized, and 1 Timothy 3. 14.
so was discovered, and did him much harm. O Sirs, you may cover and conceal
your sin for a time, yet a discovering day is coming, the day shall declare it.

2. Some persons sins are not discovered until they come to the great
Reckoning, the great Audit-day. Some men's sins (says the Apostle) 1 Timothy 5. 24.
are open before hand to judgment, and some men they follow after. Then the
hidden things of darkness that escape discovery now, will all be brought to
light; and what if you be hid here, this will but harden you; whereas a
discovery might be a means to awaken you, and bring you to Repentance:
Sometimes poor sinners by shame are brought to true Humiliation for sin, when
they are discovered; they are ashamed as a Thief is ashamed, and so are led
from the sight of their shame unto the sight of their sin; but assure your
selves, if you be not found out now, yet the day of the Lord will make a
discovery of all your hidden sins, at Sea, or at Land, when the Lord comes, He
will bring to light the hidden things 1 Cor. 4. 4.
of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall
every man have praise of God. Not only the secret sins of men's lives, but the
secret sins of men's Romans 2. 16.
hearts; therefore it is called, a Day in which God will judge the secrets of
men.

3. Some sinners guilt comes under more dreadful aggravations than others, and
ordinarily the more aggravations that men's sins are clothed with, the sooner
God will lay them open to a discovery: This was Jonahs case, his guilt was not
ordinary guilt; the aggravations of it you have heard: As Hypocrites their sins
are more aggravated than other men's, therefore usually discovered; he often
unvailes them, as he did Judas, as he did Demas, as he did Herod, and others;
and backsliders, persons that once have tasted of the good word of God, and
sweetness in the ways of God, and fall back, these men's sins though sometimes
hidden, God makes open discovery of, rips up their sins they never thought
should come to light. These men's sins are under great aggravations, and so lie
nearer to a discovery; and so poor Seamen that are men of so many mercies, and
their Relations, Persons under such ties and bonds of mercy, if they will break
all these, and sin in an hidden and secret way against God. Oh this aggravates
their sin exceedingly, and God will sooner or later make a discovery of it.

4. Usually if God discover guilty persons, it is in a more than ordinary way;
their guilt is not ordinary, and so the way that God takes for their discovery
is not ordinary. God we see sent an extraordinary storm after Jonah, and finds
him out by Lots, which was the most extraordinary way of discovery that was
used; they are not ordinary Convictions, nor ordinary Afflictions, that usually
God discovers such guilty persons by.

5. Upon their discovery they either grow worse, and are hardened; or they are
deeply humbled. Jonah he now upon his discovery, acknowledges and accepts the
Punishment of his iniquity. For my sake is this evil come upon you; which was
an expression setting out his Repentance and Humiliation. Herod upon his
discovery grew worse, and added to all, taking John's liberty and life away,
under whose Ministry he did once sit. Thus we see Hypocrites after discovery,
often prove profane; and Backsliders often prove persecuters; these Revolters
are profound to make slaughter.

These things premised, the Query for us to look into, will be this, in opening
this Doctrine, What ways and means usually does God take for the discovery of
guilty persons? This will contribute very much to the clearing of the Point.

1. God does often discover guilty persons, by pursuing them with the Terrors
of their own Consciences. Conscience, as Gods Avenger does pursue the guilty
sinner, though for a time it may sleep, as Jonah's here did; yet when God
awakened him, you see what he says, Cast me overboard, for my sake is this
evil come upon you. Though conscience may be for the present seared, and
insensible; yet when God once awakens it, Oh it will cause a poor guilty soul
to cry out, Oh miserable wretch that I am! O vile brute that I am to provoke
such a God! to hazard for ever and wound such an Immortual Soul! to run a
course directly headlong to my eternal ruin! That word is very considerable
you have had hinted; when Moses gave the Tribes good Counsel, that were to
inherit on the other side Jordan, if they would not follow it, he tells them,
Be sure their sin will find them out; their sin, viz. their punishment Numb. 32
23.
for sin should come upon them, as the blood-hound finds out the thief. We read
David in great trouble and distress, he was not able to look up, his Heart
failed, and was not this sad? Looking up is the Believers last refuge. The case
was this, Guilt lay upon him, Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me. Psalm. 40
12.
As the Hue and Cry takes hold of the guilty Malefactor, and then he is
discovered that was not known to be the guilty person before. Oh thus,
Conscience has found out many a secret sin, Oh how has it dogged Sinners!
many secret Murders, how Was not Savage's murder, Butler's thus?
have they been discovered by the intolerable torment of their own accusing
Consciences? Well then poor Seamen, and all poor Sinners, remember when under
any temptation to sin in another Country, where you think it will never be
known, remember Conscience looks on; and the day is coming that Conscience will
speak home, and tell you of it; it is God's Register; may be when you have
forgotten, Conscience will give you dreadful and awakening Memento's of it,
when God shall open the Seals of this Book of Conscience. Oh what discoveries
will there be made! alas now it is a sealed Book, a clasped Book, but yet a day
is coming even in this life, in which God will read you many a lecture out of
it, all your enditements here, and hereafter, sinners will be taken out of this
Book. Whither can guilty Malefactors fly to be hid from Gods finding out? If
they hide themselves* says the Lord, in the top of Camel, I Amo. 9. 3, 4.
will search and take them out thence, viz. If they climb the highest mountain
for hiding, God will discover them: O but it may be they will go to Sea; Though
they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea. Will sinners ever be found
out there? Thence will I command the Serpent, and he shall bite them. Either we
may understand it, of commanding Judgments, to find them out; as afterward, I
will command the Sword to slay them; Or, that the guilt of their own
Consciences shall bite them, and so torment them, that they shall be discovered
by it. O when God commands Conscience to bite, when God sets it on; O how it
does dog and haunt the guilty sinner! it is Gods Officer; when he commands it,
and gives it a warrant to make a search for the guilty Malefactor you cannot
deny it entrance.

2. God many times discovers guilty persons by sending Judgments, and
Afflictions after them. These are Gods searchers, Break thou the arm of the
wicked, and the evil man; seek Psalm. 10. 15.
out his wickedness until thou find none; viz. by thy Judgments punishing them
for it. Until this Judgment, this great storm came upon Jonah, he lay
undiscovered. We read of the Lords people crying out of their sins; they
testified against them, they gave in Testimony against them in the Court of
Conscience. And as for our iniquities, we know them; Oh now they are plainly
discovered Isa. 59. 12.
unto them; they were at this time under the sad strokes of God. If Conscience
be asleep, and the calls of the Word cannot be heard, and the motions of the
Spirit, the still voice cannot be heard; then God will lift up his voice in
some heavy Calamity, to try if that will do: may be a blow from Heaven will do
more, than many a word from Heaven will do; it may be the poor guilty Seaman
shall go into Slavery, and in his Captivity remember himself; and if they be
bound in Fetters, and be holden in cords Job 36. 8, 9.
of Affliction; what then? then God shows them their work, and their
Transgressions; now all is laid open, and discovered, and that they have
exceeded; or it may be a breach may come upon men's Estates to discover men's
sins; when they are brought low, then they may see the fruit of their evil
ways; Or it may be some Judgment of God upon their Bodies.

3. God usually discovers guilty persons, by suffering them to fall into some
notorious sin. Secret Hypocrites whose hearts have been rotten, though they
have had fair outsides are many times thus discovered: Judas who was one of the
Twelve, and carried the Bag, was a close Hypocrite all the while; and you see
for a discovery of his secret guilt, what a sin he falls into, viz. to betray
his Lord and Master. Thus Herod a smooth Professor, he reformed many things,
heard John Baptist gladly, (who was no sleepy Preacher) and we find what a
dreadful piece of Guilt he falls into with his Brothers Wife, and thus is
discovered; and then adds one sin to another, in taking away the Ministers
life, that he used to hear gladly. And this also is observable, when poor Souls
that have had tastes of God, and some impressions and convictions upon them, do
wear these off, and cast all seriousness from them; the Lord often suffers them
to fall into some very gross and scandalous evil, either to discover some
former guilt, that lay hid, unrepented of; or else to awaken their Souls, that
they may recover that which they have lost; as a man that sleeps on Horseback,
may soon get a dangerous fall, so a poor sleepy Professor may, nay often does
catch, desperate falls, to awaken him.

4. God discovers the guilty person by giving him up to some gross and
notorious error. We read of Heresies being among the Corinthians, Cor. 11. 19.
That they that are approved might be made manifest; and so God gives up often
Tim. 1. ^, 20.
unsound hearts to unsound opinions; thus Tim. 3. 9.
Alexander, who was an eminent Professor; and God says of such, They shall go
no further, but be made manifest.

5. God many times discovers guilty persons by causing the Power and Authority
of the Word to seize upon them, and arrest them. Thus God did by Nathan,
discover David's hidden ^am. 12. ^ 13.
sin, Thou art the man: and as soon as this Arrest was clapped upon him by the
Prophet, David's Conscience cried guilty, I have sinned against the Lord; he
does not deny it, he does not plead for it; nay, though it was done in secrecy,
and covered over with a great deal of art, and industry, he does not put the
Prophet upon proof, For thou did it secretly, says Nathan; how did Nathan
know? The Lord who sees in secret, had informed Nathan. We read a strange word
of the Prophet Elisha, that he told the Kings ^ings 6. 12.
of Israel the words that the King of Assyria spoke in his Bedchamber; it was
the Lord that informed the Prophet. Sometimes poor sinners are so plainly told
of their sins in the Ministry of the Word, that they think some has told the
Preacher; Alas this is the secret convincing power that goes along with the
Word, as the Ministry of Christ to the Woman of Samaria found out her guilt,
Him thou have, is not thine Husband; and see how she was smitten, and taken
with it both, I have met with a Prophet that has told me all that I have done.
O poor sinners when the Word thus meets with you, Oh then you should say,
Surely God has a Design of love upon me to humble me, by finding of me out,
and by so particular speaking to my Soul; for when God has a design to convert
a Soul, he speaks particularly to it; and when he has a design to comfort a
Soul, he speaks particularly to it.

6. God many times discovers secret guilt by wonderful Providence. We read of
a Bird of the air, telling the voice of the thoughts, and that which has
wings, telling the matter, even the hidden matters of the Bedchamber. The
Bedchamber is the secret place, and a thought is the most secret act; A Bird
of the air shall carry the voice; Viz. Eccles. ult.
It shall be revealed by some unexpected means, as little suspected for the
doing such a thing as a Bird is; and also it shall be discovered speedily: God
does it sometimes in both senses, That which has wings shall tell the matter,
(in the Hebrew it is) that which is Master of wing shall carry it abroad; Viz.
God will work a miracle to discover it, rather than it shall be hid: By what
strange Providence have some secret Murders come out, History is full of; nay,
many of your own Observations may be full of; as sometimes in the very places
where secret sins, or open sins have been committed, those are the places where
Judgments overtakes the sinner; it is a good consideration for Seamen, If thou
sin in this place, what if thou suffer in this place? and if thou think no body
that knows thee, can know of it; O but that which has wings shall tell the
matter, rather than thou pass on undiscovered, or unpunished.

7. God discovers guilt, or guilty persons, many times by bringing them to
Heart, and Conscience-Examination. Jonah notwithstanding the Lot fell upon him,
confesses not, discovers not himself; they are glad to fall to examination,
Tell us we pray thee ^r. 8.
for whose cause this evil is come upon us? what is thine occupation? and
whence come thou? what is thy Country? and of what people art thou? and then
he confesses presently, (as Solomon says in that case) Counsel in the ^ov. 20.
5.
heart of man is like deep water, but a man of understanding will draw it out.
So we may say of guilt, it lies deep, but by examination it may be fetched out.
As often before a Magistrate when the Conscience of a Malefactor is put to it
by a close and judicious examination, much guilt has been discovered this way.

1. Reason. Why God will discover guilty persons. Why the Lot will fall upon
Jonah? because God hereby gets himself a Name; God by such discoveries brings a
revenue of Glory to himself, yea, in the Consciences of poor Heathens; thus it
was in this case of Jonah, Then these poor Mariners feared the Lord
exceedingly, and offered Ver. 16.
Sacrifice to the Lord, and vowed vows. Then (viz.) not only when they see they
were delivered, but saw the Lord so righteously deciding the Controversy by
the Lot, and discovering the Delinquent. This did commend God to their
Consciences: What a name did God get by the discovering of Achan, who had
secretly sinned, and the execution of the offender was commemorated; And they
raised over him a great Josh 7 ult.
heap of stones unto this day, and the sierce anger of the Lord was turned
away; wherefore the name of the place was called the Valley of Achor unto this
day.

1. In the discovery of guilt, God gets his Justice a name. God will be just,
and every man a liar: How was God's Justice glorified in the Lot falling upon
the grand Delinquent here? He as a righteous Judge passes sentence upon the
guilty Malefactor, and the Sentence is justified in Jonah's own Conscience, For
I know that for my sake is Ver. 12.
this great tempest come upon you. Thus David after he had so hid and covered
his sin, you know he did it secretly, and deliberately, endeavored to conceal
it, by his irregular usage of Vriah; but when God fetched all ^sal. 51. 3.
King. 21 10.
out by the confession of his Conscience, then he clears God's righteousness,
For I acknowledge my sin, and it is ever before me. It is a custom for the
Accuser to stand before the Guilty person; so David here alludes, My sin is
ever before me; he was now haunted ^al. 51. 5.
with it, he saw guilt walk in his Conscience; but Oh how does he clear God in
the case! That thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when
thou judge; Viz. Lord, I have so sinned, that thou may ^. Ans^orth.
most righteously perform against me all the things thou have threatened; That
thou be righteous in thy speaking, and pure in thy judging; Viz. in what God
said to him by Nathan, (so the Dutch read it) or that thou may overcome, (so
one reads it), and so the ^om. 3.
Greek Version takes notice by the Apostle. O now the Soul is overcome, the
Lord gets the victory of the sinner; and he cries out Lord, thou art righteous
in all that is come upon me; how secretly and covertly soever men commit sin,
either at Sea or Land, God is so just a God, he will bring it out to light
sooner or later; What you do in secret shall be revealed upon the housetop; as
is said in that case of the Disciples. Oh then how good a Check is this to
Seamens Temptations! Oh but God is a just God, and he will find me out. Gods
eye which is a righteous eye, looks on; I think you have something about your
Ships, called the A Bloc^ in the Ship wherein the Launcers go that man fast the
shrowds to the Chains.
Dead-mans eye; but here I am sure you may say the Living God's eye is upon
your Ships, upon your Souls, upon your Sins, yea, upon your secret sins: for
even they are set in the light of God's Countenance.

2: By discovering of hidden Guilt, God gets his Wisdom a name; Oh the Lot is
disposed of by the Lord: Here was the wisdom of God in the disposing of the Lot
upon Jonah; a God of wisdom draws it out: You may say here of the wisdom of
God, as the wisdom of Solomon got a name in the 1 King. ^ 28*
decision of the Controversy about the two Harlots, and the living child; he
gave there such excellent Judgment: So does God get his Wisdom a name in
discovering secret guilt.

3. The Omniscience of God gets a name, by discovering hidden guilt. Nothing is
hidden from him; you do not consider, when at Sea, who looks on; what if
Relations-eyes be not upon you, or Fathers eyes, or Friends eyes be not upon
you, nor Ministers eyes, who dearly love your Souls, and cannot cease to pray
for you? yet I will tell you whose eye looks on, Gods eye always is upon you.
Oh this melted the heart of the poor Prodigal, when he first repented, and
returned to his Father, Father, I have sinned Luke 15. 18.
against Heaven and before thee: This was the consideration that gave check to
Joseph's Temptation, which might have been yielded mighty secretly, How can I do
this wickedness Genesis 39. 11.
and sin against God? The secrecy of the Temptation she thought would have
brought him over; There was (says the Text) none of the men within: Oh, but
Joseph knew there was an all-seeing God within, and this graciously awed his
Soul. What though you Seamen go to the ends of the earth, Gods eyes run to and
fro from one end of the earth to another.

4. God by discovering Guilt, gets his Omnipresence a name; If I go, says
David, to the bottom of the Sea, thou art there. Can you go whither you sail
from under the reach of Gods eye? or from under the reach of his hand? Can you
go out of Gods Dominion? The Kings of the Earth, one has one part of the
Earth, and another has another; but the Lord is Universal Monarch, his
Dominion reaches to the ends of the Earth. And as the Egyptians in their
Hieroglyphics, give for Magistracy a Scepter full of Eyes: So indeed the
Scepter of this Universal Monarch is full of Eyes; He is Omnipresent to behold
all things done in the Earth: Is not the East Indies, Guiny, the West Indies
all God's Teritories? Is not he present there? Alas, poor Jonah would fly to
Tarshish from the Presence of the Lord, but the Lord met him at Sea.

5. God by discovering hidden Guilt gets his Word and Truth a Name, he
magnifies his Word in it. The word of his Threatenings against sin though never
so occultly committed; not one of his Threatenings, no more than one of his
Promises shall fall to the ground: [as she said of John Knox's Threatenings,
when he had denounced the wrath of God against a Scoffer at the people of God.]
Oh then, how true will all God's Threatenings prove! Has God said, your Sin
shall find you out, and will he not be as good as his word?

2. Reas. Why the Lord will discover Guilt? To bring poor Souls to shame, and
so to Repentance, and all this while he has a design of Love to the Soul in
this discovery; other poor sinners go on in secret ways of sin, and their
iniquities are concealed, upon which they are hardened in their sinful secret
haunts, until they be arrested, and summoned to appear before God's righteous
Tribunal. It is said of the guilty Children of Israel, As a Thief is ashamed
when he is Jer. 3. 26.
found, so is the House of Israel ashamed. Now how is that? We read of some in
Job that are cried after, As a Thief (or as some reads Job 30. 5.
it) they hooted over him as over a Thief. This sets out the shame of
discovered guilt; and now what will the sinner do in this case when his shame
appears? he many times by it is brought upon his knees, and to say with poor
penitent Ephraim, After that I was instructed I smote upon my Thigh and was
ashamed, and confounded, because I did bear the Reproach of my Youth. Therefore
Repentance is thus expressed in many places of Scripture, We lie down in our
shame, and Jer. 3. ult.
our confusion covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord our God, etc.
And being impenitent, as it is expressed by being impudent, and shameless. Oh
poor sinner, had not you be better ashamed than damned; bear your shame here,
than carry it into Hell upon you.

3. Reas. Why God discovers Guilt. Why the Lot falls upon Jonah? Because he
will have some persons made cautions and examples, and Sea-marks to others.
Jonah was now set up as a Sea-mark to others. David as I have already showed
you, was discovered, that he might be a caution unto following Ages. So sinners
should say, The secret guilt of such an one is come out, God has laid open
all, although he thought himself safe enough; and Oh now shall not I hear and
fear falling into the same; least my sin should be aggravated, having such fair
warning? Therefore we read of them that made their iniquity to be remembered,
Ezekiel. 21. 24.
in that their Transgressions were discovered; i. e. that in all their doings,
their sins did appear. This was to warn others they sinned not in the like kind.

4. God discovers guilt, secret guilt. That that the world may know that he
will testify his displeasure against sin, here the Heathen Mariners had a
clear Testimony against the sin of Jonah. When God does wink at the sins of
men, they themselves and others begin to think that he sees not, or that he is
like themselves; according to that of the Psalmist, These things have thou Ps.
50. 51.
done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether like thy self;
but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. You think
because I do not manifest your guilt for the present, but suffer you to go on,
that I am not displeased with your sin: it is spoken of secret sins, as Theft
and Adultery, both which used to be carried on and managed covertly and
hiddenly; but says God, I will now discover them, and bring you to account for
them, set them in order before you. And thus God gives in the Testimony of
displeasure against Sin; and what follows? Consider this all you that forget
God. So here it is, that others might take notice of it. God we see is
impartial too in his Testimony against Sin, though it be in a Jonah, one that
is dear to him, yet he will discover his displeasure against it; if it be in a
David, one after God's own heart, yet he will discover it, and bear an
impartial Testimony against it; he will not let it go undiscovered in his own
Children.

5. God discovers secret guilt, or guilty persons, that the rottenness of many
hearts may appear, and may no longer go on to deceive others. Sinners are prone
to walk in their disguises and masks; now God will put these off, that men may
appear in their proper colors what they are: The word Hypocrite signifies a
Stage Player, one that acts in a Comedy, and they you know, are clothed to the
part they Act; they may act the part of a Prince, and attired in such a Garb;
and when this Garb is put off, they are pitiful contemptible wretches. Oh, God
will unclothe sinners, although they go in the garb of Saints and Believers;
yet the Lord will in his time let the world see what filthy Ulcers, and what
rotten hearts they have under their goodly outsides; thus he did by Judas,
though it was a great while first; as God says of them, They shall preceed 2 Timothy 3. 9.
no further, for their folly shall be made manifest unto all men. Here is an
ample and an open discovery made of them; they shall proceed and deceive no
more. We read of a terrible threatening of God, that God in this case often
fulfills in this present life, They that turn aside to their own crooked Psalm.
25. 5.
ways; viz. of Hypocrisy as well as Idolatry, shall be led forth, or walk
forth (as the Hebrew reads it) with the workers of iniquity; viz. shall be
discovered to be in no better a condition than the very profane persons are,
they shall be led forth to punishment, or execution with them; for it seems to
hint at such a leading forth as when Prisoners go to condign Punishment. Oh,
persons may go on, as we have heard, smoothly a great while, but the shame of
their nakedness shall appear, and God will turn men's insides outmost; and then,
happy is he that proves upright in the sight of God, and in the sight of others.

APPLICATION.
Is it so that the Lord will certainly discover guilt, the Lot shall fall upon
Jonah? then it is a word of Information. 1. It informs us that God is an
all-seeing God. Gods eye was upon Jonah when he lay fast asleep, as well as
when he fled from his Presence at first Gods eye followed him at Sea. So I say
to you poor Seamen, Gods eye is upon you at Land, at Sea, at the beginning of
your Voyage, and the progress of your Voyage, and the finishing of your Voyage.
Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful Kingdom. So I say the eyes of
the Lord are upon all sinful Kingdoms where ever you come; you cannot go from
under his eye, you cannot sail out of his observation. There is no Doctrine
more proper, nay, of choiser Advantage to Seafaring men, than the Doctrine of
Gods Omniscience; therefore I will a little make bold to enlarge upon it; nay
indeed it is an useful Doctrine for all sorts of people whatsoever.

1. The Omniscience of God lays an Awe of God upon Spirits. Can thou say or
think that God looks on and venture to sin? what to sin in the Presence of God?
as he said, Will he force the Queen in the Presence of the King? Oh what a
height of impudence in sin is it for a person to steal before the face of the
Judge! What poor Seaman, when thou art in a foreign Country, though the eye of
Friends, Relations, godly Acquaintance do not look on, yet that eye looks on
which should ten thousand times more awe thee, than the eye of all the
Relations thou have in the world; the eye of God. The eye 1. of an holy God
looks on, who cannot behold iniquity but with abhorrency; and dare thou sin
under such an Eye? 2. The eye of a righteous God, will not this awe the Soul?
The eye of a righteous Judge, Oh poor sinner, is upon thee. 3. The eye of the
great God, who has power not only to strike thee dead, but damned in every act
of sin: What not the greatness of God awe thee poor sinner? how will the
greatness of Persons awe a man's Spirits, and make them very cautious of their
deportments, and shall not the greatness of God strike sinners with an holy awe
of his Majesty? to awe men's Spirits in his Worship, we read this reason, given
why they should look carefully what they offered up to God, For I am a great
King, and my Mal. 1. ult.
Name is dreadful among the Heathen. 4. The eye of that God looks on, before
whom thou must solemnly appear. O did poor sinners but think, shortly they must
give an account of these actions of theirs to that God that now is a Spectator;
would it not awe their spirits? He sees thee now that must judge thee ere long.
Now thou art running on in sin, there is no stopping thee; thou art
Sermon-proof, and casts the Word of the Lord behind thy back, and hate to be
reformed; Well poor sinner, it will but be a little while and thou shall stand
trembling before Gods Tribunal, receiving thy Sentence for these sins that thou
thought were secret, and hidden. 5. The eye of that God looks on that has been
a God of many preservations and salvations to thee; who is it that gives thee
thy Life every storm, every Voyage, nay every moment? who has been thy old
friend to carry thee out, and bring thee home again? to rescue and redeem thee
so many times from the very brink of the Pit? Was it not God? may not you call
him the God of your Salvations? How often has he given you large Commentaries
upon the Word, Salvation belongs unto the Lord. Psalm. 3. 8.
And this God looks on, and dare you ven-venture to sin under the eye of such a
God?

2. The Omniscience of God truly studied and observed is an argument of
sincerity, and integrity of Soul. Hypocrites act from the eye of men, both as
to their sins, as well as services; they did all, it is said of the Pharisees
to be seen of men: So if the eye of man be over an unsound heart, it may be he
is awed. O but the eye of God has an awful influence upon a sincere gracious
Soul; O says this poor soul as Joseph did, How can I do this and sin against
God; although the temptation was advantaged with so much privacy and secrecy.
Therefore we read of that word of God's to Abraham, Walk before me, and be
perfect; (viz.) be upright: The eye of God is much considered of by an upright
Soul.

3. The sense of Gods Omniscience usually makes the Soul conscientious as to
thoughts. What thoughts poor souls take in; Oh that is a wicked Proverb,
Thoughts are free. Oh no, says a poor gracious soul; Gods eye is upon every
thought of the heart; as soon as it springs up in a conception in the soul, is
falls under his cognizance: That which is said of the Word, much more may be
said of God, It is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart;
discerns it as a Critic that passes censure what is to be approved, and what
refused, (so the word is) he does not only discern the thoughts, Heb. 4. 1^
but critically discern them; he passes his observations upon them. It speaks a
great deal of Spirituality in the heart, to be careful of our thoughts: It may
be poor Seamen may at Sea be plotting sin, what they will do when they come to
their Port; Oh the Lord knows this. God saw that the Genesis 6.
wickedness of man was great upon the earth, and that every thought of the
imagination of his heart were evil continually. Figment of the thought; viz.
what the mind fashioneth within it self by thinking.

4. The sense of Gods Omniscience will raise a spirit of watchfulness in the
Soul against all sin, but especially against the right hand-sin. Who are so
watchful over their own hearts as those that live under the sense of Gods
all-seeing Eye, being upon them? But there is one sin above all we should be
very watchful against, and that is the sin of our Complexions that we are so
very prone to fall into: Oh the eye of God awes the Soul as to this; if it be
drunkenness; if it be that ordinary sin of poor Seamen, Swearing.

5. The sense of Gods Omniscience will preserve your Souls against Atheism.
This is an Age that never more abounded with Atheists than at this day: What is
the language of them? How does God know? can he judge through the dark Cloud?
thick Clouds are a covering to him, that he sees ^^b 22. 14
not. This is true of wicked men, though it was not true of Job. The Psalmist
tells us of them, That they say in their heart, God (...). 10. 11.
has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it: And if you forget
Gods Omniscience, you presently may be brought to a denial of his Being; you
had need have cautions against Atheism at Sea, even where you see so many of
the Wonders of the Lord.

2. Branch of Information. Is it so that God will discover the guilty person
sooner or later, then it informs us what a folly it is for poor sinners either
at Sea or Land, to think to hide and cover their sin from the eye of God! are
there not many poor sinners run into guilt at Land, and then to cover it and
conceal it, they will go to Sea as Jonah did, who fled from the presence of the
Lord, and he would hide all by going to Tarshish, but you have heard how God
followed him. It is true, The heart of man is deceitful above all things; and
will be covering and hiding its fin from God: But says he, I the Lord search
the heart, and try the reins, even to give every man according Jer. 17. ^ 10*
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. We read a sad story of
a professing people, even the Ancients of the House of Israel; Son of man see
thou what they do in the dark; every man in the Chambers Ezekiel. 1
of his Imagery, for they say the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the
Earth. And yet you see Gods eye was upon them all this while. These Chambers
were the secret places, where they had Idolatrous Pictures, and did there
privately worship them, (as most conclude upon the place): though Achan's wedg
of Gold was hid in the Tent, as has been hinted, God discovered him.

3. It informs us then, If God will discover the guilty person, of the
wretchedness of our sinful deceitful hearts, and in what does their
wretchedness and deceitfulness appear more than in this thing, viz. to go about
to hide sin, when we have committed sin: Oh then the next step that Satan
treads in toward us, is to excuse sin; this is as natural to us as it is to
sin, this hiding of sin we derive from Adam, he excused the matter of his
eating the forbidden fruit, and put it in a sense upon God, The Woman thou
gave me, etc. Is not this to add sin unto sin? Oh see the wretchedness of
hiding or going about to hide our sin by way of excuse, in these Particulars.

1. This is a continuance and persisting in sin, and this always greatens
guilt. It is dangerous to step into a sinful way; but it is more dangerous to
continue on, and walk on in it; We read of a dreadful threatening unto him that
walks on in his Trespasses; God will wound the hairy scalp of such. A godly man
may step into a way of sin, but he is not hence denominated an ungodly man,
because it is not his course; and so an ungodly man may step into a way of
holiness, but he is not for this called a godly man, because it is not his
course. Now every man is denominated from his course, but now when a poor
sinner does go on in his sin, this speaks it his course.

2. Our sin and wretchedness in excusing our guilt, does appear in this, it
carries a face in it, as though we could mock God; nay, is it not an
endeavoring to mock God? And has not the Apostle cautioned sinners against
it? Be not deceived, God will not be Gal. 6. 7.
mocked. What though you may deceive Relations, and mock them; and delude them;
but thus you cannot do with God, God sees you, and will find you out: If you
will seek to mock God, I must tell you the day is coming that he will mock at
you; He will laugh at you when your desolation comes as a whirlwind; yea, he
will mock when your fear comes.

3. A woe is written upon the head of this sin; Woe unto them that cover, but not
with a Isa. 30. 1.
Covering of my Spirit; that they may add sin unto sin. And sure they are no
small sins that God writes his woes upon the head of: Though it is true the
literal sense of it is, The Covering of the Kings's of Egypts Protection; yet
it holds true in this sense. For he has said, He that hides his sin shall not
prosper. Jer. 2. ul^
You may be confident in this Covering and the other, but in such confidences
you Souls shall not prosper, for God will lay open all.

4. Our sin and wretchedness appears in this, When we go about to hide our sin,
it argues a great measure of Judicial obduracy, and hardness of heart, to be
upon us; is not this a hard heart, that yields not to the Testimony of
Conscience? and stands it out against inward checks and convictions, nay it may
be against terrors, and horrors of Conscience: It may be when the Soul looks
within it self, is a Magor-missabib, a terror to it self, yet it falls not down
in Confession before the Lord. Oh poor Soul what if God should leave thee
sealed under this hard heart, and say of thee as of Ephraim, He is joined to
Idols, let him alone. And he that is filthy, let him be so still; and he that
is unclean, let him be so still?

5. Our hiding of sin does lead into great Temptations: Thus David's hiding his
sin did; you see what Temptations to cover sin was he led into; one sin brings
in and brings on another; seldom does one sin go alone; David's Adultery must be
hid with making Vriah drunk, and sending a Letter to Joab to put him in the
Front of the Battle; how often is committing sins covered with lying, And then
I know not the man, with standing in it, and then clapping an Oath upon the
back of a lie; and thus one sin clapped for a cover upon the back of another; We
see how Adam seeking to hide his sin, brought him into further guilt.

4. It informs us then, what a dangerous condition Hypocrites are in if God
will discover the guilty person, many persons go on smoothly, and carry the
fair side forward, and yet the Lord sees, within is rottenness; Oh poor souls,
a day is coming that will discover the thoughts of many hearts; when God will
turn men's inside outward, and cause them to wear their hearts in their faces; O
then will the Soul approved in the sight of God, be a blessed Soul! alas, he is
not a Jew that is one outwardly, but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, whose
Rev: 2. 23
praise is of God, and not of man. Therefore it is we read God telling the
Church of Ver. 13.
Thyatira, He will make all the Churches to know that he is a God that searches
the reins, and heart. He will find out all the hollow hearted, rotten
Hypocrites that creep into Churches: For Jesus Christ is there described to
have Eyes like a flame of fire; viz. to make exact discoveries, both of things
and persons: Oh what discovering days and dispensations has God already
brought upon us of late years, and yet greater discoveries are behind!

2. Use. Is it so that God will discover the guilty person? then it is a word
of Caution, Then take heed you do not hide your sin; Oh, poor Seamen of all men
in the world should stand clear here! should be cautioned here as well as
others; Therefore Joshua speaks thus to Achan, Confess and give glory to God,
tell me what thou have done, and hide it not Josh. 7. 19.
from me. This we are very prone to, as has been already hinted. We read of
some that are said, To hide it like a sweet morsel under Job 20. 12 13.
their Tongue. Though he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep it still within
his mouth: What then? Yet his meat in his Bowels is turned, it is the gall of
Asps within him. Though they be mightily taken with it, and so as Children keep
it as a sweet bit under their Tongues, and there hide it, yet it is bitter when
down, like the poison of Aspes, that kills suddenly. Oh poor Seamen take heed
of hiding your sweets bits.

1. If you go about to hide sin, God will reveal it in his anger, he will speak
to you in his wrath, and vex you in his sore displeasure; Gods anger reveals
Jonah's guilt: What was the matter the storms and winds were so high? Oh God
was angry! What was the matter the Vessel had like to have been broken in
pieces? Oh God was angry with one aboard, that was hiding of his sin! If once
Gods anger be up, and be upon searching work for guilt, he will find it out, he
has strange ways to do it in. The Sea shall rise up against poor Sinners one
while, and the Earth another: We read an observable word of the wicked; Terrors
Job 20. 26, 27.
are upon him, all darkness shall be hid in his secret places; which some
understand, his hiding places, where he thought to keep himself close, and
covered in the dark, shall be light and discovered; by hiding places, (are
meant) private corners, and secret places, or means of retiring, or sheltring,
which the wicked endeavor to find out, for the avoiding and escaping of the
Judgments of God: The meaning of it then, is this, that they shall be so far
from finding any help, and shelter in those hiding places, that they shall be
discovered, and meet with nothing but misery and calamity; and this seems to be
the sense of the place, by what follows, A fire unblown shall consume him; viz.
The wrath of God here is compared to fire. But shall his sin go hid now, the
Lords anger is up against him, and his Family for it? shall it go ill with him,
that is left in his Tabernacle? now it is like to go ill with the
House-Company, or Ships-Company? Why what is the matter? Oh God is about
discovering work; The Heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and the Earth shall
raise up her self against him. Some understand it, That all the Creatures,
Celestial and Terrestrial, animate and inanimate, shall be ready to minister
and serve God in the executing of his righteous Decrees and Judgments against
wicked men. As the Stars fought against Sisera, so God can cause the Stars in
their influence to fight against poor Seamen; the Stars that so much befriend
you. God raises up the Sea against you, the Winds against you to discover the
very guilt that you go about to hide.

2. Poor Seamen take heed of concealing and hiding your sin, when God shall set
it home upon you, you will then cry out so much the more of it. It is like
poison; if it be not vomited up, the person dies for it; as is said of some
wicked men, They have swallowed down Riches, and they Job 20. 15.
shall vomit them up again, God shall cast them out of his belly. Thus may it
be said of poor sinners, that hide their sin from God, when Conscience shall
come and cause the secret poison to work; Oh then what Confessions will there
be to the Lord! as David, I have sinned: I said I would confess my sin, etc. He
did not go about now to hide it as formerly he had done. He had layn three
quarters of a year in that fit of the Lethargy, the sleepy disease; but now
when God awakened him, Oh what Prayers and Confessions, and Tears does he pour
out to God! Thus Achan, though he had contrived Josh. 7.
to hide all, God you have heard brought out all, and then he confesses. So
Jonah, here now God has found him out, confesses all; it may be in a storm at
Sea, so will you do, or on a sick bed in a strange Country; so will you do it
may be going down into the bottom; Oh then why should you now go about to hide
it?

3. Let poor Seamen take heed of hiding their sin; for they think to make the
Sea a hiding place to them; yet Gods right hand can reach them where ever they
sail; they cannot sail beyond the reach of Gods right hand. Oh God will make a
long arm after you, but he will find you out: Gods right hand can reach beyond
the Line. Thine Psalm. 21. 8.
hand shall find out all thine Enemies, where ever they are; at Sea, or at
land, secret, or public Enemies: Thy right hand shall find out those that hate
thee. Some carry it, Thy hand shall find vengeance for thy Enemies, for all
thine Enemies. Thine hand, (one observes Mr. Ainsworth.
that the Chaldee reads it) the stroke of thine hand. Oh cannot this hand find
you at the East Indies, or the West Indies? or where ever you go? O poor
sinner, thou that at present do not feel the weight of thy own guilt, it may
be ere long wilt feel the weight of Gods stroke.

4. Oh let poor Seamen take heed of hiding their sin, for this does aggravate
their sin: this is to add sin unto sin. When men do sin, and confess, and
presently are brought upon their knees for it, before the Lord; he is ready to
forgive sin. I said I would confess my sin, and thou forgavest me the iniquity
of my sin: But when men conceal and deny, Oh this aggravates and greatens it
exceedingly.

5. O let poor Seamen take heed of hiding sin; for God has said, such shall
not prosper, whether they be Landmen, or Seamen, the word of the Lord stands
sure, They Prove. 28. 13.
shall not prosper. They may prosper for a while as the wicked, which the
Psalmist says, flourishes like the green Bay Tree; But however he prosper in
the world, he shall not prosper in his design of covering his sins; for they
shall be laid open and discovered to his shame; but he that confesses and
forsakes* shall find mercy. You see Jonah had success, and things hit with him
for a while, as in finding a Ship ready to set sail when he came to Joppa; yet,
we see, he did not prosper in his design.

6. Oh let poor Seamen take heed of hiding guilt, for this will bring terrible
and dreadful storms. Guilt usually is a stormbreeder; it was so here with
Jonah; it was Jonah's secret guilt that did raise this storm; and Oh then poor
Souls, what will you do, when ready to sink, and your hidden unpardoned guilt
looks you in the face! will not the Mariners then be afraid, the stout hearted
Mariners? will not they then be terrors to themselves? and terrors to all round
about them? Oh what terrible Lectures will Conscience read poor guilty Seamen,
when they are in their distresses?

3 Use. Is it so that God will find out the guilty person; then it is a word of
Exhortation to all Seamen, and other poor sinners, that they would confess
their sin to the Lord. I bespeak you, and beseech you in the language of Joshua
to Achan, My Son confess, and give glory to the Lord. You have heard it is in
vain to hide it from him: Oh therefore come to the Lord with that humble
confession of the Church in Ezra's days. O Lord God of Israel, thou art
rightoous, for Ezra 9. 15
we remain yet escaped, as it is this day; behold we are before thee in our
Trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee, because of this. O how many poor
Seamen may say we are yet escaped; escaped such a storm, such a fatal tempest
unto others, and yet we are before thee in our Trespasses, and cannot stand
with comfort and confidence before the Lord, because they have again broken his
Commandments after their eminent deliverances and salvations: And that you may
fall down before the Lord in humble confession, consider these following
Motives.

1. This is usually the beginning of a kindly effectual touch of grace upon the
heart: The poor Prodigal upon his first return unto his Father, says, Father, I
have Luke 15. Act. 19. 18
sinned against Heaven, and before thee; his first work upon his return is
Confession. We read of a great success the Gospel had in Paul's day, and many
believed; and as soon as the Gospel touched kindly their Souls, they confessed,
and showed their deeds, (says the Text) viz. laying their heinous sins by way
of humble confession, as Ephraim did, so it will be with a poor sinner, As a
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, he confessed he had been. Lord, will the poor
Soul say, what a vile wretch have I been; with Paul, of sinners I am chief; a
Blasphemer, a Persecuter, an injurious person. When Paul was humbled, Oh how he
confesses then, what a wretch he had been!

2. This puts poor Souls under a promise. O now upon thy knees poor sinner,
while thou art confessing thy sin, thou may put into plea and suit Gods
promise; and Oh what an excellent way is this of dealing with God, to be
bewailing your sin, and at the same time be pleading Gods promise for pardon;
this is right Evangelical repentance to have one eye upon sin to humble you;
and another eye upon the promise to quicken you up to believe your pardon:
usually legal sorrow keeps an eye upon guilt, but forgets to keep an eye upon
the Promise. Now poor Soul it is thy only way to confess under a Promise, If we
confess 1 John 1. 9.
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. Oh now he is engaged as a faithful God, to pardon
poor souls: Oh Faithfulness is his name, and he will not, nay, cannot deny his
name; and now he can be just in the pardoning, as well as in the punishing of
sin.

3. Motive to Confession of sins: you have comfortable presidents upon record,
of great sins, and sinners pardoned upon confession, nay, upon the serious
purpose of humble confession: We read of Gods readiness to pardon, even in a
case of great guilt; this we have in David, I said I would confess my sin, and
thou forgavest me the iniquity of my sin; which was a piece of guilt highly
aggravated, and circumstantiated. Mary that was such a poor Penitent that we
Luke 7. 4. 47.
read, she washed the feet of Christ with her Tears; (and must not here be most
eminent Confessions poured out with these Tears?) And it is said of her, Her
sins that are many are forgiven her, for she loved much.

4. Motive to Confession of sin; if you deny it, it will be proved against you;
and Oh what a folly is it for a Prisoner to deny the fact before the Judge, when
he knows it will be proved against him. Thou have set our iniquities before
thee, our secret sins in the light Psalm. 90. 8.
of thy Countenance. As it is the comfort of Gods people that he keeps a Book
of Remembrance of their Sufferings: So it is the terror of wicked men that he
keeps a Book of Remembrance of their sins. There is the Conscience of the poor
sinner will be called in as Gods witness against the guilty Malefactor at the
Bar; that is an observable place in the Prophet, We roar all like Bears, and
mourn sore like Doves; we look Isa. 59. 11, 12.
for Judgment, but there is none; for Salvation, but it is far off from us: For
our Transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against
us. They did bear Testimony against them. Oh poor Seamen, have not you many
times in your extremities and distresses at Sea, felt the terror of this
Testimony? have not the iniquities of your heels compassed you about?

5. Motive to Confession of sin. The King of Israel is a merciful King; It is
this merciful King tha^ the Soul presents it self before in humble Confession.
This was the motive to the Servants of Benadad, We have heard that the King of
Israel is a merciful King; and they came with Ropes about their necks. Oh poor
Souls, if you come to this merciful King with ropes about your necks,
Confessing you deserve to be turned off the Ladder, and to have a righteous
sentence executed upon you, he will meet you with a Pardon in his hand. This
King sits upon a Throne of Grace upon the Mercy-seat, giving out his Pardons
daily to humble Penitents. Now we read that the Book of the Law, which contains
all in it, all poor sinners Enditements, it was put into the Ark, and the
Mercy-seat covering it was above it. Oh this was shadowed out by it. Mercy
triumphs over Justice in the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh then poor sinners bring your
Confessions to the Mercy-seat.

Oh let all poor guilty Seamen, and all other poor guilty sinners confess their
sins over the head of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Priest was to confess all the
iniquities of Exodus 25* 20*
the people over the head of the Scapegoat; noting to us, that we must take
Christ into our Confessions; all poor sinners Confessions, should fall upon the
head of Christ. Now poor sinners, and poor guilty Seamen, ask your own
Consciences, Whether you had not better carry your Guilt before the Lord in
humble Confessions, than have the Lords just and righteous lot find it out,
either to the confusion, or condemnation of your immortal precious Souls. O let
this Text never be forgotten by you when you come under Sea-temptations, or
Land-temptations. Oh, but the Lot fell upon Jonah.

FINIS.
Books sold by Dorman Newman at the King's Arms and Bible in the Poultry.
Folio.
THe History of King John, King Henry the Second, and the most Illustrious King
Edward the First; wherein the ancient Sovereign Dominion of the Kings of Great
Britain over all persons in all causes, is asserted and vindicated: With an
exact History of the Popes intolerable usurpation upon the Liberties of the
Kings and Subjects of England and Ireland. Collected out of the Ancient Records
in the Tower of London. By William Prinn, Esquire of Lincolns Inn, and Keeper of
his Majesty's Records in the Tower of London. A Description of the Four parts
of the World, taken from the Works of Monsieur Sanson, Geographer to the French
King; and other eminent Travelers and Authors; to which is added the
Commodities, Coins, Weights and Measures of the chief places of Traffic in
the World, illustrated with variety of useful and delightful Maps and Figures.
By Richard Blome Gent. Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings and Deaths of
those Excellent Personages that suffered for Allegiance to their Sovereign in
our late intestine Wars, from the year 1637, to 1666, with the Life and
Martyrdom of King Charles the First. By David Lloyd. The Exact Politician, or
Complete Statesman, briefly and methodically resolved into such Principles,
whereby Gentlemen may be qualified for the management of any public trust, and
thereby rendered useful for the Common-welfare. By Leonard Willa^ Esquire. A
Relation in form of a Journal of the Voyage and Residence of King Charles the
Second in Holland. The History of the Cardinals of the Roman Church, from the
time of their first Creation to the Election of Pope Clement the Ninth, with a
full account of his Conclave. Mores hominum, the Manners of Men described in
sixteen Satyrs, by Juvenal; together with a large Comment, clearing the Author
in every place, wherein he seemed obscure out of the Laws and Customs of the
Romans, and the Latin and Greek Histories. By Sir Robert Stapleton, Knight. A
Treatise of Justification. By George Downham* Dr. of D. Fiftyone Sermons,
Preached by the Reverend D. Mark Frank, Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridg,
Archdeacon of S. Albans, Prebend and Treasurer of St. Paul's; being a course of
Sermons beginning at Advent, and so continued throughout the Festivals; To
which is added a Sermon Preached at Pauls-Cross, Anno 1641, and then commanded
to be Printed by K. Charles the first.
Quarto.
The Christian man's calling; or, a Treatise of making Religion ones Business:
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all Religious duties, Natural
actions, particular Vocations, Family-directions, and in his own recreations in
all relations, in all conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the choice
of his Company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a weekday, from morning
to night, in visiting the sick, and on a dying-bed. By George Swinnock. Mr.
Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Job. Gospel-Remission; or, a Treatise showing
that true Blessedness consists in the pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Buroughs. An
Exposition of the Song of Solomon. By James Durham, late Minister in Glasgow.
The real Christian; or, a Treatise of effectual calling; wherein the work of
God in drawing the soul to Christ, being opened according to the holy
Scriptures, some things required by our late Divines as necessary to a right
Preparation for Christ; and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respects to those worthy men brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: to which is added a few words concerning
Socinianism. By Giles Firmin, sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex. Mount
Pisgah, or a Prospect of Heaven; being an Exposition on the fourth Chapter of
the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. By Tho. Case sometimes
Student in Christ-church, Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel. The virtue and
value of Baptism. By Zach. Crofton. The Quakers spiritual Court proclaimed;
being an exact Narrative of a new high Court of Justice; also sundry errors and
corruptions amongst the Quakers which were never till now made known to the
world. By Nath. Smith, who was conversant among them 14 years. The Sinners
Sanctuary, or a discovery made of those glorious privileges offered unto the
penitent and faithful under the Gospel, unfolding their freedom from Death,
Condemnation, and the Law, in forty Sermons, on the Eighth of the Romans. By
that eminent Preacher of the Gospel Mr. Hugh Binning, late Minister at Govan. A
Treatise of Miscellany questions, wherein many useful questions and case of
Conscience are discussed and resolved. By George Gillespie, late Minister in
Edinburgh. An exact Concordance to the holy Bible, according to the last
Translation, composed in a new and most comprehensive method. By John Jackson
Minister of the Gospel at Moulsea in Surry. A Discourse of Prodigious
abstinence occasioned by the twelve months fasting of Martha Tailor the famed
Darbyshire Damsel; proving, that without any miracle the texture of humane
bodies may be so altered that life may be long continued without the supplies
of meat and drink. By John Reynolds.
Octavo, and Twelves.
Vindiciae Pietatis, or a Vindication of Godliness from the imputation of folly
and ffancy; with several directions for the attaining and maintaining of a
godly life. By R. Allin. Heaven on Earth, or the best Friend in the worst
times; to which is added a Sermon preached at the funeral of Thomas Mosley
Apothecary. By James Janeway. A Token for Children, being an exact account of
the conversation, holy and exemplary lives, and joyful deaths of several young
Children. By James Janeway. A Token for Children, the second part, being a
further account of the conversion, holy and exemplary lives and joyful deaths,
of several other young Children; not published in the first part by James
Janeway. Justification only upon a Satisfaction. By Rob. Ferguson. Lazarus
Redevivus, being a collection of several Sermons. Preached by N. Blakie.
Minister of the Gospel. Fellowship with God, or 28 Sermons on the 1 John 1. 2.
By Hugh Binning, late Minister at Govan. Mysterium Pietatis, or, the mystery of
Godliness. By William Annand. A brief Exposition on the Epistles of Paul to the
Galatians and Ephesians. By James Ferguson. The life and death of Dr. James
Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland.
FINIS.

